Letters
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 6, No. 4, July–August 2000434
more orders of magnitude (8,10). In spite of
this concentration method, the success rate in
EM diagnostics using swab specimens has
declined to <10%, while viral agents continue
to be identified in >60% of lesions in submit-
ted aspirates.
Because concentration methods are not
always available, and in view of the sample
problems identified by Marshall (3), we re-
viewed, in Winnipeg, whether collection of
lesion fluids directly onto EM sample grids (5)
improved sensitivity over aspiration into 26-
gauge needles on tuberculin syringes (4). While
neither method increased the number of cases
identified in matched samples, the yield of virus
seen in samples taken by touching the EM
sample grid directly to the base of the lesion did
increase, making it easier to identify viral
agents in the samples (Hazelton and Louie,
unpub. data). In Berlin, we also routinely find
higher particle numbers on grids that have
been prepared by the direct touch method.
Sample preparation on EM grids is conducive to
prolonged storage and transport of samples
over long distances (5) and removes the risk of
needle-stick accidents.
We continue to recommend examining grids
touched directly to the lesion or vesicle aspi-
rates. Where possible, infectious diseases and
infection control staff contact the EM unit when
a sample needs to be collected to receive in-
structions about methods and ensure that staff
are available to conduct the examination. When
the specimen needs to be transported some
distance, such as between cities, smears on
individually packaged glass slides or on sample
grids are an alternative method for submitting
vesicle aspirates. Glass slides allow the collec-
tion of samples for both polymerase chain
reaction and EM examination (Charles
Humphrey, personal communication). An
additional advantage of smears is that interfer-
ing background proteins can be removed by
drying the sample on the slide and then resus-
pending the viral agent. Proteins such as
mucus, which interfere with staining and
visualization, remain insoluble. We understand
that other major viral EM diagnostic units also
prefer aspirates, smears on glass slides, or
lesion exudate on the final sample grid as
preferred methods of submission of suspected
blister material because of ease in handling and
higher efficiency in examination.
Acknowledgment
We thank Charles Humphrey, Tom Louie, and Sara
Miller for their observations.
Hans R. Gelderblom* and Paul R. Hazelton†
*Konsilarlaboratorium für die
Elektronenmikroskopische Erregerdiagnostik
in the Robert Koch Institut, Electron Microscopy
and Imaging Group, D13353 Berlin, Germany;
and †Electron Microscopy Unit, Department of
Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
University of Manitoba, Canada
References
1. O’Toole T. Smallpox: An attack scenario. Emerg
Infect Dis 1999;5:540-6.
2. Henderson DA. Smallpox: clinical and epidemiologic
features. Emerg Infect Dis 1999; 5:537-9.
3. Marshall JA, Catton MG. Specimen collection for
electron microscopy. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5:842.
4. Burtonboy G, Lachapelle JM, Tennstedt D, Lamy
ME. Detection rapide des virus au microscope
electronique. Interet de la methode de coloration
negative pour le diagnostic de certaines dermatoses
d’origine virale. Ann Dermatol Venerol 1978;105:707-
12.
5. Van Rooyen CE, Scott MA. Smallpox diagnosis with
special reference to electron microscopy. Can J Public
Health 1948;39:467-77.
6. Flewett TH. Some recent contributions from the
electron microscope laboratories. BMJ 1972;1:667-70.
7. Gelderblom HR, Renz H, Özol M. Negative staining
in diagnostic virology. Micron Microscopica Acta
1991;22:435-77.
8. Hammond GW, Hazelton PR, Chuang I, Klisko B.
Improved detection of viruses by electron microscopy
after direct ultracentrifuge preparation of specimens.
J Clin Microbiol 1981;14:210-21.
9. Biel SS, Gelderblom HR. Electron microscopy of
viruses. In: Cann A, editor. Virus cell culture—a
practical approach. Oxford: Oxford University
Press;1999:111-47.
10. Gelderblom H, Reupke H. Rapid viral diagnosis using
the Airfuge. IV. (Abstract W50A/9). International
Congress on Virology. The Hague; 1976: p. 630.
Antimicrobial Resistance
To the Editor: Davis et al. offered four reasons
why local antimicrobial selection pressure in
cattle may not play an important role in the
dissemination of multidrug-resistant
Salmonella from cattle to humans (1). Their
conclusions differ from those of other recent
studies (2-6).
The authors’ first two arguments relate to
the high levels of chloramphenicol resistance in
the United States, despite a relative lack of
Letters
435Vol. 6, No. 4, July–August 2000 Emerging Infectious Diseases
chloramphenicol use in livestock. In industrial-
ized countries, chloramphenicol use in humans
is also low because of medical and legal con-
cerns about aplastic anemia. In Australia, the
total average annual human use of chloram-
phenicol from 1992 to 1997 was 208 kg (6). This
is lower than the annual use for most other
antibiotics (e.g., sulphonamide 22,331 kg in
humans and 24,869 kg in animals; tetracycline
12,677 kg in humans and 77,619 kg in animals)
(6). Despite this low use in humans, chloram-
phenicol resistance can be common in many
human pathogens, e.g., multidrug-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (7) and Pneumococcus
(8). Even though tetracyclines are not used in
children, children’s pneumococcal isolates are
often tetracycline resistant (8). With these
bacteria, the use of other antibiotics (e.g.,
penicillins, macrolides, and cephalosporins)
appears to drive chloramphenicol (and other)
resistance, which is often a part of gene clusters
that encode for multidrug resistance. The
situation in animals for Salmonella is likely to
be similar. In the United States, chlorampheni-
col resistance is higher in isolates from cattle
(73% in 1995-97) than from humans (47% in
1997). Therefore, chloramphenicol resistance
seen in cattle isolates is very unlikely to have
come from the human use of chloramphenicol.
Also, chloramphenicol-resistant isolates in-
creased suddenly in both human and animal
isolates just after 1990; resistance in cattle
isolates rose from 2% to 62% (1). These points
suggest that just after 1990 the same chloram-
phenicol-resistant strains (presumably new
clones) were being shared rapidly between
cattle and people. This spread is very unlikely
to be from people to cattle but rather to people
from cattle through food.
The third argument by Davis et al. relates
to the spread of resistant strains by wildlife.
Even though these strains can move easily
around the world, they need to be amplified to
cause a serious problem. One of the best ways
to amplify resistant bacteria is to give them a
selective advantage (e.g., when Salmonella is
ingested in feed or water by animals that
receive in-feed antibiotics).
The authors’ fourth argument is that there
is still broad dissemination of antibiotic-suscep-
tible strains. So what? In hospitals, despite the
overuse of antibiotics, we still see cross-infec-
tion with relatively sensitive strains of
S. aureus, even when these hospitals have a
high incidence of multidrug-resistant S. aureus.
This does not mean that antibiotic use in
humans is not one of the important factors in
the amplification and spread of multidrug-
resistant S. aureus.
As Davis et al. point out, antibiotic-resis-
tant bacteria spread worldwide in many ways,
including by wild animals and human travel.
We need to prevent this spread; however, the
central issue is antibiotic use in animals and
how it amplifies resistant bacteria (e.g., Salmo-
nella enterica serovar Typhimurium DT104).
For every antibiotic Davis et al. tested, the level
of resistance was higher in Salmonella isolates
from cattle than from humans (1). The figures
supplied by the authors clearly show that
antibiotic resistance in cattle and human
isolates is related and that resistance in Salmo-
nella is and has been more of a problem in
cattle than in humans, presumably as a result
of widespread use of antibiotics in cattle.
Antibiotic resistance over the medium- to
long-term is an inevitable consequence of
antibiotic use. Ciprofloxacin and similar
fluoroquinolones are the most effective drugs
for treating many serious infections in humans,
including some Salmonella infections (such as
bacteremia or osteomyelitis). The prevalence of
resistance to fluoroquinolones in human
infections acquired from animals through the
food chain is increasing (2,4). We should
therefore avoid entirely the use of “last-line”
human antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones
(i.e., antibiotics for which there may be no
alternatives if resistance develops) in livestock.
All other antibiotics should be used only when
there is no other way to prevent or treat
infections.
Peter Collignon
The Canberra Hospital, Garran, Australia
References
1. Davis M, Hancock D, Besser T, Rice D, Gay JM, Gay
C, et al. Changes in antimicrobial resistance among
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium isolates
from humans and cattle in the northwestern United
States, 1982-1997. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5:802-6.
2. Molbak K, Baggesen DL, Aarestrup FM, Ebbesen JM,
Engberg J, Frydendahl K, et al. An outbreak of
multidrug-resistant, quinolone-resistant Salmonella
enterica serotype typhimurium DT104. N Engl J Med
1999;341:1420-5.
Letters
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 6, No. 4, July–August 2000436
3. Glynn MK, Bopp C, Dewitt W, Dabney P, Mokhtar M,
Angulo FJ. Emergence of multidrug-resistant
Salmonella enterica serotype typhimurium DT104
infections in the United States. N Engl J Med
1998;338:1333-8.
4. Smith KE, Besser JM, Hedberg CW, Leano FT,
Bender JB, Wicklund JH, et al. Quinolone-resistant
Campylobacter jejuni infections in Minnesota, 1992-
1998. Investigation team. N Engl J Med
1999;340:1525-32.
5. European Commission (1999). Opinion of the
Scientific Steering Committee on Antimicrobial
Resistance (SSCOAR). European Commission
Directorate General XXIV, Consumer Policy and
Consumer Health protection, 28 May 1999.
6. Report of the Joint Expert Advisory Committee on
Antibiotic Resistance (JETACAR). The use of
antibiotics in food-producing animals: antibiotic-
resistant bacteria in animals and humans. Australian
Commonwealth Department of Health and Aged Care
and the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry; 1999 Sep; Canberra.
7. Turnidge J, Nimmo G, Francis G. Evolution of
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus in Australian
teaching hospitals. Australian Group on
Antimicrobial Resistance (AGAR). Med J Aust
1996;164:68-71.
8. Collignon P, Bell J. Drug-resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae: the beginning of the end for many
antibiotics? Australian Group on Antimicrobial
Resistance (AGAR). Med J Aust 1996;164:64-7.
Changes in Antimicrobial Resistance in
Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium
To the Editor: The conclusion by Davis and
colleagues (1) that use of antimicrobial agents
in agriculture is unlikely to have contributed to
the emergence of multidrug-resistant
Salmonella serotype Typhimurium DT104 (MR-
DT104) is contrary to available evidence. Use of
antimicrobial agents in aquaculture in Asia
may have contributed to the emergence of
DT104. The resistant determinants of MR-
DT104 reside on the chromosome, apparently
within a transferrable element (2-4).
Chloramphenicol resistance in MR-DT104 is
due to floR, a florfenicol resistance gene (5);
florfenicol is a veterinary antimicrobial agent
that, although not approved in the United
States until 1996, has been used in aquaculture
in Asia since the early 1980s. FloR was first
identified in Photobacterium damsela, a
bacterium found in fish (5). Furthermore,
tetracycline resistance in MR-DT104 is due to a
class G resistance gene first identified in Vibrio
anguillarum, a pathogen of fish (4,6). The
molecular sequence where the class G and floR
determinants reside on the DT104 chromosome
is closely related (94% identity) to a plasmid in
Pasteurella piscicida, another pathogen of fish
(7). These data suggest that the resistance
determinants of MR-DT104 may have emerged
among bacteria in aquaculture and been
horizontally transferred to
S. Typhimurium DT104.
Spread of MR-DT104 between regions
during international travel, as Davis and
colleagues suggest, is unlikely because in
industrialized countries Salmonella is seldom
transmitted from person to person (8). Once
MR-DT104 emerged, it spread rapidly to many
regions through unknown means. The rapid
emergence of MR-DT104 suggests a means of
spread more efficient than person-to-person
transmission. Possibilities include movement of
infected breeding or “multiplier” stock or
shipment of contaminated feed ingredients;
such movements may not be as limited as Davis
et al. suggest. For example, the international
spread of Salmonella serotype Agona was
traced to the global distribution of contami-
nated fish meal from Peru (9).
Once MR-DT104 is introduced into food
animals in a region, use of antimicrobial agents
in animals would contribute to further dissemi-
nation of MR-DT104 (8). If MR-DT104 is
present on a farm, the use on the farm of any
antimicrobial agent to which MR-DT104 is
resistant would contribute to its persistence. An
example of such use in cattle in the United
States is the tetracycline-containing milk
“replacement” commonly fed to dairy calves.
This product could kill susceptible gastrointes-
tinal flora while allowing tetracycline-resistant
flora such as MR-DT104 to survive and prolifer-
ate. Once MR-DT104 proliferates on a farm,
dissemination to other farms in the region is
facilitated, particularly if the other farms are
using an antimicrobial agent to which MR-
DT104 is resistant.
Increasing antimicrobial resistance in
Salmonella contributes to its spread and
threatens the use of clinically important antimi-
crobial agents. To slow the emergence and
dissemination of resistant Salmonella, mea-
sures should be implemented to ensure that
antimicrobial agents are used prudently in
food-producing animals (10).
