STUDIES OF THE REGULATORY EFFECTS OF THE SEX
HORMONES ON ANTIBODY FORMATION AND STEM
CELL DIFFERENTIATION*
BY DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT:~
(Fromthe Departmentof Microbiologyand Immunology, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada)
(Received for publication 1 June 1972)
The capacity of the female of various mammalian species, including man, to
outperform the male when measured in terms of immune responsiveness has
been documented many times. Depending on such variables as age of host,
presence of associated disease, or experimental conditions, enhanced antibody
and/or serum levels of IgA (1, 2), IgM (2-4), and IgG (5) have been observed
in females in comparison with levels in control groups of males. The capacity
for enhanced antibody formation is manifested both in secondary as well as in
primary immune responses (4, 6).
The enhanced immunological capability, as perhaps might have been predicted, has
been associated with numerous additional observations and consequences. For ex-
ample, it is apparently easier to produce immunological tolerance in the male than
in the female (7). The female rodent experiences enhanced susceptibility to auto-
immune disease produced by circulating antibody (8, 9) as well as by immune com-
plexes (10). A similar increased incidence in the human female has been documented
frequently.
It has also been recorded that the capacity for cell-mediated immunity is greater
in females than in males. Thus, females reject tumors and homografts with greater
efficiency than males (4, 11-13), and cells derived from females perform better in mixed
lymphocyte cultures than cells derived from males (14).
Despite the abundant evidence which has accumulated for enhanced immunological
response in the female, the underlying mechanisms to account for these differences
have not been adequately defined. The possibility that lymphoid tissue is involved in
these variations is suggested by several observations. It is well documented that both
androgens and estrogens produce lymphoid atrophy of both thymus and peripheral
lymphoid organs (15 18). Conversely, gonadectomy both in the male (19) and in the
female (5, 19) has been associated with lymphoid hyperplasia. Adrenalectomy also
enhances antibody production (20) presumably by generating lymphoid hyperplasia
*This work was supported by grants from the Medical Research Council of Canada, the
National Cancer Institute of Canada, and the Ontario Heart Foundation.
:~Present address: Department of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians &
Surgeons, New York.
1098 TttE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL YIEDICINE - VOLUME 136, 1972
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMASJ. GARRETT 1099
(16), arising as a consequence of excision of additional androgen or adrenocorticos-
teroid-producing tissue.
In the present work a beginning has been made in defining the mechanisms
underlying the marked effect of sex hormones on immune responsiveness. In
order to evaluate the potential role of the thymus-derived and bone marrow-
derived lymphocytes, comparison of the immune response in normal males and
females to highly thymus-dependent and thymus-independent antigens was
undertaken. For comparison with these two groups, evaluation was also made
of the immune response in gonadectomized males, a procedure which others
have shown to convert the male to a female in terms of immunological respon-
siveness (5, 12). As an indirect assessment of the contribution of lymphoid
tissue, thymus and spleen weights were determined in the three groups of mice
and correlated with changes in numbers of circulating lymphocytes. Additional
studies pertaining to the role of the thymus gland in generating the enhanced
responses in gonadectomized males were performed by evaluating immune re-
sponsiveness in groups of mice which had been simultaneously thymectomized
and gonadectomized. The percentage of cortisone-resistant thymus cells was
also evaluated in the three experimental groups of mice. Finally, a possible
role of altered stem cell differentiation was considered indirectly by assessing
the iron-59 uptake of lethally irradiated gonadectomized and normal males, and
females reconstituted with bone marrow cells.
Materials and Methods
Animals.--Mice used in the followingexperiments were mainly of the CAF1and B6D2F1
inbred strains (purchased from Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine), although an out-
bred Swissmousestrain (Taconic Animal Farms, Germantown, N. Y.) was also employed in
some experiments. Experimental and control groups consisted of 6~12mice. Animalswere 5-6
wk of age at the commencement of the experiments. They were fed on a Rockland Tek]ad
(Teklad, Inc., Monmouth, Ill.) diet of mouse pellets and water, ad libitum.
Antlgens.--Various antigens wereused in the experiments.After initialtrials with a variety,
most experimentswere carried out with horse and gooseerythrocytes as examplesof thymus-
dependent antigens (R. Kerbel, unpublished observations; A. J. S. Davies, unpublished ob-
servations) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)1 as a thymus-independent antigen (21, 22). An-
tigens were generallygiven intravenously in a dosage which will be indicated in each experi-
ment.
Assays of hemagglutinins were carried out employingmicrotitrator equipment (Fisher Sci-
entific Co. Canada Ltd., Toronto, Ontario). A relative measure of 19S and 7S hemagglutinlns
was performed employingdifferentialsensitivity with 2-mercaptoethanol (23). Assays of anti-
bodiesto PVP werecarried out employingsuitably tanned erythrocytes as previously described
(21).
Operative Techniques.---The testes of 6-wk old male micewere removed under ether anes-
thesia via a small midline incision of the scrotal skin. Mice aged 5 wk were thymectomized
employingsuction for removal of the thymus. Thus, in the experimentalgroups in which com-
bined thymectomy-orchiectomywasperformed, removal of the gonads was carried out in mice
surviving thymectomy at an interval of 1 wk.
1Abbra,iation usedin this paper:PVP, polyvinylpyrrolfdone.
ii00 SEX HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
Determination of Spleen and Thymus Weights.- The thymuses and spleens of the various
mice were dissected free of fibrous connective tissue andweighed on a sensitive Mettler balance
(Mettler Instrument Corp., Princeton, N. J.) The weights were recorded to the nearest mil-
ligram. In some experiments the body weights of the mice were determined before excision of
the organs.
Determination of NucleatedOrganand PeripheralCell Counts.--For the determination of
numbers of nucleated cells per spleen or thymus, individual lymphoid organs were pressed
through an 80 mesh stainless steel grid into a Patti dish containing either 2 or 5 cc of medium
(depending on the individual experiment). Nucleated cell counts were performed routinely
with a hemacytometer. Counts were expressed as cells per cubic centimeter or per thymus or
spleen. For the determination of the number of cortisone-resistant cells, mice were given an
injection of cortisone acetate (kindly provided by Dr. Edward L. Masson, Upjohn Company
of Canada, Don Mills, Ontario) inn dosage of 125 mg/kg body weight. 48 hr later the thymus
glands were removed and cell suspensions prepared as described. This period corresponds to
the time of onset of maximum reduction of thymic cell number after this dosage of cortisone
acetate (24).
[rradiation.--In the single experiment in which irradiation was employed, mice housed in
a Lucite chamber were lethally irradiated with 850 R, employing a Gammacell 20 irradiator
(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., Ottawa, Ontario). The irradiation source was cesium-137
administered in a dosage of 117 rads/minute.
DeterminationofIron-59 Uptake.--Lethally irradiated mice were reconstituted with either
105, l0 n, or 107 bone marrow cells derived from syngeneic recipients. During the late afternoon
of the 6th day a tracer dose of 0.2 #Ci of iron-59 was administered. The following morning the
mice were sacrificed, individual spleens removed, the tissue solubilized with tissue solubilizer
(Amersham/Searle Corp., Toronto, Ontario), and the gamma emission determined in a Pack-
ard gamma counter (Packard Instrument Co., Downers Grove, Ill.). The data were expressed
as counts per spleen.
Determination of Spleen Colonies.--Lethally irradiated groups of mice were injected with
105 bone marrow cells. Either 8 or 9 days later the mice were sacrificed, and individual spleens
excised and deposited in small vials containing Bouin's fixative. After 2 or more hr the number
of spleen colonies was counted.
Statistical Methods.--The titers, cell counts, colony counts, and uptake of radioactivity
were compared employing a Student's t test. The data were considered significant when the P
values were less than 0.05,
RESULTS
Comparison of the Primary and Secondary Immune Responses to Thymus-De-
pendent and Independent Antigens.--Initial experiments demonstrated that the
enhanced capacity for humoral antibody formation in gonadectomized male
mice did not occur with regularity until 10 wk had elapsed postorchiectomy.
Since orchiectomy was regularly performed at 6 wk of age, the comparative ex-
periments were undertaken in mice 16 wk of age or older.
Fig. 1 illustrates the comparative responses of normal male and female mice
and orchiectomized male mice immunized intravenously with 0.1 #g of PVP
(360,000 tool wt). It may be seen that the immune response of females ex-
ceeded that of the male mice, while the castrated mice generated levels sig-
nificantly higher than those of female mice. In some additional experiments em-
ploying this thymus-independent antigen, levels in castrates were equivalent
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT 1101
0
.4
10.
1
....~ ~ ~
"'-~ .............. ~........
1
i i i f i /
5 6 7 14 21 3 o
TIME IN DAYS
FI6. |. Primary immune response of normal females and normal and gonadectomized males
immunized intravenously with 0.1 #g of PVP at 16 wk of age, 10 wk after orchiectomy. Points
indicate mean and sE of 8-10 B6D2FI mice per group. Castrated males, (O--O); normal
males, (O ....... O); normal females, (E-tin).
20"
16"
12-
8-
4-
i _-~5
/'
I'
/
/
/
/
/
/
,!
{
' ' 3'54 9 14 2Uo
TIME IN DAYS
FIG. 2. Primary immune response of males, females, and orchiectomized males after intra-
venous administration of 0.2 cc of 10% horse erythrocytes. Animals were 16 wk of age, 10
wk after gonadectomy. Each point represents mean and sE of 9-12 B6D2F1 mice per group.
Gonadectomized males, (O--O); normal males, (O ....... O); normal females, (J-N)-
1102 SEX HORMONAL REGULATIONOF IMMUNE RESPONSE
to those in females. For the determination of the differential immune response to
thymus-dependent antigens, numerous experiments were carried out employing
groups of normal male and female mice and orchiectomized mice of equivalent
age, immunized with either 0.2 cc of 10 % horse erythrocytes, rat erythrocytes,
or goose erythrocytes intravenously. Fig. 2 illustrates the data derived from a
typical experiment employing horse erythrocytes. The female mice responded
better than the normal male mice throughout both the early 19S phase as well
as the subsequent 7S phase of the response. The early 19S phase of the response
of castrated mice was characterized by levels of 2-mercaptoethanol-sensitive
hemagglutinating antibody in excess of those reached in the female mice. Sub-
sequently, the levels of 2-mercaptoethanol-resistant hemagglutinins were corn-
TABI,E I
Summary of Experience in Evaluation of Enhancement* of Antibody Formation in
Gonadectomized Male Mice
Antigenemployed:~ No. of experiments No. of positives No. of negatives
PVP 7 6 1
Goose RBC 33 17 16
Rat RBC 21 4 17
Horse RBC 17 9 8
* Numbers of positives denotes those experiments in which statistical significance was
established. In practice, this corresponded to observationof at least a 2 log2difference through-
out the time-course of the experiments. Negatives were not evaluated statistically. No
experimentswere seen in which responses of normal male exceeded those of castrated animals.
:~The response to PVP, the thymus-independent antigen, was always evaluated in mice
immunized intravenously with 0.1 ~g, which was shown to be the optimal dose for im-
munization. In the other experiments with thymus-dependent erythrocyte antigens, various
dosage schedules were employed, although 0.2 ce of 10% erythrocytes intravenously was the
usual dose.
parable with the titers observed in normal males, and significantly lower than
levels in female mice. The more rapid appearance of circulating antibody in fe-
males and castrates was also regularly observed.
Numerous additional experiments were then carried out omitting the use of
female mice for the purpose of economy, in order to determine the reproduci-
bility of the changes in response of gonadectomized male mice. In general, the
development of enhanced levels of antibody during the 19S phase of the im-
mune response to thymus-dependent antigens together with a more rapid ap-
pearance of circulating 19S antibody was confirmed in the castrated mice when
compared with normal male mice. However, comparisons of the 7S phase indi-
cated the primary responses of males and gonadectomized males to be extremely
variable. Table I summarizes our total experience. In some experiments 7S
antibody levels in castrates were higher than in normal males. In many other
instances differences could not be demonstrated. Although the reasons for
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS 1. GARRETT 1103
these variations remain obscure, failure to demonstrate enhancement was be-
lieved in part to be due to seasonal variation; the enhancement in 7S levels be-
tween the mice was more regularly produced during the summer months than in
the winter months. There was some indication also that strain differences repre-
sented a major factor. For example, the BALB/c mice in three experiments
32-
28
24
0
.J
rr 2C
W
F-
/,/,
!
i'
I I I
4 9 14 20 3t5
TIME IN DAYS
FIG. 3. Tertiary immune response of gonadectomized and normal males immunized intra-
venously with 0.1 cc of 1% rat erythrocytes at 16 wk of age, 10 wk postorchiectomy. These
animals had been primed by two injections of 0.1 cc of 10~o rat erythrocytes at 2 and 4 wk
of age, Points indicate mean and sE of eight Swiss white mice per group. Castrated males,
(0--0); normal males, (O ....... ©).
regularly yielded very significant enhancement in orchiectomized mice, but
their cost and lack of availability in bulk numbers precluded their use. In addi-
tion, some of the differences may have been due to differential content of
estrogen in the grain contained in the mouse diets, as reported by the manu-
facturer.
Experiments to evaluate levels of secondary antibody production were per-
formed in normal males and females as well as in castrated males. In these ex-
periments a second injection of 0.1 cc of 1% erythrocyte antigen was given at
1104 SEX HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
about 30-40 days after the initial immunization. In most cases the levels of
antibody reached in the castrated male was equivalent to the levels reached in
the female, and in both these groups the levels exceeded those attained in the
normal male of equivalent age. In these instances the antibody was resistant to
2-mercaptoethanol, and therefore, presumed to be 7S antibody.
The influence of castration on secondary and tertiary immune responsiveness
4 IA) T/l\~j''~
¢,q
(5
0
(B)
I t l i l r l I I I
(c)
I I I I I L l I I 1
,/~"/I\
; ~ ; ; ~ ; 1'o 1'2 ,'4
TIME IN DAYS
FIc. 4. Primary immune response of normal and castrated Swisswhite male mice immu-
nized intravenously with 0.1/zg of PVP, 10 wk (Fig. 4 A), 20 wk (Fig. 4 B), and 30 wk (Fig.
4 C) after gonadectomy at 6 wk of age. Each point indicates the mean and sE of 8-10 mice.
Castrated males, (•-- • ); normal males, (O........O).
was most dramatically represented in groups of mice immunized with either a
second or third injection of 1% rat erythrocytes at 16 wk of age, 10 wk after
castration, which was carried out after prior administration of either one or two
doses of 0.1 cc of 10% rat erythrocytes. Fig. 3 illustrates the data from one ex-
periment. It may be seen that orchiectomy profoundly influenced levels of anti-
body formation even when carried out subsequent to priming of the animal
with that antigen.
The duration of the enhancement effect was studied in groups of Swiss white
mice immunized intravenously with 0.1/~g of PVP, 10, 20, or 30 wk after cas-
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT 1105
tration at 6 wk of age. From the data presented in Fig. 4, it may be seen that the
enhanced response to PVP was diminished when animals were challenged 30
wk after orchiectomy. A disappearance of the enhancement effect was noted
when responses to thymus-dependent antigens were determined with increasing
time after gonadectomy. Finally, gonadectomy of two groups of older male
mice, aged 9 and 10 months, failed to yield significant enhancement of anti-
body production when tested 10 wk later.
Effects of Sex Hormones on Lymphoid Tissue.--The next experiments were
carried out in order to determine the changes in lymphoid organ weight and cell
80-
60-
40-
20 I I I i
,3 6 8 12 1~3 17 2tl
AGE IN WEEKS
FIG. 5. Thymus weight of normal maleand femaleB6D2F1miceand of malesorchiecto-
mized at 6 wk of age. Each point represents mean and sE of 12 mice per group. Gonadecto-
mized males, (e--O); normal males, (O........ O); normal females, (J~-I).
number after orchiectomy at 6 wk of age. These organ-extirpated mice were
compared with normal male and female mice of equivalent age.
Fig. 5 indicates the relative thymus weight of the three groups of animals. In
control male and female mice the increased thymus weight of females was al-
ready apparent even at 3 wk of age. After orchiectomy at 6 wk of age the thymus
weight of operated mice increased dramatically. A significant increase in thymus
weight was noted as early as 2 wk after orchiectomy. Throughout the period of
observation the weight of the thymus of the castrated animal greatly exceeded
the weight of the thymus from female animals, which in turn, exceeded the
thymic weight in the male.
The body weights of the three groups of mice during the period from 8 to 16
wk of age varied, the males weighing 24-26 g, the females 20-22 g, and the
gonadectomized males 22-24 g. Taking body weights into account and ex-
1106 SEX HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
pressing the thymus weights recorded in Fig. 5 per unit body weight, the
differences in thymus weight were even more striking.
Similarly, the spleen weight per body weight analyses revealed that the
order of differences between the three groups of mice was the same as that re-
corded for the thymus. Spleens of castrated male mice weighed more than the
organs of females, which in turn, exceeded the weights of spleens of normal male
animals.
Fig. 6 illustrates the peripheral white counts obtained in the three groups of
animals. It may be seen that the levels of peripheral white cells were greater in
20"
"•
16"
×
12-
m
8-
4-
//>\
i I I I I I I I
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
TIME IN WEEKS POSTGONADECTOMY
Fro. 6. Perfpheral white blood cell counts of the three groups of B6D2F1 mice. Each point
represents mean of duplicate assays on a pooled blood sample derived from bleedings of 12
mice. Castrated males, (e k e); normal males, (O........ O); normal females, (~-tl).
castrated males than in either of the other two groups, which were essentially
equivalent in terms of total numbers of peripheral cells.
Various investigators have delineated the immunocompetence of the corti-
sone-resistant population contained in the thymus gland (24). Consequently, it
was considered essential to document the numbers of cortisone-resistant cells
in the thymus glands of castrated male mice and normal male and female mice.
Figs. 7 and 8 illustrate the data comparing the numbers of thymus and spleen
cells, respectively, before and 48 hr subsequent to administration of cortisone
acetate in a dose of 125 mg/kg body weight. It may be seen from the resutts de-
rived from assays 4, 7, and 10 wk after castration that the absolute numbers
of cortisone-resistant thymus cells were equivalent in all three groups both in
spleen and in thymus. Thus, the increase in lymphoid organ weight resides in
the increased size of the cortisone-sensitive lymphoid population.
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT 1107
Role of the Thymus in Enhancement ofAntibody Formation in CastratedMice.-
The marked hyperplasia of the thymus gland after orchiectomy at 6 wk of age
raised the question as to whether the enhancement of immune response in cas-
trated mice represented a hyperfunction of this tissue. In order to investigate
its role, mice were thymectomized at the age of 5 wk and sets of surviving male
mice were castrated 1 wk later. At the age of 16 wk the immune response of
thymectomized, castrated mice to PVP was evaluated. The response of these
mice was compared with male mice sham-thymectomized and castrated, as well
as to thymectomized and normal male and female mice.
o
×
v
g
>-
._1
LLI
O
LL
©
cc
w
m
Z
400-
320-
240-
160-
80-
5-
8 III
I I I I I
12 13 14 15 16
AGE IN WEEKS
FIG. 7. Total nucleated cell counts of thymuses of normal and castrated male and female
B6D2F1 mice of identical age, before and 48 hr after injection of cortisone acetate intraperi-
toneally in a dose of 125 mg/kg body weight. After cortisone administration, the number of
recoverable cells was virtuallyidentical; hence, the data are expressed as a single line for clar-
ity. Each point represents the mean and SEof 12 mice per group. Castrated males, (0--0);
normal males, (O ........ O); normal females, (~--II).
Fig. 9 indicates the response of experimental and control groups of mice.
Thymectomy of normal male mice enhanced the response to PVP, confirming
previously published data (22). Hence, castration and thymectomy which also
generates enhancement should have produced an additive enhanced effect. It
did not. In fact, thymectomy abolished the enhancement seen after gonadec-
tomy (Fig. 9 B).
In order to test the environment in castrated vs. normal male mice, animals
were lethally irradiated and reconstituted with 10 million normal spleen cells
and 5 million bone marrow cells. Separate groups of animals were immunized
with 0.1 ~g of PVP intravenously or with either 0.1 cc of 2.5 % rat or goose
erythrocytes. Fig. l0 indicates the responses to PVP, the thymus-independent
1108 SEX HORIV[ONAL REGULATION OF BIMUNE RESPONSE
antigen. It may be seen that the castrated, lethally irradiated mice possessed an
improved environment for response to this antigen, in that levels of antibody in
the castrated group greatly exceeded the serum levels of normal, lethally ir-
radiated reconstituted animals. In contrast, no difference was observed be-
tween castrated and normal, lethally irradiated recipients in responsiveness to
the thymus-dependent antigens, goose, or rat erythrocytes.
Effect of Gonadectomy of the Male on Stem Cell Di~erentiation.--In order to
evaluate whether the environment was capable of generating differences in stem
350-
~" 31o- r
v
z 270-
03
03
-J 190-.4
150-
rr
uJ
70 m 1/ 112 I I J I
10 t 1 3 14 15 16
AGE IN WEEKS
FIO. 8. Nucleated spleen cell counts before (uppei set of curves) and 48 hr after (lower set
of curves) administration of cortisone acetate in a dose of 125 mg/kg body weight. Each point
represents mean and ss of 12 B6D2F1 mice per group. Castrated males, (e--O); normal
males, (©........ ©) ; normal females, (1#-tl).
cell differentiation which could account for the enhanced responsiveness on the
basis of a greater stream of cells differentiating into the lymphoid system from
bone marrow multipotent precursor cells, initial evidence for a potential altera-
tion in stem cell differentiation was sought. In these experiments, the capacity
for hematopoiesis in reconstituted animals was evaluated, only in the context
of an index of potential alterations.
The number of spleen colonies in animals receiving 10'5 bone marrow cells
after lethal irradiation was determined. Table II indicates the data of four ex-
periments from which it may be seen in three of these experiments, that the
number of colony-forming units in the spleen of reconstituted gonadectomized
mice was significantly higher than normal male mice. In one of the four ex-
¢q
(.5
O
_a
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT
(A)
T NORMAL (~
l,
1
',J T T.- ........... o
o,.. ..-I t"-. /
1
(B)
CASTRATED
T
1109
I I I I I I I I I I I I
5 6 7 14 21 35 5 6 7 14 21 35
TIME IN DAYS
FIG. 9. Primary immune response after administration of 0.1/zg of PVP in various groups
of B6D2F1 mice. Each point represents mean and sE of 8-10 mice per group. (A) Thymecto-
mized males, (A--A); normal males, (O ........ O). (B) Castrated males, (O--O);castrated,
thymectomized males, (A--A).
6-
4
I.-
I-
0
.-1
2
.0....... .0.....
/1//
TIME IN DAYS
FIc. 10. Response to 0.1 #g of PVP of castrated and normal lethally irradiated CAF1 mice
reconstituted with 107 spleen cells and 5 X 106 bone marrow cells from normal syngeneic
male donors. Each point represents the mean of 10-12 mice. Castrated males, (O--O) ;normal
males, (O ........ O).
z
d
co
(.3
SEX HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
perirnents it was noted that the numbers of colonies in the female group were
equivalent to those of the normal male mice, and fewer in number than the
orchiectomized male animal. The validity and reproducibility of this observa-
tion was not tested further.
TABLE II
Splenic Colony-Forming Units in Lethally Irradiated Castrated and Norma~ Males and Females
Reconstituted with 105 Bone Marrow Cells
No. of colonies/spleen
Exp. No.
Females Males Castrates
I 13.7 4- 1.8 (14) 13.3 4- 0.8 (16) 23.4 4- 2.7 (14)
II -- 15.4 4- 1.2 (14) 23.1 4- 1.9 (13)
III -- 18.4 4- 1.9 (5) 34.5 4- 2.5 (4)
IV -- 20.9 4- 2.2 (10) 21.5 4- 2.0 (12)
Numbers in parentheses indicate number of animals employed in each experimental
group.
T
32
19,200"
16~800-
14~400-
12,000-
9600-
7200-
4800-
2400-
1110
I I I
10 7 10 6 10 5
DOSE OF BONE MARROW CELLS
FIG. 11. Uptake of S~Fe expressed as counts per minute (CPM) per spleen taken from nor-
mal and castrated males and females. Mice were lethally irradiated and reconstituted with
either 105, 106, or 107 syngeneic bone marrow cells. A dose of 0.2 #c of 59Fe was admin-
istered intravenously 16 hr before sacrifice, 7 days after lethal irradiation and reconstitutlon.
Each point represents the mean and SE of 12 B6D2F1 mice. In this experiment mice were 12
wk of age, hence, 6 wk after orchiectomy. Castrated males, (O--O); normal males,
(© ........ O); normal females, (~).
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT 1111
In three separate experiments designed to provide more quantitative objec-
tive data, a tracer dose of iron-59 was administered and the isotope uptake of
growing hematopoietic cells evaluated 1 wk after reconstitution with 105, l0 G,
or l0Tsyngeneic bone marrow cells. Fig. 11 indicates the data in one experiment
of three identical experiments carried out to evaluate this parameter. In two ex-
periments the uptake of radioactive tracer at the dose of 106 bone marrow cells
was greatest in the castrated male animal. In one case the female exhibited the
highest uptake. However, in all three instances the splenic uptake in these two
groups of mice exceeded levels of radioactivity in normal male mice. It was be-
lieved but not proven that the variation at the l0T dose was due to spatial
interference induced by reconstitution with excessive numbers of cells.
DISCUSSION
The results of the present work confirmed the experiments of numerous in-
vestigators in denoting the enhanced capacity for humoral antibody formation
in female vs. male mice. Both IgM (19S) production, particularly in primary
immune responses, as well as IgG (7S) antibody production denoted in sec-
ondary and tertiary immune responses were enhanced. Thus, under diverse
experimental and natural conditions the female may generate enhanced im-
munoglobulin production in probably all classes of antibody (1-6).
The unusual observation in the present work was the markedly enhanced
responses to the thymus-independent antigen, PVP, in female and in castrated
male mice. Whereas the responses to thymus-dependent antigens in the cas-
trated mice simply converted the male to the female animal in terms of re-
sponsiveness, castrated mice not infrequently exhibited the highest responses
to thymus-independent antigens. The marked hyperplasia of the thymus gland
after castration at 6 wk of age pointed to this organ as the etiological factor in
generating the enhanced responses. This view was confirmed by experiments
combining thymectomy with gonadectomy. The enhanced response to PVP in
the castrated mice was abolished by thymectomy. Since thymic function di-
minishes with increasing age (25, 26), the reduction or disappearance of the en-
hancement with time after castration at 6 wk of age, and the failure to demon-
strate enhancement 10 wk after castration of 9- or 10-month old animals, also
provided indirect evidence for the role of the thymus is mediating the castration
effect. Similar arguments may be put forth denoting the role of the thymus in
producing the differential enhanced responses in normal female vs. male mice.
It would appear that the thymus gland is capable of enhancing humoral
antibody formation by at least two differing mechanisms. The first is via pro-
duction of enhancing factor or hormone (27-29), which may or may not be
equivalent to thymosin (30). The second mechanism has been more recently
described by ourselves (31) and by Gershon and colleagues and others (32-
34), namely, that the thymus possesses, at the very least on a functional basis, a
population of inhibitory or suppressor cells. The enhanced response to thymus-
independent antigen has been interpreted to represent enhanced B lymphocyte
1112 SEX HORIvIONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
function generated by loss of thymic inhibitory cell function (21). The abolition
of the enhancement effect of castration by thymectomy suggests therefore that
the enhancement effect in the castrated mice is mediated by thymic hormone.
Further evidence that the enhancement is hormonal in origin was derived by
comparing responses of lethally irradiated castrated and normal male mice.
The response in the former greatly exceeded the latter. Although the thymus is
markedly radiosensitive (35), it may be that the thymic hormone production is
a radioresistant capability of thymus for which there is some evidence (29), or
alternatively, that higher serum levels of the hormone may be reached in the
castrated mice before lethal irradiation. Thus, in an absolute sense, the immune
response to PVP may be looked upon as being negatively thymus dependent.
A possible role of the pituitary gland was studied indirectly as follows. The
response to PVP was evaluated at intervals after oophorectomy of female mice.
No enhancement of the response to PVP was seen, indicating that the pituitary-
endocrine axis is not involved in the enhanced response. Thus, enhanced
pituitary hormonal activity after gonadectomy does not mediate the effect.
The substantial increase in cortisone-sensitive cells in the thymus after cas-
tration, while preserving equivalent numbers of cortisone-resistant cells, sug-
gests that there may be a greater production of thymic lymphocytes from
precursor cells after castration. The observed enhancement of the secondary
as well as the primary immune responsiveness to the highly thymus-dependent
antigens, horse, or goose erythrocytes suggests that the cellular differentiation
of T1 to T2 lymphocytes (36) may also be promoted. That the effect on thymus-
dependent antigens is mediated by cellular rather than environmental factors is
indicated by the absence of enhanced response to goose or rat erythrocytes in
lethally irradiated and reconstituted castrated mice when compared with
ethally irradiated and reconstituted normal male mice. Thus, it is the cell
inoculum rather than the host environment (in contrast to thymus-independent
antigen) which is the overriding factor in enhanced response to thymus-de-
pendent antigens.
The observed increases in numbers of colonies and 59Fe uptake of henla-
topoietic cells in the spleens of bone marrow-reconstituted female or gonadec-
tomized male animals as compared to normal males provided indirect evidence
that stem cell differentiation, at least in the hematopoietic system, is enhanced
in an environment deficient in androgenic hormone. It may be more than coin-
cidental that the reconstitutive capacity of bone marrow is directly propor-
tional to the thymus weight of the three groups of mice. Neonatal thymectomy
has been shown to diminish numbers of spleen colonies (37), while addition of
syngeneic thymus cells to a bone marrow inoculum augments numbers of
hematopoietic colonies (38). However, the potential role of trophic hormones
derived from the pituitary gland was not evaluated by experiments employing
oophorectomized females, nor was stem cell differentiation in the lymphoid
system examined directly at this time. Nevertheless, all of the findings taken
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS ~. GARRETT 1113
together imply a profound albeit complex influence of the sex hormones on cell
proliferation and differentiation in both the lymphoid and hematopoietic sys-
tems, mediated both by hormonal or environmental, and cellular mechanisms.
The enhanced capability of hematopoietic stem cell differentiation from bone
marrow precursors in castrated animals raises serious questions regarding the
clinical use of androgens to promote stem cell differentiation in aplastic anemia
and myelofibrosis. Its use would seem in part to be related to the observation of
the stimulation of erythropoiesis in rodents (39, 40) brought about (perhaps)
by increased levels of erythropoietin (41, 42). There is no doubt that androgens
can induce a remission in patients with aplastic anemia (43, 44) or myelofibrosis
(45). However, evidence for a direct effect of androgens in stimulating erythro-
poiesis is controversial, some workers being in favor (46, 47) and some opposed
(48, 49). The observations in the present work imply that the mechanisms of
stimulation of erythropoiesis are complex, and that the role of androgens in the
clinical treatment of aplastic anemia and myelofibrosis need to be reassessed.
SUMMARY
The primary and secondary immune responses to thymus-dependent and
-independent antigens were evaluated in normal male and female mice and in
castrated male mice. Both IgM antibody production in the primary response
and IgG antibody production in the secondary response were enhanced in fe-
males vs. males of equivalent age. Castration of the male converted this animal
to a female in terms of responsiveness to the thymus-dependent group of anti-
gens, while inducing equivalent or even greater enhanced responsiveness over
the female to the thymus-independent antigen, polyvinylpyrrolidone.
Further characteristics of the changes in lymphoid organs were determined
in the castrated animal vs. normal males and females. It was shown that the
spleen and thymus became markedly hyperplastic, the organ weights exceeding
the female, which in turn were greater than in the male. The enhanced weight of
the thymus was shown to be due to increased numbers of cortisone-sensitive
cells, the absolute number of cortisone-resistant cells remaining equivalent to
normal males and females. Thus, the increased thymic weight of the female
also resided in the cortisone-sensitive population. Peripheral lymphocyte
counts in castrated animals exceeded both normal males and females. Further
experiments in gonadectomized males provided evidence that increased thymic
cell activity per se played a role in enhanced response to thymus-dependent
antigens, but that a thymic-derived hormone mediated the enhanced effect to
the thymus-independent antigen in the castrated animal. The capacity for loss
of androgenic hormone-producing tissue to generate enhanced differentiation
of stem cells was denoted by experiments in which numbers of spleen colonies
and uptake of 59Fe,employed as an index of hematopoiesis 1 wk after reconsti-
tution of lethally irradiated castrated and normal recipients, were enhanced in
gonadectomized male animals. Thus, in summary, changes in sex hormone
levels exerted a marked influence on immune responsiveness and stem cell
1114 SEX HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
differentiation, by increasing numbers of functioning cells, by promoting cellular
differentiation, as well as by promoting cellular function via hormonal effects.
The authors are indebted to Miss Donna-Marie Jackson and Mrs. Christine Thorpe for
excellent technical assistance, and to Dr. Hugh F. Pross for his help in the preparation of this
manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Ainbender, E., R. Berger Weisinger, M. Hevizy, and H. L. Hodes. 1968. Differ-
ence in the immunoglobulin class of polioantibody in the serum of men and
women. J. Immunol. 101:1.
2. Butterworth, M., B. McClellan, and M. Allansmith. 1967. Influence of sex on
immunoglobulin levels. Nature (Loml.). 214:1224.
3. Rhodes, K., A. Scott, R. L. Markham, and M. E. Monk-Jones. 1969. Immuno-
logical sex differences. A study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, their rela-
tives, and controls. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 28:104.
4. Rowley, M. J., and I. R. MacKay. 1969. Measurement of antlbody-producing
capacity in man. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 3:407.
5. Batchelor, J. R. 1968. Hormonal control of antibody formation. I~, Regulation of
the Antibody Response. B. Cinader, editor. Charles C Thomas, Publisher,
Springfield, Ilk 276.
6. Terres, G., S. L. Morrison, and G. S. Habicht. 1968. A quantitative difference in
the immune response between male and female mice. Proo. Soc. E:cp. Biol. Med.
127:664.
7. Dresser, D. W. 1962. Specific inhibition of antibody production. I. Protein-over-
loading paralysis. Immunology. 5:161.
8. Steinberg, A. D., T. Pincus, and N. Talal. 1971. The pathogenesis of autoimmu-
nity in New Zealand mice. III. Factors influencing the formation of anti-nucleic
acid antibodies. Immunology. 20:523.
9. Helyer, B. J., and J. B. Howie. 1963. Spontaneous autoimmune disease in NZB/BL
mice. Br. J. tfaematol. 9:119.
10. Halstead, S. B. 1969. Observations related to pathogenesis of dengue hemorrhagic
fever. VI. Hypotheses and discussion. J. Biol. Med. 42:350.
11. Kongshavn, P. A. L., and J. Q. Bliss. 1969. Sex differences in survival of H-2 in-
compatible skin grafts in mice treated with antithymocyte serum. Nature
(Lond.). 226:451.
12. Graft, R. J., M. A. Lappe, and G. D. Snell. 1969. The influence of the gonads and
adrenal glands on the immune response to skin grafts. Transplantation. 7:105.
13. Brent, L., and P. Medawar. 1966. Quantitative studies on tissue transplantation
immunity. VIII. The effects of irradiation. Proe. R. Soc. London B Biol. Sci.
165:413.
14. Lieber, E., K. Hirschhorn, and H. H. Fudenberg. 1969. Response of agammaglob-
ulinaemic lymphocytes in mixed lymphocyte culture. Cli~z.E:~p. Immunol. 4:83.
15. Freeham, W., and R. Small. 1941. Effect of testosterone proprionate on various
responses of immature rats. Endocrinology. 29:758.
16. Dougherty, T. F. 1952. Effect of hormones on lymphatic tissue. Physiol. Rev. 32:
379.
DAVID EIDINGER AND THOMAS J. GARRETT 1115
17. Gardner, W. U. 1953. Hormonal aspects of experimental tumorigenesis. Adv.
Cancer Res. 1:173.
18. Wasi, P., and M. Block. 1961. The histopathologic study of the development of
the irradiation-induced leukemia in C57 black mice and of its inhibition by tes-
tosterone. Cancer Res. 21:463.
19. Chiodi, H. 1940. Relationship between the thymus and the sexual organs. Endo-
crinology. 26:107.
20. Murphy, J. B., and E. Sturm. 1947. The lymphoid tissue and antibody formation.
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 66:303.
21. Kerbel, R., and D. Eidinger. 1972. Enhanced immune responsiveness to a thymus
independent antigen early after thymectomy: evidence for short-lived inhibitory
thymus-derived cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 9.:114.
22. Andersson, B., and H. Blomgren. 1971. Evidence for thymus-independent humoral
antibody production in mice against polyvinylpyrrolidone and E. coli lipopoly-
saccharide. Cell. [mmunol. 9.:411.
23. Eidinger, D., and H. F. Pross. 1967. The immune response to sheep erythrocytes
in the mouse. I. A study of the immunological events utilizing the plaque tech-
nique. J. Exp. Med. 126:15.
24. Blomgren, H., and B. Andersson. 1970. Characteristics of the immunocompetent
cells in the mouse thymus. Cell population changes during cortisone-induced
atrophy and subsequent regeneration. Cell. Immunol. 1:545.
25. Price, G. B., and T. Makinodan. 1972. Immunologic deficiencies in senescence. I.
Characterization of intrinsic deficiencies. J. Immunol. 108:403.
26. Miller, J. F. A. P. 1965. Effect of thymectomy in adult mice on immunological
responsiveness. Nature (Lond.). 208:1337.
27. Wu, C. Y., and B. Cinader. 1971. Antigenic promotion. Increase in hapten-specific
plaque-forming cells after preinjection with structurally unrelated macromole-
cules. J. Exp. Med. 134:693.
28. Dutton, R. W., R. Falkoff, J. A. Hirst, M. Hoffmann, J. W. Kappler, J. R. Kett-
man, J. F. Lesley, and D. Vann. 1971. Is there evidence for a non-antigen spe-
cific diffusable chemical mediator from the thymus-derived cell in the initiation
of the immune response? Prog. Immunol. 1:355.
29. Ekpaha-Mensah, A., and J. C. Kennedy. 1971. New indicator of histo-compati-
bility differences in vitro. Nat. New Biol. 9.33:174.
30. Goldstein, A. L., F. D. Slater, and A. White. 1966. Preparation, assay, and partial
purification of a thymic lymphocytopoietic factor (thymosin). Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 56:1010.
31. Eidinger, D., and H. F. Pross. 1972. Studies of antibody formation in vitro and
in lethally irradiated reconstituted mice. Evidence for an inhibitory function of
thymus derived cells. Scand. J. Immunol. 1:193.
32. Gershon, R. K., P. Cohen, R. Hencin, and S. A. Liebhaber. 1972. Suppressor T
cells. J. Immunol. 108:586.
33. Okumura, K., and T. Tada. 1972. Regulation of homocytotropic antibody forma-
tion in the rat. VI. Inhibitory effect of thymocytes on the homocytotropic anti-
body response. J. Immunol. 107:1682.
34. Baker, P. J., P. W. Stashak, D. F. Amsbaugh, B. Prescott, and R. F. Barth. 1970.
Evidence for the existence of two functionally distinct types of cells which regu-
1116 SEX HORMONALREGULATION OF IMMUNE RESPONSE
late the antibody response to type III pneumococcal polysaccharide. J. Immu-
nol. 105:1581.
35. Blomgren, H., and L. Revesz. 1967. Cellular composition of mouse thymus after
x-ray exposure. Exp. Cell Res. 51:92.
36. Raft, M. C., and H. Cantor. 1971. Subpopulations of thymus cells and thymus de-
rived lymphocytes. In Proceedings of the First International Congress of Im-
munology, Washington, D. C., August 1971. Academic Press Inc., New York.
83.
37. Resnitzky, P., D. Zipori, and N. Trainin. 1970. Effect of neonatal thymectomy
on hemopoietic tissue in mice. Blood. 37:634.
38. Goodman, J. W. 1971. Cellular interaction between thymocytes and transplanted
marrow stem cells. Transplant. Proc. 3:430.
39. Shirakura, T., M. Azuma, and T. Maekawa. 1967. Studies on erythropoietic
action of testosterone. Acta Haernatol. (Basel). 38:49.
40. Fried, W., R. Degowin, and C. W. Gurney. 1964. Erythropoietic effect of testos-
terone in the polycythemic mouse. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 117:839.
41. Fried, W., and C. W: Gurney. 1965. Use of mild plethora to demonstrate an eryth-
ropoietic effect from small amounts of androgens. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.
120:519.
42. Gordon, A. S., R. Katz, E. D. Zanjani, and E. A. Mirand. 1966. Renal mecha-
nisms underlying actions of androgen and hypoxia on erythropoiesis. Proc. Soc.
Exp. Biol. Med. 123:475.
43. Alexanian, R. 1969. Erytbropoietin and erythropoiesis in anemic man following
androgens. Blood. 33:564.
44. Shahidi, N. T., and L. K. Diamond. 1961. Testosterone induced remission in aplas-
tic anemia of both acquired and congenital types. N. Engl. J. Med. 264:953.
45. Gardner, F. H., and D. G. Nathan. 1966. Androgens and erythropoiesis. 111. Fur-
ther evaluation of testosterone treatment of myelofibrosis. N. Engl. 3. Med.
274:420.
46. Erslav, A. J. 1962. Erythropoietin and testosterone in vitro. Proc. IX Congr. Int.
Soc. Hematol. 3:143.
47. Reisher, E. H., Jr. 1966. Tissue culture of bone marrow. II. Effect of steroid hor-
mones on hematopoiesis in vitro. Blood. 27:460.
48. Gurney, C. W., and W. Fried. 1965. Further studies on the erythropoietic effect
of androgens. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 65:775.
49. McDonald, T. P., T. J. Mitchell, and R. D. Lange. 1971. Effects of testosterone
and erythropoietin on rabbit bone marrow cells. Isr. J. Med. Sci. 7:885.
