263Vol. 7, No. 2, March–April 2001 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Special Issue
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), and the
American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation
(ASBMT) sponsored the Guidelines for Preventing Opportu-
nistic Infections Among Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant
Recipients. This document was drafted in 1997 by a working
group of infectious disease and transplant experts,1 revised
extensively from 1997 to 1999, and released for public
comment on September 15, 1999, on the CDC website. The
final document was published in CDC’s Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report on October 20, 2000, and in the
Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation in late 2000.
The term hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients
(HSCT) is preferable to “bone marrow transplant recipients”
because the new term more accurately describes the current
state of transplantation, which may involve harvesting donor
cells from peripheral blood, umbilical cord blood, or bone
marrow (1).
The document is an evidence-based statement of
recommended strategies for preventing opportunistic infec-
tions in HSCT recipients. The prevention strategies are rated
by the strength of the recommendation and the quality of the
evidence supporting it. This rating system was developed by
IDSA and the U.S. Public Health Service for use in the
guidelines for the prevention of opportunistic infections in
persons infected with HIV (2). The rating system allows the
importance of each recommendation to be assessed. An A
rating indicates strong evidence for efficacy and clinical
benefit and an intervention that should always be offered; an
intervention with a B rating is supported by moderate
evidence and generally should be offered; a C rating indicates
an optional intervention because evidence is insufficient to
support a recommendation or evidence for efficacy might not
outweigh adverse effects; a D rating indicates that moderate
evidence for lack of efficacy or adverse outcome supports
recommending against the intervention; and an E rating
indicates strong evidence that an intervention is contraindi-
cated because of lack of efficacy or adverse effects. Three
categories are used to rate the quality of evidence supporting
each recommendation, with I the highest, indicating evidence
from at least one randomized, controlled trial; II indicating
evidence from at least one well-designed clinical trial without
randomization, from cohort or case-controlled analytic
studies, or from multiple time-series, or dramatic results from
uncontrolled experiments; and III indicating evidence from
authorities’ opinions based on clinical experience, descriptive
studies, or reports of expert committees. This article
summarizes the hospital infection control guidelines in the
Guidelines for Preventing Opportunistic Infections Among
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients, with ratings
in brackets.
Ventilation
All allogeneic HSCT recipients should be placed in rooms
with >12 air exchanges per hour (3,4) and point-of-use, high-
efficiency (>99%) particulate air (HEPA) filters capable of
removing particles >0.3 µm in diameter (4-7) [AIII]. This
recommendation is particularly important for facilities
undergoing construction and renovation (8). The need for
environmental HEPA filtration for autologous HSCT
recipients has not been established; however, the use of
HEPA-filtered rooms should be considered for autologous
HSCT recipients who have prolonged neutropenia, the major
risk factor for nosocomial aspergillosis [CIII].
The use of laminar air flow rooms for bone marrow
transplant recipients has been controversial. Such rooms
contain filtered air that moves in parallel, unidirectional flow;
the air enters the room from one wall and exits the room on the
opposite wall (3). Although LAF protects patients from
infection in aspergillosis outbreaks during hospital construc-
tion (9,10), its routine use may not be valuable for all HSCT
recipients (11). Since 1983, rooms with laminar air flow have
been preferred for allogeneic HSCT recipients with aplastic
anemia and human leukocyte antigen-identical sibling
donors because the reported death rate of patients in regular
rooms was nearly four times higher (12). However, the
survival of aplastic anemia HSCT recipients in the late 1990s
exceeds that reported in the early 1980s, and no study has yet
Hospital Infection Control in Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplant Recipients
Clare A. Dykewicz
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Address for correspondence: Clare A. Dykewicz, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Mailstop A12, Atlanta,
GA 30333, USA; fax: 404-639-4664; e-mail: cad3@cdc.gov
Guidelines for Preventing Opportunistic Infections Among Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant
Recipients contains a section on hospital infection control including evidence-based recommendations
regarding ventilation, construction, equipment, plants, play areas and toys, health-care workers, visitors,
patient skin and oral care, catheter-related infections, drug-resistant organisms, and specific nosocomial
infections. These guidelines are intended to reduce the number and severity of hospital infections in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients.
1
Chair: Clare A. Dykewicz: Members: Raleigh A. Bowden, David Emanuel, David Longworth, Philip A. Rowlings, Robert H. Rubin, Kent A. Sepkowitz, Keith
Sullivan, and John R. Wingard. CDC members: Robert T. Chen, Brian R. Edlin, Beth Hibbs, Harold W. Jaffe, William R. Jarvis, Jonathan Kaplan, Thomas J. Spira.
264Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 7, No. 2, March–April 2001
Special Issue
determined whether survival of HSCT recipients with
aplastic anemia improves when they are treated in rooms
with laminar air flow. Therefore, such rooms need not be
constructed for every HSCT recipient, and use of available
rooms is optional [CII].
Hospital rooms should have directed airflow so that air
enters at one side of the room and is exhausted at the opposite
side (5) [BIII]. Each hospital room should be well sealed (e.g.,
around windows and electrical outlets) (5) [BIII]. To provide
consistent positive pressure in the HSCT recipient’s room,
consistent pressure differentials should be maintained
between patients’ rooms and the hallways or anterooms at
>2.5 Pascals (3,4) [BIII]. In general, air pressure in hospital
rooms of HSCT recipients should be higher than in adjoining
hallways, toilets, and anterooms.
Backup emergency power and redundant systems should
be provided to maintain room pressurization and a constant
number of air exchanges in HSCT units when the central
ventilation system is shut off for maintenance and repair (13)
[BIII]. In addition, protocols should be developed to protect
HSCT units from bursts of mold spores when air-handling
systems are restarted after routine maintenance [BIII].
Construction
Hospital construction and renovation have been
associated with increased risk for nosocomial fungal
infection, especially aspergillosis, among severely
immunocompromised patients (14). Therefore, people respon-
sible for HSCT unit construction or renovation should consult
published recommendations for environmental controls
(15,16) [AIII]. Planning for construction or renovation should
include strategies for intensified aspergillosis-control mea-
sures [AIII]. The planning committee should include
engineers, architects, housekeeping staff, infection control
personnel, the director of the HSCT unit, administration
representatives, and safety officers [BIII].
Isolation
HSCT units should follow published guidelines for
hospital isolation practices, including CDC guidelines for the
prevention of nosocomial infections (17,18) [AIII]. However,
the efficacy of specific isolation and barrier precautions in
preventing nosocomial infections in HSCT recipients has not
been evaluated. HSCT recipients should be placed in private
rooms [BIII]. When indicated, HSCT recipients should also be
placed on airborne, droplet, or contact precautions in addition
to standard precautions (17) [AIII]. Careful observation of
isolation precautions is important to prevent transmission of
infectious agents among HSCT recipients, health-care
workers, and visitors.
Hand Hygiene
Hand hygiene is the single most effective procedure for
preventing nosocomial infection (17). Everyone, especially
health-care workers, should wash hands before entering and
after leaving rooms of HSCT recipients and candidates
undergoing conditioning therapy (chemotherapy and radia-
tion) (17,19) or before and after any direct contact with
patients, regardless of whether hands were soiled [AI]. HSCT
recipients should be encouraged to practice good hand hygiene
(e.g., washing hands before eating, after using the toilet,
before and after touching a wound) [BIII]. Hands should be
washed with antimicrobial soap and water [AIII]; hygienic
hand rubs are also an acceptable means of maintaining hand
hygiene (20,21). Health-care workers wearing gloves should
put them on in the patient’s room after handwashing and then
discard them in the same patient’s room before washing
hands again on exiting the room. Gloves should always be
changed between patients or before touching a clean area if
the gloves become soiled (e.g., change gloves after touching
the perineum and before touching a clean area) [AIII].
Appropriate gloves should be used by all persons handling
potentially contaminated biological materials [AII].
Equipment
HSCT units should monitor opened and unopened
wound-dressing supplies such as adhesive bandages (22) and
surgical and elastic adhesive tape (23) to detect mold
contamination and prevent cutaneous transmission to
patients [BII]. All bandages and wound dressings should be
discarded that are out of date, have damaged packaging, or
are visually contaminated by construction debris, moisture.
[BIII].
Plants
Exposure to plants and flowers has not been conclusively
shown to cause fungal infections in HSCT recipients.
However, most experts strongly recommend that plants and
dried or fresh flowers not be allowed in the hospital rooms of
HSCT recipients or candidates undergoing conditioning
therapy because Aspergillus spp. have been isolated from the
soil of potted ornamental plants (e.g., cacti), the surface of
dried flower arrangements, and fresh flowers (5,7,24) [BIII].
Play Areas and Toys
Play areas for pediatric HSCT recipients and candidates
undergoing conditioning therapy should be cleaned and
disinfected weekly and as needed [BIII]. Only toys, games,
and videos that can be kept clean and disinfected should be
allowed in the HSCT unit [BIII]. HSCT units and clinics
should follow published recommendations for washing and
disinfecting toys (25) [BIII].
Health-Care Workers
Each hospital or HSCT center should prepare a written
comprehensive policy on the immunization of hospital
personnel that meets current recommendations of CDC, the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
(26) [BIII]. Immunizations are needed to prevent transmis-
sion of vaccine-preventable diseases to HSCT recipients and
candidates undergoing conditioning therapy. In general,
health-care workers should be immune to measles, mumps,
rubella, and especially varicella and influenza.
Visitors
Hospitals should have written policies for screening
HSCT unit visitors, especially children, for potentially
infectious conditions. Such screening should be performed by
clinically trained health-care personnel [BII]. Visitors who
have communicable infectious diseases such as upper
respiratory infection or flulike illness, recent exposure to
communicable diseases, an active shingles rash (whether
covered or not), a Varicella zoster-like rash within 6 weeks of
receiving a chickenpox vaccine, or a history of receiving an
oral polio vaccine within the previous 3 to 6 weeks should not
265Vol. 7, No. 2, March–April 2001 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Special Issue
be allowed to enter the HSCT unit or have direct contact with
HSCT recipients or candidates undergoing conditioning
therapy [AII].
Patient Skin Care
Skin care during neutropenia should include daily
inspection of sites likely to be portals of infection, such as the
perineum and intravascular access sites [BIII]. HSCT
recipients and candidates undergoing conditioning therapy
should maintain good perineal hygiene to minimize loss of
skin integrity and risk for infection [BIII]. To facilitate this,
HSCT units should develop special protocols for patient
perineal care. To prevent vaginal or cervical irritation and
abrasions, menstruating immunosuppressed HSCT recipi-
ents should not use tampons [DIII]. (Immunosuppressed
HSCT recipients are defined as being <24 months post-HSCT,
on immunosuppressive therapy, or having graft-versus-host
disease.) The use of rectal thermometers, enemas, suppositories,
and rectal exams are contraindicated for HSCT recipients
because of the risk for skin or mucosal breakdown [DIII].
Oral and Dental Care
Establishing optimal periodontal health before HSCT is
one of the most important steps patients can take to avoid oral
infections, and maintaining good oral hygiene after the
transplant can minimize the severity and facilitate healing of
mucositis, especially before engraftment [BIII]. All HSCT
candidates should receive a dental evaluation and relevant
treatment before conditioning therapy begins (27) [AIII].
Likely sources of dental infection should be rigorously
eliminated [AIII].
HSCT recipients with mucositis and HSCT candidates
undergoing conditioning therapy should maintain good oral
hygiene by rinsing the mouth four to six times a day with
sterile water, normal saline, or sodium bicarbonate solutions
(27) [AIII]. HSCT recipients and candidates should brush
their teeth at least twice a day with a soft regular toothbrush
(27) [BIII]. Patients who cannot tolerate these brushings may
use ultra-soft toothbrushes or sponge or foam toothettes (Sage
Products, Crystal Lake, IL) [CIII], but these products are less
effective in removing dental debris (17). Toothpaste is
optional, depending on patient tolerance (27) [CIII]. HSCT
recipients and candidates undergoing conditioning therapy
who are skilled at dental flossing should floss daily if this can
be done without trauma [BIII].
Prevention of Bacterial Infections
Related to Intravascular Catheters
HSCT units are advised to implement published
guidelines for preventing infections related to the use of
intravascular devices (28) [AIII]. HSCT units should avoid
tap-water contact with the central venous catheter site [BIII].
To prevent bloodstream infections associated with the use of
needleless intravenous-access devices, HSCT recipients
should cover and protect the catheter tip or end cap during
bathing or showering to protect it from tap-water
contamination, change the device in accordance with
manufacturers’ recommendations, and have a care giver
perform IV infusions whenever possible (29) [BII].
Drug-Resistant Organisms
Avoiding the misuse of antibiotics will decrease the
emergence of drug-resistant strains of bacteria. Therefore,
HSCT units should routinely review patterns of use for
antibiotics and should prudently prescribe all antibiotics,
especially vancomycin, to prevent the emergence of
multidrug-resistant organisms. Medical and ancillary staff
members responsible for monitoring antimicrobial use
patterns should routinely review vancomycin use (30) [AIII].
Vancomycin and all other antibiotics, especially third-
generation cephalosporins and antianaerobic agents such as
metronidazole, must be used judiciously (30) [AII].
Specific Nosocomial Infections
Nosocomial pathogens are potential threats to all
patients; however, if infected, HSCT recipients are at risk for
more severe disease. Nosocomial pathogens of concern include
Legionella spp., methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
Streptococcus viridans, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and
community respiratory viruses such as influenza, respiratory
syncytial virus, adenovirus, and parainfluenza virus.
Legionellosis
Clinicians should always consider infection with
Legionella spp. in the differential diagnosis of pneumonia in
HSCT recipients. Because HSCT recipients are at much
higher risk for disease and death from legionellosis (31),
periodic routine culturing for legionellae in water samples
from the transplant units’ potable water supply may be part of
an overall prevention strategy in such units [CIII]. However,
the optimal methods (frequency, number of sites) for
environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units have
not been determined, and the cost-effectiveness of this
strategy has not been evaluated. Because HSCT recipients
are at high risk for legionellosis and a safe concentration of
legionellae organisms in potable water has not been
determined, the goal, if environmental surveillance is
undertaken, should be to maintain water systems with no
detectable organisms [AIII]. Clinicians must maintain a high
index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with
nosocomial pneumonia even when environmental surveil-
lance cultures do not yield legionellae [AIII].
Community Respiratory Virus Infections
Clinicians should institute appropriate precautions and
infection control measures to prevent nosocomial pneumonia
in hospitalized HSCT recipients and candidates undergoing
conditioning therapy, especially during community or
nosocomial respiratory virus outbreaks (5) [AIII]. Even when
there is no nosocomial or community outbreak of respiratory
virus infections, which are emerging infections in HSCT
recipients, everyone who enters an HSCT unit, including
visitors and health-care workers, should be screened daily for
symptoms of upper respiratory infection [BIII]. Some experts
recommend that health-care workers who work in HSCT
units should provide daily verification (e.g., sign-in sheets)
that they are symptom free before being allowed to care for
patients. To minimize the risk for transmission, health-care
workers and visitors with upper respiratory symptoms should
be restricted from contact with HSCT recipients and
candidates undergoing conditioning therapy [AIII]. All
health-care workers with upper respiratory infection symptoms
should be restricted from patient contact and reassigned to
nonpatient care duties until their symptoms resolve [BIII].
Visitors with such symptoms should be asked to defer their
visit to the HSCT unit until their symptoms resolve [BIII].
266Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 7, No. 2, March–April 2001
Special Issue
Viral shedding among HSCT recipients with community
respiratory virus infection has been documented to last up to
4 months for influenza (32), 2 years for adenovirus (33), and
22 days for respiratory syncytial virus (34); however, viral
shedding has been reported to last up to 112 days in a child
with severe combined immunodeficiency (35). Therefore, to
prevent nosocomial transmission, HSCT units should factor
such possible prolonged viral shedding into policy decisions
about duration of precautions for infected HSCT recipients or
candidates undergoing conditioning therapy [CIII].
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
HSCT candidates should be screened for tuberculosis
(TB) by a careful medical history and chart review to
ascertain any history of TB exposure [AIII] because latent TB
infection is more likely to progress to active disease among
persons who are immunocompromised (36). HSCT units
should also consider administering a tuberculin skin test
(TST) by the Mantoux method with 5 tuberculin units of
purified protein derivative (PPD) [CIII]; however, the TST
may not be reliable in immunocompromised patients.
Patients with a recent positive TST result or a history of a
positive TST result and no prior preventive therapy should be
given a chest X ray and evaluated for active TB (36) [AI].
Because immunocompromised patients have a decreased
ability to mount a delayed hypersensitivity response, a
positive TST result for them is defined as >5 mm of induration
(36) rather than >10 mm [CIII]. Since immunosuppressive
therapy decreases the sensitivity of the TST, HSCT providers
should not rely solely on the TST to determine presence of
latent TB infection and need for preventive therapy [DIII].
Instead, a full 9-month course of isoniazid preventive therapy
should be given to immunocompromised HSCT recipients or
candidates who have had close contact with someone with
active, infectious (i.e., sputum-smear positive) pulmonary or
laryngeal TB, regardless of the HSCT recipient’s or
candidate’s TST status (36) [BIII]. Routine anergy screening
results may not be reliable for HSCT recipients and
candidates undergoing conditioning therapy, and therefore
such screening is not recommended [DIII]. HSCT should not
be canceled or delayed because of a positive TST result [DIII].
Infection Control Surveillance
HSCT units should not perform routine fungal or
bacterial cultures of asymptomatic HSCT recipients (37)
[DII]. In the absence of epidemiologic clusters of infections,
HSCT units should not perform routine periodic bacterial
surveillance cultures of the HSCT unit environment or of
equipment or devices used for respiratory therapy,
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation
anesthesia (5) [DIII]. Some experts suggest that hospitals
routinely sample air, ceiling tiles, ventilation ducts, and
filters to test for molds, especially when construction or
renovation occurs near or around the rooms of
immunocompromised patients (24,37) or when clinical
surveillance demonstrates a possible increase in mold (e.g.,
aspergillosis) cases [CIII]. In the absence of a nosocomial
fungal outbreak, HSCT units need not perform routine fungal
cultures of devices and dust in the rooms of HSCT recipients
and candidates undergoing conditioning therapy [DIII].
HSCT units should routinely monitor the number of
aspergillosis cases occurring in HSCT recipients, especially
during hospital construction or renovation [BIII]. A twofold or
greater increase in the attack rate of aspergillosis during any
6-month period indicates that the HSCT unit environment
should be evaluated for breaks in infection control techniques
and procedures and that the ventilation system should be
carefully investigated (21) [BIII].
Careful adherence to the recommendations in these
Guidelines for the Prevention of Opportunistic Infections in
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients may
decrease the rate of hospital infections among HSCT
recipients.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Richard Besser, John M. Boyce, Raymond
Chinn, Harold W. Jaffe, William R. Jarvis, Jonathan E. Kaplan,
William Kohn, David L. Longworth, Michael McNeil, Lauren Patton,
Doug Peterson, Michele Pearson, Frank Rhame, Renee Ridzon, Kent
A. Sepkowitz, Jane D. Siegel, Andrew J. Streifel, Raymond Strikas,
Keith Sullivan, Thomas Walsh, and Estella Whimbey for their
assistance.
Dr. Dykewicz is a medical epidemiologist in the Division of AIDS,
STD, and TB Laboratory Research, National Center for Infectious Dis-
eases, CDC. She was an officer in the Epidemic Intelligence Service
from 1989 to 1991 and completed a fellowship in pediatric infectious
diseases at Yale University in 1995.
References
1. Dykewicz CA. Preventing opportunistic infections in bone marrow
transplant recipients. Transplant Infectious Disease 1999;1:40-9.
2. United States Public Health Service (USPHS)/Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) Prevention of Opportunistic Infections
Working Group. USPHS/IDSA guidelines for the prevention of
opportunistic infections in persons infected with human
immunodeficiency virus: a summary. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 1995;44(No.RR-8):1-34. Available from: URL: http://
www.cdc.gov/epo/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00038328.htm
3. Streifel AJ. Design and maintenance of hospital ventilation
systems and the prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In:
Mayhall CG, editor. Hospital epidemiology and infection control.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 1211-21.
4. Streifel AJ, Marshall JW. Parameters for ventilation controlled
environments in hospitals. In: Moschandreas DJ, editor. Design,
constructionandoperationofhealthybuildings.Solutionstoglobaland
regional concerns. Atlanta: American Society of Heating, Refrigera-
tion, and Air-Conditioning Engineers Press; 1998. p. 305-9.
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for
prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 1997;46(RR-1):1-79,or Respir Care Clin N Am 1994;39:1191-
236, or available at URL: http://www.cdc.gov/epo/mmwr/preview/
ind97_rr.html
6. American Institute of Architects Academy of Architecture for
Health. 1996-1997 Guidelines for design and construction of
hospitals and health care facilities. Washington: The Institute;
1996.
7. Rhame FS, Streifel AJ, Kersey JH Jr, McGlave PB. Extrinsic risk
factors for pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J
Med 1984;76(Suppl 5A):42-52.
8. Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB Jr, Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer
PG II. Efficacy of infection control measures during a nosocomial
outbreak of disseminated aspergillosis associated with hospital
construction. J Infect Dis 1986;153:634-7.
9. Barnes RA, Rogers TR. Control of an outbreak of nosocomial
aspergillosis by laminar air-flow isolation. J Hosp Infect
1989;14:89-94.
267Vol. 7, No. 2, March–April 2001 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Special Issue
10. Sheretz FJ, Belani A, Kramer BS, Elfenbein GJ, Weiner RS,
Sullivan ML, et al. Impact of air filtration on nosocomial
aspergillus infections. Unique risk to bone marrow transplant
recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709-18.
11. Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant
recipient. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823-47.
12. Storb R, Prentice RL, Buckner CD, Clift RA, Appelbaum F, Deeg J,
et al. Graft-versus-host disease and survival in patients with
aplastic anemia treated by marrow grafts from HLA-identical
siblings. N Engl J Med 1983;308:302-7.
13. Streifel AJ. Maintenance and engineering. In: Association for
Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Infection
control and applied epidemiology: principles and practice. 2nd
edition. St. Louis: Mosby; 2000. p. 76-1.
14. Weems JJ Jr, Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ.
Construction activity: an independent risk factor for invasive
aspergillosis and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic
malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71-5.
15. Vesley D, Streifel AJ. Environmental services. In: Mayhall CB,
editor. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins; 1999. p. 1047-53.
16. Carter CD, Barr BA. Infection control issues in construction and
renovation. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:587-96.
AvailableatURL:http://www.cdc.gov/epo/mmwr/preview/mmwrht-
ml/00035909.htm
17. Garner JS, the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:1-80.
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Overview of CDC
Guidelines for the Prevention and Control of Nosocomial
Infections. Available at URL: http://www/cdc/gov/ncidod/hip/
Guide/overview.htm
19. Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC Guidelines for the prevention and
control of nosocomial infections. Guideline for handwashing and
hospital environmental control, 1985. Supersedes guideline for
hospital environmental control published in 1981. Am J Infect
Control 1986;14:110-29, or available at URL: http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/hip/Guide/handwash.htm
20. Rotter ML. Hand washing and hand disinfection. In: Mayhall CG,
editor. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. 2nd ed.
Baltimore: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins; 1999. p. 1339-55.
21. Larson EL. APIC Guideline for handwashing and hand antisepsis
in health care settings. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:251-69.
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Nosocomial outbreak of
Rhizopus infections associated with Elastoplast wound dressings—
Minnesota. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1978;27:33-4.
23. Bryce EA, Walker M, Scharf S, Lim AT, Walsh A, Sharp N, et al. An
outbreak of cutaneous aspergillosis in a tertiary-care hospital.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:170-2.
24. Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur
J Epidemiol 1989;5:131-42.
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The ABCs of safe and
healthy child care. Available at URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
hip/ABC/abc.htm
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immunization of
health care workers: recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Hospital Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep1997;46:(RR-18):1-42,oravailableatURL:http://www.cdc.gov/
nip/publications/ACIP-list.htm
27. Schubert MM, Peterson DE, Lloid ME. Oral complications. In:
Thomas E, Blume KG, Forman SJ, editors. Hematopoietic cell
transplantation. 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Science, Inc.; 1999. p.
751-63.
28. Pearson ML. Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee. Guidelines for prevention of intravascular device
related infections, July 1996. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:262-93,
or available at URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip/iv/iv.htm
29. Do AN, Ray BJ, Bannerjee SN, Illian AF, Barnett BJ, Pham MH,
et al. Bloodstream infection associated with needleless device use
and the importance of infection-control practices in the home
health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442-8.
30. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for
preventing the spread of vancomycin resistance: recommendations
of the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
(HICPAC). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1995;44(RR-12):1-13,
or available at URL: <http://aepo-xdv-www.epo.cdc.gov/wonder/
prevguid/m0039349/m0039349.htm>.
31. Kool JL, Fiore AE, Kioski CM, Brown EW, Benson RF, Pruckler
JM, et al. More than 10 years of unrecognized nosocomial
transmission of legionnaires’ disease among transplant patients.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898-904.
32. Hayden FG. Prevention and treatment of influenza in
immunocompromised patients. Am J Med 1997;102:55-60.
33. Hillis WO, Cooper MR, Bang FB. Adenovirus infection in West
Bengal. I. Persistence of viruses in infants and young children.
Indian J Med Res 1973;61:980-8.
34. Harrington RD, Hooton TM, Hackman RC, Storch GA, Osborne B,
Gleaves CA, et al. An outbreak of respiratory syncytial virus in a
bone marrow transplant center. J Infect Dis 1992;165:987-93.
35. Hall CB, Powell KR, MacDonald DE, Gala CL, Menegus ME, Suffin
SC, et al. Respiratory syncytial virus infection in children with
compromised immune function. N Engl J Med 1986;315:77-81.
36. American Thoracic Society and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;161:S221-S247.
37. Walsh TJ. Role of surveillance cultures in prevention and
treatment of fungal infections. National Cancer Institute Monogr
1990;9:43-5.
