A COMPARISON OF ERYTHROCYTE SEDIMENTATION RATES AND
ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF NORMAL AND
PATHOLOGICAL HUMAN BLOOD
BY THEODORE SHEDLOVSKY, l~.D., ANDJOHN SCUDDER, M.D.
(From the Laboratoriesof The RockefellerInstitute for Medical Research)
(Received for publication, October 6, 1941)
The suspension stability of blood, as measured by the rate of sedimentation
of erythtocytes in plasma, has had wide application in medicine since F~hraeus
(I) published the results of his investigations on the subject some twenty years
ago. It is well known that the sedimentation rate is increased markedly in
many pathological conditions, notably in acute infections. However, al-
though a voluminous literature has grown, dealing with many aspects of
this subject, the mechanism responsible for the observed differences in the
sedimentation rates of normal and pathological blood is not well understood.
Various workers have called attention to an apparent correlation between
increases in the sedimentation rate and corresponding increases in serum
globulin or fibrinogen levels. An excellent survey of the subject was made by
Ham and Curtis (2), in which they discussed various techniques for measuring
sedimentation rates, the influence of erythrocyte size and total volume on
the rate of fall, and correlation with fibrinogen levels.
In this paper, we shall report the results of studies on human blood in a
number of pathological conditions, obtained by the method of electrophoresis.
These results have been correlated with corresponding observations on the
erythrocyte sedimentation rates.
Materials and Methods
Sedimentation rate measurements were performed on samples of blood1taken into
tubes containing a dry mixture of potassium and ammonium oxalates, as recom-
mended by Heller and Paul (3). In some cases heparin (Connaught Laboratories)
was used as an anticoagulant instead of the oxalate mixture; about 0.1 rag. of this
material was sufficient for 10 cc. of blood. After thorough but gentle mixing the blood
was introduced into Rourke-Ernstene (4) tubes, graduated at 2 taro: intervals over
a length of 100 ram., containing about 1.25 ml. The tubes were suspended in an
accurately vertical position in a glass cylinder of water, the temperature of which
1Fasting samples of blood were drawn from the antecubital vein with as little
stasis as possible. The sedimentation rate was measured within 2 hours after
collection.
119
120 ERYTI:LKOCYTE SEDIMENTATION PATES AND ELECTNOPHORESIS
remained quite constant, the work being done in a thermostated room at 25°C.
Readings of a clock were taken as the erythrocyte boundary came to succeeding
graduation marks. The region of uniform rate of fall determined the (uncorrected)
sedimentation rate. The partial volume occupied by the cells (hematocrit) was
measured after centrifuging the tubes for 30 minutes at 3000 gI,.M. The corrected
sedimentation rate2 was then obtained with the aid of charts published by Rourke
and Emstene (4).
Electrophoretic studies were carried out in the Tiselius apparatus, using the
scanning method of Longsworth (5). The technique has been described in detail by
Longsworth, Shedlovsky, and MacInnes (6). All the determinations were made in
diethylbarbiturate buffer solutions at pH 7.8-7.9 and an ionic strength of 0.05, on
samples of plasma or serum which had been diluted with 3 volumes of buffer solution
against which they were then dialyzed.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In the paper to which we have just referred (6), electrophoretic determina-
tions were made on the plasma or serum from a number of normal individuals,
as well as on that of patients suffering from aplastic anemia, rheumatic fever,
pneumonia, peritonitis, peritonsiUar abscess, acute lymphatic leukemia,
lymphogranuloma, obstructive jaundice, lipoid nephrosis, and multiple
myeloma. The corresponding sedimentation rates were determined by us,
but were not published at that time. The present electrophoretic studies have
extended the work to include more normals and cases of tuberculosis, coronary
thrombosis, duodenal ulcer, nephritis, arthritis, lymphosarcoma, burns,
fractures, and chemically induced shock in treating insanity. The results are
summarized in Table I, and some of the corresponding electrophoretiC patterns
are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. In columns 7 to 10 of the table are given the values
for the ratios of a globule, fl globulin, "r globulin, and ~ (fibrinogen) to al-
bumin, respectively. The concentrations of albumin in the plasma (or serum)
appear in column 5, and the albumin:globulin ratios in column 6. The cor-
rected erythrocyte sedimentation rates (E.S.g.) are listed in column 11. The
concentrations of the various components were obtained from the areas under
the corresponding electrophoretic peaks, such as are shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
The values found for the normals in the present series agree closely with those
found by Longsworth, Shedlovsky, and MacInnes (6). It was pointed out by
these authors that the most striking and general change in the electrophoretic
patterns of pathological serum is reflected in the a globulin levels, which appear
2The rate of fall of particles in a fluid contained in a tube of finite length is deter-
mined in part by the partial volume of the particles, since they fall against a counter-
current of the fluid which must rise to replace the space formerly occupied by the
particles. The counterforce thus exerted against the falling particles depends on
the relative volumes of the particles and of the fluid.
THEODORE SHEDLOVSKY AND JOHN SCUDDER 121
to be significantly increased in cases of various febrile infections. The present
results confirm these findings and also indicate that they hold true in cases of
TABLE I
Composition of Normal and PathologicalSerum and Plasma
Corrected Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate
No. Material
1 Normal
2 Normal
3 Normal
4 Oligophrenia
5 Psychopathic per-
sonality
6 Schizophrenia
simplex
7 Fracture of tibia
and fibula
$ Fracture of femur
9 Burns, first, sec-
ond, and third
degree
10 Duodenal ulcer
II Coronary throm-
bosis
12 Coronary throm-
bosis
13 Tuberculosis
14 Tuberculosis
lS Tuberculosis
16 Tuberculosis
17 Tuberculosis
18 Neoplastic disease
19 Lymphosarcoma
20 Chronic nephritis
21 Arthritis
Remarks
Phenyl pyruvic acid
During metrazol shock
During insulinshock
3 days after accident
2 days after accident
6 days after accident
Complicated with hem-
orrhage and obstruc-
tion
1 week after initial
attack
6 weeks after initial
attack
Chronic pulmonary
Bilateral pulmonary, far
advanced
Bilateral pulmonary, far
advanced
Miliary, tuberculous
meningitis
Bilateral pulmonary, far
advanced
X-ray: general skeletal
involvement
Febrile. Biopsy
Toxemia of pregnancy.
Post partum
Gonococcus, 9 day his-
tory
extensive tissue destruction, as evidenced by the patterns for coronary throm-
bosis, burns, and fractures3 (Figs. 1 and 2). No significant deviation from
normal in either sedimentation rate or electrophoretic patterns was found in
the cases (4, 5, 6 of Table I) of chemically induced shock in demented patients.
Various authors have reported that good correlation exists between sedi-
3Determinations on the plasmas of three normal individuals whose temperatures
were raised by artificial fever to 106°F. for 40 minutes showed no increase ino~globulin.
122 ERYTHI~OCYTE SEDr~-NTATION RATES AND ELECTROPHORESIS
mentation rates and fibrinogen levels (2). However, the addition of put/fled
fibrinogen to normal blood fails to increase the rate of sedimentation of eryth-
A
Normal Tuberculosis
plasma
Alb.
Coronary thrombosis Lymphosarcoma
6 weeks i week
FIG. 1
FIGs. 1 and 2. Electrophoretic patterns on normal human plasma and on plasma
from individuals with tissue injury from various causes.
rocytes to the same extent as one observes in pathological blood containing
comparable quantites of this protein. In Fig. 3, we have plotted the sedimen-
tation rate (E.S.R.) against corresponding levels of fibrinogen expressed as
fibrinogen:albumin ratios (~/A), using the results of Ham and Curtis (2).
Tm~ODO~ SHEDLOVSXYAND Jom~ SC~DER 123
It will be observed that only a qualitative correlation exists between these two
factors.
A
Tuberculosis Toxemia of
pregnancy
i
Bleeding Fracture Multiple
duodenal ulcer of femur bums
FIG. 2
We have found no satisfactory similar correlation with either t~ globulin,
-/globulin, or albumin:globulin ratios. However, as will be shown below, a
significant correlation can be demonstrated between sedimentation rates and
the corresponding a globulin present in the blood.
In Fig. 4 are plotted the a globulin levels, expressed as a globulin:albumin
124 ERYTHROCYTE SEDIMENTATION RATES AND ELECTROPHORESIS
ratios, (a/A), against the corresponding corrected sedimentation rates
(E.S.R.). In this graph have been included points corresponding to the results
reported by Longsworth, Shedlovsky, and MacInnes (6) as well as our more
recent determinations. Although it is not possible to draw a smooth curve
through the points indicated, any more successfully than in Fig. 3, an in-
~tecl. Z.5.R.
mm./mln.
2.~
2.0
1.0--
0.~-
• Normal
• Pathological
O ° o
• •
O) • •
• •
D, •
O g •
• • i
e •
• O •
O :0 •
e
4°$ ' •
oO0
OA 00 •
0 cO° I I 1 I
0 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 025 0~0 0135
Fibpino£en
albumin
I I
FIG. 3. Variation of corrected erythrocyte sedimentation rates with fibrinogen
levels.
teresting relationship appears. By drawing a horizontal line corresponding
to the upper limit of normal sedimentation rate and a vertical line correspond-
ing to the upper limit of normal a/A values (a/A = 0.17), we find all the points
corresponding to the normals, as well as those for nearly all the pathological
conditions which yield normal electrophoretic patterns, in the lower left hand
quadrant. The other points, corresponding to elevated sedimentation rates,
fall in the upper right hand quadrant. If we were to draw another vertical
line at about a/A = 0.20, all the points in this more restricted upper right
Ol
01
0.40
THEODORE SHEDLOVSKY AND ~'Ot~"~"SCUDDER 125
hand quadrant, with one exception, correspond to febrile conditions. The
significance of fibrinogen and of a globulin in the mechanism responsible/or
increased sedimentation rates in blood will be discussed in another paper.
Corrected E.S.R
mm./mm.
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
• Normal
© Feve~
® Infection
0 Aplastic anemia
0 Neoplasticdisease
0 Mi~cellaneous
0
@
@
0g
0
@
@
0
° °.. °
-0- AO& -(3-
&
t I I I t I
0 0.05 O.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35
,,ac-91obulin
olbumin
@
O
FIG. 4. Variation of corrected erythrocyte sedimentation rates with a globulin
levels.
We wish to express our appreciation to the following hospitals for their cooperation:
City of New York, Department of Hospitals, Bellevue Hospital, Metropolitan Hos-
pital; Presbyterian Hospital; Rockefeller Hospital; Sloane Hospital for Women; and
State of New York, Department of Mental Hygiene, Psychiatric Institute and
Hospital.
SUMMARY
Electrophoretic studies and erythrocyte sedimentation rate measurements
were carried out on normal and pathological human blood. An increase in
globulin levels appears to take place, as well as an increase in sedimentation
0.40
125 ER~'rJdI~OCYTE SEDIMENTATION RATES AND ELECTROPHOI~ESIS
rates, when there is present any considerable inflammation or tissue destruc-
tion, irrespective of its cause. A graphic correlation is presented between
sedimentation rates and a globulin levels, which is at least as good as a similar
correlation involving fibrinogen levels.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. F~hraeus, R., Biochem. Z., 1918,89, 355; Hygiea, 1918,80, 369; Acta m~d. Scan&,
1921, 55, 1; Physiol. Rev., 1929,9, 241.
2. Ham, T. H., and Curtis, F. C., Medicine, 1938, !7, 447.
3. HeUer, V. G., and Paul, H., J. Lab. and CIin. Med., 1933-34, 19, 777.
4. Rourke, M. D., and Ernstene, A. C., J. Clin. Inv., 1929-30, 8, 545.
5. Longsworth, L. G., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1939, 61, 529.
6. Longsworth, L. G., Shedlovsky, T., and MacInnes, D. A., f. Exp. Med., 1939,
70, 399.
