PROGRESS IN HEMATOLOGY Transfusional iron overload and iron chelation therapy
Japanese epidemiological survey with consensus statement
on Japanese guidelines for treatment of iron overload
in bone marrow failure syndromes
Takahiro Suzuki Æ Masao Tomonaga Æ Yasushi Miyazaki Æ
Shinji Nakao Æ Kazuma Ohyashiki Æ Itaru Matsumura Æ
Yutaka Kohgo Æ Yoshiro Niitsu Æ Seiji Kojima Æ Keiya Ozawa
Received: 30 April 2008 / Accepted: 2 June 2008 / Published online: 27 June 2008
Ó The Japanese Society of Hematology 2008
Abstract Many patients with bone marrow failure syn-
dromes need frequent transfusions of red blood cells, and most
of them eventually suffer from organ dysfunction induced by
excessively accumulated iron. The only way to treat transfu-
sion-inducedironoverloadisironchelatingtherapy.However,
most patients have not been treated effectively because daily/
continuous administration of deferoxamine is difﬁcult for
outpatients. Recently, a novel oral iron chelator, deferasirox,
has been developed, and introduction of the drug may help
many patients beneﬁt from iron chelation therapy. In this
review, we will discuss the current status of iron overload in
transfusion-dependent patients, and the development of
Japanese guidelines for the treatment of iron overload in
Japan,whichwereestablishedbytheNationalResearchGroup
on Idiopathic Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes in Japan.
Keywords Bone marrow failure syndrome Á
Iron overload Á Iron chelation Á Guidelines
1 Introduction
Many patients with aplastic anemia (AA) or myelodys-
plastic syndromes (MDS) need frequent transfusions of red
blood cells (RBCs). One unit (derived from 200 mL of
whole blood) of RBC transfusion in Japan contains about
100 mg of iron. Because there is no physiological mech-
anism for iron excretion in humans, and daily iron
excretion is no more than 1 mg in a healthy man, repeated
RBC transfusions will soon result in iron overload. Excess
iron is mainly deposited in the liver, heart and pancreas,
and causes organ dysfunction [1, 2].
As phlebotomy is not an option because of the under-
lying bone marrow failure, the only way to treat iron
overload is by iron chelation therapy. However, difﬁculty
in optimal administration of deferoxamine (DFO, Desfer-
alÒ
) in Japan has hampered effective chelation, and
currently most patients are not treated effectively [3].
T. Suzuki Á K. Ozawa (&)
Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine,
Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke-shi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan
e-mail: kozawa@ms2.jichi.ac.jp
M. Tomonaga Á Y. Miyazaki
Department of Hematology and Molecular Medicine Unit,
Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan
S. Nakao
Department of Cellular Transplantation Biology,
Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan
K. Ohyashiki
First Department of Internal Medicine (Department
of Hematology), Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan
I. Matsumura
Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan
Y. Kohgo
Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology
and Hematology/Oncology, Asahikawa Medical College,
Asahikawa, Japan
Y. Niitsu
Fourth Department of Internal Medicine,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan
S. Kojima
Department of Paediatrics,
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan
123
Int J Hematol (2008) 88:30–35
DOI 10.1007/s12185-008-0119-y
Recently, a novel oral iron chelator, deferasirox (ExjadeÒ
),
has been introduced in more than 60 countries, including
Japan. The introduction of deferasirox may improve com-
pliance with iron chelation therapy [4]. Under these
circumstances, the National Research Group on Idiopathic
Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes in Japan drew up Japa-
nese guidelines for the treatment of transfusion-induced
iron overload. Herein, we describe the current status of iron
overload in transfusion-dependent patients in Japan, and
development of the proposed guidelines for the treatment
of transfusion-induced iron overload.
2 Current status of transfusion-induced
iron overload in Japan
In 2005, the ﬁrst nationwide survey on iron overload in
transfusion-dependent patients in Japan was carried out [3].
This retrospective survey investigated the outcomes of iron
overload-related morbidity and mortality from August
2001 to December 2005. A questionnaire was sent to
hematology departments in hospitals all over Japan, and 43
hospitals responded by returning data on 292 patients.
Demographic data showed that MDS and AA accounted
for about 80% of the underlying diseases: MDS, 52.1%;
AA, 30.8%; pure red cell aplasia (PRCA), 5.1%; and
myeloﬁbrosis (MF), 4.5%. Serum ferritin levels were sig-
niﬁcantly correlated with the lifetime total number of RBC
transfusion units received. Figure 1 shows the relationship
between the number of RBC units and mean ferritin level,
indicating the percentage of patients with an abnormal
ferritin level (C1,000 ng/mL) for any total number of RBC
units received as analyzed by a logistics model. The
goodness-of-ﬁt of this model between theoretical and
actual values was assessed by Pearson chi-squared test, and
the estimated number of RBC units required to raise ferritin
to C1,000 ng/mL in 50 and 75% of patients was calculated
as 21.5 and 43.4 units, respectively.
Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) and
serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) abnormali-
ties were signiﬁcantly correlated with transfusion
frequency and increased ferritin levels; there was a sig-
niﬁcantly (P \ 0.0001) higher prevalence of SGOT and
SGPT abnormality in patients with high serum ferritin than
in those whose serum ferritin was \1,000 ng/mL (Fig. 2).
Moreover, among patients in whom cardiac function was
evaluated, abnormalities were found in 21.9%, and cardiac
abnormality was weakly correlated with serum ferritin
levels. These data indicate that ferritin levels can be a
useful predictor of hepatic and cardiac dysfunction. Fasting
blood sugar (FBS) abnormality was also correlated with
transfusion frequency.
In the survey, 75 deaths were reported, most of which
were caused by infection and leukemia. However, cardiac
and hepatic failure was noted in 24% and 6.7% of cases,
respectively. Patients who died from cardiac or hepatic
failure had received more transfusions than those who died
from other causes, and among 38 patients in whom serum
ferritin levels were available, 37 patients died with serum
ferritin levels C1,000 ng/mL; the majority of patients (24
patients) had serum ferritin levels [5,000 ng/mL. These
data indicate that multiple transfusion therapy is associated
with a high risk of fatal complications caused by iron
overload. Recently, similar analyses have been reported
describing that transfusion-dependent MDS patients show
signiﬁcantly shorter survival than those who do not require
transfusions and that transfusion-induced iron overload
signiﬁcantly affects survival [5].
3 Iron chelation therapy
As phlebotomy is not an option because of underlying bone
marrow failure, the only way to treat iron overload is with
iron chelation therapy. Until recently, the only available
iron chelating agent in Japan was DFO. Because of the
limited absorption from the gastrointestinal tract and short
biological half-life of the agent, the drug must be admin-
istered by parenteral injections at least 5–7 times a week, or
continuously for optimal effectiveness [6]. In the survey,
43.2% of patients received DFO, but only 8.6% received
DFO daily or continuously; most of the patients were
administered the drug intermittently (average once per
1.9 weeks) or concurrently with transfusion [3]. While
improvements in serum ferritin, SGOT, SGPT and FBS
were noted in the patients who received DFO daily or
continuously, these data did not improve, and rather
worsened, in those without optimal administration
(Table 1). This indicates that appropriate administration of
the chelating agent is needed for sufﬁcient therapeutic
results.
Fig. 1 Relationship between serum ferritin and total number of red
blood cell units. [3] Modiﬁed with permission from Takatoku et al.
Eur J Haematol. 2007;78:487–494. Ó
2007 Blackwell Publishing
Japanese guidelines for iron overload 31
123
Moreover, it has also been reported that iron chelation
not only reduced iron burden and improved organ dys-
function, but also ameliorated the hemoglobin levels of
iron-overloaded patients [7, 8]. Although the biological
mechanism of the hematopoietic recovery remains to be
elucidated, this fact indicates that iron itself negatively
impacts on hematopoiesis, and in some conditions removal
of iron burden from the hematopoietic environment can
restore normal hematopoiesis.
Deferasirox is easily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract
and has an elimination half-life of 8–16 h, which means that
deferasirox is continuously present in the plasma with once-
daily dosing [9]. In a large Phase III trial, deferasirox was
comparable with DFO at decreasing iron burden in b-thal-
assemic patients [10]. Deferasirox also reduced iron burden
in patients with various anemias including MDS [11]. These
ﬁndings indicate that oral iron chelators can improve
patients’ quality of life by ameliorating organ dysfunction
and preventing iron damage, even improving hematopoiesis
itself. Oral iron chelators are expected to prolong survival of
transfusion-dependent patients.
4 Japanese guidelines for the treatment of iron
overload in transfusion-dependent patients
The clinical signiﬁcance of iron chelation is undeniable and
requires attention. With the availability of deferasirox in
Japan, the frequency of continuous treatment may be
strengthened and many more patients can beneﬁt from
chelation therapy. To help optimal iron chelation therapy,
the National Research Group on Idiopathic Bone Marrow
Failure Syndromes drew up the Japanese guidelines for the
treatment of transfusion-induced iron overload. To date,
guidelines for iron overload have been developed in several
countries [6, 12–14], and the Japanese guidelines were
designed to align with the international guidelines (see the
paper by Dr. Gattermann in this issue). The essential fea-
tures of the Japanese guidelines are depicted in Fig. 3 and
Table 2.
The contents of the guidelines are as follows:
Patients who may beneﬁt from chelation therapy: The
guidelines are applicable to transfusion-dependent patients
with primary (MDS, AA, PRCA, MF, etc.) and secondary
(chemotherapy-induced, etc.) bone marrow failure. Trans-
fusion-dependent patients are deﬁned as those receiving[2
RBC units/month for C6 months. Because organ dys-
function becomes symptomatic after a certain period of
time, it is suggested that iron chelation therapy is offered to
patients with an expected survival of more than 1 year. The
international guidelines for MDS patients also recommend
that they should have a life expectancy of C1 year.
Diagnosis of iron overload: After patients become
transfusion dependent, regular examination of serum fer-
ritin is required to monitor iron burden at least once every
3 months. For early diagnosis of organ dysfunction,
Fig. 2 Relationship between
serum transaminase abnormality
and serum ferritin levels. [3]
Modiﬁed with permission from
Takatoku et al. Eur J Haematol.
2007;78:487–494. Ó
2007
Blackwell Publishing
Table 1 Average changes in laboratory values during the period of transfusion dependence in patients receiving deferoxamine treatment
Parameter Intermittent (once/1.9 week) Concurrent with transfusion Daily/continuous
Serum ferritina,b
(ng/mL) +2222.8 (n = 36) +2204.8 (n = 19) -1135.2 (n = 9)
SGOTa,c
(mU/mL) +28.0 (n = 53) +40.0 (n = 30) -9.2 (n = 10)
SGPT (mU/mL) +28.6 (n = 53) +10.3 (n = 30) -28.8 (n = 10)
FBS (mg/dL) +31.2 (n = 31) +8.2 (n = 12) -4.8 (n = 5)
[3] Modiﬁed with permission from Takatoku et al. Eur J Haematol. 2007;78:487–494. Ó
2007 Blackwell Publishing
a
Intermittent versus continuous, P \ 0.05
b
Continuous versus concurrent, P \ 0.01
c
Continuous versus concurrent, P \ 0.05
32 T. Suzuki et al.
123
periodic check-ups of cardiac, hepatic and pancreatic
endocrine functions are recommended.
Patients can be said to be iron overloaded when their
serum ferritin levels reach [500 ng/mL and when they
have received [20 Japanese RBC units (in pediatric
patients, [50 mL/kg body weight). Severity of iron over-
load is determined by serum ferritin levels and organ
dysfunction (Table 2, lower part).
Initiating iron chelation therapy: Administration of an
iron chelator is the only recommended treatment for iron
overload in patients with bone marrow failure. To initiate
iron chelation therapy, conﬁrmation of serum ferritin levels
[1,000 ng/mL for more than 2 months, at least in two
successive examinations, is recommended. The nationwide
survey reported that more than 90% of patients who suf-
fered from organ dysfunction had serum ferritin levels
[1,000 ng/mL, and prevalence of hepatic dysfunction
increases in parallel with ferritin levels [3] (Fig. 2).
Therefore, a serum ferritin level [1,000 ng/mL is consid-
ered the appropriate point to initiate iron chelation.
However, serum ferritin levels are not reliable in patients
with inﬂammatory conditions such as Still’s disease and
hemophagocytic syndrome, or in those with malignancies.
In these cases, transfusion history should be taken into
account. Therefore, receiving a total of more than 40 Jap-
anese RBC transfusion units (in pediatric patients,
[100 mL/kg body weight) was included as another rec-
ommended criterion. As mentioned previously, about 75%
of patients who received [40 RBC units have serum fer-
ritin levels[1,000 ng/mL, indicating that 40 units of RBC
transfusion can be a good indicator of transfusion-induced
hyperferritinemia. However, transfusion history alone is
also not reliable, because serum ferritin levels may not
increase in patients with chronic bleeding and hemolysis.
Furthermore, patients who have already discontinued
transfusion therapy with successful treatment may not
require iron chelation therapy. If neither of these two cri-
teria is applicable, chelation therapy should not be started.
Target ferritin maintenance levels and adverse effects of
iron chelators: During chelation therapy, monitoring of
iron burden and organ functions should be continued. After
initiating chelation therapy, serum ferritin levels should
decrease, but if they continue to increase, even 3–6 months
after starting treatment, an increase in dose is necessary.
When patients are minimally transfusion dependent (\2
RBC units/month) or already free of transfusions, dose
adjustment must be determined carefully.
It is recommended that serum ferritin levels are main-
tained at 500–1,000 ng/mL, and when ferritin levels are
below 500 ng/mL at two successive examinations, chela-
tors should be discontinued. As an excessive reduction in
iron burden is harmful, the guidelines have determined this
target value (500–1,000 ng/mL) with a safety margin.
As iron chelating agents can induce adverse effects on
the kidney, liver and sensory organs [10], regular exami-
nation of renal and hepatic functions, and periodical (prior
to treatment and annually after initiation) ophthalmologic
examinations and hearing tests, are recommended. If an
abnormal increase in serum creatinine level is noticed, the
drug should be decreased or discontinued. In patients with
a high risk of renal dysfunction, weekly monitoring of
creatinine level is recommended, at least during the ﬁrst
Fig. 3 A ﬂow chart for the
treatment of transfusion-
dependent iron overload
Japanese guidelines for iron overload 33
123
month. Furthermore, if drug-induced hepatic injury is
suspected, withdrawal of the drug with appropriate treat-
ments is needed. It has been reported that iron chelators can
cause hearing loss and cataracts. Therefore, if any signs of
dysfunction are noticed a dose reduction or discontinuation
of the drug is necessary and prompt consultation by an
ophthalmologist or otorhinolaryngologist is required. In
pediatric patients, annual monitoring of height, weight and
state of secondary sex characteristics are needed for an
early diagnosis of abnormal development.
5 Conclusions
The retrospective survey of transfusion-dependent patients
revealed that the mortality rate is raised in heavily iron-
overloaded patients, with liver and cardiac dysfunction
being the primary cause of death [3]. Daily or continuous
chelation therapy is effective in reducing iron burden and
improving organ function, but practically, daily or contin-
uous administration through parenteral injection is difﬁcult.
In Japan, a novel oral chelator, deferasirox, has recently been
approved. Oral iron chelators can improve compliance of
treatment and many more patients who need iron chelation
may beneﬁt from a reduction in iron burden and improve-
ment of organ function, which ultimately may lead to the
improvement of patients’ prognosis and quality of life.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by a grant (Research
on Intractable Diseases) from the Ministry of Health, Labor and
Welfare of Japan. The authors thank Dr. Norbert Gattermann for his
valuable advice in establishing the guidelines.
References
1. Kushner JP, Porter J, Olivieri N. Secondary iron overload.
Hematology/American Society of Hematology Education
Program Book: American Society of Hematology; 2001.
2. McLaren GD, Muir WA, Kellermeyer RW. Iron overload disor-
ders: natural history, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy. Crit
Rev Clin Lab Sci. 1983;19:205–66.
3. Takatoku M, Uchiyama T, Okamoto S, et al. Retrospective
nationwide survey of Japanese patients with transfusion-
Table 2 Japanese guidelines for transfusional iron overload (main points)
Patients Transfusion-dependent patients with bone marrow failure syndromes who are likely to survive for [1 year
Diagnosis of iron overload 1. Total RBC [20 unitsa
(in pediatric patients, RBCs [50 mL/kg body weight)
and
2. Serum ferritin [500 ng/mL
Criteria for initiating chelation
therapy
1. Total RBC [40 unitsa
(in pediatric patients, RBCs [100 mL/kg body weight)
and/or
2. Serum ferritin [1,000 ng/mL
Decisions should be made taking both criteria into consideration, especially for patients:
–with chronic bleeding or hemolysis;
–who no longer need RBC transfusions;
–with complications that chronically raise serum ferritin levels independently of transfusion; e.g., Still’s disease,
hemophagocytic syndrome and malignancies
Target serum ferritin
maintenance level
Serum ferritin 500–1,000 ng/mL
Classiﬁed severity of iron overload
Serum ferritin (ng/mL) With normal organ function With organ dysfunction
[500 Stage 1A Stage 1B
[1,000 Stage 2A Stage 2B
[2,500 Stage 3A Stage 3B
[5,000 Stage 4A Stage 4B
The severity of iron overload is deﬁned by serum ferritin level and organ dysfunction (cardiac, liver and pancreatic endocrine dysfunction). The
dysfunction must be considered to be related to iron overload; i.e., the organ dysfunction progresses as serum ferritin or transfusion burden
increase
The criteria for speciﬁc organ dysfunction are as follows
–Cardiac dysfunction: LVEF \50%
–Hepatic dysfunction: abnormal transaminase levels, ﬁbrosis and cirrhosis of the liver
–Pancreatic endocrine dysfunction: impaired glucose tolerance
a
20 and 40 units of the Japanese RBC transfusion correspond to 10 and 20 Western RBC units, respectively
34 T. Suzuki et al.
123
dependent MDS and aplastic anemia highlights the negative
impact of iron overload on morbidity/mortality. Eur J Haematol.
2007;78:487–94.
4. Shashaty G, Frankewich R, Chakraborti T, et al. Deferasirox for
the treatment of chronic iron overload in transfusional hemosid-
erosis. Oncology (Williston Park). 2006;20:1799–806, 1811;
discussion 1811–3, 1817.
5. Malcovati L, Porta MG, Pascutto C, et al. Prognostic factors and
life expectancy in myelodysplastic syndromes classiﬁed accord-
ing to WHO criteria: a basis for clinical decision making. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:7594–603.
6. Gattermann N, Porter J, Lopes L, Seymour J. Consensus state-
ment on iron overload in myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematol
Oncol Clin North Am. 2005;19:18–25.
7. Di Tucci AA, Murru R, Alberti D, Rabault B, Deplano S,
Angelucci E. Correction of anemia in a transfusion-dependent
patient with primary myeloﬁbrosis receiving iron chelation
therapy with deferasirox (Exjade, ICL670). Eur J Haematol.
2007;78:540–42.
8. Jensen PD, Heickendorff L, Pedersen B, et al. The effect of iron
chelation on haemopoiesis in MDS patients with transfusional
iron overload. Br J Haematol. 1996;94:288–99.
9. Piga A, Galanello R, Forni GL, et al. Randomized phase II trial of
deferasirox (Exjade, ICL670), a once-daily, orally-administered
iron chelator, in comparison to deferoxamine in thalassemia
patients with transfusional iron overload. Haematologica.
2006;91:873–80.
10. Cappellini MD, Cohen A, Piga A, et al. A phase 3 study of
deferasirox (ICL670), a once-daily oral iron chelator, in patients
with beta-thalassemia. Blood. 2006;107:3455–62.
11. Porter J, Vichinsky E, Rose C, et al. A phase II study with
ICL670 (Exjade), a once-daily oral iron chelator, in patients with
various transfusion-dependent anemias and iron overload. Blood.
2004;104:abstract 3193.
12. Alessandrino EP, Amadori S, Barosi G, et al. Evidence- and
consensus-based practice guidelines for the therapy of primary
myelodysplastic syndromes. A statement from the Italian Society
of Hematology. Haematologica. 2002;87:1286–306.
13. Bowen D, Culligan D, Jowitt S, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and therapy of adult myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol.
2003;120:187–200.
14. Greenberg PL, Baer MR, Bennett JM, et al. Myelodysplastic
syndromes clinical practice guidelines in oncology. J Natl Compr
Canc Netw. 2006;4:58–77.
Japanese guidelines for iron overload 35
123
