PROGRESS IN HEMATOLOGY Transfusional iron overload and iron chelation therapy
Body iron metabolism and pathophysiology of iron overload
Yutaka Kohgo Æ Katsuya Ikuta Æ Takaaki Ohtake Æ
Yoshihiro Torimoto Æ Junji Kato
Received: 30 April 2008 / Accepted: 2 June 2008 / Published online: 2 July 2008
Ó The Japanese Society of Hematology 2008
Abstract Iron is an essential metal for the body, while
excess iron accumulation causes organ dysfunction through
the production of reactive oxygen species. There is a
sophisticated balance of body iron metabolism of storage
and transport, which is regulated by several factors
including the newly identiﬁed peptide hepcidin. As there is
no passive excretory mechanism of iron, iron is easily
accumulated when exogenous iron is loaded by hereditary
factors, repeated transfusions, and other diseased condi-
tions. The free irons, non-transferrin-bound iron, and labile
plasma iron in the circulation, and the labile iron pool
within the cells, are responsible for iron toxicity. The
characteristic features of advanced iron overload are failure
of vital organs such as liver and heart in addition to
endocrine dysfunctions. For the estimation of body iron,
there are direct and indirect methods available. Serum
ferritin is the most convenient and widely available
modality, even though its speciﬁcity is sometimes prob-
lematic. Recently, new physical detection methods using
magnetic resonance imaging and superconducting quantum
interference devices have become available to estimate iron
concentration in liver and myocardium. The widely used
application of iron chelators with high compliance will
resolve the problems of organ dysfunction by excess iron
and improve patient outcomes.
Keywords Hemochromatosis Á Hepcidin Á
Iron metabolism Á Iron overload Á
Non-transferrin-bound iron (NTBI)
1 Introduction
Iron is an essential metal for hemoglobin synthesis of
erythrocytes, oxidation–reduction reactions, and cellular
proliferation, whereas excess iron accumulation causes
organ dysfunction through the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). The total amount of body iron is
approximately 3–4 g, two-thirds of which is composed of
red blood cell (RBC) iron and recycled iron by RBC
destruction; the remainder is stored in ferritin/hemosiderin,
while only 1–2 mg of iron are absorbed in the intestinal
tract and circulated in the blood [1]. Body iron metabolism
is a semi-closed system, and is critically regulated by
several factors including the newly identiﬁed peptide
hepcidin. In the circulation, iron is usually bound to
transferrin (Tf), and most of the Tf-bound iron is utilized
for bone marrow erythropoiesis [1]. As there is no active
mechanism to excrete iron from the body, a progressive
accumulation of body iron easily occurs as a result of
long-term transfusions in patients with anemia of genetic
disorders such as thalassemia, sickle cell disease (SCD),
and Diamond Blackfan syndrome, and of bone-marrow
failures such as aplastic anemia (AA) and myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS). In order to consider pathophysio-
logical mechanisms of organ injury by iron overload, an
understanding of molecular mechanisms of body iron
metabolism is essential.
Y. Kohgo (&) Á K. Ikuta Á T. Ohtake Á Y. Torimoto
Division of Gastroenterology and Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College,
Asahikawa, Japan
e-mail: yskohgo@aol.com
J. Kato
Fourth Department of Internal Medicine,
Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan
123
Int J Hematol (2008) 88:7–15
DOI 10.1007/s12185-008-0120-5
2 Molecular mechanisms of body iron metabolism
Table 1 shows a list of molecules involved in body iron
metabolism, categorized as functions including intestinal
absorption, erythroid iron uptake, reutilization of senescent
RBCs, hepatic iron storage, and systemic regulation.
2.1 Intestinal iron absorption
Ingested iron is classiﬁed as non-heme iron and heme iron.
Non-heme iron derived from plants is mainly composed of
inorganic ferric Fe(III) iron, and is absorbed into entero-
cytes through the divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) after
reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II) by duodenal cytochrome b [2,
3]. In contrast, heme-iron derived from meat is absorbed
through a heme carrier protein into enterocytes, where it is
degraded by hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1). Iron within en-
terocytes is then transferred from the luminal to the
vascular site of the cell, and released into the circulation
via the metal transporter, ferroportin in the form of Fe(II).
Excreted Fe(II) is thereafter oxidized to Fe(III) by hepha-
estin, a homolog of ceruloplasmin, and the resulting ferric
iron is bound to serum Tf [4].
2.2 Red blood cell iron reutilization in the reticulo-
endothelial system (RES) and iron load by blood
transfusion
The average life span of circulating RBCs is approximately
120 days, indicating that 20 mg of iron derived from 20 ml
of RBCs are processed by RES/macrophages on a daily
basis. Within macrophages, heme derived from phagocy-
tized RBCs is catabolized by HO-1, and free iron is released.
Intra-cellular iron is released into the circulation via
ferroportin, and the iron is donated to Tf and reutilized for
bone marrow erythropoiesis.
In patients with genetic anemias and bone marrow fail-
ures, regular transfusion is required in order to overcome
the intractable symptoms. Transfused RBCs are taken up
and degraded by RES/macrophages, in which the recycled
iron is overloaded and the excess iron saturates the binding
capacity of Tf. This excess iron appears in the circulation as
a form of non-Tf-bound iron (NTBI) [1, 5], and causes
organ dysfunction by the production of ROS. One milliliter
of blood contains approximately 0.5 mg of iron, and there is
no active mechanism for excretion of this excess iron. In
Japan, one unit of blood corresponds to 200 ml of whole
blood or 140 ml of concentrated RBCs, both of which
contain approximately 100 mg of iron. As the critical level
of iron overload at which organ dysfunction occurs in the
liver is approximately 7 mg/g dry liver weight [6],
according to the formula derived by Angelucci [body iron
accumulation (mg/kg) = liver iron concentration (LIC; mg/
g dry weight 9 10.6)] [7], only 40 Japanese units of
transfusion are required to reach this level.
2.3 Iron uptake and utilization in liver
The liver is a major storage organ of iron, in which excess
iron is stored as ferritin and hemosiderin. In addition to
these proteins, an additional fraction of free iron is present
in the form of the labile iron pool (LIP) within cells. The
LIP is biologically active in intracellular metabolism via
oxidation–reduction reactions, cell proliferation, and cell
signaling, but is toxic if present in excess. As shown in
Fig. 1, hepatocytes have essentially two pathways for
uptake of iron from the circulation: Tf-bound iron (Fe2-Tf)
at physiological iron concentrations, and NTBI in iron
overload conditions [3].
Concerning the uptake of Fe2-Tf, there are three path-
ways involved: two are dependent on and one is
independent of transferrin receptor (TfR) recycling.
Table 1 Molecules involved in body iron metabolism
Molecules for intestinal iron absorption
Divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1)
Duodenal cytochrome b (Dcytb)
Heme carrier protein (HCP)
Hemeoxygenase-1
Ferroportin
Hephaestin
Transferrin
Molecules for bone marrow iron uptake
Transferrin receptor 1
Transferrin
Molecules for reutilization of senescent red blood cells
Hemeoxygenase-1
Ferroportin
Transferrin
Molecules for hepatic iron storage
Ferritin
Hemosiderin
Transferrin
Transferrin receptor 1
Transferrin receptor 2
Non-transferrin-bound iron
HFE
b2-microglobin
Divalent metal transporter 1
ZIP14
Hemojuvelin
Molecules for systemic iron regulation
Hepcidin
(Unknown erythroid regulator?)
8 Y. Kohgo et al.
123
Transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) is a classical functional
receptor, expressed highly in erythroblasts, but less so in
hepatocytes. When serum Fe2-Tf binds to TfR1, Fe2-Tf is
internalized by endocytosis. Internalized Fe2Tf-TfR1
complexes within the endosome release iron when endo-
somal pH is acidiﬁed. The resulting apotransferrin-TfR1
complex is then recycled back to the cell surface for re-
utilization. Transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2), a new homolog
of TfR1, is ubiquitously expressed on hepatocyte surfaces
and possesses a similar mechanism of recycling, but the
binding afﬁnity is rather weak: the functional role of TfR2
for cellular iron uptake is still obscured. In hepatocytes,
there is another Fe2-Tf uptake mechanism that is inde-
pendent of TfR recycling, which is also considered to be
important [8].
In iron-overloaded conditions, NTBI appears in the
circulation and is taken up through two molecules such as
DMT1 and ZIP14 on hepatocytes [9].
2.4 Bone marrow iron metabolism and erythropoiesis
Bone marrow erythroblasts require large amounts of iron
for hemoglobin synthesis. TfR1 is strongly expressed in
erythroblasts and functions as the uptake system of extra-
cellular Fe2-Tf. Within erythroblasts, iron is transferred to
mitochondria and is incorporated into the center of the
heme ring, which is synthesized by condensation of d-
aminolevulinic acid, a product made by erythroid d-am-
inolevulinic acid synthase (eALAS). It is noteworthy that
the synthesis of eALAS is also regulated by an iron-
responsive-element binding protein (IRP) as well as TfR1
[10]. It is well known that genetic abnormalities of this
pathway cause the phenotype of ringed sideroblastic ane-
mias [11].
2.5 Systemic regulation of body iron metabolism
It has been postulated for a long time that a soluble
factor acts to synchronize body iron metabolism between
different organs. Recently, a basic peptide called hepci-
din, an antimicrobial puriﬁed from urine, was found to
have this role [12]. Hepcidin is considered to be a
negative regulator that inhibits both intestinal iron
absorption and reticulo-endothelial iron release. It is
mainly synthesized in the liver, in which production is
enhanced during iron overload and inﬂammation [13]. In
some patients with genetic hemochromatosis, an abnor-
mality of hepcidin gene has been reported. In these
patients, hepcidin production was suppressed and iron
absorption increased [14]. Furthermore, hepcidin expres-
sion is also down-regulated even in patients without a
genetic abnormality of hepcidin. These reports strongly
suggest that hepcidin plays an important role in tissue
iron deposition in many iron-overloaded conditions
including HFE hemochromatosis [15]. Currently, several
additional molecules such as TfR2 and hemojuvelin
(HJV) are also known to be involved in its regulation
[16]. Furthermore, it is becoming clear that there is a
role for hepcidin even in secondary iron overload. In a
mouse model of b-thalassemia, representing ineffective
erythropoiesis, there is an upregulation of hepcidin and a
down-regulation of ferroportin, explaining how hepcidin
also contributes to the formation of secondary hemo-
chromatosis associated with ineffective erythropoiesis
[17].
3 Forms of iron in serum and tissue
As free iron is extremely toxic to cells, the body has a
number of protective mechanisms with which to bind iron
in various tissue compartments. In serum, iron is usually
bound to Tf, but some is present as NTBI when iron con-
centration exceeds the iron binding capacity of plasma Tf.
It is also noted that ferritin is present in serum, although its
biological role in iron transport is unclear.
Fig. 1 Routes for iron uptake by hepatocytes. Hepatocytes have
several pathways for iron uptake from the circulation. Concerning
uptake of Tf-bound iron (Fe2-Tf) at physiological concentrations,
there are three pathways involving TfR1, TfR2, and TfR-independent
mechanisms. The pathway via TfR1 is a classical one and is well
elucidated. When serum Fe2-Tf binds to TfR1, the Fe2Tf-TfR1
complex is internalized by endocytosis, and iron is released within the
endosome when endosomal pH is acidic. The resulting apotransferrin-
TfR1 complex is then recycled back to the cell surface for re-
utilization. Released iron into the endosome is transferred to the
cytoplasm by DMT1; the resulting cytoplasmic free iron is used for
iron-related biological functions, and the rest of the iron is stored as
ferritin. In addition to TfR1, TfR2 and the mechanism that is
independent of TfR1 and TfR2, are also considered to be important
routes for iron uptake in hepatocytes, but the details of these routes
remain to be elucidated. Concerning the hepatic uptake of NTBI,
which is present in the serum during conditions of iron overload,
DMT1 and ZIP14 are considered to be involved
Pathophysiology of iron overload 9
123
3.1 Iron in plasma: Tf-bound iron and non-Tf-bound
iron (NTBI)
It is well known that plasma Tf is capable of binding and
transporting ferric iron to cells via TfRs. The binding
capacity of Tf to inorganic iron is very strong, and this
characteristic behavior prevents iron from existing in its
free form under normal physiological conditions. As the Tf
saturation in normal physiological conditions is up to 35%,
this suggests that there is sufﬁcient capacity to prevent the
release of free toxic iron into the circulation [18]. However,
when the iron binding capacity of Tf is saturated in the
iron-overloaded state, an additional iron compartment
NTBI, appears in the circulation. This compartment is
biologically more toxic than Tf-bound iron. Among the
NTBI fractions, labile plasma iron (LPI) is the most toxic.
Unlike Tf-bound iron, the cellular uptake of NTBI is not
dependent on the TfR, and therefore the resulting iron is
diffusely distributed throughout the organs, independent of
the presence of the TfR [5, 19]. Unlike serum iron, TIBC
and percent-Tf-saturation measurements, the inter-institu-
tional difference of NTBI and LPI measurements are too
great and these parameters have not been standardized.
3.2 Iron in tissue: tissue ferritin and labile iron pool
(LIP)
Within cells, iron is stored in the proteins ferritin or he-
mosiderin. Ferritin is a cytoplasmic protein consisting of 25
heterodimeric subunits of H and L that stores iron as ferric
hydroxide phosphate in a controlled manner. Each mole-
cule can store up to 4,500 Fe(III) within the protein shell
[20], and release greater quantities of iron when the body is
iron deﬁcient. Most ferritin is present in liver, spleen, and
bone marrow, and a trace amount is found in the blood as
serum ferritin. It is noteworthy that the synthesis of ferritin
is post-transcriptionally regulated by the cytoplasmic
transacting factor IRP. IRP activates ferritin synthesis
when iron is excess in the cell [21]. This adaptive response
is important for preventing cells from free iron toxicity.
In addition to ferritin iron, LIP is present within cells in
order to facilitate biological actions involving iron atoms,
and can become cytotoxic or carcinogenic when the con-
centration exceeds the protective capacity of ferritin. Most
of the LIP is free ferric iron bound to citrate or adenosine
diphosphate, and a small amount of LIP is reduced to
ferrous iron, which is responsible for oxidation–reduction
reactions and the Fenton reaction. Iron toxicity is devel-
oped thorough the production of ROS.
3.3 Serum ferritin
In 1972, Jacobs et al. [22, 23] in the UK reported that
ferritin was also present in serum, although its amount was
very low. By quantitative phlebotomy, it was found that
serum ferritin (SF) correlated with total body iron stores.
Although it is still not clear how SF is produced, it is the
most convenient laboratory test available to estimate body
iron stores at the present time. However, the level of SF is
also affected by acute and chronic inﬂammation and
infections. Therefore, data should be interpreted carefully
when using SF as a biological marker for evaluation of
body iron stores, as shown in Table 2. There is a difference
between the standard values of SF concentration in males
and females (normal range 10–220 lg/L in males; 10–
85 lg/L in females). It is clear that low SF values less than
Table 2 Considerations needed to use serum ferritin as a biological marker for the evaluation of body iron store
There is a sex difference of standard values of serum ferritin concentration
Male: 10–220 µg/L, Female: 10–85 µg/L
Serum ferritin will be increased in various clinical conditions other than iron overload
Chronic inflammation (effect of inflammatory cytokines)
Chronic liver damage (release from destroyed hepatocytes)
Malignancies (release from destroyed tumors)
The conditions needed to be considered for differential diagnosis dependent on the value of serum
ferritin
Slight elevation (250–500 µg/L)
Malignancies, chronic liver damage, chronic inflammation, mild iron overload
Mild elevation (500–1000 µg/L)
Early stage of iron overload, ineffective erythropoiesis (thalassemia, etc)
The frequency of the conditions except iron overload decreases
Moderate elevation (1000–5000 µg/L)
Iron overload, Adult Still’s disease, hemophagocytic syndrome
Severe elevation (more than 5000 µg/L)
Iron overload (hemochromatosis)
10 Y. Kohgo et al.
123
12 lg/L are usually representative of body iron deﬁciency.
On other hand, patients with SF levels that are higher than
the normal range may be indicative of conditions such as
iron overload, inﬂammation, collagen disease, malignancy,
and hepatic diseases [24]. This characteristic feature of the
SF assay is considered to be a disadvantage for monitoring
iron overload. Especially in Japan, the signiﬁcance of SF as
an inﬂammation marker has been over-stressed because
there are few patients with hereditary hemochromatosis
showing signiﬁcantly high values of more than a couple of
thousand or ten thousand microgram per liter.
Systemic measurements of SF in various diseases were
conducted mainly in the late 1970s, just after the devel-
opment of this assay, and it was found that AA and
sideroblastic anemia patients who had received blood
transfusions had SF levels of more than 1,000 lg/L,
whereas patients without transfusions had lower levels.
These old data have suggested previously that anemic
patients who had ineffective erythropoiesis without trans-
fusion support could maintain their SF levels at values less
than 1,000 lg/L, even though adaptive increases in intes-
tinal iron absorption were noted [25]. Therefore, the
interpretation of the value of SF for the assessment of body
iron status is simpliﬁed if other clinical conditions such as
inﬂammation and malignancy are excluded by other
modalities. The clinical studies concerning the relationship
between blood transfusion and SF have been conducted
mainly in the Europe and US, showing that there is a clear-
cut positive correlation between the amount of chronic
blood transfusion and the elevation of SF in patients with
b-thalassemia [26, 27]. Furthermore, the concentration of
heart iron is increased when SF levels become greater than
1,800 lg/L, and the prevalence of cardiac events is sig-
niﬁcantly increased when SF levels are more than
2,500 lg/L [6, 28]. Similar results concerning the rela-
tionship between SF and organ dysfunction of liver and
heart were shown in a Japanese retrospective study in
transfusion-dependent patients with bone-marrow-failure
syndromes [29]. In this study, 90% of patients with either
cardiac or hepatic complications had high SF levels of
more than 1,000 lg/L. Coincidentally, this level of SF also
represents the threshold of the target value at which iron
chelation therapy should be initiated in patients with
transfusion iron overload, according to the guidelines of the
International MDS Symposium [30].
4 Measurement of body iron stores: comparison with
serum ferritin
Direct and indirect methods are available for the estimation
of body iron. As previously mentioned, the measurement of
SF is the most convenient and cost-effective technique,
although other factors can also inﬂuence its value. There is
no argument that the gold standard for iron determination is
direct tissue iron determination. Notably, other methods
that are becoming increasingly important include physical
methods such as the superconducting quantum-interference
device (SQUID) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
4.1 Direct measurement
Liver is the major organ for iron storage and has the largest
capacity to store excess iron. The measurement of hepatic
iron concentration by liver biopsy is the most reliable means
to assess body iron storage; however, this procedure is
invasive and cannot be used in all cases [7]. Figure 2 com-
pares the indirect estimation of body iron based on serum
ferritin and LIC. Open circles denote the values at the start of
the trial (before treatment with deferiprone), and solid cir-
cles denote the values at the time of the ﬁnal analysis. The
correlation between these measurements was signiﬁcant
(R = 0.73; P \ 0.005) [31]. Concerning the determination
of cardiac iron deposition, myocardial biopsy can be used;
however, this procedure is not often conducted without
special experimental reasons due to its high technical risk.
In patients with b-thalassemia, there is a correlation
between LIC and cumulative amounts of RBC transfusions
[26] and the risk of organ dysfunction is enhanced when
LIC values are greater than 7 mg/kg wet tissue, and LIC
levels of over 15 mg/kg wet tissue increase the risk of early
cardiac death due to iron deposition in the myocardium [6].
Studies in the deferasirox clinical development program in
b-thalassemia also demonstrated a correlation between the
reduction in LIC and SF values (R = 0.63).
Fig. 2 Comparison of hepatic iron and serum ferritin concentrations.
Indirect estimation is compared with the reference method, based on
the direct measurement of hepatic iron levels by chemical analysis or
magnetic-susceptibility studies. Open circles denote the values at the
start of the trial (before deferiprone therapy), and solid circles the
values at the time of the ﬁnal analysis. The diagonal line denotes the
simple linear least-squares regression between the two variables.
(From [31]. Reproduced with permission. Olivieri NF et al. N Engl J
Med. 1995;332:918–22. Copyright Ó1995 Massachusetts Medical
Society. All rights reserved)
Pathophysiology of iron overload 11
123
4.2 Physical measurement of body iron
As iron is one of the heavy metals, an increased concen-
tration of biological iron consisting of ferritin and
hemosiderin can be detected by body imaging procedures.
Until recently, abdominal echograms and computed
tomography (CT) produced images at high iron concen-
trations, although these two modalities are not quantitative
and are only capable of detecting iron overload under
conditions of extremely high iron deposition [32].
Recently, quantitative procedures such as SQUID [33] and
MRI have been introduced, which use the physical char-
acteristics of iron. However, SQUID apparatus is only
available in a couple of institutions in the Europe and US
because of its cost. On other hand, LIC determinations by
MRI are widely available. This method utilizes the speciﬁc
characteristic of iron that shortens T1, T2, and T2* relax-
ation times. The measurable range of iron concentration by
R2 (in a 1.5-T MRI magnet) is 0.3–42.7 mg Fe/g dry tis-
sue, which covers the concentrations observed in iron-
overloaded livers.
In addition to LIC measurement, the determination of
cardiac iron concentration is clinically important because
one of the major causes of death in iron overload is sudden
cardiac arrest. The most reliable non-invasive method of
cardiac iron is MRI R2*, which was developed by
Anderson et al. [34]. The advantage of MRI R2* is the
shorter time period required to acquire an image as only
one breath period is necessary by this procedure.
Of the patients with LIC values below 350 lmol/g, all
but one had myocardial iron within normal (B8 lmol/g) or
nearly normal ranges. When liver iron levels reached a
threshold of 350 lmol/g, iron deposition became evident in
the myocardium. At the same time, there was a propor-
tional increase in urinary iron excretion, indicating raised
levels of labile iron. SF levels of [1,800 lg/L were also
associated with myocardial deposition.
5 Toxic effect of iron overload on organ function
Iron overload induces organ damage in liver, heart, pan-
creas, thyroid, and the central nervous system. The main
cause of this organ damage is due to the overproduction of
ROS in the presence of excess iron.
5.1 Mechanism of iron toxicity
The production of ROS by iron is mainly through the
Fenton reaction, which eventually forms hydroxyl radicals
from superoxide or hydrogen peroxide [35]. Among ROS,
the hydroxyl radical is the most toxic fraction and it targets
carbohydrate, protein, and nucleic acids. It is known that
the reaction of hydroxyl radicals with the nucleic acid base
8-hydroxyguanine (8-OHG) is highly correlated with ter-
atogenicity and carcinogenicity by oxidative stresses.
Another powerful ROS showing similar reactivity as the
hydroxyl radical is lipid hydroxyl-peroxide: ROOH. In iron
overload, lipid peroxidative products such as malondial-
dehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal are increased, which
form the radicals ROO-(alkyl oxyradical) and RO-(alkoxy
radical). These lipid-based radicals possess longer half
lives than hydroxyl radicals, and also have a stronger
capacity for chronic cell toxicity and DNA damage.
5.2 Iron overload syndrome
Pathological conditions representing body iron overload
are designated as iron overload syndromes, and iron
deposition causes organ dysfunction including cell death,
ﬁbrosis, and carcinogenesis. Iron overload syndromes are
classiﬁed as genetic or secondary as shown in Table 3.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is the most common
genetic disorder in Western countries [36], and its clinical
Table 3 Classiﬁcation of iron overload
Hereditary hemochromatosis and related disorders
Hereditary
hemochromatosis
Type 1
HFE gene (6p21.3) mutation
Type 2
Subtype A: hemojuvelin gene (1q21)
mutation
Subtype B: hepcidin gene (19q13)
mutation
Type 3
Transferrin receptor 2 gene (7q22)
mutation
Type 4
Ferroportin gene (2q32) mutation
Ferritin gene mutation H-ferritin gene mutation (mRNA iron-
responsive-element mutation)
DMT1 gene mutation
Ceruloplasmin gene
mutation
Atransferrinemia Transferrin gene mutation
Secondary iron overload
Ineffective
erythropoiesis
Thalassemia, sideroblastic anemia,
myelodysplastic syndromes
Administration of iron
for long periods
Take orally or intravenous injection
Transfusion for long
periods
Dietary iron overload
Liver dysfunction Alcoholic liver injury, chronic hepatitis
(type C), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Others Porphyria
12 Y. Kohgo et al.
123
manifestation is systemic iron deposition mainly in liver,
heart, brain, and endocrine organs. This organ damage is
considered to be a result of tissue injuries by iron-induced
oxidative stresses [37]. In 1996, the causative gene was
identiﬁed as HFE in the human chromosome 6 [38], and
approximately 85% of patients with hereditary hemochro-
matosis in Western counties have a homologous mutation
of C282Y in their HFE gene. Thereafter, other genes such
as hemojuvelin (HJV), TfR2, ferroportin, and hepcidin
(HAMP) gene were identiﬁed [39]. In spite of the lack of
genetic background, iron overload is commonly observed
as a secondary condition. The most common condition
occurs in patients who require long-term blood transfusions
due to severe anemias. This condition includes genetic
disorders such as thalassemia and SCD, and anemia
refractory to conventional treatments. In these patients,
ineffective erythropoiesis and continuous accumulation of
exogenous iron by transfusion are considered to be
responsible for the iron overload. The resulting organ
failures such as liver failure, cardiac failure, and severe
diabetes mellitus affect patients’ outcome [1]. In addition
to these classical conditions, there are many diseases that
show mild iron deposition or dysregulation of body iron
distribution. Such conditions include chronic hepatitis C,
alcoholic liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, and
insulin resistance, and iron is an important cofactor that
modiﬁes these disease conditions. Furthermore, it is
becoming clear that excess iron is also hazardous as it
promotes atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis, diabetes, and
other lifestyle-related disorders [40].
5.3 Organ dysfunction by excess iron
The liver is the most important organ for iron storage with
the largest capacity to sequester excess iron. The periodical
change of organ dysfunction by long-term transfusions has
been studied in patients with homozygous b-thalassemia.
Usually, within 2 years of transfusion, abnormalities of
liver function tests (LFTs) such as transaminase are not
prominent; LFTs are within the normal range or slightly
elevated. During these periods, the liver biopsy examina-
tion shows a slight ﬁbrosis with mild inﬂammation and iron
deposition. Clinically, the liver is hardened and palpable,
and serum transaminase levels are moderately elevated,
while other LFTs are within the normal range or slightly
elevated. Therefore, it is important for transfusion-depen-
dent patients that clinicians make a correct staging in order
to conﬁrm whether any liver lesions are ﬁbrotic or cirrhotic
by examining CT, MRI, and biochemical analyses includ-
ing serum transaminase determinations.
The most important adverse event of long-term trans-
fusion is a sudden death due to cardiac failure. It was
reported that approximately 70% of deaths in patients with
b-thalassemia are cardiogenic [41]. Signs of cardiac dys-
function include cardiac hypertrophy, arrhythmia, and
endocarditis, which eventually cause cardiac failure. Left
ventricular disturbance is prominent and is represented as
the decrease of ventricular ejection fraction (VEF) by
cardiac echogram. As this decrease of VEF appears prior to
the clinical signs of cardiac failure and the enlargement of
cardiac shadow in chest X-rays, the cardiac echogram is
the most useful modality for the follow-up of myocardial
damage by iron overload [42]. MRI is also useful to assess
the ventricular function, and the deposition of iron in car-
diac muscles is detectable by an increase in signal
intensity. Furthermore, MRI calculation of T2* or R2*
allows the possibility of semi-quantitation of iron concen-
trations, even at relatively low concentrations [43].
According to a follow-up study in patients with b-thal-
assemia, organ dysfunction by iron overload appears ﬁrstly
in the liver when serum ferritin exceeds 1,000 lg/L, and
other organ involvements including heart follow in accor-
dance with the further development of iron deposition.
Signiﬁcant cardiac iron deposition is usually observed
when LICs are more than 15 mg/g dry weight or serum
ferritin levels are more than 1,800–2,500 lg/L [6].
Clinically, in order to detect organ dysfunctions, serum
ferritin determinations should be conducted once every 1–
3 months. When serum ferritin levels exceed 1,500 lg/L,
patients should be examined for the symptoms of cardiac
failure or arrhythmias [44], and periodical cardiac echo-
grams may also be useful in diagnosis.
In addition to iron deposition in the liver and heart,
pancreatic beta cells are another important target of iron
toxicity, which cause glucose intolerance and diabetes
mellitus. An additional factor leading to the development
of glucose intolerance is hepatic disturbance of insulin
utilization, which accelerates beta cell depletion due to
hyperinsulinemia [45]. From a clinical perspective, serial
determinations of blood glucose, urine sugar, and glyco-
albumin are useful, whereas glycohemoglobin is not as
useful owing to the effect of transfusions. Endocrinopathies
by long-term transfusion include developmental distur-
bances, incomplete puberty, and thyroid dysfunctions [46].
In patients with thalassemia and SCD, special attention
should be paid to early onset symptoms such as distur-
bances of development and sexual immaturity.
6 Conclusion
Iron is essential for the body, but extremely toxic when
excess amounts are present. As the body has no active
excretion pathways for iron, a continuous load of iron
exceeding 1–2 mg/day will result in iron overload, and
organ failures including liver and heart. The recent
Pathophysiology of iron overload 13
123
understanding of body iron metabolism at a molecular level
enables us to elucidate the mechanism of iron toxicity more
precisely. Improvement of patients’ outcomes is becoming
promising if a correct early diagnosis is made, and suitable
management of these intractable conditions using iron
chelation with high compliance is conducted.
References
1. Andrews NC. Disorders of iron metabolism. N Engl J Med.
1999;341:1986–95.
2. McKie AT, Latunde-Dada GO, Miret S, et al. Molecular evidence
for the role of a ferric reductase in iron transport. Biochem Soc
Trans. 2002;30:722–4.
3. Trinder D, Fox C, Vautier G, Olynyk JK. Molecular pathogenesis
of iron overload. Gut. 2002;51:290–5.
4. Sargent PJ, Farnaud S, Evans RW. Structure/function overview of
proteins involved in iron storage and transport. Curr Med Chem.
2005;12:2683–93.
5. Cabantchik ZI, Breuer W, Zanninelli G, Cianciulli P. LPI-labile
plasma iron in iron overload. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol.
2005;18:277–87.
6. Olivieri NF, Brittenham GM. Iron-chelating therapy and the
treatment of thalassemia. Blood. 1997;89:739–61.
7. Angelucci E, Brittenham GM, McLaren CE, et al. Hepatic iron
concentration and total body iron stores in thalassemia major. N
Engl J Med. 2000;343:327–31.
8. Ikuta K, Zak O, Aisen P. Recycling, degradation and sensitivity
to the synergistic anion of transferrin in the receptor-independent
route of iron uptake by human hepatoma (HuH–7) cells. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2004;36:340–52.
9. Liuzzi JP, Aydemir F, Nam H, Knutson MD, Cousins RJ. Zip14
(Slc39a14) mediates non-transferrin-bound iron uptake into cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;103:13612–7.
10. Schranzhofer M, Schifrer M, Cabrera JA, et al. Remodeling the
regulation of iron metabolism during erythroid differentiation to
ensure efﬁcient heme biosynthesis. Blood. 2006;107:4159–67.
11. Fleming MD. The genetics of inherited sideroblastic anemias.
Semin Hematol. 2002;39:270–81.
12. Park CH, Valore EV, Waring AJ, Ganz T. Hepcidin, a urinary
antimicrobial peptide synthesized in the liver. J Biol Chem.
2001;276:7806–10.
13. Inamura J, Ikuta K, Jimbo J, et al. Upregulation of hepcidin by
interleukin-1beta in human hepatoma cell lines. Hepatol Res.
2005;33:198–205.
14. Ganz T. Hepcidin in iron metabolism. Curr Opin Hematol.
2004;11:251–4.
15. Bridle KR, Frazer DM, Wilkins SJ, et al. Disrupted hepcidin
regulation in HFE-associated haemochromatosis and the liver as a
regulator of body iron homoeostasis. Lancet. 2003;361:669–73.
16. Pietrangelo A. Hemochromatosis: an endocrine liver disease.
Hepatology. 2007;46:1291–301.
17. Gardenghi S, Marongiu MF, Ramos P, et al. Ineffective eryth-
ropoiesis in b-thalassemia is characterized by increased iron
absorption mediated by down-regulation of hepcidin and up-
regulation of ferroportin. Blood. 2007;109:5027–35.
18. Cazzola M, Huebers HA, Sayers MH, MacPhail AP, Eng M,
Finch CA. Transferrin saturation, plasma iron turnover, and
transferrin uptake in normal humans. Blood. 1985;66:935–9.
19. Breuer W, Hershko C, Cabantchik ZI. The importance of non-
transferrin bound iron in disorders of iron metabolism. Transfus
Sci. 2000;23:185–92.
20. Koorts AM, Viljoen M. Ferritin and ferritin isoforms I: structure-
function relationships, synthesis, degradation and secretion. Arch
Physiol Biochem. 2007;113:30–54.
21. Harrison PM, Arosio P. The ferritins: molecular properties, iron
storage function and cellular regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta.
1996;1275:161–203.
22. Jacobs A, Beamish MR, Allison M. The measurement of circu-
lating ferritin. J Clin Pathol. 1972;25:1003.
23. Jacobs A, Miller F, Worwood M, Beamish MR, Wardrop CA.
Ferritin in the serum of normal subjects and patients with iron
deﬁciency and iron overload. Br Med J. 1972;4:206–8.
24. Piperno A. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of iron overload. Hae-
matologica. 1998;83:447–55.
25. Saito H, Hayashi D, Ohya T, Ohya F, Yamada H. Clinical
evaluation on serum ferritin (author’s transl). Rinsho Ketsueki.
1979;20:1317–25.
26. Galanello R, Piga A, Forni GL, et al. Phase II clinical evaluation
of deferasirox, a once-daily oral chelating agent, in paediatric
patients with b-thalassaemia major. Haematologica.
2006;91:1343–51.
27. Cappellini MD, Cohen A, Piga A, et al. A phase 3 study of
deferasirox (ICL670), a once-daily oral iron chelator, in patients
with beta-thalassemia. Blood. 2006;107:3455–62.
28. Jensen PD, Jensen FT, Christensen T, Eiskjaer H, Baandrup U,
Nielsen JL. Evaluation of myocardial iron by magnetic resonance
imaging during iron chelation therapy with deferrioxamine:
indication of close relation between myocardial iron content and
chelatable iron pool. Blood. 2003;101:4632–9.
29. Takatoku M, Uchiyama T, Okamoto S, et al. Retrospective
nationwide survey of Japanese patients with transfusion-depen-
dent MDS and aplastic anemia highlights the negative impact of
iron overload on morbidity/mortality. Eur J Haematol.
2007;78:487–94.
30. Gattermann N. Guidelines on iron chelation therapy in patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes and transfusional iron overload.
Leuk Res. 2007;31(Suppl 3):S10–5.
31. Olivieri NF, Brittenham GM, Matsui D, et al. Iron-chelation
therapy with oral deferiprone in patients with thalassemia major.
N Engl J Med. 1995;332:918–22.
32. Long JA Jr, Doppman JL, Nienhus AW, Mills SR. Computed
tomographic analysis of beta-thalassemic syndromes with he-
mochromatosis: pathologic ﬁndings with clinical and laboratory
correlations. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1980;4:159–65.
33. Brittenham GM, Farrell DE, Harris JW, et al. Magnetic-suscep-
tibility measurement of human iron stores. N Engl J Med.
1982;307:1671–5.
34. Anderson LJ, Westwood MA, Holden S, et al. Myocardial iron
clearance during reversal of siderotic cardiomyopathy with
intravenous desferrioxamine: a prospective study using T2*
cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Br J Haematol.
2004;127:348–55.
35. Crichton RR, Wilmet S, Legssyer R, Ward RJ. Molecular and
cellular mechanisms of iron homeostasis and toxicity in mam-
malian cells. J Inorg Biochem. 2002;91:9–18.
36. Yen AW, Fancher TL, Bowlus CL. Revisiting hereditary hemo-
chromatosis: current concepts and progress. Am J Med.
2006;119:391–9.
37. Pietrangelo A. Hereditary hemochromatosis—a new look at an
old disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2383–97.
38. Feder JN, Gnirke A, Thomas W, et al. A novel MHC class I-like
gene is mutated in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis.
Nat Genet. 1996;13:399–408.
39. Franchini M. Hereditary iron overload: update on pathophysi-
ology, diagnosis, and treatment. Am J Hematol. 2006;81:202–
9.
14 Y. Kohgo et al.
123
40. Bonkovsky HL, Lambrecht RW, Shan Y. Iron as a co-morbid
factor in nonhemochromatotic liver disease. Alcohol.
2003;30:137–44.
41. Zurlo MG, De Stefano P, Borgna-Pignatti C, et al. Survival and
causes of death in thalassaemia major. Lancet. 1989;2:27–30.
42. McGowan JH, Cleland JG. Reliability of reporting left ventricular
systolic function by echocardiography: a systematic review of 3
methods. Am Heart J. 2003;146:388–97.
43. Anderson LJ, Holden S, Davis B, et al. Cardiovascular T2-star
(T2*) magnetic resonance for the early diagnosis of myocardial
iron overload. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:2171–9.
44. Telfer PT, Prestcott E, Holden S, Walker M, Hoffbrand AV,
Wonke B. Hepatic iron concentration combined with long-term
monitoring of serum ferritin to predict complications of iron
overload in thalassaemia major. Br J Haematol. 2000;110:971–7.
45. Olivieri NF. The b-thalassemias. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:99–
109.
46. Fung EB, Harmatz PR, Lee PD, et al. Increased prevalence of
iron-overload associated endocrinopathy in thalassaemia versus
sickle-cell disease. Br J Haematol. 2006;135:574–82.
Pathophysiology of iron overload 15
123
