Review Article
Themed Issue: Bioinformatics and Computational Advances in the Pharmaceutical Sciences
Guest Editor: Murali Ramanathan
Informatic Tools and Approaches in Postmarketing Pharmacovigilance
Used by FDA
Joyce Weaver,1,2
Mary Willy,1
and Mark Avigan1
Received 24 September 2007; accepted 21 November 2007; published online 25 January 2008
Abstract. The safety proﬁle of newly approved drugs and therapeutic biologics is less well developed by
pre-marketing clinical testing than is the efﬁcacy proﬁle. The full safety proﬁle of an approved product is
established during years of clinical use. For nearly 40 years, the FDA has relied on the voluntary
reporting of adverse events by healthcare practitioners and patients to help establish the safety of
marketed products. Epidemiologic studies, including case series, secular trends, case-control and cohort
studies, are used to supplement the investigation of a safety signal. Ideally, active surveillance systems
would supplement the identiﬁcation and exploration of safety signals. The FDA has implemented a
number of initiatives to help identify safety problems with drugs and continues to evaluate their efforts.
KEY WORD: postmarketing product surveillance.
POSTMARKETING PRODUCT SURVEILLANCE
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible
for making sure marketed drugs and biologics are both
efﬁcacious and safe. At the time of FDA approval of drugs
and therapeutic biologics, there is an imbalance in what is
known about the efﬁcacy and safety of the products. The
efﬁcacy data are robust; efﬁcacy is well established by the
randomized clinical trial data submitted to support the new
drug application (NDA) or biologic licensing application
(BLA). Less is known about the safety of newly approved
drugs because clinical trials are not powered to detect rare
drug-induced adverse events. Little is known about the safety
of the products in a diverse (in age, ethnicity, gender, and co-
morbidities) population because the clinical trial subjects often
do not reﬂect the more diverse patient population in which the
products will be used after approval. Often narrow indications
are studied in clinical trials, but the reasons for use broaden
when the product is introduced into clinical practice. The
clinical studies are short in duration, and do not reﬂect chronic
use that may occur in clinical practice. The full safety proﬁle of
the drug emerges over a period of years of use in clinical
practice as the drug is used in a wider and more diverse patient
population than occurred in pre-marketing clinical trials. The
full safety proﬁle of an approved product is established during
years of clinical use as healthcare practitioners and patients
report their adverse experiences with the product and as the
product is studied in epidemiologic studies.
FDA’S ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING SYSTEM
(AERS)
The reports of adverse events that occur in clinical
practice are voluntarily reported by healthcare practitioners
and patients to the pharmaceutical manufacturers or directly
to the FDA. These case reports are placed into a computer-
ized safety database at the FDA, the Adverse Event
Reporting System (AERS), a database that contains sponta-
neously reported cases. AERS, a computerized database
which began nearly 40 years ago, is a database containing
over 3 million case reports. With the spontaneously reported
cases that are stored within the AERS database, the FDA
gathers safety data relatively inexpensively to allow the
detection of events not seen in clinical trials (1). Exploration
of the cases stored within AERS is especially useful for
detecting rare events associated with a drug product (2).
Because a healthcare practitioner is more likely to suspect
that an event is attributable to drug exposure if the event
occurs fairly quickly after drug exposure, events with short
latency following drug exposure are more likely to be
reported to the FDA and therefore stored within AERS.
Because AERS comprises spontaneously reported case
reports, it has important limitations as a tool in detecting and
exploring drug safety problems. The database contains duplicate
reports because more than one person may report the same
event. Although duplicate reports may be submitted for some
events, a bigger problem with AERS is extensive underreport-
ing, the true extent of which is not known (1). Because busy
healthcare practitioners are submitting the bulk of the reports
35 1530-9932/08/0100-0035/0 # 2007 American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists
The AAPS Journal, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2008 (# 2007)
DOI: 10.1208/s12248-007-9004-5
1
Ofﬁce of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evalua-
tion and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 10903 New
Hampshire Ave., Silver Spring, MD 20903-0002, USA.
2
To whom correspondence should be addressed. (e-mail: joyce.
weaver@fda.hhs.gov)
contained within AERS, the quality of the reports is variable;
the reports often lack data critical for the evaluation of the
event.
The cases submitted to AERS may be viewed as
reﬂecting adverse effects relating to real-world use of the
products in clinical practice. The patient population may be
more inclusive than the patient population the product was
tested on in clinical trials. The patients may include a more
diverse patient population in terms of age, gender, ethnicity,
and medical histories. The product may be used for wider
indications than studied, and the use of medication may be
chronic. Because the patients who use the product may have
complex medical histories, the AERS cases tend to be
complicated. The complicated nature of the postmarketing
cases poses signiﬁcant challenges to FDA scientists in
attributing the adverse events to exposure to a particular
drug product.
The actual number of adverse events occurring in people
who receive a drug product and the number of patients who
have been exposed to a drug product in the population are
not known, and so incidence rates cannot be calculated from
AERS data for drug-induced adverse events. Furthermore, it
can be difﬁcult to attribute causality for events to drug
exposure if the adverse event occurs frequently in the
population in the absence of drug exposure. For example,
myocardial infarction may be difﬁcult to attribute to drug
exposure using AERS data alone, because myocardial
infarction is a common event in the general population and
therefore may not be reported.
USING AERS TO DISCOVER AND EXPLORE SAFETY
ISSUES
Safety evaluators, most of whom are clinical pharmacists,
perform the frontline postmarketing safety surveillance for
approved drugs and therapeutic biologic products. The main
mission of the safety evaluators is to identify and monitor
safety signals for the products. The adverse event case reports
are entered into the AERS database, and each report of an
unexpected event (that is, an event not described in the
product labeling) with a serious outcome (for example, death,
hospitalization, or disability) is triaged to a safety evaluator.
Select other reports are sent to the safety evaluators as well,
including some reports that are sent on an expedited basis to
the FDA as a result of increased surveillance on an issue of
special concern for the product. The reports are sent to a
virtual inbox for each safety evaluator. In 2006, more than
218,000 such reports were forwarded to the FDA safety
evaluators (3). The safety evaluators monitor the AERS
inbox on a daily basis reading the serious, unexpected reports
that have been submitted for the drug products.
Although the safety evaluator’s AERS inbox is a primary
source of postmarketing safety data, the safety evaluators
receive postmarketing safety data from other sources as well.
For each drug product, the safety evaluators receive manda-
tory periodic safety reports prepared by the product’s
manufacturer. The periodic safety reports summarize all the
case reports submitted to the manufacturer for a product.
Safety issues can be raised other ways as well; for example,
the published medical literature or safety data in a New Drug
Application might raise a safety question. A safety question
can be raised through an inquiry to the FDA from a clinician,
patient, or a member of Congress.
Data mining can help in detecting safety signals. The
FDA uses data mining to screen the AERS database using a
Bayesian protocol for the presence of disproportionately
large adverse event–drug product pairs; that is, the database
is screened to detect the presence of an unexpectedly high
number of reports of a given adverse event for a drug
product. The FDA uses the empirical Bayes multi-item
gamma Poisson shrinker (MGPS) data mining protocol.
MGPS incorporates numerous stratiﬁcation steps to minimize
false positive signals. Details on the MGPS algorithm used by
the FDA have been published elsewhere (4).
The presence of an unexpectedly high number of reports
for a given event for a drug product does not mean
necessarily that the drug product causes the event, nor does
the absence of a data mining safety signal mean there is not a
safety problem. The data must be evaluated to determine
whether or not the disproportionately high adverse event–
drug product pair represents a true safety signal for the drug
product (5). The biases present in the AERS database are
still present when the database is “mined” for disproportion-
ately high adverse event–drug product pairs, and these biases
must be considered when evaluating the data. Data mining
information from screening the AERS database generate
hypotheses that are examined to determine the validity of the
potential safety signal and to determine the need for
additional analyses.
After a safety question is raised, the safety evaluator has
a number of options to pursue the safety issue. These options
include screening and analyzing AERS cases, requesting and
analyzing additional clinical details from patients and health-
care practitioners who reported cases of interest, analyzing
data mining information, and evaluating similar cases
reported in the medical literature. Often, the ﬁrst step in
pursuing a safety issue is searching AERS for case reports
that may speak to the safety issue. Safety evaluators search
the AERS database using the medical terminology Med-
DRA, the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities.
MedDRA is an international hierarchical medical terminolo-
gy that is used to code events within AERS. The safety
evaluator searches AERS using the MedDRA hierarchy of
terms (i.e., preferred terms, higher level terms, high level
group terms, or system organ class terms) to broaden or
narrow the search (6).
When safety evaluators gather cases from AERS, they
usually ﬁnd a range of cases in terms of information quality,
including cases with a very complete description and documen-
tation, and cases with very little supporting clinical information.
Ideally, at least some case reports contain complete information
including a complete description of the event, what product the
reporter thinks caused the event, other products the patient was
taking, patient characteristics, medical conditions, risk factors,
documentation of the diagnosis, information on whether the
event abated when the product was discontinued (dechallenge),
and information on whether the event recurred if the product
was reintroduced (rechallenge).
The safety evaluator examines the case reports to
determine if there are other factors that may explain the
event, or if, indeed, the drug product is the likely cause. For
any individual case report, it is rarely possible to know
36 Weaver, Willy and Avigan
whether the event was caused by the drug product. Never-
theless, the safety evaluator assesses the strength of the
evidence for causality, looking for the temporal relationship
between the use of the drug and the event, drug–disease
interactions, other drugs the patient was taking that may have
contributed to the event, and supportive clinical and labora-
tory ﬁndings. Additionally, the safety evaluator examines
cases for dechallenge and rechallenge information, the
biologic plausibility of the event, and known drug class
effects. The safety evaluator may examine pre-marketing
data to see if the event was observed in clinical testing.
Safety evaluators examine the case reports in AERS for
commonalities in an adverse event reported for a drug
product. The safety evaluator looks at the cases together for
the ages of the patients, the sex of the patients, the time to
onset of the adverse event, whether there is a dose–response
relationship, and whether there are risk factors that may
make patients more likely to experience the event.
How well does a spontaneous reporting system like
AERS handle safety issues? For rare, easily diagnosed events
with short latency following drug exposure, AERS is an
efﬁcient database to examine drug-induced adverse events
(2). For events confounded by the indication for use, for
events that occur frequently in patients not exposed to the
drug product, and for events that are not easily diagnosed,
AERS is not an efﬁcient database to examine the drug-
induced adverse events. The impact of these factors on the
capability of AERS to discover and explore safety signals can
be illustrated by examining several drug-related safety issues
that the FDA has confronted.
Terfenadine (Seldane) was approved in 1985 for the
relief of symptoms associated with seasonal allergic rhinitis
and ﬁnally was withdrawn from the market in 1998 because of
its role in causing cardiac arrhythmias, notably QT prolonga-
tion and torsade de pointes. The reporting of QT prolonga-
tion to the FDA for terfenadine followed an atypical pattern.
The FDA usually receives the most adverse event reports for
a drug within the ﬁrst few years of marketing (7). The reports
for QT prolongation with terfenadine did not follow this
pattern, with the most reports of QT prolongation received in
1992, seven years after the drug’s approval. It appears that
there was a delay on the part of attending physicians in the
recognition of the role of terfenadine in producing arrhyth-
mias. The ﬁrst step in reporting a safety issue is diagnosis of
the medical event. This was not accomplished easily in the
case of terfenadine-induced arrhythmias because patients
taking terfenadine generally were not being monitored with
EKGs. Even when a rhythm abnormality became clinically
apparent, the diagnosis of the speciﬁc arrhythmia was still
difﬁcult. In fact, AERS contains reports of syncope for
terfenadine that probably were cases of torsade de pointes.
Finally, after the arrhythmia is diagnosed, to be reported to
the FDA as a drug-related adverse event, the physician must
have a suspicion that the event was secondary to exposure to
a drug. In this case, the diagnosis of the arrhythmia and
attribution to terfenadine were problematic. Because of these
factors, this signal was slow to appear in AERS data.
Salmeterol (Serevent) was approved in 1994 for the
maintenance treatment of asthma. Early in the marketing of
salmeterol the FDA received postmarketing reports of
asthma exacerbation with use of the product. It is expected
that some asthma patients will experience exacerbation of
asthma, even while on therapy. The cases reported for
salmeterol were confounded by the indication for the use of
the product; that is, the patient received the drug for asthma,
and so it is difﬁcult to determine whether the asthma
exacerbation was caused by salmeterol, or was an expected
manifestation of the patient’s underlying disease. The ques-
tion to be answered in evaluating the reports is whether there
is something being experienced by the patients using salme-
terol that is out of line with what is expected, not only with
the drug, but with the underlying disease. The essential
question is whether there is a differential rate of exacerba-
tions of asthma that is attributable to the drug. By the nature
of the uncontrolled data within AERS, the AERS database
cannot answer this question; AERS cannot establish the
comparative frequency of an adverse event. Because AERS
could not answer the safety question, a large safety study was
undertaken to explore the safety issue. Although the study
did not answer the safety question fully, the study was
stopped when an interim analysis showed signiﬁcant increases
in respiratory-related and asthma-related deaths and com-
bined asthma-related deaths or life-threatening experiences in
the group receiving salmeterol (8).
Valdecoxib (Bextra) is a COX-2 selective NSAID that
was approved in 2001 and was ﬁrst marketed in early 2002.
Early in marketing the FDA received a number of cases of
Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis
temporally related to the use of this product. This information
was quickly incorporated into the labeling for the product.
What were the characteristics of this issue that lent it to
be explored via AERS? This is the type of issue that AERS
handles very well. First, the serious skin events are rare,
easily diagnosed events, with short latency from the time the
drug was started; secondly, because Stevens–Johnson syn-
drome is well recognized as a drug-induced event, the
practitioners attributed the reactions to valdecoxib; thirdly,
the practitioners reported the events to the manufacturer and
to the FDA. Finally, although FDA scientists seldom make
comparisons of reporting rates between products, because of
the similarity between the drugs in indication for use, time on
the market, and year of introduction to the market, it was
reasonable to compare the reporting rates for this event for
valdecoxib and other drugs in the class at a similar point in
marketing. This comparison showed that the reporting rate
for Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis for
valdecoxib was 8–9 times that of celecoxib and approximately
25 times that of rofecoxib and the background rate (9). Based
on these data, FDA scientists concluded that these events
occurred more frequently with valdecoxib compared to other
products in the drug class.
A second safety issue with valdecoxib is an example of
an issue that is not a good issue to study in AERS. Valdecoxib
is associated with thromboembolic events (TEE), fairly
common events even in patients not exposed to valdecoxib.
Because of the high background rate of TEE, it is difﬁcult to
explore this using AERS data.
For both the salmeterol asthma case study in which the
cases are confounded by indication and the TEE valdecoxib
case study where there is a high background rate of the event
in the general population, AERS is of limited use in exploring
the safety issue.
37Informatic Tools and Approaches in Postmarketing Pharmacovigilance
EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDIES
Passive surveillance is helpful in identifying a possible
adverse event and drug association, but as described above,
there are a number of limitations. Underreporting is known
to be a common problem with passive surveillance (7).
Reporting also varies over time and may be affected by
secular trends (7). There can be differences in the diagnostic
terminology used. And ﬁnally, the analysis of passive
surveillance data can not yield an incidence rate.
Rates obtained from passive surveillance are often
referred to as reporting rates and usually reﬂect the number
of cases reported divided by the number of patient exposures.
As discussed the numerator will be an underestimate of the
true number of cases, although media attention can lead to an
increase in reported cases. The estimated denominator is also
difﬁcult to obtain, since the number of patients truly exposed
and for how long is not easily determined.
Often reporting rates will be compared to background
rates and possibly to the reporting rates with similar drugs to
determine if there is a safety signal. Background rates in the
population or in a special population (like pediatrics) might
be used for the comparison, but are often difﬁcult to obtain.
Comparisons to other drugs must be done with care since the
reporting for each drug is inﬂuenced by the length of time on
the market, the level of manufacturer diligence to identify
cases, and whether one drug has had differential media
attention related to the event of interest. Factors that are
considered when analyzing reporting rates are the magnitude
of the differences, whether the ﬁndings are consistent when
looking at less severe forms of the event, and whether
information from the clinical trial studies and literature
reports support the ﬁndings.
As part of the investigation of a safety signal, there are
times when epidemiologic studies can provide useful infor-
mation. The types of studies that might be used postmarket-
ing include case series, secular trends, case-control and cohort
studies (10–12). Case series are generally a description of a
group of patients experiencing similar adverse events or drug
exposure with no control group for comparison. The study of
secular trends in certain outcomes can be linked to the use of
certain drugs in some deﬁned population to help with the
initial exploration of a hypothesis. Since the secular trend
data are not linked to individual patients, positive ﬁndings
must be conﬁrmed with more systematic studies. Case-control
studies compare identiﬁed cases with a deﬁned outcome to a
group of controls without the outcome; exposure to drugs can
be compared between each group. Case-control studies are
useful for rare diseases and when there is interest in multiple
causes for a given outcome. Cohort studies study deﬁned
populations over time to look for outcomes of interest.
Cohort studies generally compare people exposed to a drug
to those who are not exposed. Cohort studies beneﬁt from
reduced recall bias (accuracy of the recalled information)
since information is generally collected prospectively. But
cohort studies usually require large numbers of people and
can take an extended period to complete.
Many epidemiologic studies require large numbers of
patients to provide sufﬁcient statistical “power” for the
analysis to be worthwhile (13,14). The populations used for
pharmacoepidemiologic studies should ideally be able to link
medical, pharmacy and demographic information to allow a
complete analysis. A number of different resources are
available that link relevant information, some of the infor-
mation being available electronically (through insurance
claims) and other information requiring some manual review
of medical records (such as details about the sequence of
events, other risk factors). These databases have the advan-
tage of providing detailed information on patients for long
periods of time, to allow for retrospective cohort and case-
control studies. There are always concerns, though, about the
generalizability of these data to other populations.
ACTIVE SURVEILLANCE AND OTHER ENHANCED
REPORTING SYSTEMS
Active surveillance is a pharmacoepidemiologic tool that
has received attention as a drug safety tool. Active surveil-
lance can be deﬁned as the regular periodic collection of case
reports from health care data systems. The process of active
surveillance may be used to identify a new drug safety signal
or to validate drug safety signals identiﬁed through passive
surveillance. Active surveillance can be structured in a
number of different ways. When a new drug is marketed, an
active surveillance program might be established to monitor
prospectively for safety signals that were too rare to appear in
the typical clinical trial or, in some cases, to look for events
that were hinted at in the clinical trials, but that did not have
sufﬁcient statistical power to deﬁnitively identify; this type of
surveillance is drug-based. Certain settings like emergency
departments (ED) can be used to look to see what drug-
related events are presenting to ED (15). Anaphylaxis is a
good example of a critical event that would be seen in the ED
and might be related to a drug. Lastly, monitoring certain
diseases (or outcomes) might be initiated to determine if
there are any drug related events. For example, registries for
liver failure or aplastic anemia might collect information on
drug exposure to determine if there are unusual numbers of a
certain event in patients receiving a certain drug.
Although many would like to see the development of
active surveillance systems there are several challenges that
make their development difﬁcult. First, an effective program
requires the receipt of timely information that has been
validated and comes from both in- and out- patient data
sources. Additionally, an effective system should represent a
large population. As healthcare systems become more
automated these components should become more readily
available making an effective system possible. Most would
agree, though, that the perfect system is not currently in
place.
Although there is no perfect example of a current active
surveillance system, there are examples of programs that
have components of an active surveillance system: National
Electronic Injury Surveillance System-All Injury Program
(NEISS-AIP), Natalizumab and Progressive Multifocal Leu-
koencephalopathy (PML), and NIH sponsored Drug Induced
Liver Injury Network (DILIN). These systems make efforts
to collect information prospectively as an active surveillance
system might do, but for the most part lack efﬁcient
procedures to provide timely data and might better be
referred to as enhanced surveillance systems.
38 Weaver, Willy and Avigan
ENHANCED SURVEILLANCE BASED ON CERTAIN
SETTINGS
National Electronic Injury Surveillance System-All Injury
Program (NEISS-AIP)
The US Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC),
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have funded a
nationally representative study of medication-related adverse
events presenting to Emergency Department. The program
collects data from a sample of EDs. Trained abstractors
review ED medical records to identify patients diagnosed
with a condition that is linked to a drug. This data source can
be used to identify new safety signals or can also provide
information about the public health impact of know adverse
events. A recent summary of this program’s active surveil-
lance ﬁndings for 2004 and 2005 showed that allergic
reactions were the most common adverse event treated in
EDs followed by unintentional overdoses (15).
ENHANCED SURVEILLANCE BASED
ON TREATMENT WITH A SPECIFIC DRUG(S)
AND INDICATION
Natalizumab and Progressive Multifocal
Leukoencephalopathy (PML)
In November 2004 natalizumab (Tysabri) was approved
by FDA for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple
sclerosis (MS). Identiﬁcation of an association between
natazulimab with PML emanated from two postmarketing
clinical studies to determine the safety and efﬁcacy of this
agent in patients with relapsing-remitting forms of the disease
that were being performed by the manufacturer at the time of
approval. In February 2005 the FDA received a report from
the manufacturer of Tysabri of one conﬁrmed fatal case and
another suspected case of PML (later conﬁrmed) in enrolled
patients who had received Tysabri, each for over two years, in
addition to treatment with IFN β-1a. This led to the
immediate suspension of marketing at the end of February,
2005 to permit an in-depth evaluation of the risk and beneﬁt
of this product for the treatment of relapsing MS. Subse-
quently, evaluation of another patient who died in a trial for
the treatment of Crohn’s disease conﬁrmed a third case of
PML. With a known denominator of approximately 3,000
patients who received the drug during clinical trials to treat
MS or Crohn’s disease it was possible to estimate a rate of
PML in patients who received natazilumab of approximately
1/1,000 (16,17). Because of the small number of PML cases it
was not possible to deﬁnitively determine the relative
contribution to risk by concomitant treatment with IFN β-1a
or other immunosuppressive drugs.
The discovery of an initial PML signal in ongoing
postmarketing clinical protocols of inception cohorts who
have initiated treatment in pre-approval phase III studies was
efﬁcient and promptly reported to FDA. It highlights the
utility that such a surveillance strategy has in the early
detection of a safety signal, especially when treatment related
risk for an AE may be dependent on time of treatment, total
drug exposure or patient related susceptibility factors which
may change over time. Inception cohort studies which track a
pre-approval study population chronically exposed to a drug
after approval can play a crucial role in the identiﬁcation of
risk that appears after a latent period of drug exposure. In
addition, the opportunity to study risk is enhanced if
treatment is given by specialized health care providers
located in medical centers with a capacity to perform
comprehensive patient follow-up, clinical assessment and
meticulous record keeping.
In June 2006 FDA approved an application for resumed
marketing of natazilumab with a special restricted distribution
program linked to a Risk Management Plan called the
TOUCH Prescribing Program which has been designed to
minimized the risk, death and disability due to natalizumab-
associated PML and promote informed risk beneﬁt decisions
for MS patients regarding this agent (18). Among the
elements of this program is registration of all patients,
prescribers, natazulimab infusion centers and their associated
pharmacies. In addition, a plan has been developed to
monitor, evaluate and measure risk factors associated with
cases PML and other serious opportunistic infections and
regularly report these to FDA. The TOUCH Prescribing
Program is designed to provide a highly effective registry for
PML which is based on drug exposure and relies on a highly
specialized health care environment.
ENHANCED SURVEILLANCE BASED ON SPECIFIC
TOXICITIES/CLINICAL OUTCOMES
NIH Sponsored Drug Induced Liver Injury Network
(DILIN)
Although drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a rare
clinical event, it is the most common cause of acute liver
failure in the US. Idiosyncratic forms of DILI, which are not
predictable, have been linked to only a subset of therapeutic
products, and occur only in susceptible individuals. Both
mechanisms of liver injury and factors of individual suscepti-
bility are poorly understood. Unfortunately, in some instances
DILI has presented a barrier in drug development. Moreover,
it has been a leading cause of medication withdrawal or lack of
approval by FDA. To characterize cases and develop a better
understanding of the epidemiology and pathogenesis of this
problem a number of studies or registries have been initiated in
the US and Europe. The NIH has funded a consortium of 5 US
medical centers to perform retrospective and prospective
studies of patients identiﬁed at these centers with this condition
(19). The DILIN prospective study seeks patients with
suspected DILI not caused by acetaminophen that has
occurred within 6 months of enrollment. Referred patients
with clinical case material are extensively evaluated and
thorough differential diagnoses and expert causality assess-
ments are performed. Biological specimens for each patient
including serum, urine, lymphocytes and DNA are routinely
collected for future studies. Since 2004, over 200 patients have
been enrolled in the prospective study (20). So far, the leading
drug class associated with identiﬁed and referred cases of
idiosyncratic DILI are antimicrobials. Although identiﬁcation
and inferences of risk associated with drugs identiﬁed by this
study may be subject to a number of biases, DILIN has a
potential to develop into a useful disease based active
39Informatic Tools and Approaches in Postmarketing Pharmacovigilance
surveillance system for an important category of drug related
adverse events in the U.S.
OTHER SAFETY EFFORTS
Pooled Analysis or Meta-analysis of Randomized Clinical
Trial Safety Datasets
Causal attribution to drug exposure for adverse events
with high background rates in the same patient population is
often difﬁcult to determine. One approach to addressing this
problem is the analysis of randomized clinical datasets. After
FDA approval of a new molecular entity based on review of
pre-marketing studies, manufacturers often continue to
perform randomized clinical trials, comparing the agent with
placebo or active comparators. Often this is done in order to
study other indications of use, drug effects in different patient
populations, new dosaging protocols, etc. Because individual
clinical trials are usually not sufﬁciently powered to detect
and measure risk surrounding safety events which are either
rare or superimposed on high background rates in the treated
populations, a portfolio of randomized studies performed
before or after initial marketing can be an invaluable resource
to identify and assess these types of drug-related events.
Pooled or trial based meta-analyses of the randomized clinical
trial safety datasets to measure imbalances of these events
may be especially useful. Although there are important
limitations to consider in the analysis and interpretation of
such measurements, a recent example illustrates the value of
this approach for safety signal detection.
In the case of antidepressants (including SSRIs), review
of integrated clinical trial (ICT) data from short-term studies
in children and adolescents with major depressive disorder
and other psychiatric disorders uncovered an increased risk of
suicidal thinking and behavior (suicidality). Pooled analyses
of 4 to 16 week placebo-controlled trials of 9 drugs (24 trials
involving more than 4,400 patients) showed an increased risk
for suicidal thinking or behavior in these age groups during
the ﬁrst few months of treatment (21). The average risk of
such events in pediatric patients receiving antidepressants was
4%, twice the placebo associated risk of 2% (21). A similar
analysis revealed that this risk extends to young adults ages
18 to 24 during initial treatment, generally during the ﬁrst one
or two months of treatment (22).
Important issues can surface in the interpretation of
postmarketing randomized clinical studies. Establishing
whether relative risk measures derived from a meta-analysis
of clinical trials or individual studies reﬂects actual drug-
related risk can be challenging. In assessing study outcomes
one must consider multiple factors including consistency of
endpoints and measurements of other known risk factors for
the event of interest. In addition, it may be important to
determine whether active comparator groups are sufﬁciently
characterized to draw comparative conclusions with regards
to risk. Finally, the studies should be sufﬁciently powered and
employ reliable methods of adverse event ascertainment,
classiﬁcation and reporting. In the presence of meta-analyses
and analyses of clinical studies with disparate results, careful
attention must be given to such parameters in order to draw
conclusions about the relative contribution of each set of
results to an overall assessment of a safety signal and/or
quantitative measurement of risk. This will be especially
important as more cumulatively acquired postmarketing
safety data from randomized clinical trials are made available
for scrutiny by academic experts and the FDA.
Regular Safety Reviews of New Molecular Entities (NMEs)
Beyond awareness of the datasets and analytic tools that
form the foundations of effective pharmacovigilance, it is
critical to reinforce standard review processes to achieve
consistent and comprehensive safety evaluations of drugs.
One recent initiative that is being developed by the Ofﬁce of
Surveillance and Epidemiology and the Ofﬁce of New Drugs
for this purpose is a pilot program to systematically evaluate
the safety proﬁles of NMEs on a regularly scheduled basis (23).
Postmarketing evaluations of NMEs will incorporate review of
multiple streams of data including AERS, data mining analysis,
epidemiologic datasets, postmarketing clinical trial informa-
tion, and Periodic Safety Update Reports (PSURs) or U.S.
Periodic Reports, to identify potential safety concerns early in
the product life cycle which require in-depth evaluations.
CONCLUSIONS
The identiﬁcation of safety signals after drugs have been
approved for marketing is a complex process that requires
extensive resources. Efforts continue at the FDA to improve
the efﬁcacy and effectiveness of its drug safety program so
that safety problems are identiﬁed and in a timely fashion.
Ongoing enhancements in postmarketing studies and increas-
ing access to multiple streams of data pose many new
challenges in the timely and accurate detection and assess-
ment of drug safety.
REFERENCES
1. A. P. Fletcher. Spontaneous adverse drug reaction reporting vs
event monitoring: a comparison. J. R. Soc. Med. 84(6):341–344
(1991).
2. V. Pinkston, and E. J. Swain. Management of adverse drug
reaction and adverse event data through collection storage and
retrieval. In M. D. B Stephens, and P. A. Routledge (eds.),
Detection of New Adverse Drug Reactions: Macmillan Refer-
ences LTD., London, UK, 1999, pp. 282.
3. FDA Ofﬁce of Surveillance and Epidemiology, unpublished
data, 2006.
4. A. Szarfman, S. G. Machado, and R. T. O’Neill. Use of screening
algorithms and computer systems to efﬁciently signal higher-
than-expected combinations of drugs and events in the US
FDA’s spontaneous reports database. Drug. Saf. 25(6):381–392
(2002).
5. M. Hauben, and X. Zhou. Quantitative methods in pharmacovi-
gilance: focus on signal detection. Drug. Saf. 26(3):159–186 (2003).
6. MSSO website. URL http://www.meddramsso.com/MSSOWeb/
index.htm.
7. S. R. Ahmad. Spontaneous reporting in the United States. In
B. L. Strom (ed.), Pharmacoepidemiology: Wiley and Sons, West
Sussex, England, 2005, pp. 136–159.
8. H. S. Nelson, S. T. Weiss, E. R. Bleecker, S. W. Yancey, and P. M.
Dorinsky. SMART Study Group. The Salmeterol Multicenter
Asthma Research Trial: a comparison of usual pharmacotherapy
for asthma or usual pharmacotherapy plus salmeterol. Chest. 129
(1):15–26 (2006).
9. L. La Grenade, L. Lee, J. Weaver, R. Bonnel, C. Karwoski, L.
Governale, and A. Brinker. Comparison of reporting of
40 Weaver, Willy and Avigan
Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in
association with selective COX-2 inhibitors. Drug. Saf. 28
(10):917–924 (2005).
10. B. L. Strom. Study designs available for pharmacopeidemiology
studies. In B. L. Strom (ed.), Pharmacoepidemiology: Wiley and
Sons, West Sussex, England, 2005, pp. 17–28.
11. L. Gordis. Epidemiology, W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia,
1996.
12. K. J. RothmanS. Greenland. Modern epidemiology, 2nd ed,
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1998.
13. B. L. Strom. Study overview of automated databases in
pharmacoepidemiology. In B. L. Strom (ed.), Pharmaco-
epidemiology: Wiley and Sons, West Sussex, England, 2005,
pp. 219–222.
14. S. Hennessy. Use of health care databases in pharmacoepidemi-
ology. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 98:311–313 (2006).
15. D. S. Budnitz, D. A. Pollcok, K. N. Weidenbach, A. B.
Mendelsohn, T. J. Schroeder, and J. L. Annest. National
surveillance of emergency department visits for outpatient
adverse drug events. JAMA 296:1858–1866 (2006).
16. Natalizumab Advisory Committee, March 2006: http://www.fda.
gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/06/slides/2006-4208S1-Slide-Index.htm, last
accessed July 9, 2007.
17. T. A. Yousry, M. Habil, E. O. Major, C. Ryschkewitsch, G.
Fajhle, S. Fiscer, J. Hou, B. Curfman, K. Miszkiel, N. Mueller-
Lenke, E. Sanches, F. Barkhof, E. Radue, H. R. Jager, and D. B.
Clifford. Evaluation of patients treated with Natalizumab for
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. N. Engl. J. Med.
354:924–933 (2006).
18. Natalizumab information: http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/
natalizumab/default.htm, last accessed August 10, 2007.
19. J. H. Hoofnagle. Drug-induced liver injury network (DILIN).
Hepatology 40:773, 2004 (2004).
20. N. Chalasani, R. Fontana, P. B. Watkins, H. L. Bonkovsky, T.
Davern, J. Serrano, and J. Rochan. Drug-induced liver injury
network (DILIN) prospective study initial results. Am. J. Gastro-
enterol. 101:S168, 2006 (2006).
21. T. A. Hammad, T. Laughren, and J. Racoosin. Suicidality in
pediatric patients treated with antidepressant drugs. Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry 63:332–339 (2006).
22. Anti-depressant December 2006 advisory committee http://www.
fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/06/slides/2006-4272s1-00-index.htm;
last accessed July 9, 2007.
23. Future of Drug Safety; FDA’s Speciﬁc Safety Initiatives; upgrading
methods of beneﬁt and risk analysis and risk management: www.fda.
gov/oc/reports/iom013007.html, page 37, last accessed July 9, 2009.
41Informatic Tools and Approaches in Postmarketing Pharmacovigilance
