EDITORIAL
Recent advances in bone marrow biopsy pathology
Jon van der Walt
Received: 24 April 2009 /Accepted: 28 April 2009 /Published online: 14 May 2009
# Springer-Verlag 2009
Advances in bone marrow pathology continue apace in
2009. The following publications are a personal selection of
highlights which are especially applicable to bone marrow
biopsies (BMB).
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
The revised 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) classi-
fication established a new category of “acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) with myelodysplasia-related changes” (AML-MRC).
Weinberg et al. [1] evaluated the clinical, pathologic,
cytogenetic, and molecular features of 100 AML patients
using the 2008 WHO criteria. Patients underwent genetic
screening for NPM1, FLT3-ITD, FLT3-D835, and CEBPA
mutations. Compared with patients with AML, not otherwise
specified, patients with AML-MRC were significantly older,
presented with a lower hemoglobin, more frequently
expressed CD14, and exhibited a decreased frequency of
CEBPA mutations. Multivariate analysis indicated that
patients with AML-MRC had a significantly worse overall
survival, progression-free survival, and complete response
compared with AML, not otherwise specified. The authors
conclude that their data support the clinical, morphologic, and
cytogenetic criteria for this 2008 WHO AML category.
Therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN) is the term
recently proposed by the World Health Organization to
cover the spectrum of disorders previously described as
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome (t-MDS) or
therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML). Larson
[2] has reviewed the current views on this new category and
the diagnostic highlights are summarized here.
t-MN is recognized as a clinical syndrome occurring as a
late complication following cytotoxic therapy. The term
therapy-related leukemia is based on a patient’s history of
exposure to cytotoxic agents and implies a causal relation-
ship although the precise mechanism remains to be proven.
These neoplasms are thought to be the direct consequence
of mutational events induced by cytotoxic therapy or via
the selection of a myeloid clone with a markedly elevated
risk for mutational events. Several distinct clinical and
cytogenetic subtypes of t-MN are recognized and closely
associated with the nature of the preceding treatment.
Therapy-related disease may develop from a few months
to several years after therapy, depending both on the
cumulative dose or dose intensity of the preceding
cytotoxic therapy and exposure to specific agents. The
majority of patients have clonal chromosome abnormalities
in their bone marrow cells at diagnosis.
A spectrum of morphological abnormalities is observed.
There is a continuum in the percentage of marrow blasts
from t-MDS to overt acute leukemia and rapid progression
from the former to the latter. These observations support the
WHO categorization as a single disorder. The clinical
course is typically progressive and relatively resistant to
conventional therapies used for leukemias arising de novo.
The classical form of therapy-related leukemia follows
treatment with alkylating agents and/or radiation therapy.
The blood and bone marrow findings resemble those seen
in primary MDS, although the degree of dysgranulopoiesis
and dysmegakaryocytopoiesis is typically greater. Marked
dysplastic changes are observed in all three cell lines. Mild
to marked reticulin fibrosis may be present. Complex clonal
chromosomal abnormalities are identified in most cases.
J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102
DOI 10.1007/s12308-009-0033-0
J. van der Walt (*)
Department of Histopathology, St. Thomas’ Hospital,
Westminster Bridge Road,
London SE1 7EH, UK
e-mail: Jon.vanderwalt@kcl.ac.uk
Loss of part or all of chromosomes 5 and/or 7 is the
characteristic findings and has been reported in over 90% of
cases. The most common single abnormality is monosomy
7, followed in frequency by deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 5 [del(5q)] and by monosomy 5 [2].
Therapy-related leukemia secondary to topoisomerase II
inhibitors typically result in translocations involving the
MLL gene on chromosome 11, band q23, and, less
commonly, the AML1 gene on chromosome 21, band q22.
In contrast to classic t-MN, these leukemias have a much
shorter latency period and a preceding MDS is not common.
Neoplasia is traditionally thought to arise from a single
cell. However, recently, it has been proposed that divergent
clones may either be derived from the original clone or
represent distinct and unrelated clones.
Beer et al. [3] looked for clonal diversity in patients with
a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) associated with more
than one acquired genetic lesion. A tyrosine kinase
mutation and a cytogenetic lesion were found in the same
clone in six of seven patients. By contrast, the genetic
lesions were present in separate clones in all six patients
with two tyrosine kinase pathway mutations. In two
patients, the clones were genetically unrelated by X-
chromosome inactivation studies. This study demonstrated
clonal diversity in a subset of patients with early-stage
hematopoietic malignancy and showed, for the first time,
that such clones may arise independently. Perhaps findings
such as these may explain some of the difficulties in the
morphological classification of MPN.
Acute myeloid leukemia carrying cytoplasmic mutated
nucleophosmin (NPMc+AML) and blastic plasmacytoid den-
dritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) were included as new entities in
the revised WHO classification of myeloid neoplasms. These
conditions may show clinical and pathological overlapping
features including leukemia and skin involvement and expres-
sion of macrophage markers. Facchetti et al. [4] studied both
entities in BMB and showed that aberrant cytoplasmic
dislocation of nucleophosmin—the immunohistochemical
surrogate for NPM1 mutations—allows the two entities to
be genetically separated. Nucleophosmin was consistently
cytoplasmic in NPMc+AML (due to the presence of NPM1
mutations), while it was nucleus-restricted (predictive of a
germ line NPM1 gene) in BPDCN. Cytoplasmic nucleophos-
min is therefore a useful marker for distinguishing NPMc+
AML from BPDCN and should be included in immunopanels
for the differential diagnosis of these disorders.
The myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms
The WHO diagnostic criteria for chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (CMML) are mainly based on the peripheral blood
and bone marrow aspirate. According to definition, the
presence of peripheral blood monocytosis is essential for the
diagnosis of CMML. Human peripheral blood monocytes
are distributed between a major CD14+ CD16− population
representing 90–95% of total blood monocytes and a minor
CD14 low CD16+ population [5]. CD14 is considered to be
a good marker of the major monocyte population and can
be now evaluated on paraffin-embedded tissue [5]. Although
flow cytometry has demonstrated a moderate increase of
CD14+ cells in CMML, the level and pattern of monocytic
proliferation in the BMB of patients have not been clearly
established.
Qubajal et al. [5] immunostained 15 paraffin-embedded
cases of CMML, including two new antibodies staining for
CD14 and CD16. CD68 (KP1), CD68 (PG-M1), and
CD163 were not differentially expressed between CMML
and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In CMML,
there was a significant increase in the number of CD14+
monocytes, comprising dispersed cells in the interstitium,
with frequent bilobated nuclei, difficult to differentiate from
neutrophils. There was no expansion of CD16+ monocyte-
like cells. There was, however, a significant decrease in the
number of granulocytes expressing CD16, MPO, and CD15
in CMML compared to CML and control BMB, probably
related to dysgranulopoiesis. The authors conclude that
BMB immunohistochemistry can be helpful in the diagno-
sis of CMML by identifying both the monocyte expansion
with CD14 and the dysgranulopoiesis with CD16.
Both the 2001 and 2008 editions of the WHO classifica-
tion of hematopoietic neoplasms include refractory anemia
with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis (RARS-T) as
distinct diagnostic category, describing patients who have
both ≥15% ring sideroblasts and a sustained elevated platelet
count. However, it has recently become apparent that
patients fulfilling the WHO diagnostic criteria for RARS-T
have clonal JAK2V617F
and MPLW515
mutations similar to
the reported rate for essential thrombocythemia (ET).
Wardrop and Steensma [6] have reviewed the historic
literature and current molecular evidence on RARS-T and
conclude that, given that the provisional classification of
RARS-T as a MDS/MPN overlap syndrome, rather than as
a form of MPN (i.e., ET), rests principally upon the
presence of ring sideroblasts and that these are nonspecific
morphological findings, these new molecular results should
prompt reconsideration of RARS-T as a distinct category.
The authors argue cogently against the continued use of
RARS-T as a separate diagnostic category in comparison
with a simplifying diagnosis of ET with ring sideroblasts.
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Hypocellular or hypoplastic acute myeloid leukemia (H-
AML) and hypocellular myelodysplastic syndromes (H-
98 J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102
MDS) represent a small fraction of myeloid malignancies.
Pronounced cytopenia may raise the question of a diagnosis
of acquired aplastic anemia (AA) and it may be very
difficult to separate these disorders from each other
utilizing morphological criteria applied to bone marrow
aspirate smears since criteria such as blast counts and
degree of morphological dysplasia may overlap. In addi-
tion, the marked hypocellularity of bone marrow aspirates
render interpretation difficult. Thus, a bone marrow biopsy
is critical and necessary to diagnose these variants in all
patients, children included [7].
Bennett and Orazi [7] report the conclusions of three
workshops held by members of the French–American–
British Cooperative Leukemia Working Group.
The following approach was used:
1. The presence of unequivocal blasts in the peripheral
blood is considered indicative of MDS or AML.
Because of significant leukopenia, a precise determina-
tion of blast percentage is often impossible, but an
effort should be made to count at least 100 cells,
including lymphocytes.
2. Hypogranular neutrophils or pseudo-Pelger neutrophils
are considered indicative of either MDS or AML if
more than 10% are identified. Fewer numbers raise the
suspicion but are not felt to be definitive.
3. The presence of >1% to 20% blasts in the marrow
aspirates is considered diagnostic of MDS if dysplasia
is recognized.
4. Morphological marrow dysplasia of either granulocytes
or megakaryocytes is considered as abnormal and
inconsistent with AA. Erythroid dysplasia must be
moderate to severe, if it is the sole finding (binucleated
or trinucleated forms, numerous Howell-Jolly bodies,
nuclear budding or bridging).
5. The presence of any abnormal sideroblasts (>5 granules
surrounding the nuclear membrane or occupying at
least one third of the circumference) is considered as
evidence of dyserythropoiesis and excluded a diagnosis
of AA.
6. A 1- to 2-cm core biopsy is preferred for all patients
being evaluated for a potential diagnosis of either
hypoplastic myeloid disorder or aplastic anemia.
7. The presence of two or more clusters of immature
precursors (minimum of three blasts/clusters) in the
bone marrow biopsy is indicative of either MDS or
AML
H-AML proved to be the most contentious diagnosis. The
diagnosis of myeloid neoplasms with fatty marrow such H-
MDS and H-AML may be very difficult, particularly in cases
with a bone marrow cellularity of less than 10%. The
established criteria of a 5% minimal blast percentage in the
marrow for MDS and below 1% in AA require the use of a
500 cell differential count as recommended by the WHO
system.
The presence of easily identifiable megakaryocytes
within an architecturally disorganized marrow and the
presence of reticulin fibrosis favor MDS over aplastic
anemia. An important feature of the BMB in cases with
fatty marrow and paucicellular aspirates is its ability to
identify blasts. The presence of aggregates or clusters of
blasts, previously defined as abnormally localized immature
myeloid precursor cells (ALIP), is mainly seen in the
aggressive MDS subtypes and is associated with a poor
prognosis and an increased incidence of progression to
acute leukemia. Cases are classified as ALIP positive if at
least three aggregates (more than five myeloid precursors)
or clusters (three to five myeloid precursors) are identified
in a histology section. Immunohistological staining for
CD34 is an essential tool for counting blasts in tissue
sections. Other antibodies that may be useful include
CD117, myeloperoxidase, lysozyme, and CD68. Both an
increase in the percentage of CD34-positive cells and a
tendency of positive cells to form aggregates have been
shown to be useful in distinguishing H-MDS and H-AML
from AA.
The diagnosis remains difficult in cases with a bone
marrow cellularity of less than 10% but cytogenetic
analysis failures are frequent. Although there is often good
correlation between CD34 percentage as determined by
flow cytometry and morphology, the percentage of blasts as
determined by flow may be influenced by hemodilution and
the result from flow cytometry should never be used in lieu
of morphological inspection of the peripheral blood film,
bone marrow aspirate smears, and bone marrow biopsy.
The authors emphasize the value of a multiparameter
approach and the necessity for experience in the diagnosis
of these related conditions.
Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia
and abnormalities of PDGFRA, PDGFRB, and FGFR1
The hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) encompass a
spectrum of diseases that have increased blood eosinophils
and tissue damage in common and protean clinical
manifestations, involving any organ system but especially
the skin [8]. Gleich and Leiferman [8] present a compre-
hensive review of HES with discussion of the various
classifications that characterize patients with marked eosin-
ophilia. A classification is proposed: (1) myeloproliferative
HES (chronic eosinophilic leukemia with a unique genetic
marker, FIP1L1-PDGFRA, and well controlled by admin-
istration of the kinase inhibitor, imatinib, and FIP1L1-
PDGFRA negative cases of unknown etiology); (2)
lymphocytic HES associated with T cell clones producing
J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102 99
interleukin 5 which can evolve into lymphoma; (3)
undefined HES (benign, complex, and episodic); (4)
familial HES; (5) associated HES; (6) overlap HES.
While myeloproliferative and lymphocytic HES are well
established and permit elimination of the term idiopathic for
these varieties, most HES patients do not fall into these
categories and are classified as complex [8].
The identification of myeloproliferative HES depends on
identification of clonal eosinophilic myeloid populations,
especially those harboring the FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutant
gene and identification of lymphocytic HES rests upon
recognition of distinct helper T cell subsets (TH1 and TH2)
and clonal overgrowth of specific cytokine-producing cells.
The value of the BMB is emphasized and the importance of
investigation of the involvement of other cell lineages in
particular mast cells is highlighted. It is recommended that
biopsies should be examined both by conventional micros-
copy and also by staining with antibodies to eosinophil
granule proteins because eosinophil granule protein depo-
sition may occur in the virtual absence of intact eosinophils.
Lymphoid lesions in the bone marrow
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) are CD5+ small B cell neoplasms (SBCNs)
with overlapping features. Flow cytometry is often used to
help differentiate CLL from MCL, and a characteristic CLL
phenotype is considered essentially diagnostic [9]. Ho et al.
[9] analyzed 28 cases of SBCN by flow cytometry and
found typical MCL immunophenotypes. However, fluores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis indicated that
57% had t(11;14) translocations consistent with MCL, while
32% lacked t(11;14) translocations but had other cytogenetic
abnormalities commonly found in CLL. The authors found
no significant morphologic or immunophenotypic differ-
ences between the t(11;14)-positive and t(11;14)-negative
cases. They conclude that many blood-based SBCNs with
typical MCL immunophenotypes likely represent cases of
phenotypically atypical CLL.
The BMB analysis may thus be crucial in the diagnosis
of MCL and atypical CLL and both immunocytochemistry
for cyclin D1 and FISH for t(11;14) should be employed in
SBCN of indeterminate type,
Feldman et al. [10] identified recurrent translocations
involving the multiple myeloma oncogene 1/interferon
regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) locus in peripheral T cell
lymphomas (PTCLs); 169 PTCLs were studied using
fluorescence in situ hybridization; 12 cases with IRF4
translocations were identified. Two cases with t(6;14)(p25;
q11.2) had translocations between IRF4 and the T cell
receptor alpha (TCRA) locus. Both were cytotoxic PTCLs,
unspecified involving bone marrow and skin. Eight of the
remaining ten cases were cutaneous anaplastic large cell
lymphomas without TCRA rearrangements. IRF4 transloca-
tions exist in myeloma and some B cell lymphomas but had
not been reported earlier in PTCLs. Translocations involving
IRF4 but not TCRA appear to occur predominantly in
cutaneous ALCLs. Cytotoxic PTCL-unspecified involving
bone marrow and skin and containing IRF4/TCRA trans-
locations might represent a distinct clinicopathologic entity.
This study suggests that immunostaining for MUM1/IRF4
protein should be included in immunopanels for cases of
PTCL involving BMB and skin.
Antibody therapy is being employed in an increasing
range of disorders. Jiang et al. [11] carried out a study of
CD52 (alemtuzumab) expression using flow cytometry in 78
untreated patients diagnosed with mature T/natural killer (NK)
cell neoplasms, including 34 adult Tcell leukemia/lymphomas
(ATLL), two ALCLs, three angioimmunoblastic T cell
lymphomas (AITL), 16 cutaneous T cell lymphomas (CTCL),
four extranodal T/NK cell lymphomas (ENT/NKCL), four
hepatosplenic Tcell lymphomas (HSTCL), 13 peripheral Tcell
lymphomas, not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) and two T
prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL). The level of CD52
expression varied widely within each diagnostic category. All
AITL, HSTCL, and T-PLL cases were CD52 positive and the
frequency of CD52 expression was high in PTCL-NOS,
ATLL, and CTCL but expression was low in ALCL and
ENT/NKCL suggesting a role for alemtuzumab in treatment
of positive cases but not in negative cases. These findings
imply an increasing role for immunocytochemistry in the
assessment of which cases in a particular lymphoma type are
suitable for antibody therapy and hematopathologists will
have to add these antibodies to their standard panels for BMB
assessment.
Survivin is selectively expressed in most common human
cancers and is now viewed as a potent modulator of the cell
death/proliferation balance in tumor cells [12]. Romagnoli et
al. [12] had previously reported that myeloma cells
expressed high levels of survivin protein in correlation with
disease progression and that survivin knockdown by RNA
interference decreased myeloma cell growth. In this study
[12], the authors demonstrated that survivin overexpression
promotes the proliferation and survival of human myeloma
cells both in vitro and in vivo in the absence of their major
growth factor, interleukin 6. The effect correlated with the
downregulation of Bim, a critical BH3-only cell death
activator during cytokine deprivation, mainly at transcrip-
tional level. The tight link between survivin and Bim
expression was further confirmed in a panel of newly
diagnosed patients with myeloma, and BIRC5 was validated
as a gene significantly associated with short survival in these
patients. The authors conclude that survivin directly contrib-
utes to malignant progression of myeloma and that targeting
survivin may disrupt the delicate balance controlling cell
100 J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102
survival and proliferation. Studies such as these promise an
expanding role for immunocytochemical analysis of prog-
nostic markers in BMB.
Interphase FISH coupled to cytoplasmic staining of
specific immunoglobulin (cIg-FISH) on bone marrow
plasma cells has become well established in the initial
evaluation of multiple myeloma [13]. However, little has
been published on cytogenetic abnormalities in patients
with light-chain amyloidosis.
In a study from the Mayo Clinic, Bryce et al. [13]
reviewed 56 patients with light-chain amyloidosis who had
cIg-FISH performed as part of their routine clinical testing
using their standard screening panel employed in multiple
myeloma. Seventy percent of patients had abnormal cIg-
FISH, with the most common abnormalities being IgH
translocations (48%)—including t(11;14) (39%) and t(14;16)
(2%)—and del13/del13q (30%). No t(4;14) or deletions of
17p (p53) were observed. Patients with t(11;14) had the
lowest levels of clonal plasma cells, and those with del13 had
the highest. The risk of death for patients harboring the
t(11;14) translocation was 2.1, which on multivariate analysis
was independent of therapy. The authors concluded that their
preliminary data would suggest that cIg-FISH testing is
important in patients with light-chain amyloidosis and that
t(11;14) is an adverse prognostic factor in these patients. This
study has implications for BMB analysis and indicates that
cyclin D1 should be part of the immunopanel chosen to assess
amyloidosis cases.
Boveri et al. [14] reported a case of a 50-year-old HIV+,
HBV+, and HCV+ male patient who presented with mild
asthenia, splenomegaly slowly progressing anemia, gran-
ulocytopenia, lymphocytosis, and mild thrombocytopenia.
He was not on antiretroviral therapy.
A BMB showed a discrete lymphoid interstitial infiltrate
of mature Tcells, which were CD1−, CD2+, CD3+, CD5−/+,
CD7+/−, LAT+, CD4−, CD8+, CD57+/−, TIA1+, perforin+,
granzyme B+, CD56−, and CD25− and had an intra-
sinusoidal distribution. Polymerase chain reaction demon-
strated a monoclonal rearrangement of the T cell receptor
(TCR). Cytologic examination of peripheral blood showed
an increased number of large lymphocyte with granular
cytoplasm, fulfilling the criteria for the diagnosis of T cell
large granular lymphocytic (T-LGL) leukemia.
The authors note that sinusoidal infiltration is often
considered specific for different lymphoma subtypes, either
of B cell (splenic marginal zone lymphoma, intravascular
large B cell lymphoma) or T cell origin (T-LGL leukemia,
hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma), and has never been
described in reactive T cell proliferations, including reactive
expansions of T-LGL. The authors comment that CD8+
LGL can occur during HIV infection and about one third of
these subjects carry a monoclonal TCR rearrangement,
although without hepatosplenomegaly or a clinically ma-
lignant course. HBV is also a known cause of CD8+
lymphocytosis. This short report serves as a reminder that
lymphocytosis in HIV infection is not always reactive and
deserves thorough investigation.
Persistent polyclonal B cell lymphocytosis (PPBL) is a rare
chronic lymphoid hyperplasia characterized by a benign
clinical course and a typical clinical setting in middle-aged
female smokers [15]. Del Giudice et al. [15] reported five
cases of PPBL with progressive splenomegaly. Splenectomies
were performed in three cases. BCL2/IGH rearrangements
were found in three cases: HLA-DRB1*07 in all. BMB
showed a moderate lymphoid infiltrate with intrasinusoidal
distribution resembling a splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
Splenic white pulp revealed an enlargement of the marginal
zone area: red pulp was infiltrated by the same lymphocytes
engulfing the sinuses. Splenic and BMB B lymphocytes were
CD79a+, CD20+, IgM+, IgD+, bcl-2+, CD27+, DBA.44−,
CD31−, and polyclonal by immunophenotype/polymerase
chain reaction.
The authors conclude that PPBL features an expansion
of splenic marginal zone B lymphocytes, which infiltrate
BM sinusoids and circulate in the blood with no evidence
of clonality, even in cases with progressive splenomegaly.
This paper demonstrates the importance of establishing
monoclonality in cases in which a diagnosis of splenic
marginal zone lymphoma is entertained in a BMB and of
obtaining the relevant clinical history.
Secondary neoplasms
Evaluation of the BMB is accepted as essential for the
accurate staging and follow-up of patients with neuroblas-
toma. Krishnan et al. [16] evaluated the use of routine
immunohistochemical analysis of BMB in neuroblastoma
cases. Immunostaining for synaptophysin, chromogranin, and
β-catenin on otherwise histologically negative BMB identi-
fied isolated tumor cells (ITCs) in 9.1%, 5.0%, and 10.0% of
220 biopsy specimens, respectively. Overall survival however
was not significantly different between patients with and
without ITCs. Of the immunohistochemical markers evaluat-
ed, β-catenin showed the greatest sensitivity for identifying
ITCs in the bone marrow and showed reactivity in primary
tumor samples. β-catenin appears to a sensitive immunohis-
tochemical marker of primary and secondary neuroblastoma
and should thus be used in the routine assessment of BMB in
the evaluation of neuroblastoma.
Infectious and inflammatory disorders
The diagnosis and management of immune thrombocytopenic
purpura (ITP) are hampered by a lack of consensus on
J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102 101
standardized critical definitions, outcome criteria, and termi-
nology. Rodeghiero et al. [17] report the conclusions of an
International Working Group of recognized expert clinicians
(the Vicenza Consensus Conference) in defining standard
terminology and definitions for primary and secondary ITP,
different phases of disease and for the grading of severity.
The panel preferred “immune,” to “idiopathic,” to
emphasize the immune-mediated mechanism of the disease
and to allow a division into “primary” (as opposed to
idiopathic) to indicate the absence of any obvious initiating
and/or underlying cause and “secondary immune thrombo-
cytopenia” (secondary ITP) to include all forms of immune-
mediated thrombocytopenias except primary ITP. The term
“purpura” was felt inappropriate because bleeding symp-
toms are generally absent or minimal. The acronym ITP is
however preserved recognizing its time-honored use and
facilitating literature searches. A platelet count less than
100×109
per liter was preferred to the more commonly
used level of less than 150×109
per liter.
Secondary ITP includes cases of thrombocytopenias that
are due to an underlying disease or to drug exposure. Other
examples include fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombo-
cytopenic purpura, posttransfusion purpura, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE)-associated, HIV-associated, “drug-
induced,” e.g., “secondary ITP (quinine-induced)” and
“heparin-induced thrombocytopenia”. The term “newly
diagnosed ITP” was recommended for all cases at diagno-
sis, “persistent ITP,” for patients with ITP lasting between 3
and 12 months from diagnosis, including patients not
achieving spontaneous remission or not maintaining their
response after stopping treatment and “chronic ITP” for
patients with ITP lasting for more than 12 months. “Severe”
ITP should be used only in patients who have clinically
relevant bleeding.
Hematopathologists have a role in the diagnosis of ITP
particularly in the exclusion of myelodysplasia. Both SLE
and HIV infection with thrombocytopenia have suggestive
morphological features in the BMB which may provide the
first evidence of these diseases. This review provides a
useful clarification and standardization of terminology
which is relevant to the reporting of BMB in ITP cases.
Conflict of Interest The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1. Weinberg OK, Seetharam M, Ren L, Seo K, Ma L, Merker JD, Gotlib
J, Zehnder JL, Arber DA (2009) Clinical characterization of acute
myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia-related changes as defined by
the 2008 WHO classification system. Blood 113:1906–1908
2. Larson R (2009) Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms. Haemato-
logica 94:454–459
3. Beer PA, Jones AV, Bench AJ, Goday-Fernandez A, Boyd EM,
Vaghela KJ, Erber WN, Odeh B, Wright C, McMullin MF, Jonathan
Cullis J, Huntly BJP, Harrison C, Cross NCP, Green AR (2009)
Clonal diversity in the myeloproliferative neoplasms: independent
origins of genetically distinct clones. B J of Haematol 144:904–908
4. Facchetti F, Pileri SA, Agostinelli C, Martelli MP, Paulli M,
Venditti A, Martelli MF, Falini B (2009) Cytoplasmic nucleo-
phosmin is not detected in blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell
neoplasm. Haematologica 94:285–288
5. Qubaja M, Marmey B, Le Tourneau A, Haiat S, Cazals-Hatem D,
Fabiani B, Diebold J, Marie J-P, Audouin J, Geissmann F, Molina
TJ (2009) The detection of CD14 and CD16 in paraffin-embedded
bone marrow biopsies is useful for the diagnosis of chronic
myelomonocytic leukaemia. Virchows Arch 454:411–419
6. Wardrop D, Steensma DP (2008) Is refractory anaemia with ring
sideroblasts and thrombocytosis (RARS-T) a necessary or useful
diagnostic category? B J Haematol 144:809–817
7. Bennett JM, Orazi A (2009) Diagnostic criteria to distinguish
hypocellular acute myeloid leukemia from hypocellular myelodys-
plastic syndromes and aplastic anemia: recommendations for a
standardized approach. Haematologica Vol 94:264–268
8. Gleich GJ, Leiferman KM (2009) Review: the hypereosinophilic
syndromes: current concepts and treatments. B J Haematol
145:271–285
9. Ho AK, Hill S, Preobrazhensky SN, Miller ME, Chen Z, Bahler
DW (2009) Small B-cell neoplasms with typical mantle cell
lymphoma immunophenotypes often include chronic lymphocytic
leukemias. Am J Clin Pathol 131:27–32
10. Feldman AL, Law M, Remstein ED, Macon WR, Erickson LA,
Grogg KL, Kurtin PJ, Dogan A (2009) Recurrent translocations
involving the IRF4 oncogene locus in peripheral T-cell lympho-
mas. Leukemia 23:574–580
11. Jiang L, Yuan CM, Hubacheck J, Janik JE, Wilson W, Morris JC,
Jasper GA, Stetler-Stevenson M (2009) Variable CD52 expression
in mature T cell and NK cell malignancies: implications for
alemtuzumab therapy. B J Haematol 145:173–179
12. Romagnoli M, Sèveno C, Wuillëme-Toumi S, Amio M, Bataille
R, Minvielle S, Barillè-Nion S (2009) The imbalance between
Survivin and Bim mediates tumour growth and correlates with
poor survival in patients with multiple myeloma. B J Haematol
145:180–189
13. Bryce AH, Ketterling RP, Gertz MA, Lacy M, Knudson RA,
Zeldenrust S, Kumar S, Hayman S, Buadi F, Kyle RA, Greipp PR,
Lust JA, Russell S, Rajkumar SV, Fonseca R, Dispenzieri A
(2009) Translocation t(11;14) and survival of patients with light
chain (AL) amyloidosis. Haematologica 94:380–386
14. Boveri E, Riboni R, Antico P, Malacrida A, Pastorini A (2009)
Letter to the Editor: CD3+ T large granular lymphocyte leukaemia
in a HIV+, HCV+, HBV+ patient. Virchows Arch 454:349–351
15. Del Giudice I, Pileri SA, Rossi M, Sabattini E, Campidelli C,
Della Starza I, De Propris MS, Mancini F, Perrone MP, Gesuiti P,
Armiento D, Quattrocchi L, Tafuri A, Amendola A, Mauro FR,
Guarini A, Fo R (2009) Histopathological and molecular features
of persistent polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (PPBL) with
progressive splenomegaly. B J Haematol 144:726–731
16. Krishnan C, Twist CJ, Fu T, Arber D (2009) Detection of isolated
tumor cells in neuroblastoma by immunohistochemical analysis in
bone marrow biopsy specimens: improved detection with use of
B-catenin. Am J Clin Pathol 131:49–57
17. Rodeghiero F, Stasi R, Gernsheimer T, Provan D, Arnold DM,
Bussel JB, Cines DB, Chong BH, Cooper N, Godeau B, Lechner
K, Mazzucconi MG, McMillan R, Sanz MA, Imbach P, Blanchette
V, Kühne T, Ruggeri M, George JN (2009) Standardization of
terminology, definitions and outcome criteria in immune throm-
bocytopenic purpura of adults and children: report from an
international working group. Blood 113:2386–2393
102 J Hematopathol (2009) 2:97–102
