J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
DOI 10.1007/s12308-008-0011-y
http://eahp.colloques-adera.fr
XIV. Meeting of the
European Association
for Haematopathology
20 - 25
September 2008
Cité Mondiale,
Bordeaux - France
Abstracts
Bone Marrow Symposium &
Lymphoma Symposium
International Scientific Committee
• Andreas Chott
• Antoine de Mascarel
• Ahmet Dogan
• Martin Hansmann
• Daniel Jones
• Hans Kreipe
• Steven Pals
• Stefano Pileri
• Miguel Piris
• Anna Porwit
• Leticia Quintanilla-Fend
Local Organizing Committee
• Antoine de Mascarel
• Marie Parrens
• Jean-Philippe Merlio
• Béatrice Vergier
• Isabelle Soubeyran
Lymphoma Workshop Panel:
• Philip Kluin
• Daphne de Jong
• Antoine de Mascarel
• Eric Hsi
• Yaso Natkunam
• German Ott
• Stefano Pileri
• Leticia Quintanilla-Fend
Bone Marrow Workshop Panel
• Vito Franco
• Hans Kreipe
• Attilio Orazi
• Anna Porwit
• Jon van der Walt
162 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
ABSTRACTS
Bone Marrow Symposium
21 September 2008
BMS 1
DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF BMI-1
IN VARIOUS TYPES OF MYELODYSPLASTIC
SYNDROME (MDS) AND WITH IMPLICATION
OF ITS ROLE IN PATHOGENESIS
Kai Zhang, MD and J. Shi, MD and Fan Lin MD, Ph.D.
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Geisinger
Medical Center, Danville, PA
Background: The Bmi-1 gene is a putative oncogene and is essential and
indispensable for the regulation of self-renewal of normal and leukemic
stem cells. In this study, we investigated Bmi-1 expression on bone
marrow core biopsy samples from various types of MDS to assess its
possible role in MDS.
Design: Using an EnVision-HRP detection kit (Dako), we evaluated
the expression of Bmi-1 in 60 cases of bone marrow biopsy specimens
using monoclonal anti-Bmi-1 antibody. These included 10 cases for
each of following 6 groups according the updated WHO classification:
Group 1(G1)- benign bone marrow, Group 2 (G2)-MDS-RA (refractory
anemia),Group 3(G3)-MDS-RARS (RA ringed sideroblast), Group 4
(G4)MDS-EB1 (excess blast type-1), Group 5(G5) MDS-EB2 (excess
type-2), and Group 6 (G6) MDS-AML (acute myeloid leukemia). The
staining intensity was graded as weak, moderate, or strong. The types and
percentage of Bmi-1 positive cells (erythroid precursors and immature
myeloid cells) was counted manually. Cytoplasmic and/or nuclear
staining for Bmi-1 was regarded a positive result.
Results: In G1 (benign marrow), megakaryocytes and occasional
primarily large erythroblasts and early myeloid precursors showed mild
to moderate cytoplasmic and/or nuclear staining. Approximately 5% of
small rubricytes and metarubricytes were weakly positive. In G2 (MDS-
RA)and G3 (MDS-RARS), Bmi-1+ rubricytes and metarubricytes were
significantly increased up to 20%; and 80% respectively, which were
associated with increased staining intensity with strong nuclear staining. In
G4, G5 and G6, the majority of recognizable erythroid precursors and
megakayrocytes were found to be strongly positive for Bmi-1. There was a
significant difference among these three groups in terms of Bmi-1+
immature myeloid cells or blasts, with the number of Bmi-1+ cells of 8%
in G4, 15% in G5, and over 30% in G6, respectively. Importantly, all Bmi-
1+ positive cells showed dominantly strong nuclear staining signal instead
of the cytoplasmic staining.
Conclusion: Increased abnormal hematopoietic populations of either
erythroid precursors or immature myeloid /blasts among various types
of MDS are correlated with 1) the overexpression of Bmi-1 and 2) the
switching of Bmi-1 expression from the cytoplasmic staining to
nuclear staining, which suggests that Bmi-1 may play an important
role in the pathogenesis of MDS.
BMS 2
Evolution of the Accelerated and Blastic Phases
of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia: Molecular, Cytogenetic,
Flowcytometric and Electron Microscopic Studies
Amira M Khorshed, MD.; Amira H Soliman, MD.; Nahed Abdel
Wahab, MD.; Sherine Ibrahim, MD.; Khaled A. Emara, MD.; Reham
Rashed, Tarek Mansour, MD.*; Naglaa Kholousy, MD.**; Fayek M.
Ghaleb, MD. ***
Departments of Clinical Pathology and Cancer Biology*, National
Cancer Institute, Cairo University and Immunogenetic Department,
National Research Center** and Clinical Pathology Department,
Ophthalmology Research Institute***
Background: Chronic Myeloid Leukemia is a clonal disease that results
from an acquired genetic change in a pluripotential hemopoietic stem
cell. Molecular abnormalities and mutations usually accompany the
accelerated and blastic crisis phases of CML.
Aim of Work: This study was conducted to explore the possible
ultrastructural, molecular cytogenetic, apoptotic and morphological
abnormalities that may contribute to the progression of chronic phase
to accelerated and blastic crisis phases in CML patients, for focusing
on high risk patients to justify accurate lines of treatment.
Subjects and Methods: The study included thirty CML patients
newly diagnosed and under treatment presenting to the Medical
Oncology department of the National Cancer Institute, Cairo
University, and ten age-matched subjects as a control group. CD95
(FAS) and P53 were studied by flowcytometry, BCR/ABL gene was
studied at the cytogenetic and molecular level by RT PCR and
ultrastructural apoptotic changes were studied by EM in PB samples.
Also FISH was performed on few selected cases where conventional
cytogenetics was not informative.
Results: Mean level of P53% was highly increased in the accelerated
&/or blastic crisis phase and the chronic phase compared with controls
(p=0.04). Mean level of CD95% expression was higher when
measured on the whole cell population in the (accelerated &/or blastic
crisis) compared with chronic phase and controls (p=0.14). By
selecting CD34+ve cells, lower levels of CD95 % expression were
found in the (accelerated &/or blastic crisis phase) compared with the
levels expressed on the whole cell population in the same phase.
Cases were divided according to follow up into Group 1: 16/30
(53.3%) chronic phase cases that remained chronic during treatment.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
DOI 10.1007/s12308-008-0011-y
Group 2: 12/30 (40%) chronic phase cases that developed an
accelerated or blastic crisis during treatment then returned to the
chronic phase. Group 3: 2/30 (6.6%) chronic phase cases that
developed an accelerated or blastic crisis phase then died. Mean P53
% levels showed no statistically significant difference between the
groups of CML (p=0.85). Higher levels of CD95% in CD34+ve cells
were expressed in Group 1 compared with Group 2 and Group 3 and
were statistically insignificant (p=0.85). Mean levels of CD95%
expression were higher when measured on the whole cell population
in Group 2 than Group 1 and Group 3 (p=0.45). Mean level of P53 %
in the treated cases was higher compared to newly diagnosed cases
(before treatment) showing a statistically significant difference (p=0.01).
Higher mean levels of CD95% on whole cell population, and on
CD34+ve selected cells were detected after treatment (p=0.30, p=0.83).
The mean levels of P53% and CD95% were higher in BCR/ABL fusion
gene positive cases than BCR/ABL fusion gene negative cases but didn’t
reach significant levels respectively (p=0.21, p=0.62).
Conclusion: a) P53% and CD95% levels expression in the accelerated
and blastic crisis phases of CML patients were higher than those in the
chronic phase. b) comparative studies for the apoptotic markers with
cytogenetic analysis and RT PCR techniques revealed higher levels of
P53 and CD95 in BCR/ABL positive cases than BCR/ABL negative
cases c) P53 and CD95 levels were higher in treated cases than newly
diagnosed cases.
BMS 3
SCLEROSING MESENTERITIS: A RARE MIMIC
OF MYELOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS.
George Fedoriw, Nelofar Shafi
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Veterans Affairs
Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, USA
Systemic and localized non-neoplastic conditions can significantly
influence the bone marrow microenvironment, inducing changes
mimicking clonal neoplastic disorders. In most cases, the diagnostic
dilemma is quickly resolved and disease etiology elucidated as
presenting symptoms, laboratory and histopathologic features appro-
priately guide the clinical course. The purpose of this report is to
present the laboratory and clinical data of a patient with sclerosing
mesenteritis, a rare non-neoplastic fibrosing condition associated with
features of myeloproliferative disorders. Our patient is a 70 year old
man who presented with shortness of breath, drenching night sweats,
lower extremity edema, abdominal discomfort, and recent 20 lb
weight loss. His past medical history was significant for prostatic
adenocarcinoma treated with surgery and radiation, umbilical hernia
repair, and hypertension. Clinical exam revealed hepatosplenomegaly
and no palpable lymphadenopathy. Laboratory findings showed a
microcytic anemia with peripheral blood smear examination revealing
significant anisopoikilocytosis characterized by dacrocytosis and
polychormasia, and marked leukocytosis. CT scan confirmed hep-
atosplenomegaly and showed nonspecific changes including “streak-
ing” of the mesenteric soft tissue; changes initially suspected to be
involvement by lymphoproliferative disorder. Subsequent bone
marrow evaluation revealed a markedly hypercellular marrow with
panmyelosis, left shifted myeloid maturation, and reticulin fibrosis.
No increase in myeloid blasts was present morphologically or flow
cytometrically. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis demonstrated a
normal karyotype and no evidence of BCR/ABL translocation or
JAK-2 mutation. Progressive radiologic changes of the intra-abdominal
soft tissue prompted a mesenteric biopsy with histologically confirmed
features of sclerosing mesenteritis. Treatment with prednisone and
tamoxifen was initiated with rapid and significant improvement in
symptoms, laboratory values and bone marrow histology. This report
highlights the clinical, laboratory and bone marrow histopathologic
changes in a patient with sclerosing mesenteritis presenting as a
myeloproliferative disorder. The full range of available diagnostic
modalities should be employed to establish the correct diagnosis and
initiate timely treatment.
BMS 4
DISCORDANT IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC PROFILES
IN ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA INVOLVING
BONE MARROW AND SKIN (LEUKEMIA CUTIS)
Reena Sachdev, MD1
, Tracy I. George, MD1
,
and *Uma N. Sundram, MD, PhD1,2
Departments of Pathology1
and Dermatology2
, Stanford University
Medical Center, Stanford, California, USA
Background: Leukemia cutis (LC) occurs in less than 5% cases of
acute leukemia, and its occurrence may constitute progression of
disease. The parameters governing occurrence of LC are poorly
understood.
Purpose: We investigated expression patterns of certain homing
receptors via immunohistochemistry in skin lesions involved by acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), to determine if skin homing plays a role in
extramedullary involvement. Ten paired cases of skin and bone
marrow biopsies from patients with LC and 15 bone marrow biopsies
from patients without LC were studied with antibodies directed
against CD34, cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA), CD62-L (L-
selectin), CD54 (ICAM-1), CD29 (β1 integrin subunit), and CD183.
Results: CLA was expressed in all cases of leukemia (both marrow
and skin involvement), whereas CD54 was consistently negative.
CD34 was expressed in 5/10 biopsies of marrow infiltrates with LC
and 3/10 biopsies of matching skin infiltrates; in marrows without LC,
8/15 were positive. CD62-L was expressed in 4/10 biopsies of marrow
infiltrates with LC and 6/10 biopsies of matching skin infiltrates; in
marrows without LC, only 2/15 were positive. CD29 was expressed in
1/10 biopsies of marrow infiltrates with LC and 4/10 biopsies of
matching skin infiltrates; in marrows without LC, only 1/15 were
positive. CD183 was expressed in 1/10 biopsies of marrow infiltrates
with LC and 4/10 biopsies of matching skin infiltrates; in marrows
without LC, CD183 was entirely negative.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that CLA and CD54 expression in
bone marrow may not be necessary or sufficient for involvement of
skin in AML. The gain of CD62-L, CD29, and CD183 expression in
bone marrow and skin infiltrates in LC, relative to bone marrow
infiltrates of cases without LC, suggests a potential role for these
markers in AML homing to skin.
164 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
BMS 5
CLINICAL CORRELATES AND PROGNOSTIC
VALUE OF BONE MARROW HISTOLOGICAL
PARAMETERS IN PRIMARY MYELODYSPLASTIC
SYNDROMES
* Emanuela Boveri,1
Matteo Giovanni Della Porta,2
Luca Malcovati,2
Alessandro Castello,1
Erica Travaglino,1
Barbara Burroni,1
Marco
Lucioni,1
Marco Paulli,1
Cristiana Pascutto,2
Francesco Passamonti,2
Elisa Rumi,2
Luca Arcaini,2
Rosangela Invernizzi,3
Umberto
Magrini,1
Mario Lazzarino,2
and Mario Cazzola.2
1
Department of Surgical Pathology, 2
Department of Hematology and
3
Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Oncology, Fondazione
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of Pavia, Italy.
Background: In myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), bone marrow (BM)
histology allows the evaluation of parameters, which are complementary
to the informations obtained by marrow smear and karyotype.
Purpose of the study is to determine the clinical correlates and prognostic
value of BM histological parameters in 301 consecutive primary MDS
patients diagnosed according to WHO criteria between 2000 and 2006.
Results: By univariable statistical analysis, the following histological
variables affect overall survival (OS) and leukemia-free survival (LFS):
age-related cellularity (OS HR 1.008, P=.005; LFS HR 1.011, P=.003),
percentage of CD34+ cells (OS HR 1.017, P<.001; LFS HR 1.028,
P<.001), presence of BM CD34+ cell clusters (OS HR 2.87, P<.001;
LFS HR 3.89, P<.001), grade 2-3 BM fibrosis (OS HR 4.39, P<.001;
LFS HR 3.48, P<.001). In multivariable analysis, grade 2-3 BM fibrosis
and BM CD34+ cell clusters have an independent negative impact on
OS (P<.001 and P=.019, respectively) and LFS (P<.001 and P=.004,
respectively). Grade 2-3 BM fibrosis (17% of cases) is associated with
multilineage dysplasia (P=.001), high transfusion need (P<.001), poor
risk cytogenetics (P=.007). BM CD34+ cell clusters (23% of patients) is
associated with WHO categories with excess of blasts (P<.001) and
poor risk cytogenetics (P=.001). A hierarchical clustering analysis
identifies 3 subsets of patients with distinct clinical features. One of
these clusters mainly consists of patients with BM fibrosis, multilineage
dysplasia, high transfusion need; these patients show lower OS and LFS
(P=.001 and P<.001, respectively). Within patients stratified according
to WHO classification-based prognostic scoring system, BM fibrosis
signifies a shift to a one-step more advanced risk group.
Conclusion: BM fibrosis and CD34+ cell clusters are histological
parameters with a strong diagnostic and prognostic significance in
MDS patients; BM fibrosis identifies a distinct subgroup of MDS with
poor prognosis, and represents an independent prognostic factor that
can be useful in clinical decision-making.
BMS 6
JAK2V617 ACTIVATING MUTATION IN CHRONIC
MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
*Achille Pich, Ludovica Riera, Francesca Sismondi, Laura Godio,
Laura Davico Bonino, Paola Francia di Celle.
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, Section of
Pathology, University of Turin, Italy.
Background: Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) has
heterogeneous clinical and morphologic features, and is classified in
the WHO myeloproliferative-myelodysplastic overlap category. The
Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) V617F mutation was detected in 40 to 94% of
patients with myeloproliferative disorders, such as polycythemia vera,
essential thrombocythemia and myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia,
but only in a small number of patients with myelodysplastic/
myeloproliferative diseases or myelodysplastic syndromes.
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to search for JAK2 V617F
mutations in CMML and investigate the association with clinical,
hematological and bone marrow (BM) histological features.
Materials and Methods: Sixty-five consecutive patients (18 females
and 47 males; mean age: 71 years) with newly diagnosed CMML
from 2004 to 2007 were included in the study. JAK2 V617F mutation
was assessed using direct sequencing of exon 14 or by allele-specific
PCR from total peripheral blood or bone marrow samples. BM
biopsies were stained with H&E, Dominici, Perls, Gomori and
immunostained for CD34, CD68PGM1, CD31, Factor VIII-RA,
myeloperoxidase and glycophorin.
Results: JAK2 V617F mutation was identified in 5 (7.7%) of 65
cases. Patients with JAK2 V617F mutation presented all with a
marked splenomegaly and had a significantly higher haemoglobin
level (13.5 g/dL vs 10.7 g/dL, p=0.01) and neutrophil count (14.5×
109
/L vs 6.8×109
/L, p=0.01) than patients without the mutation. BM
biopsies of CMML with JAK2 V617F mutation showed in all cases
marked myeloid hyperplasia, moderate to marked megakaryocytic
hyperplasia, with occasionally clustered megakaryocytes, and mild to
moderate reticulin fibrosis; three showed an increased number of
dilated sinusoids.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that JAK2 V617F mutation can be
detected in a small number of CMML and is associated with clinical
and morphologic features of the myeloproliferative type of CMML.
Therefore, this finding could help in a more appropriate classification
of the disease.
BMS 7
BONE MARROW ANGIOGENESIS IN HODGKIN’S
LYMPHOMA
*1
Tatjana Terzić, 2
Vesna Čemerikić-Martinović, 3
Maja Peruničić-
Jovanović, 3
Ljubomir Jaković, 1
Gordana Basta-Jovanović
1
Institute of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Serbia; 2
Histolab, Belgrade, Serbia; 3
Institute of Hematology, Clinical
Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia
Background: Angiogenesis is essential step for tumor growth, invasion
and progression. Bone marrow infiltration is present in 5-15% of patients
with Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL). It is usually associated with prominent
fibrosis and proliferation of blood vessels. Limited information exists
about the significance of neoangiogenesis in HL.
Purpose of this study: was to analyse the microvessel density,
imunohistochemicaly marked with monoclonal antibody CD34, in
reactive bone marrow and bone marrow of patients with HL.
Results: We retrospectively analysed bone marrow biopsies of 43
patients with HL (26 male and 17 female, median age 44 years), 25
patients with bone marrow infiltration by HL and 18 patients without
bone marrow infiltration. These bone marrow biopsies were compared
with reactive bone marrow samples of 5 patients without any
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 165
hematological malignancy (control group). Bone marrow biopsies
were stained with hematoxylin&eosin and reticulin fibers (Gordon-
Sweet). Angiogenesis was estimated by microvessel density (MVD)
using standard immunohistochemical staining for CD34. We counted
the number of vessels per high power field (×500) in two the most
vascularized areas. We found increase of microvessels density (MVD)
in bone marrow patients with HL, but without bone marrow
lymphoma infiltration (9,30±5,23), compared with control bone
marrow (3,50±0,71), but correlation was not statistically significant
(p>0.05). We observed that MVD inside the bone marrow lymphoma
infiltrate (17,63±9,27) in HL patients was higher than MVD in HL
patients without bone marrow infiltration (9,30±5,23). This correlation
was statistically significant (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that angiogenesis in bone marrow
infiltration by HL was extensively increased. Therefore, the density of
microvessels may provide basis for the therapeutic investigation of
anti-angiogenic agents in the cases of HL with bone marrow
infiltration.
BMS 8
COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF CD20 B-CELL
RECEPTOR INTO GLYCOSPHINGOLIPID-RICH
MICRODOMAINS INDUCES THE COMMONLY
OBSERVED “DOWNREGULATION” OF CD20
IN RITUXIMAB TREATED B-NHL
C. Aumueller1
, C. Meyer zum Bueschenfelde2
, I.Koch1
, M. Perker3
,
L. Quintanilla-Martinez4
, F. Fend1,5
and M. Kremer1
1
Institute of Pathology, Technical University, Munich, 2
III Internal
Department, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University, Munich,
3
Center for Hematology, Weilheim, Helmholtz-Research Center,
Neuherberg, 5
Institute of Pathology, University of Tuebingen,
Germany
Background: Rituximab has shown significant efficacy in patients
with B-cell NHL. Loss or downregulation of CD20 during rituximab
therapy has been observed and held responsible for secondary
resistance. However, systematic immunohistochemical and molecular
studies examining this downregulation in a larger series of cases are
lacking.
Aims: We performed a retrospective analysis of imunophenotypic
changes in sequential biopsies of patients with a variety of B-cell
NHL before, during and after rituximab therapy. Additonally we
investigated the molecular mechanisms, responsible for the observed
loss or downregulation in NHL cell lines.
Design: A total of 131 formalin-fixed lymph node and bone marrow
biopsies of 87 pts. with B-NHL (28 FL, 37 MCL, 3 MZL, 14 DLBCL,
1 CLL) and three cell lines (NCEB-1, DB, MEC1) and primary cells
from B-CLL were analyzed. Biopsies were taken between 0-16 months
after initiation of Rituximab therapy. Protein and mRNA expression of
CD20, PAX5, CD79a, CD3, CD5, CD23, CD38, FMC7, CD10,
kappa, lambda were analyzed by IHC, FACS, Western Blot, and qRT-
PCR. IgH rearrangement analysis was performed in selected cases.
Results: Twenty-eight cases studied achieved CR without immuno-
phenotypical or molecular evidence of lymphoma in the post-therapy
samples. A complete downregulation of CD20 was observed in 23/28
(82%) of these cases.
Fifty-five cases showed persistent disease or developed relapse. A
total loss of CD20 expression was noticed in 6/55 (11%), a partial
downregulation in 17/55 (31%) of the cases.
CD20 downregulation was clearly time-dependent, with the highest
frequency within the first three months of Rituximab therapy. CD20
protein expression was considerably diminished in primary B-CLL,
MEC-1, and NCEB cells after Rituximab incubation, but CD20
mRNA remains stable in NCEB cells in up to 24 days. Incubation
with B1 did not show this effect.
Conclusions: Loss or diminished CD20 protein expression after
Rituximab therapy is a frequent phenomenon, and time dependent with
its maximum within the first three months after therapy. An internalization
or intracytoplasmocytic protein degradation of CD20 has not been
observed in cell lines. The CD20 “downregulation” is most probably
due to B-cell receptor movements into lipid rafts in the cell membrane
since incubation with B1 antibodies preserves CD20 detection.
BMS 9
STROMAL-HEMOPOIETIC INTERACTION
IN APLASTIC ANEMIA
Samia H Rizk*, MD, MPH, Manal W El-Masry, MD, Iman M
Mansour, MD, Doha Mokhtar MD, and Ilham Yousry MD
Departments of Clinical Pathology and Pediatrics, Cairo University,
Egypt
Background: Aplastic anemia is associated with quantitative and
functional abnormalities in the hematopoietic stem cell compartment.
Activated type 1 cytotoxic T cells and type 1 cytokines have been
implicated. γ-Interferon (and tumor necrosis factor-α) reduces the
numbers of human hematopoietic progenitor-derived colonies in vitro
and efficiently induce apoptosis in CD34 target cells. Also, sustained
exposure to low concentrations of γ-interferon markedly reduces the
output of long-term culture-initiating cells (LTC-IC), consistent with
local amplification of toxicity in the marrow milieu.
Methodology: In order to estimate the effect of intrinsic inhibitory
cytokines on the primitive BM stem cells of aplastic anemia, we
studied 14 cases with newly diagnosed acquired aplastic anemia as
well as eight controls with non aplastic non infiltrated marrows. Long-
term bone marrow culture (LTBMC) was performed for both cases
and controls and the loss of CFUs was assessed weekly for five
weeks. The degree of apoptosis was also studied in the remaining
elements at the end of 4th week
using TUNEL staining method.
Results: We demonstrated a significant reduction of the number (p=
0.015) and maintenance (p=0.005) of CFUs in LTBMC of aplastic
anemia patients` bone marrows, in comparison to normal controls.
The weekly loss of CFUs was also significant till the end of the
5th week
(P>0.0001). The percentage of apoptotic cells in AA patients
was higher than that of controls with a significant difference regarding
the number of apoptotic colony / 10 colonies (P=0.027), but not
regarding the number of apoptotic cells/ colony.
Conclusion: Immune reaction mediated by cytotoxic T-cells is
suggested to be a leading cause for marrow hypoplasia.
166 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
BMS 10
CCL3 AND CCL4 FACILITATE
MICROENVIRONMENTAL INTERACTIONS
OF CLL CELLS VIA THE CD49d/VCAM PAIR.
*Claudio Tripodo1
, Antonella Zucchetto2
, Fleur Bossi3
, Dania
Benedetti2
, Riccardo Bomben2
, Michele Dal Bo2
, Daniela Marconi4
,
Massimo Degan2
, Giovanni Del Poeta5
, Silvia Deaglio6
, Gianluca
Gaidano7
, Francesco Tedesco3
, Fabio Malavasi6
, Vito Franco1
, Valter
Gattei2
1
Dipartimento di Patologia Umana, Università degli Studi di Palermo,
Palermo; 2
Servizio di Onco-Ematologia Clinico-Sperimentale, Centro
di Riferimento Oncologico, IRCCS, Aviano; 3
Laboratorio di Immu-
nologia, Dipartimento di Fisiologia e Patologia, Università degli Studi
di Trieste, Trieste; 4
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN), Sez.
Bologna, Università degli Studi di Bologna; 5
Ospedale S. Eugenio,
Università di Tor Vergata, Roma; 6
Laboratorio di Immunogenetica,
Università degli Studi di Torino; 7
Divisione di Ematologia, Diparti-
mento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale & IRCAD, Università degli
Studi del Piemonte Orientale Amedeo Avogadro, Novara, Italy.
Background: CD49d and CD38 have a negative prognostic impact on
CLL. These two markers share an adhesive function and could
mediate interactions between CLL cells and bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment, providing proliferation and survival signals for the
neoplastic component.
Purpose: We aimed to find a link between CD38 and CD49d that may
explain their negative impact in CLL, focusing on genes involved in
mechanism(s) regulating CLL-cells/BM-stroma interactions.
Methods: i) Gene-expression profiling performed using mRNA
derived from purified CLL cells of 11 CD38+CD49d+ and 15
CD38-CD49d- cases; ii) Functional and validation experiments
performed by flow-cytometry, real-time quantitative PCR (RTQ-
PCR), ELISA, and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Results: CCL3 and CCL4 chemokine genes were found up-regulated
in CD38+CD49d+ cases, this over-expression being confirmed by
RTQ-PCR. In vitro experiments on CD38+CD49d+ CLL-cells
cultured for 14 (t14) and 24 hours (t24) in the presence of agonist
(IB4) anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies, demonstrated up-regulation
of CCL3/CCL4 mRNA at t14 (by RTQ-PCR, p=0.005), and increased
release of CCL3/CCL4 protein at t24 (by ELISA, p=0.01). Consistently,
CCL3 was detected by immuno-histochemistry (IHC) in neoplastic cells
from BM biopsies (BMBs) of CD38+CD49d+ but not CD38-CD49d-
CLL. High expression of CCL3/CCL4 receptors CCR1 and CCR5
was found on CLL-derived monocytes and in-vitro differentiated
macrophages. Accordingly, a higher number of infiltrating CD68+
macrophages was found in CD38+CD49d+ compared to CD38-
CD49d- cases (p=0.013), suggesting a role of these cells as target for
CLL-derived chemokines. Parallel experiments showed that conditioned
media from CCL3-stimulated macrophages induced expression of the
CD49d-ligand VCAM-1 in human endothelial cells. Consistently, a
denser meshwork of VCAM-1+ cells was detected by IHC in CD38+
CD49d+ as compared to CD38-CD49d- infiltrates (p=0.002).
Conclusion: These findings identify a novel functional cross-talk
between CD38+CD49d+ CLL cells and cells of the tumor microenvi-
ronment, this interplay eventually affecting survival and recirculation of
tumor cells via the CD49d/VCAM pair.
BMS 11
LYMPHOPLASMACYTIC LYMPHOMA
RESPONDING TO IMATINIB: A POSSIBLE ROLE
FOR MAST CELLS IN LYMPHOPLASMACYTIC
LYMPHOMA
L Tsao, J Chapman, J Horwitz, *CV Cotta
Background: Experiments have shown that mast cells directly
facilitate the proliferation of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma cells.
Other studies have shown that follicular lymphomas with low density
of mast cells have a better prognosis than those with high density. The
possible mechanism is the low density of T-regs in these tumors, as
mast cells are, at least partially, responsible for the proliferation of T-
regs. Since imatinib inhibits mast cell proliferation, there may be a
role for imatinib in the treatment of low grade lymphomas.
Purpose: Demonstrate the effect of imatinib on lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma, as monitored by total plasma protein level.
Description of results: A 62 year old man was enrolled on a clinical
trial investigating imatinib in idiopathic fibrosing alveolitis. At the
onset of the study, he had increased total serum proteins (9.2 g/dL).
Immediately after treatment, the total serum proteins decreased (8.1 g/
dL), and remained at normal levels (7.5-8.1 g/dL) for the duration of the
treatment (two years). After imatinib was discontinued, the total serum
protein level became elevated (9.3 g/dL) with an increase in serum
viscosity. The cause of this elevation was a monoclonal IgM (IgM kappa,
3.78 g/dL). The bone marrow biopsy showed lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma.
Conclusion: While the etiology of the increased total serum proteins
was not initially established, it was most likely due to the underlying
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma present before and during the treatment
with imatinib. The correlation between the treatment schedule and total
serum protein level suggests that imatinib could play a role in the
treatment of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. The mechanisms through
which imatinib controls lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma could include
inhibition of mast cell proliferation and direct inhibition of pathways
controlling lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma cell proliferation.
BMS 12
ANGIOGENESIS IN CHRONIC
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE DISEASES
IS INDEPENDENT OF THE JAK2 STATUS
*A. Tzankov, S. Dirnhofer, A. Gratwohl, R. Skoda, A. Tichelli, M.
Medinger
Dept. of Pathology and Hematology, University Hospital Basel,
Switzerland
Background: Chronic myeloproliferative diseases (CMPD) are
hematopoietic stem cell neoplasias characterized by bone marrow
outgrowth with maturation of one ore more myeloid lineages,
insidious onset with the potential for progression and transformation
and accompanying myelofibrosis. In over 50% of Ph-
CMPD cases
the hematopoietic precursors harbor an acquired gain-of-function
mutation in the JAK2 gene resulting in a selective growth advantage
as compared to precursor cells with the wild-type gene. In addition,
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 167
fibrogenic and angiogenic cytokines are aberrantly expressed by
clonal megakaryocytes and histiocytes in a significant proportion of
cases.
Purpose: We aimed to immunohistochemically study the microvessel
density (MVD) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-
expression in 96 Ph-
CMPD, including 24 essential thrombocythae-
mia- (ET), 46 polycythemia vera- (PV), 26 chronic idiopathic
myelofibrosis- (CIMF) and 20 control reactive bone marrow cases
and to correlate these findings with known biological and clinical key
data, particularly with the JAK2 status.
Results: 67% of the cases (64/96) displayed the V617F mutation in
the JAK2 gene. The mean MVD was highest in CIMF (55 micro-
vessels/mm2), compared to PV (33/mm2), ET (22/mm2) and controls
(15/mm2, p<0.0001) as was the expression of VEGF in megakar-
yocytes and histiocytes (15 cells/mm2 in CIMF, 13/mm2 in PV, 12/
mm2 in ET and 5/mm2 in controls, p=0.003). Increased MVD
correlated with the fibrosis degree only in ET and exceeded that of the
controls solely in ET cases with fibrosis ≥ grade 1. There were no
correlations between MVD or expression of VEGF and JAK2 status,
thrombotic or bleeding complications or transformation.
Conclusion: Except for early ET, angiogenesis is increased in Ph-
CMPD, particularly in CIMF. It is independent of the JAK2 status and
fibrosis degree (except for early ET). Thus, angiogenesis might
potentially serve as JAK2 independent treatment target in Ph-
CMPD,
especially in cases with present or imminent fibrosis.
BMS 13
ROLE OF CD146+ BONE MARROW
OSTEOPROGENITORS IN PRIMARY
MYELOFIBROSIS.
Claudio Tripodo1
, *Andrea Di Bernardo1
, Maria Paola Ternullo1
,
Carla Guarnotta1
, Umberto Gianelli2
, Emanuela Boveri3
, Rossana
Porcasi1
, Sabrina Ingrao1
, Ada Maria Florena1
and Vito Franco1
1
Department of Human Pathology, Università degli Studi of Palermo,
Policlinico Paolo Giaccone, Palermo,Italy; 2
Pathology Unit, Depart-
ment of Medicine, Surgery and Odontology, San Paolo Hospital, and
Policlinico IRCCS Hospital, Mangiagalli and Regina Elena Founda-
tion, University of Milan,Italy; 3
Departments of Surgical Pathology
and Hematology, University of Pavia Medical School, Fondazione
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy
Background: Primary Myelofibrosis is characterized by a poor
prognosis and by the lack of a valid therapeutic approach mainly
beacause of the progressive development of reticulin fibrosis leading
to bone marrow (BM) failure. BM stromal reaction seems to play a
role in the progression of the disease as suggested by both the increase
of neoangiogenesis in the different phases and the formation of new
bone (osteomyelosclerosis) in the advanced stages. CD146+ bone
marrow (BM) stromal cells have been recently recognized as
clonogenic osteoprogenitors able to organize a complete hematopoietic
microenvironment and induce bone formation.
Purpose of the study: In this study we investigated the contribution
of CD146+ BM osteoprogenitors to the stromal remodelling occurring
in the different stages of primary myelofibrosis (PMF), by immuno-
histochemical analysis on BM samples from 32 PMF patients.
Results: We found that CD146+ cells sited at the abluminal side of
the BM vessels and branching among hematopoietic cells, signifi-
cantly increased in the advanced stages of PMF (p<0.001), forming a
dense subendothelial meshwork. Such an increase was associated with
both the extent of fibrosis (rho=0.916, p<0.0001) and the microvas-
cular density (rho=0.883, p<0.0001). Coherently with a mural cell
function, such cells were characterized also by the expression of
smooth-muscle actin.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that CD146+ subendothelial reticular
cells may play a role in the stromal remodelling occurring in the
progression of PMF through the generation of osteoprogenitor cells
responsible for bone formation and by the direct production of
reticulin fibers. They could also support BM neoangiogenesis through
the Angiopoietin-1/Tie-2 pathway, recently described in Ph- Chronic
Myeloproliferative Disorders therefore representing a rationale for
new therapies targeting BM stroma in PMF.
BMS 14
BONE MARROW HISTOLOGY IN RELATION TO JAK2 V617F
MUTATION IN POLYCYTHEMIA VERA AND ESSENTIAL
THROMBOCYTHEMIA
*Parasi-Ismailou A1
, Kalagiakou E2
, Pantoula P1
, Βelessi C2
,
Manioudaki E2
, Karayannis M1
, Xyristaki S1
, Laoutaris N2
.
Pathology1
, Hematology2
Department General Hospital of Nikea-Piraeus
“Agios Panteleimon”, Athens, Greece
Background: Polycythemia vera (PV) and Essential Thrombocythemia
(ET) are members of the Ph- chronic myeloproliferative diseases
(CMPDs) characterized by hyperplasia of one or more hematopoietic
cell lines, dysplastic features of the megakaryocytic lineage, variable
marrow fibrosis and clinical heterogeneity. The identification of JAK2-
V617F mutation in a high proportion of the Ph- CMPDs has provided
new insights into the molecular basis of Ph- CMPDs.
Purpose: Detection of JAK2 mutation in PV and ET patients and
possible correlation with BM cellularity, changes in the megakaryocytic
lineage and degree of BM fibrosis.
Material: Cellularity and BM Fibrosis (after Gomori’s stain) were
evaluated and scored, according to the recent European Consensus
proposal, in BM trephine biopsies of 30 patients (15 PV and 15 ET).
Megakaryocytic changes (clustering, morphology) were interpreted
after LAT-1 protein immunostain. The histological parameters were
evaluated by two pathologists in a blinded fashion. JAK2-V617F
mutation was detected, using allele specific PCR.
Results: The V617F mutation was detected in 20 cases, 13/15(86.7%)
PV and 7/15(46.7%) ET patients. A positive correlation was found
between JAK2 positivity and BM cellularity. All 12 cases with marked
increase in cellularity carried the JAK2 mutation, while none of the 5
cases with mild or no increase in cellularity carried the mutation (p=
0.001). Moderate to marked increase in cellularity was observed in all
JAK2+ PV and ET cases. No correlation of the JAK2 mutation with the
degree of fibrosis and the megakaryocytic changes was observed.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that JAK2-V617F mutation could
correlate with the clinical and laboratory heterogeneity of ET.
168 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
BMS 15
PRIMARY BONE MARROW LYMPHOMAS (PBML):
CLINICAL PRESENTATION, HISTOPATHOLOGICAL
FEATURES AND OUTCOME (IELSG #29)
*M. Rozman1
, A. Martínez1
, C. Agostinelli2
, K. M. Hebeda3
, E.
Matutes4
, M. Ponzoni5a,5b
, A. Ferreri5a,5c
, C. Campidelli2
, B.
Espinet6
, G. Perea7
, A. Acevedo8
, S. Pileri2
, A. López-Guillermo1
,
E. Campo1
, on behalf of the International Extranodal Lymphoma
Study Group.
1
Hematopathology Unit and Hematology Department, Hospital
Clínic, DIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Spain; 2
Haematopathology
and Hematology Depatment, Bologna University School of Medicine,
Bologna, Italy; 3
Department of Pathology, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 4
Haemato-
Oncology Unit. Royal Marsden Hospital/Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK; 5a
Unit of Lymphoid malignancies,5b
Pathology Unit and
5c
Medical Oncology Units, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan,
Italy; 6
Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Pathology
Service, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain; 7
Laboratory Department,
Corporació Sanitaria Parc Taulí, Sabadell (Barcelona), Spain; 8
Pa-
thology Department, Hospital Quirón Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Background: PBML are rare and only few cases are reported in the
literature.
Purpose of the study: To determine whether PBML may have
specific clinico-pathological features and distinct outcome, we have
retrospectively reviewed cases of PBML among eight European
institutions. Including criteria were: 1) isolated BM involvement, 2)
no evidence of extra-marrow dissemination on imaging studies, 3) no
evidence of splenic, liver or other organ infiltration, 4) absence of
localized bone tumours, and 5) exclusion of lymphomas primarily
involving BM (SLL/CLL, LPL, MCL, SMZL, Burkitt and ALL).
Results: Seventeen cases fulfilled the inclusion criteria, and complete
clinical data were available for 16 of them. The median age was 64
(29-91) years without sex predominance; B-symptoms were present in
69%, leukopenia in 31%, anemia in 46% and thrombocytopenia in
50%. Three cases (19%) had blood involvement. High serum LDH
was observed in 79% cases. Twelve patients received CHOP-like or
R-CHOP-like regimens; the complete response rate was 36%. Median
overall survival (OS) was 1.8 years. Platelet count <100×109
/L and
high serum LDH predicted poor OS.
Histologically, 12/17 cases had large B-cell lymphoma (6 nodular / 6
diffuse infiltration pattern). Among these, a germinal centre (GC) origin
was demonstrated in 2 and excluded in 1, whereas 2 cases were T-cell rich
B-NHL. The GC-associated features could not be assessed in 9 cases. The
remaining 5 cases had histology consistent with FL (3) and PTCL (2). The
3 FL had paratrabecular infiltration, rearrangement of bcl-2 and 2 had
peripheral blood involvement. The 2 PTCL showed an interstitial/diffuse
infiltration pattern, bone marrow fibrosis, mild eosinophilia, and PD-1
expression consistent with a derivation from GC-T-cells.
Conclusion: PBML is a very uncommon extra-nodal lymphoma often
associated with cytopenias, aggressive disease, poor outcome and
heterogeneous histological features, some of them revealing a putative
germinal centre origin.
BMS 16
BONE MARROW PATHOLOGY CONTRIBUTES
TO “IN SITU” UNDERSTANDING
OF CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
IMMUNOPATHOGENESIS: ANALYSIS
OF A SERIES OF 112 PATIENTS
*Maria Fameli1
, Niki Stavroyianni2
, Ioanna Athanasiadou2
, Evi
Pouliou1
, Kostas Stamatopoulos2
, Achilles Anagnostopoulos2
,
Athanasios Fassas2
, Theodora Papadaki1
1
Department of Hematopathology, Evangelismos Hospital, Athens;
2
Department of Hematology and HCT Unit G. Papanikolaou Hospital,
Thessaloniki; all Greece
We analyzed bone marrow biopsy (BMB) samples from 112 patients
with CLL and explored associations with clinical features and
outcome, CD38 expression, and IGHV mutation status. Patient group:
M:F=66:46, median age: 66 years, Binet stage-A/B/C: 88/19/5.
Peripheral blood immunophenotype: (1) CD38+: 42/112 cases (2)
IgG+: 16/103 cases. Mutated/unmutated IGHV genes (M-IGHV/A-
IGHV): 73/39 cases. Formalin-fixed, decalcified, paraffin-embedded
sections of BMBs were examined: (1) morphologically (H&E); (2)
immunohistochemically (ABC technique). The following antibodies
were used: CD20, CD79a, CD3, BCL-2, CD5, CD23, SIg/CIg (k/l/m/
d/g/a), CD27, myeloperoxidase, PGM1 (CD68), glycophorin-C,
CD61. All cases showed neoplastic small lymphocytic infiltration
(20-95% of BM cellularity) by CD20+CD79a+CD5+CD23+cells.
Medium- or large-sized cells were admixed in 6 and 2 cases,
respectively. A moderate number of monocytoid-like cells with clear
cytoplasm were identified in 4 cases. Finally, 6 cases exhibited
lymphoplasmocytoid differentiation in a small proportion of the
neoplastic population. Three patterns of neoplastic lymphocytic
infiltration were identified: (1) interstitial: 50 cases; (2) nodular/
nodular+interstitial: 35 cases; (3) diffuse: 27 cases. Moderate-to-
significant reduction of the granulocytic series was observed in 54/112
cases. The remaining cases showed hyperplastic granulocytic series
with a left shift and, occasionally, dysplastic changes of mature forms.
Hyperplasia of the erythroid and megakaryocytic series -often with
dysplastic changes- with normal/decreased hemoglobin levels and
platelet counts was observed in 64/112 and 85/112 cases, respectively;
the remaining cases showed moderate-to-significant reduction of
either series. Significant correlations were identified between: (i)
nodular infiltration and M-IGHV genes (p<0.001); (ii) diffuse
infiltration and shorter time-to-progression (p=0.05).
In conclusion, BMB examination: (1) permits identification of the
rare CLL subtype with plasmocytoid differentiation (WHO); (2)
allows evaluation the BM stroma and the hematopoietic marrow and
provides important evidence for CLL-associated hematopoietic auto-
immunity. Finally, the favorable prognosis of the nodular pattern of
infiltration in CLL may be interpreted in view of its association with
M-IGHV genes.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 169
BMS 17
MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMAS (MZL)
PRESENTING WITH ABSOLUTE MONOCLONAL
LYMPHOCYTOSIS AND/OR MONOCLONAL
GAMMOPATHY. A REPORT OF 8 CASES
George Kanellis1
, Ekaterini Stephanoudaki2
, Gariphalia Kokkini3
,
Eleni Papadaki4
, *Theodora Papadaki5
1
Cytology Department, “Evangelismos” Hospital, Athens; 2
Depart-
ment of Hematology, “Amalia Fleming” Hospital, Athens; 3
Depart-
ment of Hematology, “Sismanoglio” Hospital, Athens; 4
Department
of Hematology University of Crete School of Medicine; 5
Department
of Hematopathology “Evangelismos” Hospital, Athens; all Greece.
Introduction: Lymphocytosis and/or monoclonal gammopathy can be
the presenting findings in a number of malignant B-cell lymphopro-
liferative diseases. Furthermore, a number of different disorders with
monoclonal proliferation of plasma cells (PC) are encountered in
routine bone marrow (BM) evaluation, some of which primarily arise
from the BM. However, exclusively clonal PCs or plasmocytoid
lymphocytes admixed with a high number of clonal PCs may be seen
in the context of secondary involvement of the BM by an occult B-
cell lymphoma, thus hindering a definitive diagnosis.
The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the morphological
and immunohistochemical findings of 8 cases of occult MZL (MALT
type x6, Nodal x2) presenting with absolute lymphocytosis and/or
monoclonal gammopathy, in which the BM was the first histopath-
ologically assessed tissue.
Methods: Paraffin sections from BM biopsies (x8) as well as nodal
and extranodal tissues (stomach x4, lung x1, oral mucosa x1, lymph
nodes x2) were studied morphologically (H&E) and immunohisto-
chemically for CD20, CD79α, CD3, CD5, CD23, Cyclin D1, CD43,
MUM-1, CD138, CD55, SIg/CIg (κ,λ,γ,μ,α), CD21.
Results: Demographics, presenting symptoms and morphological and
immunohistochemical findings are summarized in Table 1.
Conclusions: Our observations,
1. support the close association between the cell of origin of MALT
or nodal MZL and their plasmacytic component in the concept of
the capacity of their normal counterparts, MZ B-cells, to
differentiate into antibody secreting plasma cells.
2. confirm recent data concerning the tendency of extranodal and or
nodal MZL with plasmacytic differentiation to be associated with
disseminated disease at initial presentation.
3. emphasize the value of BMB in the monitoring of patients
presenting with monoclonal lymphocytosis and or gammopathy.
4. suggest that pathologists should be alerted that clonal lympho-
placytic and/or pure plasmacytic BMB infiltrations could be the
first presentation of occult extranodal or nodal MZL.
BMS 18
Transformation of Marginal Zone Lymphomas
to pure plasma cell Histology following treatment
with the anti-CD20 antibody Rituximab
Kypros Dimosthenous1
, Asimina Papanikolaou2
, Ioanna Athanasiadou3
,
Ekaterini Stephanoudaki4
, Gariphalia kokkini5
, Eleni Papadaki6
,
*Theodora Papadaki2
.
1
Cytology Department Laiko Hospital, Athens; 2
Department of
Hematopathology Evangelismos Hospital, Athens; 3
Department of
Hematology and HCT unit G. Papanikolaou Hospital, Thessaloniki;
4
Department of Hematology Amalia Phleming Hospital, Athens;
5
Department of Hematology Sismanoglion Hospital, Athens;
6
Department of Hematology University of Crete, School of Medicine;
all Greece.
Background: Marginal Zone Lymphomas (MZL) [extranodal MALT-
type, nodal, splenic] putatively arise from marginal zone B-cells
which are ontogenetically related to antibody secreting plasma cells.
170 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Case Lymphocytosis Monoclonal
paraprotein
BMB Tissue
1 + - Clonal M(λ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
BALT lymphoma with PC differentiation and M(λ) clonality
2 + - Clonal G(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
Nodal MZL with PC differentiation and G(κ) clonality
3 - G(κ) Clonal G(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
MALT lymphoma of oral mucosa with PC differentiation and
G(κ) clonality
4 - M(κ) Clonal M(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
MALT lymphoma of stomach with PC differentiation and
M() clonality
5 + M(κ) Clonal M(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
Nodal MZL with PC differentiation and M(κ) clonality
6 - G(κ) Clonal G(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
MALT lymphoma of stomach with PC differentiation and
G(κ) clonality
7 + A(κ) Clonal A(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
MALT lymphoma of stomach with PC differentiation and
A(κ) clonality
8 + - Clonal M(κ) B-cell and PC
infiltration
MALT lymphoma of stomach with PC differentiation and
M(κ) clonality
Table 1
This may also interpret their variable plasmacytic differentiation. In
contrast to the almost ubiquitous CD-20 negativity of plasma cells,
MZL cells express CD20 and the anti-CD20 antibody Rituximab is
reported as an active treatment in patients with MZL.
Purpose of the study: Presentation of 6 MZL patients with plasmatic
differentiation who were treated with Rituximab and subsequently
developed a purely clonal plasmacytic infiltration of the bone marrow
(BM), clonally identical to the neoplastic lymphoplasmacytic infiltra-
tion in the initial biopsy sites (nodal/extranodal tissues as well as
BM).
Materials and Methods: 4 males and 2 females, aged 58-75 years.
Extranodal lymphoma (x3), splenic (x1), nodal (2), BM biopsy
(BMB) (x6) samples were available for diagnosis.Immunohistochem-
ical panel: CD20, CD79, CD138, SIg/Cig, CD56, CD3, CD21, CD5,
CD23, Cyclin D1, DBA44, MPO, LAT, Glycophorin C.
Results: The results are summarized in table 1
Conclusions: Our observations:
1) Confirm the close association between the cell of origin of MZL
and their plasmacytic component, in line with the normal B-cell
differentiation.
2) Demonstrate that Rituximab can profoundly alter the histologic
features of MZL with plasmacytic differentiation. The most likely
explanation for these unusual histologic changes is eradication of
the CD20-positive MZL cells with consecutive “overgrowth” of
the CD20-negative plasma cellular component of the tumor, as
evidenced by the identical clonality of pre- and post- Rituximab
analyzed tissues.
3) Suggest that careful re-assessment and biopsy of the “MZL”
persisting or relapsing in the BM or other sites outside the BM
post-Rituximab, is mandatory, in order to avoid potentially
ineffective treatment approaches, such as re-induction with
Rituximab.
BMS 19
LYMPHOCYTE SUBPOPULATIONS
AND BONE MARROW HISTOPATHOLOGY
IN RITUXIMAB-TREATED LYMPHOMA PATIENTS
WITH LATE-ONSET NEUTROPENIA (LON)
*Kostas Stamatopoulos1
, Ioanna Athanasiadou1
, Charalambos
Pontikoglou2
, Niki Stavroyianni1
, Katerina Pyrovolaki3
, George
Paterakis4
, Achilles Anagnostopoulos1
, Helen Papadaki3
, Theodora
Papadaki2
,
1
Department of Hematology and HCT Unit G. Papanikolaou Hospital,
Thessaloniki; 2
Department of Hematology, University of Crete School
of Medicine, Heraklion, Crete; 3
Department of Hematopathology,
Evangelismos Hospital, Athens; 4
Immunology Laboratory, G.
Gennimatas Hospital, Athens; all Greece
LON is a complication of Rituximab of yet unknown pathophysiol-
ogy. We investigated potential underlying mechanisms in 12 patients
with various non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) subtypes who developed
LON without identifiable causes at a median of 95 days after
completion of the intended treatment with Rituximab ± chemotherapy.
Similarly treated NHL patients who did not develop LON were used
as controls. Ten of 12 patients with LON and 33/38 controls
developed profound B-cell depletion. Inverted CD4/CD8 cell ratios
were observed in 10/12 LON cases vs. 13/38 controls (p<0.01). CD8
cells >1.0×109
/L were identified in 8/12 LON cases vs. 8/38 controls
(p<0.01). T-LGL proliferation (CD3+CD8+CD57+ cells >30%) was
observed in 7/12 LON cases vs. 14/38 controls (p=0.1885). BM
biopsy samples from 10/12 LON cases were examined at onset of
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 171
Age Sex Sample BMB before Rituximab BMB after Rituximab
1 70 M Tonsil: MALT lymphoma with PCD/CIgM (κ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgM (κ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgM (κ)
2 75 M Stomach: MALT lymphoma with PCD/CIgM (κ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgM (κ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgM (κ)
3 60 M Stomach: MALT lymphoma with PCD/ CΙgA (κ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgA (κ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgA (κ)
4 64 M Lymph node: NMZL with PCD/CIgM (λ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgM (λ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgM (λ)
5 72 F Lymph node: NMZL with PCD/CIgG (κ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgG (κ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgG (κ)
6 58 F Spleen: SMZL with PCD/ CIgΜ (κ) B-cell lymphoid infiltrate with
PCD/CIgM (κ)
Pure plasma cell infiltration CIgM (κ)
Table 1
neutropenia. Mild-to-moderate lymphocytic infiltration with predom-
inantly nodular and/or interstitial growth was observed in all cases.
Lymphoid aggregates lacked CD20+ or CD79a+ B-cells and were
composed entirely of CD3+CD45RO+CD43+ T-cells. In the control
group, BM infiltration by T cells with similar features as above was
observed in 18/27 cases. Seven of 10 LON patients showed moderate-
to-significant hypoplasia of the granulocytic series; the remaining
three exhibited hyperplasia. All ten LON patients had pronounced
shift-to-the-left, extending to maturation arrest in 6/10 cases. In
contrast, 21/27 control cases (78%) showed granulocytic hyperplasia;
the remaining cases were normal or showed granulocytic hypoplasia.
As in LON cases, control cases exhibited different degrees of shift-to-
the-left of the granulocytic series. Hyperplasia of the erythroid and
megakaryocytic series with dyserythropoiesis and dysmegakaryopoeisis,
respectively, was identified in all LON cases and most controls. In all
cases with repeat samples, MDS-like changes eventually resolved. We
conclude that T-cell mediated autoimmune myelopathy/myelodysplasia
associated with MDS-like changes of all myeloid series is critically
implicated in the pathophysiology of Rituximab-related LON, at least in a
subset of cases.
BMS 20
COMPARISON OF CD23 EXPRESSION
IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CLL)
AND MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA (MCL).
CLINICAL UTILITY OF A THRESHOLD VALUE
FOR EXPRESSION INTENSITY.
Ravi Patel2
, Joanne Luider1
, Xiu Jiang, Iwona Auer1
, Adnan
Mansoor1
.
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary
& Calgary Laboratory Services and 2,
Master in Biotechnology program
University of Calgary. Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Objective: CD19/CD5+ B-cell lymphoma represents a heterogeneous
group, however, most common differential diagnosis is CLL and
MCL. WHO criteria identify the leukemic cells in CLL to be positive
for CD19/CD5/CD23. Among MCL patients (pts) CD23 is either
absent or weakly expressed. Differential expression of CD23 in CLL
is well known and recently; some reports have indicated expression of
CD23 in MCL pts. Thus mere positive and negative expression of
CD23 fails to differentiate between CLL and MCL by flow-cytometry.
The purpose of this study is to determine a threshold value for CD23
expression using flow cytometry, a value which can be adopted in
clinical practice to differentiate between CLL and MCL.
Methods: Pts from Calgary Health Region (CHR) with confirmed
diagnosis by morphology /immunohistochemistry / FISH were
included in the analysis. Cyclin D1 and t (11; 14) FISH was used to
distinguish between MCL and CLL pts. Peripheral blood, bone
marrow, lymph node tissue etc were stained with a 5-colour panel
consisting of FMC7-FITC, CD43-PE, CD23-ECD, CD5-PC5 and
CD19-PC7. Neoplastic cells were identified using a CD5/CD19 gate;
median fluorescent intensities (MFI) as well as percentages of positive
cells (% positive) were recorded utilising FC500 flow-cytometer.
Results: A total of 154 pts (131 CLL and 23 MCL) between the ages
of 33-89 yrs (median 69yrs) were included in the analysis. The
samples comprised of peripheral blood (108; 70%), bone marrow (34,
21%), lymph node (7, 5%) and others (5, 4%). Using a MFI threshold
of 0.700 to determine positivity, CD23 expression was able to
differentiate between CLL and MCL with a sensitivity of 96.1% and
a specificity of 91.7%. The Chi-square test revealed a p value of
< 0.0001 indicating a significant association between CD23 expression
and type of disease (CLL or MCL). Similarly, a threshold of 40% to
determine positivity, revealed a sensitivity of 94.7% and a specificity of
95.7%. The Chi-square p value was <0.0001.
Conclusions: Increased CD23 expression with higher intensity is
significantly more frequent in CLL when compared to MCL. Using a
threshold of 40% positive, CD23 expression by flow-cytometry has
significant predictive value in differentiating CLL from MCL.
BMS 21
THE STROMAL COMPOSITION OF MAST CELL
AGGREGATES IN SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS
Attilio Orazi1
, Nahid Nanaji1
, Gabriela Gheorghe1
, Amy Chadburn2
,
April Chiu2
1
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN and 2
Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.
Introduction: Mastocytosis (MC) is a rare stem cell disorder
characterized by pathological accumulation of mast cells in one or
more organ systems. Mast cells are known to be the source of
fibrogenic cytokines including platelet-derived growth factor, trans-
forming growth factor-beta and basic fibroblast growth factor.
Tryptase and histamine present in mast cells are also capable of
inducing fibrosis. Although systemic MC is characterized by the
presence of fibrosis in areas of bone marrow (BM) involvement, very
little is known of the stromal composition involved in this response.
Design: We investigated the stromal cellular composition and
immunophenotypic expression in areas involved by MC in ten BM
biopsies and one spleen sample with systemic MC. The extracellular
matrix (ECM) was evaluated by immunohistochemistry for collagen
IV (CIV22), laminin (4C7), and by thrichromic and reticulin staining.
The stromal cells were examined with an antibody against low-affinity
nerve growth factor receptor (L-NGFR; ME20-4), a marker of BM
reticulum cells, periarteriolar, and pericapillary adventitial cells, and
dendritic reticulum cells. Smooth muscle actin (SMA; 1A4) was used
to identify myofibroblastic differentiation. Five normal BM biopsies
were used as controls. The results were also compared with data
previously obtained by us in other types of diseases associated with
BM fibrosis (e.g. primary myelofibrosis, metastatic malignancies,
HIV and granulomatous infections).
Results: In areas of MC involvement, all cases showed moderate to
severe reticulin fibrosis which was associated with the presence of
mature collagen as demonstrated by thrichrome stain. The fibrotic
areas were largely negative for markers of BM stroma cells including
L-NGFR and for ECM proteins (other than mature collagen) such as
collagen IV or laminin. SMA expression was identified in only three
of the cases. Additionally, areas occupied by fibrotic mast cell lesions
were largely devoid of neovascularization (microvessels) as seen by
CD34 immunostaining (performed in four cases).
Conclusion: Our immunohistochemical results are consistent with a
mature fibroblastic response most likely induced by the mast cells
perhaps in combination with other cell types (e.g. eosinophils). The
paucicity of cells expressing L-NGFR and to a lesser extent SMA and
the presence of mature collagen, as shown by thrichrome staining, is
172 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
comparable to what is seen in other pathologic conditions also
characterized by advanced BM fibrosis, such as osteosclerotic primary
myelofibrosis, well formed granulomas, and in a variety of non
hematologic metastatic malignancies.
BMS 22
THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS BETWEEN
“EARLY PHASE” OF POLYCYTHEMIA VERA
AND ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTHEMIA:
A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM.
Umberto Gianelli*, Alessia Moro, Daniela Graziani, Leonardo
Boiocchi, Alessandra Iurlo, Claudia Vener, Elisa Fermo, Paola
Bianchi, Silvano Bosari, Giorgio Lambertenghi Deliliers, Alberto
Zanella, Guido Coggi.
Pathology Unit, Hematology I – Bone Marrow Transplant Unit,
Hematology Unit II, University of Milan, DMCO - San Paolo
Hospital and Policlinico IRCCS Hospital, Mangiagalli and Regina
Elena Foundation, Milan, Italy.
Background: it has been suggested that Polycythemia Vera (PV)
could be preceded by an early “latent” phase of the disease (e-PV), in
which, by definition, the increase in the red cell mass or hemoglobin
level is lower than requested for the PV diagnosis either by the
updated diagnostic criteria of the Polycythemia Vera Study Group
(PVSG) or by the WHO classification.
Purpose of the study: to identify the diagnostic criteria useful for a
diagnosis of e-PV. We examined the clinical, morphological and
molecular features of a cohort of patients presenting at the first
observation with thrombocytosis, in the range of ET, and upper-limit
or increased hemoglobin levels, but lower than necessary for PV
diagnosis (e-PV), developing during the course of the follow-up a
well-characterized PV. We compare them with two other groups
presenting well-defined WHO criteria for the diagnosis of ET and PV.
Results: e-PV cases result more similar to PV than to ET. In fact, e-
PV patients are characterized by increase of the red cells parameters,
splenomegaly (p<0.05) and hepatomegaly (p=0.038), together with a
hypercellular bone marrow, due to increased erythropoiesis and
granulopoiesis, associated to megakaryocytic hyperplasia, with pleo-
morphic aggregates (p<0.001). The frequency of JAK2V617F
mutation
was similar in e-PV (100%) and PV patients (95%), whereas
significantly lower (54%) in ET patients (p=0.0007).
Conclusion: the results of our study suggest that the polycythemic
phase of PV can be preceded by an “early” (pre-polycythemic) phase
of the disease, frequently presenting with thrombocytosis and
mimicking ET. This condition could precede the development of PV
for several years. A diagnostic algorithm based on JAK2 mutation
screening and bone marrow examination could distinguish classical
ET from this “early” phase of PV.
BMS 23
BONE MARROW ANGIOGENESIS IN DIFFUSE
LARGE B CELL NON HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Perunicic Jovanovic M*, Mihaljevic B, Jakovic LJ, Terzic T,
Cemerikic Martinovic V, Gotic M, Boskovic D.
Institute of Hematology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia
Background: Angiogenesis plays an important role in pathophysiol-
ogy of hematological malignancies. The few studies published on
bone marrow angiogenesis in lymphoma have raised the question of
whether or not microvessel density (MVD) is associated with more
aggressive disease.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the correlation between
bone marrow (BM) angiogenesis estimated as MVD, with tumor
staging and outcome of DLBCL patients (pts).
Results: Retrospective analysis was performed on 50 DLBCL pts who
were treated with rituximab plus CHOP. Gender distribution was 30
male/20 female, mean age of 50±18.16 years (17-80). High IPI was
present in 36% of patients. Bone marrow infiltration was presented in
16 (32%) pts.
After 5 years of follow-up, 28 (56%) pts are still in CR and 22 (44%)
pts died. Univariate survival analysis showed that high IPI had
statistically significant negative influence on overall and also on event
free survival time (log rank, p<0.01).
Bone marrow vessels were visualized by immunohistochemical
staining for CD34 on slides of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
BM biopsies. MVD was calculated by the number of vessels per 400×
high-power field (HPF) in the area of the densest vascularization.
Microvessel density in the bone marrow was higher in DLBCL pts
with high IPI (≥3) compared with pts with low IPI (<3). The results
showed a statistically significant difference of MVD in the bone
marrow specimens between the pts with vs. pts without tumor
infiltration (mean 20.35 vs. 41.78 MVD/HPF).
Conclusion: Increased angiogenesis in DLBCL, combined with high
IPI, represents possible predictive factors of poor prognosis. Our
findings have potential implications for vascular targeting and therapy.
BMS 24
SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS ASSOCIATED
WITH A CLONAL PLASMA CELL DISORDER
K. Sapru1
, K. Purdy2
, A. Kew2
, *R. Juskevicius1
, R. Liwski1
Departments of Pathology1
and Medicine2
, QEII Health Sciences
Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Systemic mastocytosis (SM) is a rare neoplastic mast cell disease that
can sometimes be associated with clonal hematologic non-mast cell
lineage disorders (SM-AHNMD; WHO, 2001). Most commonly, the
clonal disorders associated with SM are myeloid neoplasms such as
acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome and chronic
myelogenous leukemia. There are very few case reports of an
association with lymphoproliferative disorders. Association with
clonal plasma cell disorders is even more unusual with only four
previously reported cases. Here, we report the case of a 64 year old
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 173
male patient who presented with a 2 year history of rash on the thighs
and trunk and no other systemic symptoms. Histologic examination of
a skin biopsy showed the rash to be consistent with urticaria
pigmentosa. The patient was referred for hematologic assessment to
rule out possible bone marrow mastocytosis. Morphologic evaluation
of a bone marrow biopsy sample revealed extensive involvement by
aggregates of neoplastic mast cells, consistent with systemic masto-
cytosis. In addition, there was the very unexpected but interesting
finding of a co-existent lambda restricted plasmacytosis (30% marrow
involvement). Further evaluation revealed a monoclonal IgG/lambda
paraprotein in the serum and possible lytic bone lesions of the
calvarium. The findings of both SM and plasma cell myeloma are
diagnostic of SM-AHNMD.
In conclusion, in addition to myeloid & lymphoid neoplasms,
systemic mastocytosis can be associated with plasma cell disorders.
The pathobiology underlying this association is unclear and needs
further study.
BMS 25
BONE MARROW MICROENVIRONMENT-
SUSTAINED LYMPHOMA PERSISTENCE
IN FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA WITH
MULTIDIRECTIONAL MULTIDIRECTIONAL
CELL MIGRATION BETWEEN LYMPH NODE
AND BONE MARROW
Martin Wartenberg1
, Christian Meyer zum Bueschenfelde2
, German
Ott3
, Andreas Rosenwald4
, Falko Fend5
, and Marcus Kremer1
Institutes of Pathology, 1
Technical University of Munich, 3
Robert-
Bosch Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, 4
University of Wuerzburg, 5
University
of Tuebingen, and 2
III Internal Dept., Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Munich, Germany
Background: In follicular lymphoma (FL), the initial t(14;18)
translocation is believed to occur in the bone marrow (BM), whereas
evolution to definite lymphoma is assumed to proceed within the
germinal centers of involved lymph nodes (LN). However, details of
tumor cell dissemination to or from the BM remain largely unknown.
Goals: We performed simultaneous mutational analysis of the IgH
heavy chain gene rearrangement of LN and BM clones. By generating
genealogical trees, we delineated the dissemination and migration of
FL cells between LN and BM, and revealed the clonal evolution of
BM involvement. Furtheron, we analyzed ongoing somatic hyper-
mutation for the presumed influence of BM microenvironment on
clonal tumor cell evolution.
Design: Sequential biopsies of three FL with simultaneous infiltration
of LN and BM were studied, by amplification of the IgH gene with
family specific primers (VHL1-6) against FR1 (in cases with fresh-
frozen LN) and primers against FR2 (in cases with formalin-fixed,
paraffin embedded, and decalcified trephines). Microdissection was
used when necessary in BM trephines. Amplification products were
cloned, transfected and sequenced. Hierachical genealogical trees
were generated by comparative analysis with the germline sequence
(NCBI Blast) and by interclonal comparison of the clonal micro-
heterogeneity. Ongoing mutations were analyzed using the modified
multinomial Chang and Casali formula.
Results: The obtained IgH rearrangements were identical in all LN
and BM clones of each case, showing the common clonal origin of
tumor clones. The sequences within each case differed from each
other by point mutations (ranging from 3-100), generating intraclonal
sequence diversity. The cases showed tumor cell clusters in the BM
derived from the most ancient common LN progenitor cell. The LN
and BM clones shared different numbers of mutations (ranging from
30–60%), with early migration from the LN to the BM, and vice
versa. About 80% of the IgH sequences from the LN and about 25%
of the BM showed ongoing somatic hypermutation with evidence for
antigen selection.
Conclusion: Our results suggest, that BM involvement in FL is
characterized by infiltration of descendants of LN clones. Vivid
exchange of different derivates of tumor cell subclones among the two
compartments were observed. All BM infiltrates showed ongoing
somatic hypermutation, indicating that the BM provides a mutagenic
microenvironment, similar to the germinal centers in LN.
BMS 26
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF BONE MARROW
BIOPSY INFILTRATION PATTERNS
IN ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T CELL LYMPHOMA
AND CLASSICAL HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA
REKHA NAIR*, SINDHU NAIR, NILEENA NAYAK , ELIZABETH
ABRAHAM
Background: This study comes from Regional Cancer Centre (RCC)
Trivandrum, South India. Around 300 cases of Non Hodgkin
Lymphomas and 100 cases of Hodgkin Lymphomas are diagnosed
and treated here every year. Peripheral T cell Lymphomas accounts for
22% of mature lymphomas here. Anaplastic large cell Lymphoma is
the commonest type of PTL (49%) and Angiommunoblastic T cell
Lymphoma is the second commonest (26%).
Purpose of Study: This study aims at comparing the infiltration
patterns of Hodgkin Lymphoma and AILT in trephine biopsy
specimens from 2006-2008. We have found more similarities than
differences in the infiltrative components of both diseases and hence
were taken up for study. Morphology, immunotyping and reticulin
staining were done on trephine biopsy specimens.
Summarised Description of Results: 20 cases each of AILT- PTL
and Hodgkin Lymphoma (already diagnosed on lymph node biopsy)
with marrow biopsy positivity were taken up for study. H & E stained
sections in both diseases showed varying degrees of focal and diffuse
patterns of infiltration by a polymorphous population of lymphoid
cells, eosinophils, histocytes and occasional mononuclear cells with
prominent nucleoli in a fibrotic background. A few of Hodgkin
lymphoma cases showed RS like cells.
Immunotyping in both diseases revealed predominant population of
CD3 positive T cells (reactive vs neoplastic),CD30 positive mononu-
clear cells and very few CD20 positive B lymphocytes.. Reticulin
staining showed grade 3 to 4 fibrosis in all cases.
Conclusion: Most cases of AILT and Hodgkin Lymphoma infiltrates
in bone marrow biopsies cannot be distinguished from each other
except in those cases with identifiable RS cells. We are concluding
that no attempt should be made to diagnose and differentiate Hodgkin
disease and AILT on trephine biopsy sections.
174 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
BMS 27
QUANTITATIVE DETECTION OF JAK2 V617F
MUTATION IN CHRONIC MYELOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS
*Riera Ludovica, Sismondi Francesca, Tondat Fabrizio, Godio Laura,
Pich Achille, Francia di Celle Paola
Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology, Center of
Experimental Medicine and Research (CeRMS) - University of
Torino; San Giovanni Battista Hospital - Torino, Italy.
Background: The 2008 WHO document for the classification of
haematological tumors includes revised diagnostic criteria for Chronic
Myeloproliferative Disorders (CMPDs). Particularly it underlines the
occurrence of JAK2 V617F point mutations, in a high percentage of
patients with polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia
(ET) or primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
Because the mutation may be present only in a small proportion of
cells and a correlation between hematological improvement and the
reduction in the proportion of the mutated allele has been suggested,
quantitative detection methods for JAK2 V617F are required.
Purpose: In this study, we have developed a real-time quantitative
allele-specific PCR assay to detect the JAK2 V617F mutation. We
have validated our approach by comparing the results with those
achieved using two previously standardized methods.
Results: JAK2 mutation testing was performed on total peripheral
blood or bone marrow samples using direct sequencing (n=1321) and
allele-specific PCR (n=1224) of exon 14 JAK2 gene. These analysis
revealed that 478 (36.2%) and 410 (33.5%) cases was mutated
respectively.
Moreover, we performed a real-time PCR approach for the quantita-
tive determination of JAK2 V617F mutated allele and detected 113
(29.5%) mutated cases. A comparison between the three methods lead
to 100% of correlation.
Inside the group of revised diagnosis of CMPD we observed the
mutation in 88% of PV, 64% of ET and 72.5% of PMF. Mutational
load was not significantly increased among cases with PV compared
with ET, while a small number of patients with PMF showed increases
mutation loads compared with ET (P=0.002).
Conclusion: We have developed and validated a quantitative real-time
PCR approach to the detection of the V617F mutation of the JAK2
gene associated with CMPDs. The development of an approach that is
able to quantities JAK2 mutation load may improve the diagnostic
definition and may have clinical relevance in the future.
BMS 28
THE SDF-1/CXCR4 AXIS in MYELOID SARCOMA
*Annette H. Schmitt-Graeff1
, Moritz Metzger1
, Hartmut Bertz2
,
Michael Luebbert2
, Jan A. Burger3
1
Institute of Pathology and 2
Dept. Hematology/Oncology, University
Medical Center Freiburg, 3
Department of Leukemia, the University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.
Background: The homing of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells to
distinct anatomic niches is mediated by the crosstalk between ligand-
receptor signalling pathways. The relevance of chemokine-controlled
recruitment of immature myeloid cells (IMC) to extramedullary sites
resulting in myeloid sarcoma (MS) is largely unknown.
Purpose: We addressed the question of whether the lodgement of
IMCs outside the bone marrow resulting in MS is mediated by the
interaction between CXCR4 chemokine receptor, expressed on IMCs,
and its ligand CXCL12 or stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1).
Methods: Clinico-pathological and survival data of 65 patients with a
diagnosis of MS were analysed. Paraffin-embedded specimens
containing representative formalin-fixed MS biopsy material were
retrieved from our files. Tissue sections were stained for a large panel
of antibodies including CD33, NPM1, CXCR4 and SDF-1. Imaging
studies by confocal laser scanning microscopy focused on the spatial
localization of stromal cells expressing SDF-1 and of CXCR4
expressing IMCs.
Results: MS developed either de novo without concomitant bone
marrow involvement, simultaneously with bone marrow infiltration as
initial manifestation of a myeloid neoplasm, or occurred subsequently
to a previously diagnosed haematological disorder. Survival analyses
showed no significant differences for the various subcategories of MS.
However, the overall survival of patients treated with allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation was significantly superior to those treated with
conventional chemotherapy (p<0.005).
In contrast to the large variety of phenotypic profiles and clinical
settings, a common feature of all samples was an increased density of
SDF-1-positive stroma in close association with CXCR4 positive
IMCs.
Conclusions: Our observations suggest that the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis is
crucial for IMC homing to extramedullary sites. The pharmacological
disruption of this axis may be a target of future therapeutic strategies in
patients with MS. Actually, long term survival of patients with MS is
only achieved by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
BMS 29
LOW REPRODUCIBILITY OF MORHOLOGICAL
FEATURES OF THE WHO CLASSIFICATION
IN EARLY PRIMARY MYELOFIBROSIS.
S.Koopmans*1
, F.Bot1
, K.Lam2
, A. van Marion1
, J.Michiels3
, H. de
Raeve3
, K.Hebeda4
University Hospital Maastricht1
, Rotterdam2
, Antwerpen3
and Nijmegen4
,
Belgium and The Netherlands
Background: The early phases of polycythaemia vera (PV), essential
thrombocytosis (ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF) are difficult to
distinguish as they share many morphological characteristics. The aim
was to asses the reproducibility of these morphological hallmarks and
to assess the ability to obtain a definitive diagnosis on selected
trephine biopsy sections alone without knowledge of the clinical data.
Methods: 44 subsequent trephines diagnosed as PMF grade 0/1 were
retrieved from the files of the university hospital Antwerp, Belgium.
They were blindly reviewed by 4 Dutch hematopathologists, using a
standardized scoring system for the diagnosis based on 18 histological
characteristics, mainly related to megakaryocyte (MK) morphology.
Consensus was defined as agreement by 3 out of 4 pathologists.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 175
Results: a large variation in degree of consensus was apparent,
varying from 95% for staghorn nuclei to as low as 42% for the
grading of fibrosis. While in 100% the consensus diagnosis was MPN,
only 74% consensus was reached for the specific diagnosis PMF,
although all cases were previously classified as PMF according to
combined clinical and morphological WHO criteria. PV was
considered by one of the reviewers in 39% and ET in 7% of the cases.
MK nuclei % cons clusters % cons MK
cytoplasmn
% cons
Staghorn 95 No 75 normal 65
Cloud like 85 Loose 79 small 92
Dysmorphic 89 Dense 88 large 78
Bare nuclei 88 dysmorphic 79
Normal
lobulation
97 Peritrabecular
fat
92 ME ratio 72
Hyperlobulation 86 Fibrosis
grading
42
Hypolobulation 82 Dilated
sinusoids
82 MPN
subtype
74
Conclusion: Although the diagnosis of myeloproliferative neoplasm
(MPN) was reproducibly made on selected trephine biopsies without
knowledge of the clinical data, the consensus for the specific
diagnosis was only 74% with a low degree of consensus for some
major morphological hallmarks that define MPN. The reproducibility
of the WHO morphological criteria appears at best fair for
classification of early MPN or MPN with overlapping diagnostic
features for the various subtypes.
BMS 30
COMPARISON OF CD23 EXPRESSION
IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CLL)
AND MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA (MCL).
CLINICAL UTILITY OF A THRESHOLD VALUE
FOR EXPRESSION INTENSITY.
Ravi Patel2
, Joanne Luider1
, Xiu Jiang, Iwona Auer1
, Meer-Taher
Shabani-Rad1
, Adnan Mansoor1
.
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Calgary & Calgary Laboratory Services and 2
MAster in Biotechnology
program University of Calgary. Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Objective: Most common differential diagnosis among CD19/CD5+
lymphoma is between CLL and MCL. WHO criteria identify the
leukemic cells in CLL to be positive for CD19/CD5/CD23. Among
MCL patients (pts) CD23 is either absent or weakly expressed. Thus
mere positive and negative expression of CD23 fails to differentiate
between CLL and MCL by flow-cytometry. The purpose of this study
is to determine a threshold value for CD23 expression using flow
cytometry, a value that can be adopted in clinical practice to
differentiate between CLL and MCL.
Methods: Peripheral blood, bone marrow, lymph node tissue etc were
stained with a 5-colour panel consisting of FMC7-FITC, CD43-PE,
CD23-ECD, CD5-PC5 and CD19-PC7. Neoplastic cells were identified
using a CD5/CD19 gate; median fluorescent intensities (MFI) as well as
percentages of positive cells (% positive) were recorded utilising FC500
flow-cytometer. Cyclin D1 and / or t (11; 14) by FISH technique,
confirmed diagnosis among MCL patients. 154 pts (131 CLL and 23
MCL) between the ages of 33-89 yrs (median 69yrs) were included.
The samples comprised of peripheral blood (108; 70%), bone marrow
(34, 21%), lymph node (7, 5%) and others (5, 4%). Using a MFI
threshold of 0.700 to determine positivity, CD23 expression was able to
differentiate between CLL and MCL (sensitivity of 96.1% & specificity
of 91.7%; p<0.0001). Similarly, a threshold of 40% to determine
positivity, revealed a sensitivity of 94.7% and a specificity of 95.7%.
The Chi-square p value was <0.0001.
Conclusions: Increased CD23 expression with higher intensity is
significantly more frequent in CLL when compared to MCL. Using a
threshold of 40% positive, CD23 expression by flow-cytometry has
significant predictive value in differentiating CLL from MCL.
BMS 31
EXPRESSION OF VEGF, MCP-1
AND OSTEOPONTIN IN MYELOMA
Sanja Štifter, Toni Valković1
, Ksenija Lučin, Irena Seili-Bekafigo1
,
Antica Načinović-Duletić1
, Blažen Marijić1
, Merica Aralica2
, Nives
Jonjić
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka,
Croatia 1
Department of Hematology, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia 2
Clinical Laboratory, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Croatia
The role of angiogenesis in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma
(MM) is well recognized, however the involvement of myeloma cells
and different microenvironment elements of bone marrow in this
process is not completely recognized.
The aim of this study was to explore the expression of three different
cytokines, acknowledged to be involved in the angiogenesis, at the
protein level in bone marrow and in plasma of MM patients. The
expression of cytokines was correlated with microvessel density
(MVD) and clinicopathological characteristics of MM patients.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed in order to identify the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), macrophage chemotactic
protein-1 (MCP-1), osteopontin (OPN), and endothelial cells (CD34),
while ELISA method was used for detection of VEGF, MCP-1 and
OPN in plasma.
The results demonstrated higher MVD values in bone marrows with
higher percentage of plasma cells infiltrates (p<0.001); in patients
with higher clinical stage (p=0.01); in no responders to therapy (p=
0.03), and in relation to shorter overall survival (p=0.04). All three
cytokines were detected at various percentage and staining intensity in
the myeloma cells, different hematopoetic and stromal cells. Some
positive staining was also observed in extracellular matrix of bone
marrow. Association of all three cytokines expressed in the myeloma
cells and in plasma of MM patients, was detected. The expression of
VEGF and OPN in tumor cells demonstrated the inverse relationship
with the MVD, while at the plasma level neither one of three analyzed
cytokines showed correlation with MVD. Nevertheless, the plasma
VEGF, MCP-1 and OPN concentrations were significantly higher in
those patients with higher percentage of tumor cells infiltrates in bone
marrow (p<0.05).
176 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Present results confirmed the prognostic significance of MVD in
MM. In addition, the association between VEGF/MCP/OPN expression
level and tumor mass highlights their possible influence on myeloma
pathogenesis, what should be further explored.
BMS 32
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS
OF YMPHOPLASMACYTIC LYMPHOMAS:
CORRELATION OF CD138, VEGF, CYCLIN D1
EXPRESSION AND MICROVASCULAR
CHARACTERISTICS WITH PATIENTS’ CLINICAL
DATA AND SURVIVAL.
Levidou G. and Tzenou T., Kyrtsonis M.C., Korkolopoulou P.,
Kavantzas N., Androulaki A., Salpeas V., Vassilakopoulos T.,
Angelopoulou M., , Panayotidis P., Pangalis G.A., Patsouris E.
First Department of Propedeutic Internal Medicine, First Department
of Internal Medicine, Department of Haematology and Department of
Pathology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Laikon
University Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Background: Lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas (LPLs) are characterized
by a clonal proliferation of neoplastic lymphocytes, lymphoplasmacytes
and few plasma cells frequently infiltrating the bone marrow (BM).
Purpose of the study: BM paraffin embedded sections of 44 patients
with newly diagnosed LPL, 32 of which fulfilled the criteria of
Waldenstroms’ Macroglobulinaemia were studied. We investigated
the levels of cyclin D1, CD138 and VEGF expression as well as the
microvascular parameters as evaluated by CD34 immunohistochemistry
and image analysis in correlation with clinical features, patients’
survival.
Results: 53% of cases displayed cyclin D1 immunoreactivity (range
1-70%, median=2%), whereas all cases displayed CD138 (range 0-
72%) and VEGF (range 0.04-72%) immunoreactivity. The percen-
tages of VEGF and CD138 positive neoplastic cells were positively
correlated with extend of BM infiltration (p<0.0001 and p=0.0734
respectively). CD138 expression increased in parallel with the levels
of serum IgM (p=0.0111) and disease severity (p=0.0263). VEGF
expression was negatively correlated with platelet count (p=0.0409),
was higher in patients with lymphadenopathy (p=0.0178) and
marginally increased in parallel with vascular area and feret diameter
(p=0.0639 in both cases). Univariate survival analysis showed that
patients with increased total vascular area (TVA) had a trend for lower
probability of survival although this relationship failed to attain
statistical significance (p=0.0898).
Conclusions: We found a correlation CD138 expression in LPLs with
the levels of serum IgM, while there seems to be associations between
VEGF and CDA138 expression in bone marrow infiltrating cells and
clinical parameters. Importantly, despite the low number of patients
enrolled TVA seems to be associated with patients’ prognosis in
LPLs. Further larger studies on this field are warranted in order to
validate our results.
Lymphoma Symposium
22 to 24 September 2008
LS 1
ASSESSMENT AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
OF PAX5 MUTATIONS IN ADULTS B-CELL ACUTE
LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
Marina Bousquet, Julien Familiades, Etienne Coyaud, Cathy Quelen,
Georges Delsol, Nicole Dastugue, Eric Delabesse, Cyril Broccardo
and Pierre Brousset
From INSERM U563 CPTP, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, Department of
Pathology, 31059 Toulouse, Cedex, France
Background: PAX5 is a transcription factor involved in B-cell
differentiation. Rare translocations implicating PAX5 have been
reported and extensively studied.
Purpose of the study: Following the description of a new t(7;9)(q11;
p13) translocation in cases of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-
ALL), we investigated a series of adult B-ALL for PAX5 abnormalities.
A previous analysis of PAX5/X chimeras based on chromatin
immunoprecipitation and gene reporter assays showed that most of
mutated proteins acted as transdominant negative on PAX5.
Results: Different novel transcriptions and PAX5 mutations were
identified. In some cases, a loss of heterozigosity was disclosed. Since
PAX5 is essential for B-cell differentiation, these translocations or
mutations may account for the blockade of the leukemic cells at the
pre B-cell stage. A screening of a large series of adult B-ALL
(obtained from the French protocol GRAAL) showed that PAX5
mutations were specifically associated with the presence of Phi1.
Conclusion: Our results point out PAX5 as a key player in the process
of B-cell leukemogenesis. All these results will be discussed in the
light recent literature in this field.
LS 2
EXPRESSION OF MDM2 ONCOPROTEIN
PREDICTS FOR POOR SURVIVAL IN DIFFUSE
LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA (DLBCL)
WITH WILD-TYPE TP53 GENE
*KH Young,1
MB Møller,2
GWB Colleoni,3
M Sánchez-Beato,4
TM
Green,2
T Thorborg,2
MA Piris,4
JC Eickhoff,1
M Twohig,1
AH
Young,1
TD Oberley,1
JS Malter,1
JA Ferry,5
WC Chan,6
DD
Weisenburger,6
and TC Greiner 6
1
Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, UW Paul P.
Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI; 2
Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark; 3
Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil; 4
Spanish
National Cancer Center, CNIO, Madrid, Spain; 5
Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MI; 6
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 177
Background: The MDM2 gene encodes for a nuclear phosphoprotein,
and its expression has been implicated in the pathogenesis of human
neoplasms via inhibition of the p53 tumor-suppressor pathway.
Purpose of the study: The purpose of this study is to investigate the
potential role of MDM2 protein by correlating the expression of
MDM2 with TP53 mutation status in DLBCL. The TP53 gene was
analyzed for mutations and immunostains for p53 and MDM2 protein
expression were performed in 133 cases from 6 medical centers. A
positive immunostain was defined as nuclear staining in 10% or more
of the tumor cells. The Kaplan-Meier method was used for survival
analysis.
Summarized description of the results: MDM2 stains were positive
in 64 of 133 cases of DLBCL (48%). While there was a suggestion of
poor overall survival (OS) with MDM2 expression, it was not
statistically significant in the entire group of DLBCL. Twelve of 24
cases (50%) with TP53 mutations had MDM2 expression. But no
significant difference in OS was observed between MDM2-positive
and MDM2-negative cases in this TP53 mutated group (p=0.32).
Similarly, 51 of 107 cases (48%) with wild-type (WT) TP53 gene had
MDM2 expression. But in this group, the MDM2-positive phenotype
predicted for poor 5-year OS (38% vs 67%, p=0.002), and a
significantly-shorter median disease-free survival (2.3 years) as
compared to those without MDM2 expression (>5.0 years; p=
0.013). The complete remission rate was only 57% in MDM2-positive
cases compared to 73% in MDM2-negative cases in the WT-TP53
group (p=0.08). Multivariate analysis confirmed that MDM2 expression
was an independent predictor of poor OS in DLBCL with a WT-TP53
gene (HR 2.0, 95% CI 1.15-3.56; p=0.015).
Conclusion: This study demonstrates the importance of MDM2
expression in predicting survival in patients with DLBCL, representing
an alternative mechanism of p53 pathway inactivation in cases with a
WT-TP53 gene.
LS 3
PERFORATION BUT NOT IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
PREDICTS POOR PROGNOSIS IN PATIENTS
WITH PRIMARY INTESTINAL DIFFUSE LARGE
B-CELL LYMPHOMA
*Shih-Sung Chuang,1
Sheau-Fang Yang,2
Wan-Ting Huang,3
Pin-Pen
Hsieh4
Department of Pathology, 1
Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan; 2
Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung; 3
Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kaohsiung; 4
Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Background: Most primary gastrointestinal lymphomas occur in the
stomach and less commonly in the intestine, with mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBL) as the most frequent histological types. There are very
limited data on the prognostic factors of primary intestinal DLBL, and
the survival impact of germinal center B-cell (GCB) vs. non-GCB
phenotype has not studied.
Purpose of the study: The purpose of this retrospective study was to
identify the prognostic factors including perforation and cell differen-
tiation antigens in primary intestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(PI-DLBL).
Methods and results: Archival tissues from 30 tumors were used for
tissue microarray construction and immunohistochemical study. The
M: F ratio was 1.7: 1 with a median age of 60 years old. Ileum and
Ileocecum were most frequently involved, with 12 (40%) cases each
in both regions. Fourteen (47%) were at stage IE disease; 15 (50%),
stage IIE. Five (17%) tumors were perforated at presentation. The
tumors expressed bcl-6 (73%), MUM1 (21, 70%), bcl-2 (67%), and
CD10 (23%). Nine (30%) were classified as GCB phenotype and 21,
non-GCB. Perforation was a poor prognostic indicator with a hazard
ratio of tumor-related death at 8.75 (P=.001). All the antigens (CD10,
bcl-2, bcl-6, MUM1, and Ki-67 labeling index) tested and GCB vs.
non-GCB phenotype did not carry any prognostic significance.
Conclusions: We found a higher rate of perforation and lower frequency
of GCB phenotype in PI-DLBL in Taiwan as compared to other
geographic areas. Furthermore, perforation is a poor indicator of survival
but not the differentiation antigens or GCB vs. non-GCB phenotypes.
LS 4
THE PHENOTYPE OF INTRAEPITHELIAL
LYMPHOCYTES IN TAIWANESE ENTEROPATHY-
ASSOCIATED T-CELL LYMPHOMA IS DISTINCT
FROM THAT OF THE WEST
*Shih-Sung Chuang1
, Yung-Liang Liao1
, Hoxiang Liu2
, Pin-Pen
Shieh3
, Wang-Tin Huang4
, Han-Ku Chen4
, Peter G. Isaacson5
1
Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan
2
Department of Histopathology, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge,
U.K.; 3
Department of Pathology, Veterans General Hospital-Kaoh-
siung, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; 4
Department of Pathology, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital – Kaohsiung Medical Center, Taiwan; 5
Depart-
ment of Pathology, University College London, London, U.K.
Background: Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) is a
rare complication of celiac disease (CD) with intraepithelial lymphocytes
(IELs) as the cellular origin of neoplastic cells.
Purpose of the study: To characterize EATL in Taiwan.
Results: We collected 19 primary intestinal T and NK/T-cell lympho-
mas in three medical centers in Taiwan including 15 peripheral T-cell
lymphomas, unspecified, and two cases each of extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma and EATL. In the two cases of EATL, there was massive
infiltration of IELs in the mucosa away from the tumor proper. The
neoplastic cells in the tumor proper expressed CD3, CD7, CD8, CD56,
and TIA-1, but not CD4, CD5, CD20, or CD30. The phenotype of the
IELs was different from that of the tumor proper: the IELs in both cases
lost CD8 and CD56, and in addition, the IELs in Case 2 lost CD2 and
granzyme B. Both tumors were negative for EBER. The tumor cells in
Case 1 were oligoclonal, and the same-sized bands were present in the
microdissected IEL part. The tumor cells in Case 2 were clonal, and the
same-sized bands were identified in the IEL part.
Conclusions: The two EATL cases were different from the Western
type B EATL in that the phenotype of the neoplastic cells in the tumor
proper and IELs was distinct, in contrast to the shared phenotype in the
Western EATL cases. Although reason for this discrepancy is unknown,
this is evidence that EATL in Taiwan, where CD has never been reported,
is not CD-related. We suspect that these two cases are mere morphologic
mimics of the rare Western type B EATL but not a complication of CD.
More cases with serum and fresh tumor tissue are needed for clarification
of the relationship between CD and EATL in Taiwan.
178 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 5
PATHOLOGICAL AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL
STUDY OF GASTROINTESTINAL LYMPHOMAS
WITH DETECTION OF CHROMOSOMAL
TRANSLOCATION T(11;18) BY FLUORESCENCE
IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION
Iman Talaat; Assistant Lecturer of Pathology, Amany Serour;
Assistant Professor of Clinical Pathology, Nagwa Mashali*; Professor
of Pathology*, Samar El Sheikh; Assistant Professor of Pathology,
Alexandria Faculty of Medicine, Egypt.
Background: Gastrointestinal lymphomas are the most common
extra-nodal lymphomas accounting for about 40% of extra-nodal
lymphomas. The stomach is the most common location, followed by
the small intestine, and rarely the colon.
MALT lymphomas are a subgroup of low-grade B-cell lymphomas
that arise from extra-nodal sites that have accumulated MALT as a
result of a chronic inflammatory disorder. Recently, the application of
techniques such as FISH has improved the characterization of MALT
lymphomas at the genetic level.
Aim: To study GIT lymphomas pathologically and to detect the
presence of translocation t(11;18)(q21;q21) in these tumors by FISH
technique.
Material: The present study was conducted on 27 specimens
diagnosed as primary GIT-NHL. These specimens were selected from
a total of 57 archived specimens with the same diagnosis.
Methods: Pathological evaluation of the specimens (gross and
microscopic description), followed by the application of FISH on
paraffin-embedded thin sections using LSI API2/MALT1 t(11;18)
(q21;q21) dual color dual fusion translocation probe.
Results: Six out of 27 studied cases (22.2%) gave positive scoring of t
(11;18)(q21;q21) by FISH. All positive cases proved to be MALT
lymphoma with no concomitant areas of diffuse large B cell
lymphoma. Five out of the six cases (83.3%) had gastric localization,
whereas only one case was located in the small intestine.
Conclusion: The present study emphasized the successful application
of FISH technique on paraffin embedded sections, thus allowing its
application on retrospective cases.
LS 6
SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN THE RELATIVE
FREQUENCY OF FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
IN TAIWAN IN THE EARLY 21ST CENTURY
*Shih-Sung Chuang, M.D.
Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan
Purpose of the study: To clarify the impression of increased
incidence of follicular lymphoma (FL) in routine diagnostic practice.
Methods: The author analyzed the lymphoma cases diagnosed from
Jan 2005 to Dec 2007 at Chi-Mei Medical Center and compared the
results with the data published in 1989-1998 from the same institution
(Cancer 2000; 89: 1586). All consultation cases to the author and a
single non-Taiwanese patient were excluded.
Results: Among the 279 in-house Taiwanese cases, 39 cases were
excluded either because they were diagnosed at other hospitals and
immediately referred for treatment (18 patients) or came for relapsed
diseases after initial diagnosis and treatment at other hospitals (21
patients). Of the 240 lymphomas, 12 (5.0%) were classical Hodgkin
lymphomas and 228 (95.0%) were non-Hodgkin’ s lymphomas
(NHL). Among NHL, the relative frequency of FL increased
significantly from 6.1% to 14.5% (p=.005) and became the second
most common subtype after diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The other
significant changes included decreased frequency of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma (from 19.7% to 7.9%; p=.0001) and
increased incidence of small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lympho-
cytic lymphoma (from 1.0% to 7.0%; p=.002).
Conclusions: The relative frequency of FL in Taiwan has been
increasing in the past years toward the higher rate as seen in the West,
maybe reflecting the changing life style and socio-economic con-
ditions of Taiwan into a developed country. Epidemiological studies
and analytical studies such as case-control/cohort studies are needed
to resolve this issue. Furthermore, molecular studies comparing recent
cases and those of one to two decades ago with probes directing at
both the MBR and mcr regions of BCL-2 translocation might help
elucidating the molecular mechanisms of FL in Taiwan.
LS 7
HIGH NUMBERS OF TUMOR INFILTRATING
PD-1-POSITIVE REGULATORY LYMPHOCYTES
ARE ASSOCIATED WITH IMPROVED OVERALL
SURVIVAL IN FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
*Joaquim Carreras1,3
, Armando Lopez-Guillermo2
, Giovanna
Roncador4
, Neus Villamor1
, Lluis Colomo1
, Antonio Martinez1
, Rifat
Hamoudi3
, Will Howat5
, Emili Montserrat2
, Elias Campo1
.
1
Hematopathology Section, Departments of Pathology, and
2
Hematology, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona,
08036-Barcelona, Spain. 3
Division of Molecular Histopathology,
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
4
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid,
Spain. 5
Histopathology/ISH facility, Cancer Research UK, Cambridge
Research Institute. Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK.
Purpose: Tumor microenvironment influences the behavior of
follicular lymphoma (FL), although the specific cell subsets involved
are not well known yet. The aim of this study was to determine the
impact of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) positive inhibitory
immunoregulatory lymphoid cells in the clinicobiological features
and outcome of patients with FL.
Patients and methods: We examined samples from 100 patients
(53M/47F; median age 54 years) at diagnosis, as well as in 32 patients
at first relapse, with a recently generated monoclonal antibody against
PD-1. The cells were quantified using computerized image analysis.
Additional analysis consisted in double immunofluorescence and flow
cytometry.
Results: PD-1 expression was alternative to FOXP3 in lymphoid cells
from both reactive tonsils and FL. At diagnosis, the median
percentage of PD-1-positive cells was 14% (range, 0.1-74). Patients
with grade 3 FL, poor performance status and high serum LDH
showed lower numbers of PD-1-positive cells. After a median follow-
up of 6.2 years, patients with PD-1-positive cells ≤5% (N=25), 6-33%
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 179
(N=50) and >33% (N=25) had a 5-year progression-free-survival of
20, 46 and 48% (p=0.038), and OS of 50, 77 and 95% (p=0.004),
respectively. PD-1 and FLIPI maintained prognostic value for OS in
multivariate analysis. Patients with PD-1-positive cells ≤5% showed a
higher risk of histological transformation. At that time, transformed
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) had lower percentage of
PD-1-positive cells than FL.
Conclusion: a high content of PD-1-positive cells predicted favourable
outcome of FL patients, while a marked reduction is observed in
transformation.
LS 8
SOMATIC HYPERMUTATION OF IgVH GENES
AND ABERRANT SOMATIC HYPERMUTATION
IN BCL-2 NEGATIVE FLs
*É. Gagyi, Zs. Balogh, Cs. Bödör, B. Timár, L. Reiniger, L. Deák, J.
Csomor, B. Csernus, Á. Szepesi and A. Matolcsy
1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research,
Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
Follicular lymphoma (FL) is characterized by the t(14;18) transloca-
tion resulting in the constitutive expression of BCL-2 protein,
however approximately 10-15% of FLs are negative for BCL-2
protein, and a small fraction of these cases does not exhibit the
translocation of the Bcl-2 gene either. It is highly debated whether FLs
without Bcl-2 gene rearrangement and expression represent a separate
lymphoma entity with distinct biological characteristics, different
from BCL-2 positive FLs. In this entity the role of somatic
hypermutation (SHM) in the diversification of immunoglobulin genes
and the malfunction of the physiological SHM, termed aberrant
somatic hypermutation (ASHM), which affects additional genes such
as Pax-5, RhoH/TTF, c-Myc, Pim1, is not explored. To further
characterize FLs without Bcl-2 gene rearrangement and expression,
we analyzed the mutational status of IgVH genes as well as certain
other genes (c-Myc, Pax-5 and RhoH) frequently involved in the
specific type of genomic instability called ASHM in 11 cases of BCL-
2 negative FLs. We also determined the activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AID) expression levels in these lymphomas. Our findings
demonstrate that FLs without Bcl-2 gene rearrangement and expression
are associated with ongoing type of somatic hypermutation (SHM) of
the IgVH genes, low activity of ASHM and elevated AID expression.
These results indicate that similar to BCL-2 positive FLs, BCL -2
negative FLs are of germinal center B-cell origin, and can be considered
as a single entity with many common molecular features.
LS 9
PERIPHERAL T-CELL LYMPHOMA (PTCL)
WITH LARGE B-CELLS (LBCS) – 30 CASES
IN SINGAPORE
*LHC Tan1
, LL Chiu2
, AKW Lee1
and ESC Koay2,3
. 1
Department of
Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore; 2
Department of
Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore and 3
Department of Pathology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.
Background: In PTCLs, functional impairment of immunosurveillance
upon neoplastic transformation of T-lymphocytes may allow secondary
proliferation of LBCs that are often EBV-driven and sometimes Reed-
Sternberg-like, creating diagnostic confusion.
Aim: To characterise 30 of such cases by immunomorphology and
molecular studies.
Results: The mean patient age was 58.9 (range 27-88) years, with a
male:female ratio of 2:1; 77% were Chinese; 87% had nodal
presentation. 57% were initially not correctly diagnosed, 23% being
labelled “atypical lymphoid hyperplasia”. 19/29 (65.5%) yielded
clonal TCR gene rearrangements. 24/28 (85.7%) were CD4+, and
15/24 (62.5%) had EBV+ LBCs.
Only 14 (47%) were angioimmunoblastic (AITL), 2 (7%) with
synchronous TCR and IgH clonality, the latter transient in 1 case
(also the one of 3 with hyperplastic germinal centres). One case each
of AITL recurred as either LBC lymphoma (LBCL) or classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL), neither with initially demonstrable IgH
clonality.
Three cases (10%) amounted to composite unspecified PTCL-cHL,
but an additional 4 (15%) were originally misinterpreted as HL,
including 1 involving marrow with a discordant nodal diagnosis of
LBCL. Two other marrow cases showed either spontaneous disap-
pearance of LBC or phenotypic change from CD20+/CD30- to
CD20-/CD30+, clinching the primary pathology as PTCL despite
lack of demonstrable TCR clonality. Another case (AITL), with TCR
monoclonality but IgH polyclonality, disclosed transient plasmacel-
lular lambda light chain restriction in marrow.
Conclusion: PTCLs with LBCs are more often of unspecified type
than AITL. The LBCs may spontaneously disappear, undergo
phenotypic modulation, or recur as LBCL or cHL. IgH clonality
may not portend recurrence as LBCL.
LS 10
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
WITH GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE DISCORDANCE
*LHC Tan1
, ST Lim2
, CTH Chuah3
, M Tao2
and ESC Koay4
.
1
Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore;
2
Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre, Singapore;
3
Department of Haematology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
and 4
Department of Pathology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.
180 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Background: Antigen receptor PCR analysis may yield a clonal
genotype of lineage discordant from that expected from histology and
immunophenotype.
Aim: To characterise 7 of such cases by immunomorphology and
molecular studies.
Results: Five B-cell lymphomas (BCLs) showed discordant TCR
clonality [a marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) each of: (1) liver (L)
with antimitochondrial antibody (AMA)+ primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC), (2) colon with associated H. pylori (Hp) gastritis, and (3)
marrow (M); (4) CLL with cutaneous vasculitis, (5) EBV+ large BCL
[LBCL] in a HIV+ patient], while (6) a marrow showed transient
lambda-restricted plasma cells (mimicking Case 3) associated with T-
cell lymphoma (TCL), and (7) a nasal-type (EBV+) NK lymphoma
presented with transient IgH monoclonality in aqueous humour. On
follow-up, Case 1 showed cutaneous anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma
of clonotype identical to that in the AMA+ PBC 9 years before, while
in Case 3, anti-CD20 treatment unmasked an underlying TCL with an
aberrant CD2/4/5+,CD3/7/8- phenotype.
Conclusion: Transient, non-neoplastic antigen receptor gene clonality
may be detected in the setting of autoimmunity, chronic (especially
EBV and Hp) infection, or immunodeficiency (HIV and TCL),
implying underlying immune dysregulation and/or superantigen effect
with resultant antigen receptor repertoire restriction. Furthermore,
concordant clonality may not be detected in MZL and HIV/EBV+
LBCL (due to IgH somatic mutations), as well as NK lymphoma
(which has germline TCR and IgH genes). However, persistent
clonotype discordance may reflect a second lymphoma, particularly
a TCL, since immunodeficiency due to neoplastic transformation of T-
cells may have drawn clinical attention in the first place.
LS 11
EXPRESSION AND ABERRATION OF P16 GENE
IN DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
Lee Ee-Soo a
, Kim Lian-Hua b
, *Peh Suat-Cheng a
a
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. b
Department of Bioscience,
Faculty of Engineering and Science, University of Tunku Abdul
Rahman, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Aberration of p16 gene may cause cell cycle disruption that allows
abnormal proliferation of cancer cells. Deletion of p16 region on
chromosome 9p21 is a potential inactivation mechanism of p16 gene.
There are some studies which revealed that gain of 9p chromosomal
arm and/or chromosomal materials of 9p21 were common in
haematologic malignancies. This study was undertaken to investigate
expression of p16 protein and abnormalities of the gene in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Immunohistochemical expression
of p16 was evaluated in 70 paraffin-embedded DLBCL tissues. Four
cases were non-reactive for p16 staining and excluded from statistical
analysis. Increased expression of p16 was detected in 43.9% (29 /66)
of all the cases successfully studied. We found that increased
expression of p16 was more common in germinal centre B-cell-like
(GC) (60%, 15/25) compared to non-GC (34.1%, 14/41) subgroups.
Therefore, there is significant association between elevation of p16
immunoreactivity and prognostic subgroups of DLBCL (P=0.04).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was employed to further
characterise status of p16 gene in 32 DLBCL cases. FISH was
successfully performed on 24 of 32 cases, 8 cases showed low-signal
intensity and/or insufficient material for comprehensive FISH studies,
thus they were excluded from the analysis. Hemizygous and/or
homozygous deletion of p16 gene were identified in 55.6% (5/9)
and 66.7% (10/15) of GC and non-GC cases, respectively, whereas
gain of 9p chromosomal arm and/or chromosomal materials of p16
gene were shown in 88.9% (8/9) and 86.7% (13/15) of GC and non-
GC cases, respectively. In conclusion, increased expression of p16 is
more frequent in GC subgroup compared to non-GC subgroup. More
FISH analysis would be performed to determine the correlation of
increased expression of p16 protein and abnormalities of the gene.
LS 12
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS CYTOTOXIC T-CELL
LYMPHOMAS: A MORPHOLOGICAL,
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC, AND MOLECULAR STUDY
OF 35 PATIENTS
Hagiwara Masahiro
Department of Dermatology, Nagoya Graduate School
Abstract: The objective of our study was to investigate the
clinicopathological features of currently ill-defined subtypes of
primary cutaneous cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), including:
Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)-positive CTCL of unspecified type
(CTCLU) (n=3), anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) (n=5),
and EBV-negative CTCLU (n=27). EBV-positive CTCLU was
characterized by aggressive behavior similar to that observed in nasal
type NK/T cell lymphoma. Cutaneous ALCL had an indolent clinical
course and patients survived through the follow-up examination.
Patients with EBV-negative CTCLU had intermediate prognoses
between those of patients with EBV-positive CTCLU and ALCL.
Notably, the rates of spontaneous regression were relatively similar in
ALCL (40%) and EBV-negative CTCLU (26%). We divided the latter
group into the following 4 subcategories: (a) epidermotropic CD8+ T-
cell lymphoma (n=5), (b) cutaneous γ/δ T-cell lymphoma (n=8), (c)
cutaneous α/β pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma (n=8), and (d)
cutaneous medium/large pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
specified (n=6). All four of these groups of lymphomas exhibited a
relatively favorable clinical course compared to previous reports.
However, epidermotropic CD8+ T-cell lymphoma appeared to be
unique with a higher ratio (80%) of spontaneous regression, a lower
ratio (40%) of subcutaneous involvement, and a more favorable
clinical course than the other three subcategories. These EBV-negative
CTCLU cases were further subdivided into three clinical subgroups,
as follows: Subgroup A (survival with partial or complete spontaneous
resolution), Subgroup B (survival without spontaneous resolution), and
Subgroup C (a fatal clinical course after diagnosis). Subgroup A was
exclusively male, highly positive for TCRβ and CD8, negative for
CD56 and TCR gene rearrangements, had few poorer clinical
parameters, and appeared to be distinct from the other Subgroups B
and C. IPI and PIT scores were useful markers for distinguishing
between Subgroups B and C without any differences in the immuno-
phenotypic findings.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 181
LS 13
BURKITT LYMPHOMA IN UGANDA
IN THE THIRD MILLENNIUM: A MORPHOLOGIC
AND MOLECULAR APPRAISAL ON TISSUE
MICRO-ARRAY.
(*)
Cristina Campidelli MD1
, Lynnette K. Tumwine MD2
, Simona
Righi BS1
, Stefano A. Pileri MD1
1
Chair of Pathology, Unit of Hematopathology, Institute of Hematol-
ogy and Clinical Oncology “L. & A. Seràgnoli”, Bologna University
School of Medicine, 40138 Bologna, Italy 2
Department of Pathology,
Makerere University Medical School, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala,
Uganda
Ninety-five endemic Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cases, collected at
Makerere University over 10 years, were studied by the tissue
micro-array (TMA) technology. The sites of disease involvement
were the abdomen (57%), lymph node (33%), and jaw (10%).
Morphologically, 43 cases exhibited overt plasmacytoid differentia-
tion as usually seen in HIV-positive patients in Western Countries. All
cases turned out to be CD10+, Bcl-6+, Bcl-2- and EBV+, with a.
proliferation index close to 100%. Interestingly, CD30 and CD138
expression was recorded in 35 and 43 instances, respectively. The
former finding largely corresponded to the plasmacytoid differentia-
tion observed at microscopic evaluation. On the contrary, the latter
was detected irrespectively of morphology. The prevalence of t(8;14)
could not be assessed due to DNA degradation. Therefore, the
determination of CD38, CD44 and TCL1 was performed as a potential
surrogate of the molecular test accordingly to Rodig et al. (Am J Surg
Pathol 2008; 32:113-22). Out of 85 evaluable cases 73 displayed an
antigen combination consistent with the presence of t(8;14). Finally,
HIV-infection was searched by PCR and probes spanning the short
gag and env regions. None of 95 cases tested showed HIV integration.
Our study displays the following novel features:
1) the jaw was much less frequently affected than expected, this
probably meaning that BL does nowadays occur in a slightly
older population than in the past;
2) plasmacytoid differentiation is also frequently observed in
Central Africa, as further supported by the CD138 staining;
3) such differentiation is not related to HIV-infection, but else seems
to reflect the multi-step lymphomagenesis typical of BL (EBV,
malaria, Arboviruses, and Euphorbia Tirucalli);
4) CD30 expression can be related to the latter process;
t(8;14) might occur not in all BL cases as recently suggested by
Leoncini et al. (International Conference on BL and related
lymphoproliferative disorders; Kampala, February 25-27, 2008).
LS 14
DETECTION OF GENOMIC IMBALANCES
IN MICRODISSECTED PRIMARY HODGKIN-
AND REED-STERNBERG CELLS
BY OLIGONUCLEOTIDE BASED ARRAY
COMPARATIVE GENOMIC HYBRIDIZATION
*Sylvia Hartmann1
, José I. Martin-Subero2
, Stefan Gesk2
, Julia
Hüsken1
, Maciej Giefing2,3
, Inga Nagel2
, Jennifer Riemke2
, Andreas
Chott4
, Wolfram Klapper5
, Marie Parrens6
, Jean-Philippe Merlio6
,
Ralf Küppers7
, Andreas Bräuninger1
, Reiner Siebert2
, Martin-Leo
Hansmann1
1
Senckenberg Institute of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Theo-
dor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany 2
Institute of Human
Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, University Hospital
Schleswig- Holstein, Campus Kiel, 24105 Kiel, Germany 3
Institute
of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 60-479 Poznan,
Poland 4
Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria 5
Department of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-
University Kiel, University Hospital Schleswig- Holstein, Campus
Kiel, 24105 Kiel, Germany 6
Department of Pathology and Tumour
Genetics, CHU Bordeaux and EA2406 University of Bordeaux 2,
Bordeaux, France 7
Institute for Cell Biology (Tumor Research),
University of Duisburg-Essen, Medical School, Essen, Germany
Due to the usually low content of Hodgkin- and Reed-Sternberg (HRS)
cells in classical Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), analysis of primary HRS cells
remains difficult. They cells have been investigated by comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) to metaphases. Since DNA from micro-
dissected HRS cells usually has to be amplified, an amplification bias may
be introduced which can be detected by array CGH. In order to avoid
DNA amplification, 10 HRS cell rich HL cases (nodular sclerosis/
lymphocyte depleted HL) were selected for this study. DNA obtained
from approximately 100,000 microdissected HRS cells per case was
analyzed on 105K CGH arrays containing 105,000 oligonucleotide
probes. Aberrations of selected genes were confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) and FICTION in the same HL cases and in a
new series of HL cases with typical HRS cell content.
Recurrent gains of regions of chromosome arms 2p and 9p as well as
losses of chromosome 13q and X, known from metaphase CGH, were
confirmed by array CGH. In addition hitherto unknown gained and
lost regions could be identified. Gained regions included several genes
constitutively expressed in HL (e.g. STAT6, NOTCH1, TRAF2,
RELA, CCND1, RELB, JUNB, NFkB2, E2F1). Gains of STAT6,
NOTCH1 and JUNB were also detected recurrently by FISH in HL
cases with low HRS cell content. The smallest deletion detected by
array CGH and confirmed by multiplex quantitative PCR measured
156 kb containing the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B.
The present study shows that array CGH of primary HRS cells without
any amplification method allows the detection of new and the delineation
of known genomic imbalances. Detection of imbalances of 156 kb size
offers a much higher resolution than obtained by metaphase CGH.
Genomic aberrations include some genes constitutively expressed in HL,
possibly due to a gene dosage effect in rare cases.
182 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 15
THE PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF THE TUMOR/
MICROENVIRONMENT SIGNATURE COMPARED
TO EARLY PET SCAN IN ADVANCED-STAGE,
ABVD-TREATED CLASSICAL HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA (CHL) PATIENTS.
1*
C Agostinelli, 2#
A. Gallamini, #
L Rigacci, °F. D’Amore, #
F Merli,
#
PL Zinzani, #
U Vitolo, #
C Patti, #
C Stelitano, #
F Di Raimondo, #
A
Levis, #
L. Trentin, #
T Chisesi °P Kamper, #
P Torchio, 1
MT Sista and
1
S. Pileri, on behalf of #
Intergruppo Italiano Linfomi and °Danish
lymphoma group.
1
Hemopathology Unit, Bologna University, Bologna, Italy. 2
Hema-
tology Department, S. Croce Hospital, Cuneo, Italy.
Gallamini et al. (JCO 2007) reported that early-interim PET-scan is
the only tool predicting treatment outcome in advanced-stage CHL
(AsHL). We evaluated the prognostic impact of a series of
immunohistochemical markers on tissue micro-arrays assembled in
Bologna from 138 of the patients enrolled in the above mentioned
study.
In particular, eight parameters were assessed according to Sanchez-
Aguilera (Blood 2006): STAT-1, PCNA, SAP, TOP2A both in
neoplastic (HRSC) and microenvironment cells (MC), RRM2,
CDC2, MAD2 in HRSC, ALDH1A1 in MC. Moreover, CD 20,
EBER, Bcl-2 and p53 were evaluated in HRSC. All patients had been
treated with standard ABVD ± Rx therapy. Interim-PET after 2 ABVD
courses was evaluated according to the criteria of the JCO study.
The mean age was 33.3 years (14-79), the stage III-IVB in 98 and IIB
in 40, and the mean follow-up 38.1 months (7.6-71.9). Histopathology
review showed: NS-I 75, NS-II 22, MC 20, DL 3, and CHL-NOS 18
cases. Interim-PET was positive in 30 patients, while treatment failure
was recorded in 32. In unvaried analysis the factors related to
treatment outcome were Bcl-2 on HRSC (cut off value 50%), STAT-1/
SAP on MC, and PET (log-rank 6.9, 7.9 and 93.9 respectively). The
combined expression of STAT-1 and SAP was scored in three levels
depending on the architectural pattern: score 0 (expression of both
with a diffuse/rosetting pattern); score 1 (discordant: combination of
diffuse/rosetting and scattered patterns); score 2: (both markers with a
scattered pattern); the 3-y PFS were 87.4%, 69.9% and 61.9%
respectively. In multivariate analysis PET, Bcl-2 and STAT-1/SAP
remained significant (HR: 24.8, 4.6, 7.5 and 5.6, respectively; p<0.01).
The proposed model is able to predict treatment response in AsCHL,
but with a lower efficacy than PET. However, unlike PET, it can be
applied upfront therapy.
LS 16
NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA (NLPHL) WITH SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO VARIANT PATTERNS AND
SUB-TYPES PROGRESSING TO AGGRESSIVE
DIFFUSE LYMPHOMAS
(*) Martine Vornanen (1), Martin-Leo Hansmann (2)
Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital,
Tampere, Finland
Department of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum, Frankfurt/Main,
Germany
Background: NLPHL is now recognized as an indolent B-cell
neoplasm belonging to the Hodgkin group. It is thought to originate
from germinal center-derived B cells. It is a rare subtype of Hodgkin
lymphoma, presenting usually as a localized disease that showed over
the years a strong tendency to recurrence and, in a small percentage of
cases, to transformation into a more aggressive type of lymphoma,
usually DLBCL or TCRBCL-like type. Due to the rarity of this entity
the histological and immunohistochemical findings encountered
during the different phases of progression and transformation are
poorly known and so is their outcome.
From the files of our institute we retrieved 41 patients with a
diagnosis of LPHL or NLPHL. 48 blocks were collected from 40
patients and histologically reclassified using a large panel of
immunohistochemical antibodies. 3 cases were excluded due to their
reclassification as cHL.
Results: In the NLPHL group we identified 4 different subgroups on
the basis of growth pattern, cell component and immunohistochemical
findings.
1- 11 cases were classified as classical NLPHL with a B-cell rich
background identical to the classical nodular or serpiginous
pattern. By IHC L&H cells did not expressed CD19 and
presented inconstant expression of EMA.
2- In 13 cases classified as intermediate group, we could notice a
preservation of nodularity, but an increase in L&H cells in
follicles. In some central part of the nodules vanishing of
background B-cells was often noticed with their replacement by
small T-cells. In those T-cell rich areas slight positivity of L&H
cells for CD19 was noticed. Also EMA was inconstantly
expressed with stronger positivity detected only in 2 cases.
3- 4 cases were classified as nodular with an excess of blasts,
often in a tumoral or neoplastic pattern, in which the
pleomorphic centroblastic -looking blasts were forming neoplastic
groups in the nodules. They showed an immunophenotypic profile
more in favour of germinal differentiation with expression of
CD10 in 2 cases. EMA was also strongly expressed by the blastic
population.
4- The last 9 cases presented with a predominantly diffuse growth
pattern in a background of T-cells consistent with TCRLCB-like
paragranuloma. In 8 cases L&H cells showed strong expression
of CD19 as well as EMA.
The subtypes of NLPHL involved in progression or transformation are
difficult to classify in any described lymphoma group and therefore
are sometimes difficult to recognize as NLPHL. Specially the two last
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 183
groups seemed to represent an aggressive form of the disease and
some were associated with recurrent or clinically aggressively
behaving disease.
LS 17
ROLE OF CHROMATIN REMODELLING
MEDIATED BY THE HIV-1 TAT PROTEIN
IN THE GENESIS OF HIV-ASSOCIATED
MALIGNANCIES
Giulia De Falco*, Giovanna Cerino, Anna Luzzi, Alessandra
Pasquarella, Federica Morettini, Francesco Imperatore, Piero Tosi
and Lorenzo Leoncini
Dpt. Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Italy
The incidence of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) is greatly
increased in HIV-infected individuals. Although the molecular
mechanism underlying HIV-mediated transformation is not clearly
understood, the Tat protein of HIV is a likely candidate to contribute
to tumour pathogenesis in HIV-infected patients. Extensive evidence
indicates that Tat is a cofactor in the development of AIDS-related
neoplasms and the protein has also been found to have an oncogenic
role in vitro and in vivo. The molecular mechanism underlying Tat’s
pleotropic activity may include the generation of functional hetero-
dimers of Tat with cell cycle proteins, but this may not be sufficient
for neoplastic transformation in vivo.
Another mechanism of Tat-mediated transformation is by hyper-
activation of transcription due to chromatin remodelling complexes.
Recent findings indicate a complex interplay between viral proteins
and host transcription regulatory machineries. The chromatin structure
presents a significant barrier to transcription. These modifications and
alterations of chromatin structure increase DNA accessibility to
transcription factors and activators, thus promoting transcription
initiation and efficient elongation. Many reports in the last several
years have linked Tat transactivation to chromatin remodelling in vitro
and in vivo.
We aimed to investigate whether Tat-mediated chromatin remodelling
may have a role in HIV-associated transformation. Our results show
that Tat is able to modulate the expression of some chromatin
remodellers. In particular, cell lines transfected with Tat show an up-
regulation of p300, which is responsible for histone acetylation, and a
dramatic down-regulation of DNMT1, which regulates DNA hyper-
methylation. Such a condition may result in a constitutively open
conformation of the chromatin, which may eventually contribute to
malignant transformation. We investigated the molecular mechanism
underlying this event and demonstrated that it may rely on the Tat-
mediated modulation of specific microRNAs, which have these genes
as targets. Interestingly, these findings were further confirmed in
primary tumors of AIDS-related lymphomas.
LS 18
HYPERMUTATION OF IMMUNOGLOBULIN
GENES AND A LOW GENOMIC INSTABILITY
DEFINE A NEW SUBTYPE OF MANTLE CELL
LYMPHOMA WITH VERY INDOLENT OUTCOME
*Fernàndez V, Salamero O, Jares P, Espinet B, Solé F, Agostinelli C,
Koerbel L, Rozman M, Beà S, Aymerich M, Colomer D, Villamor N,
Lloveras N, Fernández C, Bosch F, Swerdlow S, Pileri S, Montserrat
E, Rosenwald A, Serrano S, Campo E
Hospital Clinic and Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain; University of
Würzburg, Germany; University of Bologna, Italy, University of
Pittsburg, PA, USA
Purpose: MCL has usually an aggressive clinical behavior and poor
response to therapy. However, a small group of patients may have a
long survival and may not require chemotherapy treatment for a long
period of time. The criteria to identify these patients are not defined.
The goal of this study was to identify clinical and molecular features
of MCL patients with a very indolent clinical outcome.
Patients and methods: We studied 12 patients with a very indolent
MCL (iMCL) that were not treated (7) or had only splenectomy (5)
and were followed for more than 2 years (median 60 months, 25-108)
without the need of additional therapy. These cases were compared
with 15 conventional MCL (cMCL) diagnosed during the same period
of time. All cases had the t(11;14)(q13;q32) and cyclin D1 over-
expression. The mutational status of the immunoglobulin genes
(IgVH) was examined in 8 iMCL and 15 cMCL. The genomic profile
of 7 iMCL and 15 cMCL was examined with 100 K SNP arrays using
DNA extracted from purified (>98%) peripheral blood tumor cells.
Results: iMCL patients had leukemic presentation (11/12), spleno-
megaly (6/12) and no (10/12) or very small isolated (2/12) detectable
lymph nodes whereas these features in cMCL were present in 13/15,
6/15 respectively, and significant lymphadenopaty in all patients, with
only one patient with localized disease (stage IIA). All iMCL had
hypermutated (>5%) IgVH genes. Seven (45%) cMCL had IgVH
mutations (>2%) but only three (20%) had a high rate of mutations
(>5%). The iMCL had no (5/7) or only one (2/7) genomic imbalances
(3p26-p25 loss, an uncommon finding in cMCL; 17pter-p12 loss not
associated with p53 mutations). On the contrary, 13/15 (87%) cMCL
had ≥2 chromosomal alterations. 3/7 iMCL and 7/15 cMCL had
partial Uniparental Disomies (pUPD) that were also present in the
germ-line of the patients except two recurrent somatic pUPDs (17pter-
p12, 20q) identified only in cMCL.
Conclusion: Non-Nodal MCL with high rate of IgVH gene hyper-
mutations and lack of genomic complexity identify a subset of MCL
patients with an indolent clinical course that may not need
chemotherapy for a long period of time.
184 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 19
microRNAs EXPRESSION AND CHROMOSOMAL
ALTERATIONS IN MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMAS
Alba Navarro1
, Silvia Beà1
, Verónica Fernández1
, Miriam Prieto1
,
Itziar Salaverria1
, Anna Mozos1
, Armando López-Guillermo2
, Neus
Villamor2
, Dolors Colomer2
, Xavier Puig3
, Andreas Rosenwald4
,
Elías Campo1
, *
Luis Hernández1
Departments of 1
Pathology and 2
Hematology, Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 3
Department of Statistics,
Technical University of Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain. 4
Institute of
Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany.
Background: Mantle cell lymphomas (MCL) usually showed a high
number of recurrent chromosomal aberrations, potentially affecting
regulatory RNAs known as microRNAs (miRs) and eventually leading
to their abnormal expression with potentially relevant pathogenetic
implications.
Purpose of the study: To determine the expression profile of a panel
of 85 miR encoded by chromosomal region commonly altered in MCL
and its potential relationship with clinical and biological character-
istics of the tumors. miR expression was assessed by looped-qPCR in
CD5+ and CD5- B-cells purifed form reactive tonsils, a panel of
8 MCL cell lines, 16 samples of purified tumor cells from peripheral
blood of MCL at diagnosis, and 12 samples of primary nodal tumors
tissue. Genomic alterations were examined by SNP-arrays. Two
paired samples of purified tumor cells from peripheral blood and
lymph node were also examined.
Results: The miR examined showed a different expression profile in
MCL and both CD5 positive and negative B-cells. The expression
levels of most miR were not related to the copy number changes of
the respective chromosomal loci or the t(11,14) translocation.
However, the expression of the oncogenic miR17-92 cluster in
13q31 was significantly related to the gain/amplification of this
chromosomal region. High expression of these miRs was frequently
associated with high MYC mRNA levels in patients with a more
aggressive behavior. Finally, we have found different miR expression
profiles according to microenvironment or Ig mutational status of
MCL tumor cells.
Conclusion: miR17-92 cluster seems the target of the 13q31 gain/
amplifications in MCL. The miR expression profile in MCL differs
from both CD5+ and − non-neoplastic B cells and it is not related to
the genomic changes of the respective chromosomal loci. The
differential expression in purified cells from peripheral blood and
tissue samples suggest a potential influence of the microenvirontment
in the modulation of miR in MCL.
LS 20
PREFERENTIAL IMMUNOGLOBULIN VARIABLE
HEAVY CHAIN USAGE AND STEREOTYPED
PATTERNS OF SOMATIC HYPERMUTATION
IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC
LEUKEMIA AND MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
Paul Rombout1
,Margit Schraders1
, Anne Jansen1
,Martijn de
Prenter1
, Reinier Raymakers2
, MD, PhD, Konnie Hebeda1
MD,
PhD, Johan van Krieken1
MD, PhD and Patricia JTA Groenen1
PhD*
Dept. of Pathology1
, dept of Hematology2
, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Background: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), biased usage
of the immunoglobulin variable heavy (IGHV) chain and stereotyped
patterns of somatic hypermutation (SH) occur, particularly in IGHV3-
21 and IGHV4-34 subsets. Both features provide evidence for antigen
selection in CLL pathogenesis. In mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), there
is preferential usage of IGHV3-21 and IGHV4-34, however there is
no evidence for a prognostic role of IGH SH, nor for antigen
selection.
Aim of study: To investigate the possibility of antigen-driven
pathogenesis in Dutch CLL and MCL patients by determination of
the CDR3 region, the VH-family and light chain usage.
Results: We determined the IGH VDJ rearrangement from blood (n=
61) or lymph nodes (n=41) of CLL patients, from lymph nodes (n=
27) of MCL patients, and the light chain rearrangements of IGHV 1-
69 and 3-21 –cases.
In CLL there is specific usage of IGHV 1-69 (17,6%), IGHV 3-21
(5,8%) and IGHV 4-34 (5,8%). In the IGHV 1-69 subgroup, there is
preferential usage of D and J gene segments. Half of the IGHV 1-69
subgroup display homology in the CDR3 region. There is however no
preferential usage nor homology in the CDR3 region of the light chain
rearrangements of IGHV 1-69 or IGHV 3-21 cases.
Usage of IGHV 1-69 does not occur in MCL. The IGHV 3-21 MCL
cases (28%) display homology in the CDR3 region but the Lambda V
gene usage is not uniform. Stereotyped patterns of SH are found in 2/6
IGHV 3-21 and 1/6 IGHV 4-34 CLL cases and interestingly also in
2/5 IGHV 4-34 MCL cases.
In conclusion: Biased V-segment usage and stereotyped patterns of
SH do occur in Dutch CLL and MCL patients. The findings in MCL
address the question whether there is involvement of antigen selection
in MCL pathogenesis, as is suggested in CLL pathogenesis.
LS 21
PITTFALLS IN TCR CLONALITY TESTING
Patricia JTA Groenen, PhD1
, Anton W Langerak, PhD2
, Jacques JM
van Dongen, MD, PhD2
and Johan HJM van Krieken, MD, PhD1
,
1
Dept. of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, Netherlands 2
Dept. of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Univer-
sity Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 185
Background: T-cell clonality testing in lymphoproliferations has
technically become relatively easy to perform in routine laboratories
using standardized multiplex PCR protocols for T-cell receptor (TCR)
gene analysis. Expertise with clonality diagnostics and knowledge
about the biology of the TCR recombination are essential for correct
interpretation of the TCR clonality data.
Description of results: To ascertain high quality and reproducible
clonality assessment and to avoid misinterpretation of the data, DNA-
quality control, controlled DNA-input and tissue reproducibility, are
essential quality parameters to evaluate in the routine diagnostic
setting. Measuring peak intensities or area under the peak is not the
way to interpret clonality results. A quantitative approach will lead to
missed clonal processes and also to wrongly called clonal cases. In
this respect, it is better to use the histopathological information on the
presence of lymphocytes and suspicious malignant lymphocytes, and
to use the knowledge of the PCR target and the multiple target
approach, to reach a correct interpretation of the clonality results.
Clonality interpretation should also be performed the context of
immunobiology. A pitfall concerns detection of oligoclonality of even
(low level) monoclonality of T-lymphoctyes under certain immuno-
biologic conditions.
In conclusion: Several technical and immunobiological pitfalls
should be taken into account to avoid misinterpretation of data. For
appropriate interpretation of TCR clonality, it is necessary to integrate
the molecular data with that from the pathology, and preferably also
flowcytometric immunophenotyping. Such an interactive, multidisci-
plinary diagnostic model guarantees integration of all available data to
reach the most reliable diagnosis.
LS 22
IDENTIFICATION OF THE CORE
PHOSPHOPROTEOME OF MANTLE CELL
LYMPHOMA CELL LINES
Daniela Cecconi1
, Elena Bianchi1
, Alice Parisi2
, Stefano Barbi2
,
Alberto Milli1
, Sara Rinalducci3
, A. Rosenwald4
, Elena Hartmann4
,
Lello Zolla3
, Marco Chilosi2
, and Alberto Zamò2
*
1
University of Verona, Dipartimento Scientifico e Tecnologico,
Laboratorio di Proteomica, Verona, Italy
2
University of Verona, Dipartimento di Patologia, Sezione di
Anatomia Patologica, Verona, Italy
3
University of Tuscia, Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Viterbo,
Italy
4
University of Wuerzburg, Department of Pathology, Wuerzburg,
Germany
Background: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable hemato-
logic malignancy whose pathogenesis is only partly understood. Few
studies have attempted the proteomic approach to decipher its
pathogenesis.
Purpose of the study: The aim of our study was the definition of a
“core phosphoproteome”, shared among all MCL cell lines, that
should be representative of real MCL samples. These data might
improve the understanding of the signal transduction pathways
involved in MCL tumorigenesis and suggest new potential therapeutic
targets. We have sorted the phosphorylated proteins of several MCL cell
lines by means of immobilized metal affinity chromatography and
separated them by 2D-PAGE, followed by RP-HPLC coupled with MS/
MS identification. These findings were then correlated with information
regarding copy number gains obtained by snp-chip analysis.
Results: Several of the identified proteins could be linked to a specific
signal transduction pathway. Some of these (like NF-kB and PI3K-
mTOR) were recently recognized as important players in MCL
pathogenesis, but a our data provide an independent proof, and
suggest a number of involved molecules not previously demonstrated.
Other pathways, like mitochondrial signalling, constitute a rather new
finding in MCL pathobiology. A second-level analysis identified
MAPK1, CK2, CK1, PKCzeta and PKCepsilon as candidate upstream
actors. The correlation with snp-chip analysis found a good
correlation with some interesting molecules, including ST13 and
FKBP4.
Conclusion: Our study provides new insights in MCL pathogenesis
and may suggest new potential therapeutic targets.
LS 23
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL HETEROGENEITY
IN PLASMABLASTIC LYMPHOMA
*Tomomi Billings, M.D., Jane Tongson-Ignacio, M.D., Xiaohui Zhao
M.D., Ph.D. Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of California Irvine School of Medicine, Irvine, California,
U.S.A.
Background: Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is classified as a rare
variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) under the WHO
classification. Although PBL shares similar morphologic features with
DLBCL, it appears to differ in other clinicopathological aspects.
Purpose: To demonstrate the diverse clinical and histopathological
features of PBL.
Results: Eight cases of PBL were evaluated. Of eight cases (2
female:6 male, 30-72 years of age), five were HIV-positive, one HIV-
negative, and two with an unknown HIV status. One had an isolated
nodal location and seven had an extranodal location (3-nasopharynx,
2-colorectum, 1-anorectum and 1-ovary) with an involvement of
ascitic fluid and/or bone marrow in some cases. All tumors showed
diffuse large round cell/blastic morphology, three of which showed
additional plasmacytic cytomorphology. The tumor cells were
negative for CD20 (8/8) and PAX5 (4/4) by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) with an immunophenotype indicative of plasma cell differen-
tiation (MUM1/CD38/CD138-positive) and light chain restriction by
IHC and/or in-situ hybridization (ISH) (4 kappa and 3 lambda). They
were variably positive for CD45 (4/8), CD79a (2/5), CD30 (1/7) and
EMA (4/7). EBER was positive in six (5 HIV-positive and 1 HIV-
negative) out of eight cases, while HHV8 (IHC) was positive in only
one case (HIV-positive) which also showed EBER positivity. On
follow-up, three patients (2 HIV-positive and 1 with an unknown
status) died of multiorgan involvement within 6 months after the
initial diagnosis, two HIV-positive patients were alive at 6- and
15-months, and the remaining three patients were lost to follow-up.
Conclusion: PBLs are poorly differentiated plasmacytic neoplasms
with diffuse large cell/blastic morphology, plasmacytic immunopheno-
type, and lymphoma-like behavior. However, PBLs are heterogeneous
entities exhibiting variable characteristics in tumor location, association
with EBV and HHV8, and clinical course. They commonly, but not
exclusively, occur in HIV-positive patients. Recognition of this rare
entity is essential for proper management.
186 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 24
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC VARIATIONS OF BURKITT
LYMPHOMA
*Katalin Kelemen, Rita Braziel, Ken M. Gatter, James Z. Huang,
Guang Fan
Department of Pathology, Oregon Health Science University, Portland,
OR, USA
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) exhibits a characteristic germinal center B-cell
immunophenotype that is positive for pan-B-cell markers, CD10 and
expresses clonal surface immunoglobulin (sIg) light chains. The
frequency of atypical immunophenotype in Burkitt lymphoma detected
by flow ctytometry (FC) has not been established. The aim of this study
is to analyze the frequency and spectrum of aberrant immunopheno-
types in Burkitt lymphoma.
33 cases of BL were studied. The diagnosis of BL was established
based on morphology, immunophenotype and cytogenetic findings
detected by FISH and/or conventional karyotyping. 51 FC analyses
were performed on the 33 BLs and all results were reviewed.
Of 33 BLs, 4 exhibited aberrant FC immunophenotype (12.1%). All
four cases with aberrant immunophenotypes had cytogenetic confir-
mation of the diagnosis. In two of the four patients, lack of sIg light
chain expression was the only observed aberrancy; both of these
patients expressed clonal cytoplasmic Ig light chains. Two cases
exhibited complex phenotypic aberrancies. One of these lacked both
surface and cytoplasmic Ig light chains and was negative for CD19
and CD22, expressed CD10, dim CD20, dim CD45, and CD79a in
addition to CD4, CD38 and CD71. Another case expressed clonal sIg
light chains and expressed CD79 but lacked CD10 and CD20. The
phenotypic aberrancies were reproduced by immunhistochemistry in
both cases. Aberrant immunophenotypes were observed in both
pediatric and adult BL cases, and in one patient, the BL represented
a post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder.
Aberrant FC immunophenotypes are detected in 12% of BL cases,
including markedly deviant phenotypes from the classic phenotype.
Recognizing the variability of immunophenotype and correlation with
morphologic and cytogenetic findings is essential for establishing an
accurate diagnosis of BL.
LS 25
UPREGULATION OF SERINE PROTEASE GENE TMPRSS2
IN HODGKIN LYMPHOMA CELL LINES.
Faisal Fadlelmola, Minglong Zhou and *Diponkar Banerjee.
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Centre for Translational and
Applied Genomics
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver, BC,
V5Z 4E6, Canada.
Background: The human genome contains 612 genes encoding
proteases or protease-like molecules, 389 non-protease homologs, 115
protease inhibitor genes, and 180 non-peptidase homologs, now
termed the “degradome”, comprising over 2% of the human genome.
Human proteases belong to five different catalytic classes (Aspartic,
cysteine, and threonine proteases, metalloproteases and serine
proteases). Metalloproteases and serine proteases are the most
common (187 and 175 genes respectively). There are over 90 protease
genes that through evolution have lost essential residues necessary for
proteolytic activity and are classified as non- protease homologs.
These inactive proteases, however, can regulate the activation of other
proteases or compete with their substrates or inhibitors.
Purpose of the study: To examine whether or not protease genes are
altered in Hodgkin Lymphoma. Five HL cell lines were surveyed for
the expression of protease genes in comparison to benign germinal
centre B cells. For genes shown to be altered, confirmatory
quantitative PCR (q-PCR), Western blots and immunofluorescence
assays were performed.
Results: TMPRSS2 was upregulated in 2 HL cell lines. Western blots
probed with anti-TMPRRS2 protein showed the presence of 2 bands
in HL cell lines, with molecular sizes of 32 kDa and 50 kDa, the
32 kDa band representing the extracellular domain of TMPRSS2
protein. Immunofluorescence labelling with anti-TMPRSS2 protein
showed strong membrane staining. Q-PCR showed 37,000 fold
relative expression of TMPRSS2 in L428 cells in comparison to
diffuse large B cell lymphoma derived B cells, house-keeping genes,
or control universal human reference RNA.
Conclusions: TMPRSS2, a type II transmembrane serine protease, is
upregulated in some but not all HL cell lines tested and the protein is
expressed on the cell membrane. The functional significance of these
findings and the presence of TMPRRS2 protein in clinical samples of
HL are being investigated.
LS 26
SOX11 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IS CONSISTENTLY
EXPRESSED IN PRECURSOR CELL LYMPHOBLASTIC
NEOPLASIA
*Michael Dictor, Department of Pathology, Lund University Hospital
Sara Ek and Carl Borrebaeck, Department of Immunotechnology,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Sox transcriptional proteins regulate fundamental developmental
processes such as embryonic stem cell differentiation, neurogenesis
and chondrogenesis. Recently, we confirmed the nearly consistent
nuclear expression of Sox11 in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) but not
in its common simulators. We have now studied additional categories
of lymphoma to gain a possible clue as to the biology of Sox11 in
lymphoid cells and determine its usefulness in diagnosis.
Lymphoma/leukemias of type marginal zone (2 splenic,1 nodal and
two extranodal MZL), Burkitt (8 BL), T and B-lymphoblastic (10 T-
LL and 12 B-ALL/LL), hairy cell (12 HCL), mature T-cell (3 Alk-1+
ALCL, 1 AIL and 6 peripheral TCL-US), NK/T-cell (4) and Hodgkin
(5 classic and 1 HL-LP) were included, in addition to 9 cases of
myeloma/plasmacytoma. HIER-treated sections were immunostained
with a rabbit polyclonal anti-human Sox11 antibody followed by
Envision (Dako)/ DAB.
Sox11 nuclear signal was present consistently in precursor cell T-LL and
B-ALL/LL (each included 2 TdT-
cases), in 4 of 8 BL and 2 of 12 HCL
but absent in myeloma, HL and other mature B and T-cell neoplasms.
As in MCL, most cases of T-LL expressed Sox11 only in the nucleus,
whereas B-ALL/LL and BL stained in both nucleus and cytoplasm.
Myeloma and MZL showed prominent granular staining confined to the
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 187
cytoplasm, similar to that noted previously in chronic lymphatic
leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma and follicular lymphoma.
The occurrence of weak cytoplasmic signal in benign germinal center
cells, frequent strong cytoplasmic signal in B-cell neoplasms and both
nuclear and cytoplasmic Sox11 protein in B-ALL/LL, BL and some
MCL suggests that Sox11 frequently accumulates in the perinuclear
cytoplasm in benign and malignant B-cells and is shuttled into the
nucleus in a narrow subset of lymphoid neoplasia.
Nuclear Sox11 is a highly sensitive marker for precursor cell T and
B- ALL/LL, in addition to MCL.
LS 27
THE LYN KINASE AND THE Cbp/PAG ADAPTOR
SELECTIVELY ASSOCIATE IN THE PLASMA MEMBRANE
RAFTS OF HUMAN NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMAS
AND PROMOTE SURVIVAL.
B. Borisch*, S. Tauzin, H. Ding and D.C. Hoessli
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Centre Medical Universi-
taire, Geneva, Switzerland.
Human cell lines from follicular, mantle-cell, diffuse large B-cell and
Burkitt-derived lymphomas associate the non-receptor Lyn kinase and
the Cbp/PAG adaptor, a widely distributed lymphoid signaling
molecule, in form of a signalosome in sphingolipid-rich plasma
membrane rafts. This Lyn/Cbp/PAG signalosome also comprises the
phosphatidylinositol-3’ kinase and phosphorylated STAT3 that both
connect the signalosome with pro-survival pathways. Upon inhibition
of Lyn with specific Gleevec-related small molecules, all cell lines
except Burkitt-derived ones undergo apoptosis, suggesting that acute
blockade of prosurvival pathways reveals the activity of intrinsic
apoptotic pathways in those cells (oncogenic shock). Inhibition of Lyn
decreases Cbp/PAG tyrosine phosphorylation and partially dissociates
the signalosome from rafts. Decreasing expression of Lyn or Cbp/
PAG with siRNAs induces similar apoptotic responses, suggesting
that the Lyn-Cbp/PAG signalosome constitutes an oncogenic compo-
nent in B-NHLs. The Lyn and Cbp/PAG signaling proteins are also
expressed in Hodgkin and ALK+ lymphoma lines, but do not
assemble in oncogenic signalosomes, and the cells do not undergo
apoptosis upon Lyn inhibition.
The Cbp/PAG adaptor is considered to maintain Lyn in a constitu-
tively activated state which cannot be altered by the cytoplasmic Csk
kinase, the negative regulator of Lyn. This modality of Lyn regulation
appears to be unique to B-NHLs and stands in contrast to what has
been described in human T lymphocytes and mast cells, where Csk
binds to the transmembrane Cbp/PAG and negatively regulates Lyn.
The Csk kinase shows negligible modular interaction with the
optimally tyrosine phosphorylated Cbp/PAG of B-NHLs, and is not
part of the signalosome.
Our results disclosed a unique kind of proximal, constitutive signaling
in B-NHLs and suggest that therapeutic approaches focusing on the
plasma membrane are likely to alter the Lyn-Cbp/PAG signalosome
and facilitate destruction of lymphoma cells “addicted” to the Lyn
kinase.
LS 28
EXPRESSION OF MUM-1, OCT-2 AND BCL-6 IN SYSTEMIC
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
E. Arzu Saglam*, Aysegul Uner
Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Ankara, Turkey
Recently, there has been an expansion in the array of transcription
factors available in diagnostic hematopathology. Several transcription
factors predominantly used for B cell lineage identification and
classification are also expressed in a small percentage of T cells within
germinal centers (GCs) and interfollicular areas. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of Mum-1, Oct-
2 and Bcl-6 in systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL). 30
cases of ALCL were retrieved from our archives and tissue microarray
constructed. Immunohistochemistry was carried out using an avidin-
biotin peroxidase complex method.
Twenty five of the cases were of the T cell phenotype, 5 of null cell
type. There were 15 ALK positive and 15 ALK negative cases. CD30
positivity was present in all cases. A predominance of nuclear staining
was observed for all transcription factors. Mum-1 was positive in all
but one case (96.7%). Half of the cases displayed Oct-2 expression
(15/30 cases). Diffuse nuclear staining with moderate to strong
intensity was observed in all positive cases with Mum-1 and Oct-2.
A considerable number of cases also had Bcl-6 expression (9/30). Bcl-
6 however mainly demonstrated focal and weak nuclear staining.
Our findings emphasize that these markers are not restricted to B cell
lineage and that extensive expression can be observed in anaplastic
large cell lymphomas of T/null cell phenotype. The significance of
this observation requires further evaluation.
LS 29
HIGLY AGGRESSIVE ALK-1 (+) ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL
LYMPHOMAWITH MULTI-ORGAN INVOLVEMENT**
*BAHAR KILICARSLAN AKKAYA(1), GULSUN TEZCAN(2),
GUL ALKAN(1), VOLKAN HAZAR(2)
AKDENIZ UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE PATHOLOGY
(1) AND PEDIATRIC HEMATOLOGY-ONCOLOGY(2) DEPART-
MENTS, ANTALYA-TURKEY
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a rare tumor comprising
10-15 of childhood lymphomas. Primary and secondary involvement
of nervous system is extremely rare in ALCL.
An 11-year-old child presented with fever and backache lasting for
more than 20 days. In physical examination, the only pathological
findings were microlymphadenopathies in cervical region and
palpable liver below the costal margin. Chest X-ray showed bilateral
pleural effusion. Because of unresponsiveness to empirical antibiotic
treatment, she was planned to be evaluated in regard of malignancy.
Bone marrow aspiration was dry tap. Thorax CT showed anterior
mediastinal lymphadenopathies and also involvement of right lung.
Abdominal CT demonstrated milimetric hypodens lesions in liver.
Spinal MRI showed posterior epidural mass in T8, T9, T10 regions.
Also diffuse skeletal infiltrations in cervical, thoracal and lumbosacral
188 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
regions consistent with infiltrative disease. Cranial MRI revealed
diffuse dural enhancement in favor of malignancy. Biopsy showed
proliferation of single and poorly cohesive groups of cells with large
pleomorphic nuclei, containing prominent nucleoli, and moderate
amount of cytoplasm on rich histiocytic backround on epidural mass.
In differantial diagnosis histiocytosis and lymphoma were considered.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed CD30, CD43, EMA and
ALK-1 positivity that is typical of ALCL, a rare form of T-cell
lymphoma. She was accepted as stage IV due to CNS and bone
marrow involvement. Chemotherapy according to NHL-BFM chemo-
therapy protocol was started. After two blocks of therapy, pulmonary
and hepatic lesions disappeared. Although clinical improvement was
obvious, cranial and spinal lesions existed. The chemotherapy has
been still continued and after the end of 6th therapy element, she is
planned to be evaluated with PET scan.
Conclusion: Involvement nervous system of ALCL is very rare. Early
recognition of ALCL by biopsy is important to order therapeutic
approach and to prevent deteriorating clinical course.
**We would like to thank with a Group of Consultation for
Lymphoma in Ankara, for providing us with support of diagnosis.
LS 30
METHYLATION OF P16INK4A
AND MAD2 IN GASTRIC
MARGINAL ZONE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS.
Sanghui Park*, Kyoung-Mee Kim, Young-Hyeh Ko
Department of Pathology, Gachon University of Medicine and
Science, Gil Medical Center, Incheon, and Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
Background: The products of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor
p16INK4A
and mitotic checkpoint gene Mad2 are key regulator
proteins at the G1 restriction point and mitotic checkpoint of the cell
cycle.
Materials and Methods: To investigates the role of promoter
methylation of p16INK4A
and Mad2 in gastric marginal zone B cell
lymphoma (MZBCL), gastric biopsies from 40 patients were analyzed
by methylation-specific PCR and the methylation status was com-
pared with the results of BCL10 expression and t(11;18)(q21;q21)
translocation.
Results: p16INK4A
was methylated in 29 of 38 MZBCLs (76.3%). The
lymphomas with p16INK4A
methylation tended to respond well to
Helicobacter pylori eradication (p=0.078) and were negative for t
(11;18)(q21;q21) (p=0.040). Mad2 was methylated in 23 of 37
MZBCLs (62.2%). The lymphomas with Mad2 methylation more
frequently expressed BCL10 (p=0.052).
Conclusion: These methylation profiles suggest that p16INK4A
and
Mad2 may play a role in the pathogenesis of MZBCL in different
way; Mad2 is H. pylori independent with a close association with
BCL10 while p16INK4A
is H. pylori-dependent with an inverse
correlation with the t(11; 18)(q21;q21) translocation.
LS 31
HIV- ASSOCIATED PRECURSOR T LYMPHOBLASTIC
LEUKAEMIA/ LYMPHOBLASTIC LYMPHOMA: REPORT
OF A CASE AND REVIEW OF LITERATURE.
D Lorenzon, T Perin, V De Re, L Caggiari, M Michieli, M Spina,
P Bulian, C. Colarossi§, V Gattei and *V Canzonieri.
From Servizio di Onco-Ematologia Clinico-Sperimentale, Anatomia
Patologica, Farmacologia Sperimentale e Clinica, Oncologia Medica,
I.R.C.C.S CRO, Aviano, Italy.
§IOM Viagrande, Catania
Background. T lymphoblastic leukaemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma
(T-ALL/T-LBL) is a rare instance among HIV patients. A PubMed
search yielded only 4 cases.
Aim. To report cytomorphologic, immunophenotypic, molecular and
clinical features of a new case of T-ALL/T-LBL.
Results. A case of precursor T-ALL/T-LBL developed after nine years
of HAART-treated HIV infection. At the onset the disease was
diagnosed as T-LBL and was characterized by epatosplenomegaly and
lymphocytosis. After 6 cycles of CHOP the patient went in complete
remission for 9 months, followed by a relapse, treated with
polychemotherapy. During subsequent remission an harvest of
peripheral blood stem cell was attempted without success. After two
months from consolidation a new relapse unresponsive to standard dose
chemotherapy was treated with high dose ARA-C. The following
complete remission lasted for about two months, during this period
failed a second attempt at peripheral stem cell harvest. After relapsing the
patient received palliative therapy for two months until death. At last
relapse bone marrow biopsy showed a hypercellular marrow infiltrated
by precursor T lymphoblasts with very condensed nuclear chromatin, no
evident nucleoli and high number of mitotic figures. In smears the cells
were medium size with high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio and cytoplasmic
vacuoles. Lymphoblasts were positive for CD1a, cCD3, TdT, CD2, CD7,
CD5, CD10, mainly CD8 with partial coexpression of CD4, with a
proliferative fraction of 70%. They were negative for EBV latent
membrane protein (LMP) and human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8). In situ
hybridization showed negativity for Epstein-Barr viral early RNA.
Genescan profiles of TCRγ PCR products showed two clonal peaks.
Analysis of TCR sequences showed that one contained a stop codon.
Conclusions. A new T-ALL/T-LBL adds up to five the total of cases
reported in the English literature and is the sole case with CD8 positivity.
LS 32
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GALECTIN-10 EXPRESSION
AND SEVERITY OF CELIAC DISEASE ABOLISHED
IN THE PRESENCE OF GAMMADELTA-POSITIVE
T CELL CLONAL EXPANSION.
*V. Canzonieri, M.P. Simula,V. De Re, D. Marin, T. Perin,
C. Colarossi§, R. Cannizzaro
Institute(s):Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, National Cancer
Institute,Aviano, and §IOM, Viagrande, Catania, Italy.
Background: Celiac disease (CD) patients are prone to develop T-cell
lymphoma throughout a progressive accumulation of aberrant, clonal
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 189
gd+ T-cells. It is supposed that high production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, and chronic antigenic stimulation, due to gluten ingestion,
plays a key role in inducing inflammation, resistance to apoptosis and
the emergence of these T-clones. Regulatory T-cells maintain
immunological self-tolerance by active suppression of auto aggressive
T-cells. Among them, Tr1 subset plays a role in the suppression of
naïve and memory T-cells. The role of Tr1 in human diseases is not
well understood, even because there are no specific markers able to
identify these cells, however recently, Galectin-10 has been proposed
as a marker for functional Tr1.
Purpose: To better understand pathogenetic mechanisms associated
with CD and clonal T-cell proliferations we investigated galectin-10
expression from gut epithelium by 2D-DIGEapproaches. Patients
were selected and grouped for histological damage degree and for
gd+T pattern defined by g-TCR genescan analysis.
Results: Groups consisted of 7 individuals with Marsh-0 (4/7
oligoclonal), 3 with a Marsh-1 or -2 (3/3 polyclonal) and 5 with
Marsh-3 (2/5 clonal gd+T). Control consisted of 4 individuals with
excluded CD. We found, a parallel increase in galectin-10 levels and
Marsh index from 1 to 3 in individuals with polyclonal gd+T cells
(p=0.0092), while reduced levels were evidenced from patients with
clonal gd+T cells / Marsh-3 (p=0.017).
Conclusion: We assume that galectin-10 up-expression may exert a
protective role in limiting the mucosal damage. Such a role disappears
in case of clonal gd+T cells proliferation. Biopsy quantitation of
eosinophils and CD25 + cell population producing galectin-10 are
performing.Further studies are needed to establish if these clones are
those more susceptible to malignant progression.
LS 33
CHARACTERIZATION OF ANTIBODIES DIRECT AGAINST
THE IDIOTYPIC VK CHAIN OF HCV-RELATED TYPE-II MIXED
CRYOGLOBULINEMIA AND B-CELL PROLIFERATIONS.
V. Canzonieri, V. De Re, M.P. Simula, A. Pavan, L. Caggiari, T. Perin,
S. Sansonno
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, National Cancer Institute, Aviano,
Italy.
Background: Autoimmune type-II cryoglobulinemia (MC) is sus-
tained by clonal/oligoclonal B-cell populations so that the disease may
be considered an “indolent B-cell lymphoma (NHL)” and may favor
overt NHL development . HCV-antigen driven mechanism induces B-
cell proliferations. Clonal B-cells demonstrate a restricted panel of
variable genes to construct the B-cell receptor (BCR) and a homology
between BCR functional regions and autoimmune rheumatoid factor
(RF) activity. We underline the BCR unique repertoire with frequent
rheumatoid factor activity also in other autoimmune disorders
associated to NHL development as Sjogren’s syndrome and rheuma-
toid arthritis. All together these BCRs are characterized by their high
degree of idiotypic (Id) cross reactivity. Particularly the K chain V3-
20/15 is frequently found in subject with positive HCV antibody. Id is
a clonal marker expressed by B cells, thus is an ideal target for
immunotherapy.
Purpose: The evidence of few Id presented in the NHL subgroup
above reported constitute the rational for the development of
antibodies and recombinant proteins that use shared Id among
different NHL.
Results: Five monoclonal antibodies have been produced in our
laboratory toward the VK3-20 region of a subject HCV+ with NHL.
Epitopes recognized has been performed using epitope excision
approach.
Conclusions: A fine determination of the antibodies activities toward
specific amino acids, possibly common to different individuals, are in
progress. Monoclonal antibodies reactivity will be produced in vitro in
ELISA, western blot, cytofluorimetry and immunohistochemistry.
Apoptosis and ERK1/2 phosphorylationpathways induced following
BCR cross-linking of antiId murine IgG will be performed.
LS 34
CLONAL CD27+ CD19+ B-CELL EXPANSION THROUGH
INHIBITION OF FCgIIR IN HCV+ CRYOGLOBULINEMIC
PATIENTS.
V. Canzonieri, V. De Re, V. Racanelli, A. Pavan, T. Perin,
S. Sansonno.
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, National cancer Institute, Aviano,
Italy, Università degli Studi di BARI, Bari, Italy.
Background: HCV infection may or may not be associated with
extra-hepatic manifestations such as type-II mixed cryoglobulinemia
(MC), a clonal B cell proliferative disorder. In persistent HCV
infection without MC an increase in serum immunoglobulins (Ig) is
commonly observed. We found this increase is polyclonal and is
determined primarily by increased levels of both HCV-specific and
nonspecific IgG. Despite this hypergammaglobulinemia, memory
CD27+ cells do not accumulate, depending on a heightened sensitivity
of memory B cells to BCR-independent non cognate T cell help which
speeds up their terminal differentiation into antibody secreting cells and
make them more prone to activation induced cell death. In persistent
HCV infection with MC, elevation of Ig is a general occurrence too.
However, it is attributable to IgG and IgM. The latter includes antibodies
with rheumatoid factor (RF) activity, which are essential for the
development of circulating, cryoprecipitable immune complexes. We
found hypergammaglobulinemia is sustained by a peripheral expansion
of IgMk+restriction indicating that a limited number of antigens drives
their proliferation through BCR interaction. We have shown that IgM RF
and their counterparts on the surface of bone marrow-resident monoclo-
nal B cells react against a Fc-epitope of IgG and the HCV-NS3 protein.
Purpose: Based on the above findings, we propose a model whereby
BCR, by binding the Fc of IgM/IgG/HCVNS3 immune complexes
deprives FcgIIR of its natural ligand. This takes the brake off RF+
CD27+ B cell proliferation and promotes their selective accumulation
which is otherwise prevented by increased apoptosis susceptibility in
persistent HCV infection without MC.
Results and Conclusions: Immunoistochemical studies based on
FcgIIR expression are ongoing.
190 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 35
RECURRENT TRANSLOCATIONS INVOLVING THE MUM1
ONCOGENE LOCUS IN PERIPHERAL T-CELL LYMPHOMAS
*Andrew L. Feldman, Mark Law, Ellen D. Remstein, William R. Macon,
Lori A. Erickson, Karen L. Grogg, Paul J. Kurtin, and Ahmet Dogan
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Background: Oncogenes involved in recurrent chromosomal trans-
locations serve as diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets in hemato-
poietic tumors. In contrast to myeloid and B-cell neoplasms, translocations
in peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are poorly understood. MUM1 is
a transcription factor involved in cellular activation and plasma cell
differentiation. MUM1 translocations exist in myeloma and some B-cell
lymphomas, but have not been reported previously in PTCLs.
Methods: Based on a PTCL, unspecified (PTCL-U) with t(6;14)(p25;
q11.2), we studied 169 PTCLs (including the index case) for MUM1
translocations. These included 23 angioimmunoblastic T-cell lympho-
mas, 72 PTCL-Us, 18 ALK-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphomas
(ALCLs), 24 ALK-negative ALCLs, 14 cutaneous ALCLs (C-
ALCLs), and 18 other PTCLs. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) was performed using a home-brew breakapart MUM1 probe.
Additional studies included breakapart FISH for T-cell receptor-alpha
(TCRA) translocations, dual-fusion FISH for MUM1/TCRA fusions,
and MUM1 immunohistochemistry.
Results: We identified 12 PTCLs with MUM1 translocations. Two
were PTCL-Us with t(6;14)(p25;q11.2) and MUM1/TCRA fusions by
FISH. Both were cytotoxic, CD30-negative PTCL-Us involving bone
marrow and skin. Eight of the remaining ten cases were C-ALCLs
without TCRA rearrangements (57% of C-ALCLs tested). A systemic
ALK-negative ALCL and an additional CD30-positive PTCL-U also
had MUM1 translocations. No ALK-positive ALCLs had MUM1
translocations. All cases with MUM1 translocations were strongly
MUM1-positive by immunohistochemistry.
Conclusions: Cytotoxic PTCL-Us involving bone marrow and skin
and containing MUM1/TCRA translocations might represent a distinct
clinicopathologic entity. Translocations involving MUM1 but not
TCRA appear to occur predominantly in cutaneous ALCLs, represent-
ing the first recurrent translocation described in this disease. Detecting
these translocations may be useful in lymphoma diagnosis. Due to its
involvement in translocations, MUM1 may play an important biologic
role in some PTCLs, and might represent a possible therapeutic target.
LS 36
RESVERATROL ACTIVITY ON MCL CELL LIEN
JEKO-1: A PROTEOMIC APPROACH
Daniela Cecconi 1, Alice Parisi 2, Elena Bianchi 1, Claudia Parolini 2,
Anna Maria Timperio 3, Lello Zolla 3, Marco Chilosi *2 and Alberto
Zamò 2
1 University of Verona, Dipartimento Scientifico e Tecnologico,
Laboratorio di Proteomica, Verona, Italy
2 University of Verona, Dipartimento di Patologia, Sezione di
Anatomia Patologica, Verona, Italy
3 University of Tuscia, Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Viterbo,
Italy
Background. Therapies for mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) are
clinically unsatisfactory, and the search for effective drugs in vitro
might foster the evaluation of their activity in vivo. Resveratrol is a
natural polyphenolic compound, showing a low toxicity profile,
whose anti-cancer activity has been proven in several neoplasias, but
not in MCL.
Purpose of the study. We have investigated the effects of resveratrol
on the MCL cell line Jeko-1 using a combination of flow cytometry,
western blotting and two-dimensional electrophoresis to identify the
molecules involved in the induction of apoptosis and cell growth
regulation.
Results. We show that resveratrol induces apoptosis in Jeko-1 cells
and modulates several key molecules, including cyclin D1 (CCND1),
p53 (TP53), p21 (CDKN1A), BCL2, BAX, Bcl XL (BCL2L1),
caspase 9 (CASP9) and p27 (CDKN1B). By high-resolution 2D-
PAGE and nano-reverse phase-high performance liquid chromatography
coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 32 differentially
expressed proteins in response to resveratrol treatment that belong to
important cell death related networks (including c-myc, NF-κB and the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway).
Conclusion. These findings may improve the understanding of
mechanisms mediating the pro-apoptotic effects of resveratrol on
MCL cells, and form the basis for its potential use as a therapeutic
agent.
LS 37
INTEGRATIVE GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF MANTLE CELL
LYMPHOMA
Lorena Di Lisio, Nerea Martinez, Cristina I. Gomez-Abad, *Margarita
Sanchez-Beato, Gonzalo Gomez, Elena Rodriguez, Raquel Villuendas,
Angel Carro, Bibiana Ferreira, Manuela Mollejo, Miguel A. Martinez,
Juan C. Cigudosa, David G. Pisano, Miguel A. Piris
Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme; Cytogenetics
Unit, Human Genetics Programme; Bioinformatics Unit, Structural
Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid; Department of Pathology, Hospital
Virgen de la Salud, Toledo; Department of Pathology, Hospital Doce
de Octubre, Madrid. Spain
Mantle cell lymphoma pathogenesis remains partially unexplained. In
the last few years, a significant role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
cancer has been recognized, whereby miRNAs play a role as tumor
suppressors or oncogenes.
miRNA expression profiling (miREP) has been also described as a
useful tool for classifying human tumors. Although several studies
have been published for CLL, SMZL or DLBCL, little is known about
the role of miRNA in others lymphoma types.
Here we explored the miREP in a set of MCL cases, reactive
lymphoid tissue, isolated IgD+ cells and MCL-derived cell lines using
the Agilent miRNA microarray platform. We also studied the gene
expression profiles (GEP) and gene dosage of the same series using
44× Agilent Whole Human Genome platform for GEP and Agilent
Human Genome CGH microarray for CGH.
MCL presents an unique miRNA signature revealing deregulation of
155 miRNAs in MCL in at least 50% of the samples, when compared
with the average expression level of the controls.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 191
Combination of GEP and miREP data by informatics tools should
reveal mechanisms of gene regulation by miRNAs, and could improve
our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of MCL. Actually,
an integrated analysis of miREP and GEP data revealed an inverse
correlation between the expression level of some miRNAs and their
potential target genes, some of them constituting the characteristic
gene expression signature of MCL. That is the case of overexpression
of genes from NFkB pathway and downregulation of miR-148a, and
miR-100, (which potentially regulate these genes); overexpression of
several MAPK pathways members and downregulation of miR-133a,
miR-31, miR-663; or overexpression of LYN and miR-1 or miR-132
downregulation. Downregulation of genes such as BCL6 are also
correlated with increased expression of miR-363 and miR-765.
A correlation has also been done for chromosomal gain and losses
with miREP data.
The miRNA signature in MCL thus contributes to explain the
increased survival signaling, a key feature of MCL pathogenesis.
LS 38
NODAL INFLAMMATORY PSEUDOTUMOR
CAUSED BY TREPONEMA PALLIDUM INFECTION.
Incardona P, Ponzoni M, Chiodera C, Fisogni S, Legrenzi L, Lonardi
S, Facchetti F*.
Department of Pathology, Spedali Civili Brescia, Brescia, Italy;
S.Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy; S.Anna Clinic, Brescia, Italy
Inflammatory pseudotumor of lymph nodes (IPT-LN) represents an
unusual cause of lymphadenitis of unknown etiology. Upon the
observation of a case of IPT-LN associated with Treponema pallidum
(Tp) infection, we analysed a series of 9 IPT-LN and 9 extranodal IPT
(spleen, 4 cases; lung, orbit, gut, skin and liver) for the presence of
Tp, using a polyclonal antibody anti-Tp (Biocare Medical, Concord,
CA, USA). At the time of biopsy, none of the patients were suspected
for luetic infection, nor specific serological tests were available. IPT-
LN areas extensively involved the nodal parenchyma in 4 cases, while
they were focal in the remaining four cases. Capsular thickening and
inflammation (6/9), venulitis (3/9), small granulomas (3/9), and
follicular hyperplasia (7/9) were observed in the associated lymphoid
parenchyma. Tp were detected in 4/9 cases of LN-IPT and in none of
extranodal IPT. Tp were extremely abunbdant within the IPT areas
and in the perivascular tissues in the surrounding parenchyma, while
they were scattered within the capsule. In Tp+ cases IPT was
extensive in 2 and focal in 2 cases, and marked follicular hyperplasia
was the single feature distinctively associated with these cases.
Double immunostains for spirochetes and several leucocyte (CD3,
CD20, CD138, CD163, S100) and vascular-associated (CD34, Factor-
VIIIRA, smooth muscle actin) antigens showed that Tp were mainly
localized in the cytoplasm of macrophages and pericytes, but also
occurred within endothelial cells and S100+ interdigitating cells. This
study shows that a significant number of IPT-LN is associated with Tp
infection. A spirochetal etiology should be suspected in all IPT-LN,
independently from the extension of the lesions, especially when
pronounced follicular hyperplasia is found. Infection by Tp of
multiple cell types, including dendritic cells, supports data from in
vitro studies and indicates that various mechanisms may be involved
in the pathogenesis of the lesions.
LS 39
Activation of the Endoplasmic Reticulum (Er) Stress Associated
Transcription Factor X-Box Binding Protein-1 (Xbp-1) Occurs
in a Subset of Normal Germinal Center Cells and in Aggressive
B-Cell Malignancies with Prognostic Implications.
Olga Balagué1
, Ana Mozos1
, Daniel Martinez1
, Lluis Hernández1
,
Lluis Colomo1
, Jose Luis Mate2
, Julie Teruya-Feldstein3
, Oscar Lin3
,
Elias Campo1
, Armando López-Guillermo4
, and Antonio Martinez 1
.
1
Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, Hospital Clínic,
Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 2
Department of Pathology,
Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Autonomous University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 3
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, USA. 4
Hematology
Department, Hospital Clínic
Background: Plasma cell differentiation and ER stress response
converge in Xbp-1s activation. Xbp-1s is expressed in plasma cell
tumors where acts as an oncogene and is targeted by the proteosome
inhibitors. Little is known about Xbp1s expression in normal B-cells
and B-NHL.
Purpose of the study: We analyze Xbp-1s expression by western
blot, immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Localization in primary
lymphoid tissues and its relationship with other main transcription
factors related with B cell differentiation such as Pax-5, Bcl-6 and Irf-
4 were investigated. We also analyzed Xbp-1s activation in 24 cell
lines, 271 B-NHL and 39 plasma cell tumors.
Results: In reactive tissues, Xbp-1s was found in nuclear extracts and
nuclear localization was observed in plasma cells. Moreover, Xbp-1s
was expressed in Irf-4+/Bcl-6-/Pax-5- germinal centre cells committed
to plasma cell differentiation. In cell lines, Xbp-1s was broadly
expressed independently of immunoglobulin secretion or plasmacytic
differentiation.
None of the low grade lymphomas showed Xbp-1s expression which
was found in 69% of myelomas, 48% of plasmablastic lymphomas
and 28% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) regardless of
germinal or post-germinal centre differentiation. Among DLBCL,
Xbp-1s was expressed in a subset of aggressive tumors with poor
response to therapy and short overall survival (5-year OS: 29 vs. 53%;
p=0.01).
Conclusion: We demonstrate for the first time Xbp-1 activation in
lymphomas, associated with aggressive subtypes and with plasma cell
differentiation. Moreover, Xbp1s expression is associated with a
worse prognosis in DLBCL. Our findings suggest a role of Xbp-1
activation in the pathogenesis of the aggressive B-cell lymphomas.
Therapies targeting the ER stress mediated activation of Xbp1 may be
use in the management of these neoplasms.
192 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 40
A20 DELETION IS ASSOCIATED WITH GAIN AT THE TNFA/
B/C LOCUS IN MALT LYMPHOMAS OF THE OCULAR
ADNEXA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND THYROID
*Estelle Chanudet,1
Hongtao Ye,1
Judith Ferry2
, Chris M Bacon,1
Patrick Adam,3
Hans-Konrad Müller-Hermelink,3
John Radford,4
Stefano A Pileri,5
Koichi Ichimura,1
V. Peter Collins,1
Rifat A.
Hamoudi,1
Andrew G Nicholson,6
Andrew C Wotherspoon,7
Peter G
Isaacson,8
Ming-Qing Du1
1
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK;
2
Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA;
3
Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany;
4
Department of Medical Oncology, Christie Hospital, Manchester,
UK;
5
Unità Operativa di Emolinfopatologia - Università degli Studi di
Bologna, Italy;
6
Department of Histopathology, Royal Brompton Hospital, London,
UK;
7
Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London,
UK;
8
Department of Histopathology, University College London, UK.
Background: MALT lymphoma develops at various extranodal sites
from a background of chronic inflammation or autoimmune disorders.
The genetic basis of MALT lymphoma is largely unknown.
Characteristic chromosomal translocations are frequently associated
with gastric and pulmonary cases, but are rare at other sites. Purpose:
Our study was designed to investigate and characterize genetic
aberrations in MALT lymphomas of the ocular adnexa (33) and lung
(25) by array-comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), followed by
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Results: 1 Mb genomic profiles revealed common genomic aberra-
tions in ocular adnexal and pulmonary MALT lymphomas, but also
recurrent 6q23 losses and 6p21.2-6p22.1 gains exclusive to ocular
cases. High-resolution chromosome 6 tile-path array-CGH identified
the gene for the NF-κB inhibitor A20 as the target of 6q23.3 deletion,
and the TNFA/B/C locus as a putative target of 6p21.2-22.1 gain.
Interphase FISH showed that A20 deletion occurred preferentially in
MALT lymphoma of the ocular adnexa (8/42=19%), salivary gland
(2/24=8%), thyroid (1/9=11%) and liver (1/2), but not in the lung
(26), stomach (45) and skin (13). Homozygous deletion was observed
in 3 cases. A20 deletion and TNFA/B/C gain were significantly
associated (P<.001) and exclusively found in cases without charac-
teristic translocation. In ocular cases, A20 deletion was associated
with concurrent involvement of the orbital soft tissue and the
conjunctiva and/or lachrymal glands, or extra-ocular sites at diagnosis
(P=.007). A20 deletion was also associated with a higher proportion
of lymphoma relapse (67% versus 37%) and a shorter relapse-free
survival (P=.033).
Conclusion: A20 deletion and gain at the TNFA/B/C locus may thus
play an important role in the development of translocation negative
MALT lymphomas, especially those arising from sites associated with
auto-immunity.
LS 41
ABERRANT COEXPRESSION OF SEVEN AUTOCRINE-
AND PARACRINE- ACTIVATED RECEPTOR TYROSINE
KINASES IN CLASSIC HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
*Christoph Renné, Klaus Willenbrock, Martin-Leo Hansmann and
Andreas Bräuninger
Senckenberg Institute for Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Germany
The pathogenesis of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is still largely unknown.
Based on a search for pathogenetic mechanisms in global RNA
expression data of several B-cell lymphoma and B-cell lymphoma cell
lines, we analyzed the expression and activation of 7 receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) in classic HL.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the RTKs PDGFRA, DDR2,
EPHB1, RON, TRKB, TRKA and TIE1 were each expressed in
Hodgkin/ Reed Sternberg (HRS) cells in 30% to 75% of HL patients
but neither in non neoplastic B-cells nor in most B-non-Hodgkin
lymphomas. Up to 7 RTKs were coexpressed, most prominently in
Hodgkin lymphoma of the nodular sclerosis (ns) subtype.
Whereas no specific RTK expression pattern or relation of any RTK to
specific clinical data of a group of cases was observed. RTK
coexpression was significantly higher in EBV negative ns HL cases
compared to both EBV positive and EBV negative mixed cellularity
HL cases. In general coexpression of 3 and more RTKs was largely
restricted to EBV negative HL cases.
Immunohistochemistry with phosphotyrosine specific antibodies
revealed a general elevation of cellular phosphotyrosine content and
exemplarily the activation of PDGFRA and TRKA/B in HRS cells.
Immunohistochemistry and Western Blotting for RTK ligands
indicated that DDR2 is likely activated in a paracrine fashion,
PDGFRA and EPHB1 seem to be activated by autocrine mechanisms
and TRKA combines autocrine and paracrine activation modi.
As the PDGFRA Inhibitor Imatinib and the TRK inhibitor K-252a
decrease the survival of HRS cell lines it is possible that the inclusion
of RTK inhibitors in therapeutic regimens of HL patients may thus be
a novel option in HL treatment.
LS 42
PLASMACYTOID DIFFERENTIATION OF B-CLL OCCURS
IN PATIENTS WITH A NORMAL KARYOTYPE
AS WELL AS WITH PROGNOSTICALLY RELEVANT
CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS
Lukáš Plank1*
, Tomáš Balhárek1
, Denisa Ilenčíková2
, Peter Szépe1
,
Alena Žákovičová2
, Martin Čermák2,
, Martina Barthová1
, Juraj
Marcinek1
, Zuzana Kviatkovská1
,
1
Department of Pathology, Comenius University Medical Faculty and
Faculty Hospital in Martin, Slovakia
2
Department of Oncological Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bratislava, Slovakia
Background: Although it it possible to distinguish B-CLL with and
without plasmacytoid differentiation (Pcoid+ and Pcoid-), the signif-
icance of this distinction remains unclear.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 193
Purpose: To correlate Pcoid differentiation with the presence of
chromosomal abnormalities (CHA), incl. del11q22-23, del13q14,
del17p13 and trisomy 12.
Material and methods: 98 patients with hematologically verified B-
CLL and available CHA examinations. Pcoid was verified in bone
marow and lymphoid tissue biopsies by reevaluation by two
observers. CHA were analyzed in peripheral blood lymphocytes after
72 h cultivation by FISH using DNA probes (Vysis).
Results: Pcoid+ was present in 39 (40%) and absent in 59 (60%)
patients. From 27 cases (27.6%) with a normal karyotype, 15 (55.6%)
were Pcoid+ a 12 (44.4%) Pcoid-. CHA were detected in 71 cases
(72.4% of all), 24 (33.8%) were Pcoid+ and 47 (66.2%) Pcoid-.
Prognostically negative CHA (del11q, del17p, 12+, incl. del13q in
combination) were found in 40 cases (40.8% of all): 16 (40%) were
Pcoid+ and 24 (60%) Pcoid-. Isolated del13q considered to be a
positive prognostic factor was identified in 31 cases (31.6% of all):
only 8 (25.8%) were Pcoid+ and 23 (74.2%) were Pcoid-.
Conclusions: In spite of the limited number of the cases our study
demonstrates that B-CLL patients with a normal karyotype show
similar frequency of either Pcoid+ or Pcoid–. In contrast, Pcoid+ is
less frequent (33-40% of the cases) in CLL with CHA generally and
in the group of patients with prognostically negative CHA. The lowest
proportion of Pcoid+ cases (approx. 1=4 of all) occurs in patients with
isolated del13q. If Pcoid+ should represent a sign of an advanced
tumor cell differentiation than tendency to this differentiation seems to
be lower in patients with CHA, incl. CHA considered to be
prognostically negative.
Supported by grants MZ SR 2005/12-MFN-04 and VEGA 1/4285/07.
LS 43
SNP ARRAY ANALYSIS REVEALS COPY NUMBER
ALTERATIONS AND COPY NEUTRAL LOH IN MANTLE
CELL LYMPHOMA AT HIGH RESOLUTION
Elena Hartmann1
*, Itziar Salaverria2
, Silvia Beà2
, Andreas Zettl1
,
Pedro Jares2
, Randy D. Gascoyne3
, Wing C. Chan4
, Dennis D.
Weisenburger4
, Timothy C. Greiner4
, Rita M. Braziel5
, Lisa M.
Rimsza6
, Jan Delabie7
, Elaine S. Jaffe8
, German Ott1,9
, Hans Konrad
Müller-Hermelink1
, Andreas Rosenwald1
, Elias Campo2
1
Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
2
Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
3
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, B.C., Canada
4
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA
5
Department of Pathology, Oregon Health and Sciences University,
Portland, OR, USA
6
Department of Pathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
7
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Norway Hospital Clinic, Oslo, Norway
8
Laboratory of Pathology, National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD, USA
9
Institute of Pathology, Robert-Bosch Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany
E. H. and I. S. contributed equally to this work. A.R. and E.C. are
co-senior authors of this work.
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is genetically characterized by the
translocation t(11;14). In addition, secondary chromosomal alterations
likely contribute to MCL lymphomagenesis and influence the clinical
course. There is increasing evidence that loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
without copy number (CN) changes (copy neutral LOH, cnLOH),
might be an important alternative mechanism for tumor suppressor
gene inactivation. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) arrays
allow – in addition to high resolution CN analyses and SNP geno-
typing - the detection of regions with cnLOH. We analyzed 8 MCL
cell lines and 75 primary MCL cases (most of them previously
analyzed by conventional metaphase CGH by Salaverria et al., JCO,
2007) with the Affymetrix 500K array set using an unpaired analysis
approach and compared the results with data obtained by conventional
CGH, in order to refine minimally altered regions and to determine
the incidence of cnLOH in MCL. Furthermore, we investigated 5
CCND1(-) lymphoma cases, that showed pathohistological and gene
expression features of conventional MCL. In an initial platform
comparison including CGH and SNP array data, we found excellent
agreement between the platforms regarding large CN alterations.
However, SNP array analysis revealed a high number of additional
CN alterations (median=3 using conventional CGH vs. median=15
using 500K SNP arrays for CCND1(+) cases), and allowed a more
precise delineation of several altered regions. Moreover, large regions
(≥5 Mb) of cnLOH were found in 29/75 (39%) of the CCND1(+) and
2/5 (40%) of the CCND1(-) cases. The results demonstrate the
capability of SNP array analysis for identifying CN alterations and
cnLOH at high resolution in MCL cell lines as well as in primary
tumor samples, and that cnLOH is a frequent phenomenon in MCL.
Moreover, the results indicate that CCND1(+) and CCND1(-) MCL
have similar profiles of secondary genetic alterations using this high
density approach suggesting a closely related pathogenesis.
LS 44
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMAS WITH AND WITHOUT
TRANSLOCATION t(14;18) DIFFER IN GENE EXPRESSION
PROFILES AND GENETIC ALTERATIONS
Ellen Leich1*
, Itziar Salaverria2
, Silvia Bea2
, Andreas Zettl1
, Randy
D. Gascoyne3
, Wing-Chung Chan4
, Rita M. Braziel5
, Lisa M.
Rimsza6
, Dennis D. Weisenburger4
, Jan Delabie7
, Elaine S. Jaffe8
,
Andrew Lister9
, Andrew J. Norton9
, Louis M. Staudt10
, Elena M.
Hartmann1
, Hans-Konrad Mueller-Hermelink1
, Elias Campo2
, German
Ott1,11
and Andreas Rosenwald1
1
Institute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Ger-
many; 2
Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain;
3
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada; 4
Department
of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA; 5
Southwest Oncology Group, Oregon
Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA; 6
Department of
Pathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; 7
Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 8
Laboratory of Pathology, National
Cancer Institute (NCI), Bethesda, MD, USA; 9
Cancer Research UK,
St. Bartholomews Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 10
Metabolism
Branch, National Cancer Institute (NCI), Bethesda, MD, USA and
11
Institute of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stutt-
gart, Germany.
Follicular lymphoma (FL) is characterized by the translocation t
(14;18)(q32;q21). Approximately 15% of FL cases, however, lack this
translocation by PCR and FISH analysis. The current study was
194 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
designed to identify the frequency of t(14;18)-negative FL in a series
of 164 FL cases graded 1-3a (Dave et al., NEJM 351:2159–69, 2004)
and to compare genetic alterations and gene expression profiles
between FL with and without t(14;18). Using PCR and tissue
microarray-based FISH analysis 17 t(14;18)-negative FL cases were
identified in this series (10%). In virtually all t(14;18)-positive FL
cases BCL2 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), whereas 11 of the FL cases without a t(14;18) were BCL2-
negative. Clinically, the t(14;18)-negative and -positive FL subgroups
were similar regarding age and gender distribution as well as median
survival times following different treatment regimens (without
rituximab). Conventional metaphase comparative genomic hybridiza-
tion (CGH) analysis revealed alteration patterns that differed
significantly between the t(14;18)-negative and -positive FL sub-
groups. In particular, FL cases with t(14;18) showed frequent gains of
chromosome 18cen-q21 (27%) which were absent in FL cases without
t(14;18). To compare gene expression between the two groups, we
used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) which revealed an
enrichment of GCB signatures in t(14;18)-positive cases and an
enrichment of ABC-, NFκB- and Interferon signatures in t(14;18)-
negative cases. Mutation analysis of the IgVH gene revealed ongoing
somatic hypermutations in both the t(14;18)-positive and the t(14;18)-
negative FL subgroup. Interestingly, in GeneScan analysis t(14;18)-
negative FL showed more often polyclonal or oligoclonal results. IHC
analysis on an independent test set of FL cases showed strong CD10
expression in 100% of t(14;18)-positive cases and 86% of t(14;18)-
negative cases with BCL2 expression, whereas CD10 expression was
weak or absent in ∼34% of t(14;18)-negative FL without BCL2
expression. These results suggest that t(14;18)-negative FL differ from
t(14;18)-positive FL at the molecular level.
LS 45
HIGH CLINICAL IMPACT OF A COMBINED
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL OUTCOME PREDICTOR
SCORE (CIOPS) IN DIFFUSE LARGE B CELL LYMPHOMA
*S. Höller1,3
, J. Kalla1
. U, Mäder2
, A. Lohr1
, T. Katzenberger1
,
P. Went3
, H-K. Müller-Hermelink1
, A. Rosenwald1
, G. Ott1,4
1: Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany, 2:
Tumorregitster, Universtity of Würzburg, Germany, 3: Instiute of
Pathology, University of Basel, Switzerland 4.: Department of Clinical
pathology, Robert-Bosch Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany
The heterogenous group of DLBCL has been subclassified using gene
expression profiling into three prognostically relevant subgroups,
termed Germinal-center B-cell like DLBCL, Activated B-cell like
DLBCL, and Mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma. This study was
devised to clarify the role of immunophenotyping of paraffin-
embedded DLBCL specimens in the dissection into prognostically
different risk groups.
145 large B-cell lymphomas (nodal and extranodal) were immuno-
phenotyped using antibodies to CD10, BCL-6, MUM1p, BCL-2 and
kappa and lambda light chains. Clinical data were collected from
treating physicians. All patients had been treated with CHOP-like
protocols, without Rituximab. The use of CD10, BCL-6 and MUM1p
in analogy to the HANS algorithm resulted in two disease subgroups
with prognostic relevance, a GC-like and a non GC-like subgroup
(Kaplan Meier p=0,0027 log rank). Adding data from BCL-2 and cIg,
a CIOPS could be developed. For each unfavourable item (CD10-,
BCL-6-, MUM1p+, BCL-2+, cIg+) one point was assigned, resulting
in the delineation of four distinct prognostically relevant subgroups. A
favourable CD10+, BCL-6+, MUM1p-, BCL-2- and cIg- group
(CIOPS 1 (score 0): n=14), a CD10-, BCL-6-, MUM1p+, BCL-2+
and cIg+ group (CIOPS 4 (score 5): n=8) with dismal prognosis
(p<0,0001 log rank) and two significantly differing intermediate
groups (CIOPS 2 (score 1 and 2): n=73, CIOPS 3 (score 3 and 4): n=
50) (p=0,0398 log rank) (Fig. 1). Other immunohistochemical
markers, like the expression of p53, FOXP1, or HLA-DR, or the
Ki67 index, failed to identify prognostically relevant subgroups.
DLBCL can be stratified into biologically and clinically relevant
subgroups using immunohistochemistry in paraffin sections, like GC-
related and GC-unrelated subgroups. According to the newly designed
CIOPS, these lymphomas can be divided into four subgroups with
impressive statistically different overall survival (high risk, high/
intermediate, low/intermediate and low risk).
LS 46
BOB.1, CYCLIN E, MUM1P AND CD79A ARE HELPFUL
MARKERS IN THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
OF CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA AND PRIMARY
MEDIASTINAL B CELL LYMPHOMA
*S. Höller, D. Zihler, E.C: Obermann, P. Hirschmann, S.A. Pileri*,
S. Dirnhofer, A. Tzankov
Departments of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland and
University of Bologna, Italy*
Classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma (cHL) and primary mediastinal B cell
lymphoma (PMBCL) are closely related entities both at the
immunohistochemical and molecular level. Even more, the recently
established “mediastinal grey zone lymphoma”, with its clinical,
histological and immunohistochemical features, is situated in between
cHL and PMBCL. Therefore, in daily practice, the differential
diagnosis between cHL and PMBCL based on conventional histology
and well established antibodies can be challenging.
In order to clarify which immunohistochemical expression profiles could
be helpful to distinguish between these two entities, we analyzed 345
cHL and 51 PMBCL on a validated tissue microarray platform with
antibodies against BOB.1, CD15, CD20, CD23, CD30, CD79a, Cyclin
E, LMP-1, MUM1p und Oct2. The positive predictive value (PPV),
sensitivity and specificity of all markers were calculated using receiver
operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis and the Chi-square test.
The number of evaluable cases for the different antibodies between
159 - 330 cases in the group of cHL and 39 - 50 cases in the group of
PMBCL. The markers with the highest PPV for cHL were: CD15
(100%), Cyclin E (100%), LMP-1 (100%), MUM1p (98%) and CD30
(97%). A good sensitivity was only achieved by CD30 (93%), Cyclin
E (78%), und MUM1p (67%). In PMBCL, 7 out of 37 cases were also
positive for CD30, which lead to a lower specificity considering cHL
for this marker (81%), compared to Cyclin E (100%) and MUM1p
(95%). The antibodies with the highest PPV in PMCL were: CD23
(93%), BOB.1 (73%) and CD79a (58%), with a good sensitivity in the
case of BOB.1 (93%) und CD79a (89%).
The additional use of the immunohistochemical markers BOB.1,
Cyclin E, MUM1p and CD79a may be helpful in the differential
diagnosis of cHL and PMBCL.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 195
LS 47
THE IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC AND CYTOGENETIC
FEATURES OF CD5-POSITIVE SPLENIC MARGINAL
ZONE LYMPHOMA
*Ellen D. Remstein, Mark E. Law, Dong Chen, William G. Morice,
Curtis A. Hanson, Paul J. Kurtin, Andrew L. Feldman, Ahmet Dogan
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN USA
Background: Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) may coex-
press CD5 but the incidence and morphologic, immunophenotypic,
and cytogenetic features of CD5+ SMZL are not well characterized.
Materials and Methods: Of 113 spleen specimens from patients with
a primary SMZL diagnosis, 27 that were CD5-positive were further
analyzed. We reviewed 19 flow cytometry histograms as well as
karyotypes from 10 spleen and/or bone marrow specimens. Tissue
microarrays (TMA) were constructed using paraffin-embedded tissue
from all 27 SMZL specimens and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
cyclinD1, cyclinD2, cyclinD3, CDK6 and p27 and interphase FISH
for 6q, 7q32, 11q22-23, centromere 12/12q15, 13q14, IGH-CCND1,
BCL3, IGH, IGK and IGL were performed.
Results: All specimens had characteristic morphologic features of
SMZL. By flow cytometry all 19 cases expressed moderate-bright
CD20. 53% expressed moderate-bright surface immunoglobulin (sIg)
and partial CD5; 26% expressed moderate-bright sIg and uniform
CD5 (mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)-like); 16% expressed dim sIg and
partial CD5; and 5% expressed dim sIg, uniform CD5 and uniform
CD23 (chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)-like). By interphase
FISH and/or karyotyping, 0% had del(6q); 12% had del(7q); 20% had
del(11q); 8% had trisomy 12 and 21% had del(13q). Six cases (23%)
had translocations including t(6;14)(p21;q32)/IGH-CCND3 (n=1),
t(11;14)(q23;q32)/IGH-?(n=1), (9;14)(p13;q32)/IGH-PAX5 (n=1),
t(2;7)(p11.2;q22)/IGK-CDK6 (n=2) and ?-CDK6 (n=1). By IHC,
only the IGH-CCND3+ case was CCND3+, only the 3 CDK6
translocation-positive cases coexpressed both CDK6 and CCND2,
and all cases were p27-positive and CCND1-negative.
Conclusions: Approximately 25% of SMZL coexpress CD5. By flow
cytometry, CD5 is usually partially expressed but patterns mimicking
MCL and CLL may occur. A minority of CD5+ SMZL have cytogenetic
abnormalities such as del(11q), trisomy 12 and del(13q). The incidence
of del(7q) in CD5+ SMZL (12%) is slightly lower than that of SMZL
overall, while IG translocations are more common and partners often
include genes of the CCND/CDK pathway other than CCND1.
LS 48
IGVH ANALYSIS IN DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
Mark A Catherwood,1,2
Lakshmi Venkatraman,3
Don Hull4
, TCM Morris,1
1
Haemato-Oncology, Department of Haematology, Belfast City
Hospital, Belfast, BT9 7AB. 2
School of Biomedical Science,
University of Ulster, Coleraine, BT52 1SA, Northern Ireland.
3
Department of Histopathology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast.
4
Department of Haematology, Craigavon Area Hospital
Background: Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the com-
monest type of NHL is both clinically and biologically heterogeneous.
This was elucidated by the identification of 3 major subgroups
termed, germinal centre B-cell like DLBCL (GCB-DLBCL), activated
B cell-like DLBCL (ABC-DLBCL) and primary mediastinal DLBCL.
Analysis of the variable region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain
gene reveals information regarding the developmental stage at which
malignant transformation has taken place.
Purpose: This study investigated the IGVH gene usage in a cohort of
DLBCL (transformed follicular and de novo) to assess possible gene
usage distinctions between GCB, non-GCB and mediastinal DLBCL
as well as de novo and transformed DLBCL.
Methods: DNA was isolated from frozen tissue from 33 DLBCL (16
GC and 17 NGC) patients. PCR for complete (VDJH) rearrangements
was performed using BIOMED-2 protocols. Germinal centre pheno-
type was defined by immunohistochemistry based on three markers
CD10, BCL6 and MUM1.
Results: There were 24 de novo and 9 transformed DLBCL that could
be categorized as GCB (16), non-GCB (17 including 3 mediastinal
sub-type). Clonal productive rearrangements were detected in 30 cases
and non-functional rearrangements in 3 cases. All cases showed
somatic hypermutation (range 3-18%). The VH genes were derived
from 4 of the 7 VH families; most cases used either VH3 or VH4 gene
segments. The IGVH usage was unbiased amongst GCB, non GCB
and mediastinal subtypes; and in de novo and transformed cases. No
correlation existed between survival and particular gene segment
usage. 20/33 patients had been treated with Rituximab containing
regimen. The average survival was 24 and 32 months respectively in
the transformed and de novo DLBCL respectively. The overall
survival was 20 and 35 months in the GCB and non-GCB sub-groups.
Conclusion: Our findings show a random use of IGVH genes in the
currently recognized clinical and biological sub-groups of DLBCL.
LS 49
SUBMICROSCOPIC DELETIONS OF CHROMOSOME 22q11
ARE FREQUENT IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
*Shelly R. Gunn,1,2
Lynne V. Abruzzo,3
David W. Bahler,4
Clemens
H. M. Mellink,5
and Ryan S. Robetorye1
1
Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX; 2
Combimatrix Molecular
Diagnostics Inc., Irvine, CA; 3
Department of Hematopathology,
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
4
Department of Pathology and ARUP Institute for Clinical and
Experimental Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT;
and 5
Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Background: Genomic aberrations have increasingly gained attention
as prognostic markers in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has improved the detection
rate of genomic alterations in CLL from approximately 50% using
conventional cytogenetics to greater than 80%. More recently, array
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) has gained popularity
as a clinical tool that can be applied to detect genomic gains and losses
of prognostic importance in CLL. In this study, bacterial artificial
chromosome array-based array CGH was evaluated as a tool for the
detection of recurrent genomic imbalances currently assayed by FISH
panels in 193 cases of CLL.
Results: Detection rates of clinically relevant chromosomal abnor-
malities involving losses of 11q23, 13q14, 17p13, and whole
196 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
chromosome 12 gains were consistent with previously reported
results. Unexpectedly, submicroscopic deletions of chromosome
22q11 were observed in 28 cases (15%), with five of the cases
exhibiting bi-allelic deletions. Interestingly, one mono-allelic deletion
case and one bi-allelic deletion case also exhibited concomitant gains
of whole chromosome 22. The frequency of 22q11 deletions in this
study was second only to loss of the 13q14 region, the most
commonly detected recurrent chromosomal aberration in CLL.
Breakpoint mapping using oligonucleotide-based array CGH analysis
of selected cases showed that the 22q11 deleted regions ranged in size
from ∼0.3 Mb up to ∼0.9 Mb, thereby defining a new subgroup of
CLL at the genomic level.
Conclusions: We have demonstrated that mono- and bi-allelic 22q11
deletions are relatively frequent in CLL, occurring in approximately
15% of cases. Further studies are needed to assess the prognostic
significance of these submicroscopic deletions and to determine
whether these alterations might predispose to the development of
CLL, contribute to the pathogenesis of CLL, or both.
LS 50
PRIMARY MARGINAL ZONE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (MZL-CNS)
ASSOCIATED WITH CHLAMYDOPHILA PSITTACI
(CP) INFECTION
M. Ponzoni1,2
, L. Poliani3
, M.G. Cangi1
, R. Dolcetti4
, A.J.M. Ferreri5
,
E. Dal Cin1
, F. Bonetti3
, E. Pasini4
, C. Doglioni1,2
, G. Rossi6
,
F. Facchetti3
1
Pathology Unit and 5
Medical Oncology Unit, Department of
Oncology, 2
Unit of Lymphoid Malignancies, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, 3
Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, 4
Depart-
ment of Pre-Clinical Research, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico,
Aviano, 6
Department of Hematology, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy
Background: The association between non-Hodgkin lymphomas and
Cp infection has been reported, with variable geographic distribution,
mainly in ocular adnexal lymphomas (OAL). Reports about the
occurrence of Cp infection in non-OAL suggest an association with
lymphomas arising in organs exposed to air-transported antigens. No data
are available about the occurrence of Cp infection in brain lymphomas.
Purpose of the study: We report the occurrence of Cp infection in a
patient with MZL-CNS. The assessment of Cp infection was made
either with PCR-based methods and immunohistochemistry.
Results: A 44-years old woman with a 20-year long history of chronic
cephalea complained with cephalalgia and hyperpyrexia. A brain CT
scan showing a cerebral lesion (right-empisphere) was followed by
surgical resection; histopathological examination concluded for MZL.
Cp was detected in tumoral tissue by two different PCR (TETR for
16S-23S spacer region and Gro-El for Hsp-60 gene), followed by
direct sequencing and by immunohistochemistry directed against
genus-specific chlamydial lypopolisaccharide. TETR-PCR did not
detect Cp in patient’s peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Conclusion: This is the first case of MZL-CNS associated with Cp
infection. This observation warrants further investigation in large
series of brain lymphomas including either low-grade and high-grade
histotypes, in order to highlight potential pathogenetic and therapeutic
implications.
LS 51
HHV-8-POSITIVE ENDOTHELIAL PROLIFERATIONS:
REPORT OF FIVE CASES AND DISCUSSION
OF THE MINIMUM DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
FOR KAPOSI’S SARCOMA.
*Elizabeth J. Soilleux1
, Kevin Gatter1
, Andrew Rainey2
, George
Philip2
, Sebastian Lucas3
1
Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Oxford
University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU U.K.
2
Department of Histopathology, The Royal Sussex County Hospital,
Brighton BN2 5BE U.K.
3
Department of Histopathology, St Thomas’ Hospital, London SE1
7EH U.K.
Background: Kaposi’s sarcoma is a vascular neoplasm that arises in
association with HHV-8 infection, generally, but not exclusively, in
HIV-positive patients.
Purpose: We describe five recent HHV-8-positive endothelial prolifer-
ations in HIV-positive patients that fail to efface tissue architecture and
we consider the minimum morphological and immunophenotypical
features required for a diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Results: We present the case of a 40 year old HIV-positive man, admitted
with fever, who died 10 days later with presumptive diagnoses of Listeria
monocytogenes meningitis and active chronic hepatitis B, although no
autopsy was performed, due to the risk of infection. A lymph node biopsy
was performed to investigate widespread low volume lymphadenopathy.
This demonstrated follicular lysis, in keeping with HIV, and focally
prominent sinus endothelial proliferation. These endothelial cells
immunostained positively for HHV-8 and the vascular markers, CD31
and CD34, in addition to the lymphatic endothelial markers LYVE-1 and
DC-SIGN/ DC-SIGNR. The endothelial proliferation did not efface the
lymph node architecture or extend beyond the lymph node capsule. A
liver biopsy failed to demonstrate hepatic Kaposi’s sarcoma.
We describe a further four cases of HHV-8-positive endothelial
proliferation, occurring in HIV-positive male patients aged between
43 and 74 years, three in the skin and one in the liver. In each case, the
endothelial proliferation fails to efface the architecture of the tissue
and does not show significant dissection of collagen. We demonstrate
the morphology and immunphenotype of these proliferations.
Conclusions: These five cases raise questions about whether all HHV-
8-positive endothelial proliferations should be regarded as Kaposi’s
sarcoma. Philosophically, one might imagine a biological continuum
between HHV-8 infected endothelial cells and an obvious neoplasm
composed of malignant endothelial cells. No clear minimum diagnostic
criteria for Kaposi’s sarcoma are currently available. We discuss
possible diagnostic criteria that might be used.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 197
LS 52
LYMPHOCYTE-RICH CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA.
A TUMOR DISTINGUISHED BY THE MICROENVIRONMENT
Syong H. Nam-Cha1,2
, Santiago Montes-Moreno1
, Maria T Salcedo,
Juan F. Garcia1
,Miguel A. Piris1
1. Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
2. Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de
Albacete, Albacete, Spain
The existence, diagnostic features, biological and clinical relevance of
de diagnosis of Lymphocyte rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma
(LRCHL) is still a debatable issue. Here we have performed a
comparative marker analysis of LRCHL (16 cases), Nodular Lym-
phocyte Predominance Hodgkin Lymphoma (NLPHL) (68 cases) and
other classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) (60 cases) , using tissue
microarrrays. Markers selected for the study were focused in three
different fields: B-cell lineage and transcription programme (OCT.1,
OCT.2, BOB.1, BCL-6, PAX-5, GCET-1, KLHL-6, BLIMP-1), NFκB
signaling pathway (REL-B, C-REL, TRAF-1, p50, MUM-1) and T-cell
microenvironment (CD3, CD57, PD-1, CXCL-13, CD10, BCL-6).
CHL and NLPHL show differences in all the analyzed programs. Thus
CHL has stronger expression of NF-kB markers, a weaker expression of
the GC program and absence of follicular T-cell microenvironment.
LRCHL cases display intermediate features between CHL and NLPHL.
Thus, there is a more frequent expression of B-cell transcription factors
like OCT.1, OCT.2, BOB.1 and BCL6 than in CHL. A follicular T-cell
microenvironment was also identified in 50% of the LRCHL. Expression
of NF-kB markers was seen in a frequency comparable to CHL.
In conclusion, Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma
(LRCHL) seem to be characterized by Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells
(HRS) with a classical HRS cell immunophenotype, strong expression of
B-cell transcription factors and a T-cell background similar to NLPHL.
LS 53
RT-PCR BASED PREDICTIVE MODEL OF CLINICAL
OUTCOME FOR ADVANCED HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
PATIENTS: INTEGRATING TUMOR
AND MICROENVIRONMENT SIGNATURES
*Juan F. García1,2
, Beatriz Sánchez-Espiridion2
, Carlos Montalbán3
,
Rafael Ramos4
, Jose Rodriguez4
, Francisco Mestre4
, Araceli
Cánovas5
, Carmen Camarero5
, Antonio Salar6
, Sergio Serrano6
,
Concepción Rayón7
, Manuel F. Fresno7
, Manuel M. Morente2
, and
Miguel A. Piris2
. In behalf of the Spanish Hodgkin Lymphoma Study
Group.
MD Anderson, International, Madrid (1); Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid (2); Hospital Ramón y
Cajal, Madrid (3); Hospital Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca (4);
Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo (5); Hospital del Mar, Barcelona (6);
Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo (7). SPAIN
Current predictive systems, based on clinical and analytical parameters,
fail to accurately identify a significant fraction of advanced classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) patients with short failure free survival (FFS).
Transcriptional analysis has identified genes and pathways associated
with clinical failure, but the biological relevance and clinical applicability
of these data are still pending of further development. Robust molecular
techniques for the identification of biological processes associated with
treatment response are necessary to develop new predictive tools.
We designed a quantitative RT-PCR based assay to be applied to routine
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples (FFPE), integrating genes
known to be expressed either by the tumor cells and their reactive
microenvironment, and related with clinical response to adriamycin-
based chemotherapy. Using this approach, 138 FFPE tumor samples
were analyzed and adequate RT-PCR profiles were obtained in all
cases. Normalized expression levels (ΔCt) of individual genes vary
considerably among samples. However, consistent with previous
results most of these genes were, on average, overexpressed in the
unfavorable group. The results of the assay can be combined in a
logistic regression model integrating pathways associated with treat-
ment response. The final model can predict treatment response with an
overall accuracy of 74,6% (chi-square 54,55, p=0,004).
Predicted probabilities identify two different risk groups associated
with clinical outcome (5-years FFS probabilities 73,1% vs 20,8%, log
rank statistic 20,76, p<0.000; OS probabilities 89,5 vs. 54.5%, log
rank statistic 42,10, p<0.000). Moreover, this biological model is
independent and complementary of the conventional International
Prognostic Score using multivariate Cox proportional hazards analysis.
In summary, we have demonstrated the potential prognostic capacity of our
assay finding a positive correlation between gene expression and treatment
response. These results could pave the way into a more comprehensive
analysis of larger series of cHL patients, allowing the identification of
subsets of patients who might benefit from alternate approaches.
LS 54
ABERRANT PDGFRA SIGNALLING IS SUSTAINED
BY AN AUTOCRINE LOOP IN PERIPHERAL T-CELL
LYMPHOMA NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
*Piccaluga Pier Paolo1
, Rossi Maura1
, Esposito Aurora1
, Tazzari Pier
Luigi2
, Ricci Francesca2
, Agostinelli Claudio1
, Righi Simona1
,
Gazzola Anna1
, Went Philip3
, Hartmann Sylvia4
, Hansmann Martin
L4
, Alviano Francesco5
, Bagnara Gian Paolo5
, Zinzani Pier Luigi1
,
Pileri Stefano A1
.
1
Department of Hematology and Oncology “L. and A. Seràgnoli”,
Hematology and Ematopathology Sections, Molecular Pathology
Laboratory, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
2
Service of Transfusion Medicine, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital,
Bologna
3
Institute of Pathology, Basel University, Basel, Switzerland
4
Department of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany
5
Department of Histology, Embriology and Applied Biology, Univer-
sity of Bologna, Italy
Background. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified
(PTCL/NOS) is the most common T-cell lymphoma; however, it
remains a complex entity showing great variety regarding morphol-
ogy, immunophenotype and clinical behaviour. Recently, gene
198 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
expression profiling (GEP) revealed PDGFRA as possible PTCL-
associated molecule, by nominating it as potential therapeutic target.
Purpose of the study. We investigated the possible determinants of
PDGFRA activity in PTCL/NOS.
Results. First, we performed GEP of 28 PTCLs/NOS and 20 samples
of normal T-cell subpopulations, by using the Affymetrix HG-U133
2.0 plus microarray. GEP showed over-expression of PDGFRA in all
tested PTCLs/NOS. Second, immunohistochemistry (IHC), performed
on tissue-microarrays (TMAs) including 145 PTCLs/NOS, confirmed
the expression of PDGFRA and its activated (phosphorilated) form, p-
PDGFRA, in most if not all instances. The PDGFRA locus (4q1.1-
4q1.3) was then studied by FISH and wide-genome SNPs analysis
(Affymetrix 500K Array), while direct sequencing of all PDGFRA
exons and introns, as well as of the promoter region was performed in
90 cases. These approaches showed preserved integrity of the
PDGRA locus. We then studied PDGF-A, PDGF-B and PDGF-C on
both TMAs by IHC and supernatants from PTCL/NOS cell cultures
by ELISA. Of note, they turned out to be expressed and secreted by
PTCL/NOS cells. Finally, in order to verify the hypothesis of an
autocrine loop, we tested whether the remotion of PDGF ligands from
the supernatant of cultured PTCL/NOS cells determined PDGFRA de-
phosphorilation. In particular, the expression of PDGFRA and p-
PDGFRA was assessed by flow-citometry in PTCL/NOS cultured
cells before and after the exposure to an anti-PDGF ligand
neutralizing antibody (R&B System). Notably, 48 h after the exposure
to 20 μg of anti-PDGF antibody, we already appreciated a reduction
of PDGFRA phosphorilation up to 75%.
Conclusions. Taken together, our data demonstrate that PDGFRA
activity is sustained by an autocrine loop in PTCL/NOS.
LS 55
Please see LS 37
LS 56
PROLIFERATION CENTRES IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC
LEUKEMIA CONTAINS SPECIFIC DENDRITIC,
T-CELL AND B-CELL SUBPOPULATIONS INVOLVED
IN THE REGULATION OF B-CELL PROLIFERATION
AND NF-KB ACTIVATION.
*SM Rodriguez-Pinilla; B Herreros, I Castillo, PAlgara, S Montes-Moreno,
R Diaz de Otazu , M Pérez Guillermo, MJ Mestre, C Bellas, MA Piris
Proliferation centres (PCs) are a distinctive tissue finding in Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukaemia, of unknown significance. Cell composition
analysis of proliferation centres may clarify the functional relevance
of this tissue compartment.
An immunohistochemical analysis of a series of lymph nodes in CLL cases
has allowed identifying specific cell subpopulations present in PCs, such as:
– Dendritic cells, positive for STAT1 and actin, negative for other
markers of interdigitating and follicular dendritic cells.
– T-cells coexpressing CD4 and CD25, partially expressing PD1,
negative for FoxP3.
This may account for the increased expression by the B-cells
occupying the PCs of markers reporting for:
– Proliferation : Ki67
– Apoptosis: Low Bcl2, High MCL1 and BIRC5
– NF-kB: IkBα-p, MUM1, TRAF1 and nuclear NFKB1.
– BCR signalling: CD40, ZAP70.
– Somatic Hypermutation: DP1, CDK7.
Nuclear expression of NFKB1 (p50) confirms NF-kB activation takes
place in PCs. Interestingly, PC B-cells exhibit a strong expression of
cytoplasmic and nuclear TRAF1, a molecule described to be induced
in response to CD40 signalling by B-cells.
PC B-cells also display increased expression of SHM markers such as
DP1 and CDK7.
PCs seem to constitute a distinctive tissue compartment, where NF-kB
activation could take place in response to signals from specific
dendritic and T-cell subpopulations.
LS 57
INTRAFOLLICULAR NEOPLASIA (IN SITU FOLLICULAR
LYMPHOMA). A REVIEW OF A SERIES OF 15 CASES.
*Yolanda Castro, Santiago Montes-Moreno, Marien Castillo, Lidia
Sanchez-Verde, Javier Menarguez, Juan Cruz Cigudosa, Miguel
Angel Piris.
In situ localization of Follicular Lymphoma (FL) was described in
2002 by E. Jaffe and coworkers (Blood. 2002;99:3376-3382), and
proposed as an early step either in the colonization of Germinal
Centres by FL or in the development of FL.
Here we review the features of a series of 15 cases of lymph node
biopsies with the diagnosis of in situ localization of FL. We have
investigated the presence of t(14;18) involving bcl2 gene either by
PCR and FISH and we have correlated the findings with the clinical
features of the patients.
Three main groups of patients were identified:
– Seven patients had no evidence of FL after conventional staging
procedures at the moment of diagnosis of in situ FL. Only one of
this cases developed FL after 15 monts of follow-up. The
remaining patients did not develop other evidence of FL in the
follow up (median time of 7 months, interval 3-25 months).
– Six patients had concurrent FL at the moment of diagnosis of in
situ FL, as revealed in the clinical staging. Interestingly these two
groups could be distinguished using a quantitative score of
germinal centre infiltration that showed that cases showing FL
colonization were characterized by a higher score.
– A third group of patients consisted of two unusual cases that
presented the association of in situ FL with Classical Hodgkin
lymphoma. Of these, one patient showed established FL after
staging procedures. The other patient has no evidence of FL after
a follow up of 3 months.
With regard to molecular studies, in 13 patients (86%) bcl2 trans-
locations were demonstrated, either by FISH or PCR. Either technique
alone was positive only in a 60 % of the cases, showing the need of a
complementary approach. Interestingly one case of in situ FL showed
amplification of bcl2, and infrequent event in FL.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 199
In conclusion so called in situ FL may represent three different
conditions, with some cases apparently not requiring any additional
therapy. The relatively high incidence of established FL in some cases
with higher degrees on infiltration of the germinal centres suggests the
need of performing conventional staging procedures to discard the
presence of full blown FL. However, the absence of such relationship in a
substantial part of the cases and the association with other lymphomas
such as HL suggests that some cases may represent a particular disease
entity whose role as preneoplastic lesion remains to be fully elucidated.
LS 58
DEREGULATED EXPRESSION OF THE POLYCOMB-
GROUP PROTEIN SUZ12 TARGETS GENES ASSOCIATED
WITH TUMORAL TRANSFORMATION IN MANTLE CELL
LYMPHOMAS
Daniel Martín-Pérez, Esther Sánchez, Lorena Maestre, Javier Suela, Lorena
di Lisio, Nerea Martínez, Miguel A. Piris, *Margarita Sánchez-Beato
Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Monoclonal
Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Programme, and Cytogenetics Unit,
Human Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. Department of Pathology, Hospital
“Nuestra Señora del Prado”, Talavera de la Reina-Toledo, Spain
Polycomb genes are transcriptional regulators with central roles in cell
fate decision, cell renewal, and development, and have been
implicated in cancer development. This is the case for EZH2, a
member of the PRC2 complex with histone methyltransferase activity
and involved in progression of prostatic cancer and in neoplastic
transformation of breast epithelial cells. SUZ12, other important
member of this complex, has been also shown to be implicated in
stem cell development and maintenance.
Although some studies have shown over-expression of SUZ12 in
certain tumors and SUZ12 locus translocation in endometrial stromal
tumors, its real relevance in human cancer has not yet been
established.
We have generated a SUZ12 monoclonal antibody (220A) and
analyzed the expression of SUZ12 and EZH2 in reactive lymphoid
tissue and in a set of 94 mantle cell lymphomas (MCL) samples. The
results showed that whereas SUZ12 is detected exclusively in
germinal centre proliferating cells in reactive lymphoid tissue, it is
overexpressed in 56% of MCL cases. We also demonstrated that
SUZ12 locus has increased copy number in 8% of MCL analyzed
cases. These results suggest that in MCL SUZ12 could have an
oncogenic/tumorigenic role independently of EZH2.
To further demonstrate the relevance of SUZ12 in MCL pathogenesis
we performed functional assays silencing SUZ12 and we also
integrated multiple genomic data combining genome-wide location
analysis in MCL-derived cell lines, with gene expression profiling in
both the SUZ12-silenced cell lines and MCL tumoral samples.
We demonstrate that SUZ12 loss compromise cell viability, identifying
a set of SUZ12-target genes relevant in MCL pathogenesis, including
genes involved in DNA-repair, apoptosis, NFkB pathway, or cell cycle
control.
Therefore, we propose that the abnormal expression of SUZ12 may
account for some of the still unexplained MCL features, such as
abnormal DNA repair, increased resistance to apoptosis and others.
LS 59
AN INCREASED AMOUNT OF PD-1+ TUMOR-INFILTRATING
LYMPHOCYTES IN CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
IS ASSOCIATED WITH POORER OVERALL SURVIVAL
S. Muenst, *S. Höller, S. Dirnhofer, A. Tzankov
Background: Programmed Death-1 (PD-1), a member of the CD28
costimulatory receptor superfamily, has an inhibitory function on T-cell
activity. It plays a role in cellular immune response as well as peripheral
tolerance and is physiologically expressed by germinal center-associated
helper T-cells in reactive lymphoid tissues. The distribution of PD-1+
lymphocytes in the tumor microenvironment of Hodgkin Lymphoma
(HL) is not random and can serve as a diagnostic marker.
Purpose: We aimed to measure the amount of PD-1+ lymphocytes in
HL and to correlate this finding with the remaining background
lymphocyte populations and with known biological and clinical key
data, based on a tissue microarray (TMA) platform encompassing 280
cases of classical HL (cHL) and 3 cases of nodular lymphocyte
predominant HL (NLPHL). Prognostic cut-off scores were determined
by receiver-operating curve (ROC) analysis.
Results: The amount of PD-1+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in 189
evaluable cases was median 8, mean 76 cells/core and median 27,
mean 269 cells/square mm, respectively, and was higher in lympho-
cyte-rich (LR) cHL and lower in the mixed cellular (MC) variant.
Rimming of tumor cells by PD-1+ cells was observed in all evaluable
cases of NLPHL but only in 1% of cHL, particularly in LR and MC
cHL. The PD-1+ cell amount was lower in cHL cases with 9p24 gains
(PD-1 ligand 2 locus; pMann-Whitney
=0.035) and in cases with higher
amounts of FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells (pPearson
=0.063). An increased
amount of PD-1+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes above the ROC-
determined prognostic cut-off score of 23 cells/square mm, turned to
be a stage-independent negative prognostic factor considering overall
survival (pKaplan-Meier
=0.005).
Conclusion: An increased amount of PD-1+lymphocytes is a novel
negative prognostic marker for overall survival in HL, as opposed to
the amount of FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells. Along with the latter, PD1+
cells might represent important lymphoma/host microenvironment
modulators.
LS 60
MICRORNA PROFILE OF DLBCL. IDENTIFICATION
OF MIRNAS SIGNATURES RELATED WITH CLINICAL
OUTCOME IN R-CHOP TREATED PATIENTS.
*Santiago Montes-Moreno, Nerea Martinez, Anabel Saez, Carlos
Montalbán, Helena Rodriguez, Lydia Sanchez, A Lopez, MC Ruiz-
Marcellan, M Canales, P. Mazorra, E. Conde, M. Cruz, M. Mollejo,
MA. Martinez , C. Grande, MA Piris.
Background: MicroRNAs have recently been shown to play a role in
malignant transformation. Few reports have shown the relationship
between isolated miRNAs with specific DLBCL phenotypes or
prognosis. However a large scale miRNA profile of DLBCL is lacking.
In this study we examined microarray microRNA expression profiles in
a series of 36 patients with DLBCL uniformly treated with R-CHOP.
Microarray microRNA expression profiles were correlated with
clinical outcome (Lymphoma Specific Survival) by means of SignS
200 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
(Signatures for Survival Data) analysis software. Differential expression
profiles among immunohistochemically defined subtypes (GC vs
nonGC, according to Hans et al. Blood. 2004;103:275-282) and cases
associated with and without EBV infection were also identified.
Results: A set of 61 miRNAs showed a relationship with survival
time with significant p values (<0.05) according to a single gene Cox
model. Of these, a selection of 25 miRNAs was identified as a miRNA
signature that was inversely associated with LSS (p value 0.046).
Differential miRNA expression analysis among subtypes of EBV-
negative DLBCL cases identified 15 differentially expressed miRNAs
(8 upregulated in GC: miR9, miR9*, miR28, miR129, miR138,
miR151, miR196a, miR196b; and 7 upregulated in nonGC cases:
miR141, miR144, miR200c, miR221, miR222, miR31, miR375).
A set of 87 miRNAs were identified as differentially expressed among
EBV positive or negative DLBCL cases. Of these, only 24 were EBV
related miRNAs, being the other human miRNAs differentially
expressed.
Conclusions: A microRNA signature in R-CHOP treated DLBCL
patients is associated with the clinical outcome. This signature is
being validated in a larger group of paraffin embedded samples.
MicroRNA expression profiling is able to identify a miRNA signature
differentially expressed among DLBCL subtypes, providing a useful
tool to identify differentiation stage-related miRNAs and its potential
gene targets.
A set of human miRNAs is differentially expressed in relationship
with EBV infection suggesting that EBV can interact with host
transcriptome deregulating miRNAs expression.
LS 61
PD-1, A FOLLICULAR T-CELL MARKER USEFUL
FOR RECOGNIZING NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE-
PREDOMINANT HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Syong H. Nam-Cha, Giovanna Roncador, Lydia Sanchez-Verde,
Santiago Montes-Moreno, Agustín Acevedo, Purificación Domínguez-
Franco, Miguel A. Piris
The nodularity and presence of T-cell rosettes surrounding the
neoplastic cells has been described as a defining feature of nodular
lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL). We have
explored the potential diagnostic value of a new marker (NAT105)
that recognizes the antigen PD1 in a series of 152 cases diagnosed as
nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma (NSHL), mixed cellularity
Hodgkin lymphoma (MCHL), lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin
lymphoma (LRCHL), NLPHL and T cell histiocyte-rich B cell
lymphoma (T/HRBCL). All the cases were immunostained with a
panel of antibodies against CD10, bcl-6, CXCL13, CD57, and PD-1
(NAT-105). The series includes a set of cases diagnosed as NLPHL
with diffuse areas, and a group of borderline cases with features
between those of NLPHL and T/HRBCL.
Results show that PD-1 (NAT-105), is an excellent immunomarker not
only of follicular T-cell rosettes in NLPHL, but not a unique and
defining feature of NLPHL, but also of a subset of LRCHLs. The
presence of PD-1-positive (NAT-105) T-cell rosettes seems to be an
additional useful feature in the differential diagnosis of NLPHL and T/
HRBCL, which is normally a controversial and difficult task. The
standard T/HRBCL cases lack follicular T-cell rosettes, while most of
the borderline cases between the two entities have follicular T-cell
rosettes, thus suggesting a closer relation with NLPHL.
LS 62
IN VIVO ACTIVATION OF p53 BY NUTLIN-3A, AN MDM2
ANTAGONIST, INDUCES ANTITUMOR ACTIVITY
IN FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
Elias Drakos1*
, Ellen J. Schlette1
, George Z. Rassidakis1,2
, Jiang Li1
,
Richard J. Ford1
, and L. Jeffrey Medeiros1
.
Department of Hematopathology The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas1
and 2
First Department of
Pathology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,
Greece.
Background: t(14;18)(q32;q21), resulting in overexpression of the
antiapoptotic protein BCL2, is a hallmark of follicular lymphoma
(FL). p53, the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in
human cancers, is rarely mutated in FL. In preliminary in vitro studies
we showed that activation of the p53 pathway by nutlin-3a induces
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in B-cell lymphoma cell lines with t
(14;18) and unmutated p53.
Purpose: We used the B cell lymphoma cell line DOHH2, that has t
(14;18) and wt-p53, and a mouse xenograft model to investigate the in
vivo therapeutic potential of nutlin-3a in FL.
Results: In mice with established FL tumors, two weeks of treatment
with nutlin-3a reduced tumor volume; mean tumor volume was
1965.5 mm3
in the control group and 107.5 mm3
in the nutlin-3a
treated group (p<0.02 Mann Whitney test). Two of the nutlin-3a-
treated mice had no palpable tumors at the end of treatment.
Examination of 6 tumors after 3 injections by Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry showed upregulation of p53 specifically in the
nutlin-3a-treated group. In the control versus nutlin-3a-treated groups,
the proliferation index (Ki-67) was 92.8% versus 75.4%, p21-positive
tumor cells were 13.8% versus 42.3%, the apoptotic index (TUNEL)
was 3.1% versus 16.6%, and activated caspase-3-positive tumor cells
were 2.1% versus 15.7%, respectively (p<0,05 Mann Whitney test).
Conclusions: p53 reactivation by the MDM2 inhibitor, nutlin-3a,
inhibits cell proliferation, induces apoptosis and strikingly inhibits in
vivo growth of FL tumors suggesting a new therapeutic approach for
patients with FL.
LS 63
HIGH NUMBERS OF PROGRAMMED-DEATH-1(PD-1)+
CELLS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH IMPROVED OVERALL
SURVIVAL (OS) IN GERMINAL CENTER B CELL(GCB)
DIFFUSE LARGE B CELL LYMPHOMA(DLBCL)
*Pedro Farinha1
, Giovanna Roncador2
, Laurie Sehn3
, Joseph M
Connors3
and Randy D Gascoyne1
.
1
Pathology and 3
Medical Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
Canada, and 2
Monoclonal Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Program,
Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
Background: Cell-of-origin (COO) distinction characterized by gene-
expression-profiling (GEP) and validated at protein level provides a
biologically relevant DLBCL subclassification. Addition of Ritux-
imab (R) to CHOP chemotherapy improved the outcome in DLBCL,
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 201
due primarily to its effect on the non-germinal center B-cell (GCB)
subgroup. The underlying mechanism responsible for this selective
impact is unknown. Programmed death-1(PD-1) belongs to the
immunoglobulin CD28 receptor family and is characteristically
expressed by germinal center-associated T cells.
Aims: Assess the clinical impact of PD-1+ cells in DLBCL,
distinguished by COO subtypes and treated in consecutive eras of
therapy with R-CHOP vs CHOP. 163 patients with de novo DLBCL
treated between 1999 and 2002 had available paraffin-embedded-
formalin-fixed blocks. TMAs were stained with PD-1 (NAT105),
CD10, Bcl-6, and MUM1.
Results: Patients were treated with CHOP (81) or R-CHOP (82). The
IPI was predictive of OS (p<0.0001). Sixteen cases had uninterpretable
immunostains resulting in 71 GCB and 74 non-GCB cases (n=145).
Overall, 22% (32) had >100 PD-1+cells, including 20 GCB and 12
non-GCB (χ2
=0.1). PD-1+>100 predicted a better OS, independently
of IPI, in the GCB group (p=0.007) but not in the non-GCB group (p=
0.61). Based on treatment era, PD-1+>100 were significantly associated
with improved OS in the CHOP group (p=0.04), and showed a strong
trend in the R-CHOP GCB DLBCL cases (p=0.1).
Conclusion: PD-1+Tcell content predicts OS in DLBCL, due largely
to its impact in GCB, suggesting an anti-tumoral immune response
present in this subtype. Although benefits are more striking in the pre-
R era, there is a clear trend in the post-R GCB group. Additional
studies are needed, but these preliminary data provide evidence that
non-neoplastic cells affect survival in patients with DLBCL.
LS 64
THE TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE “HYPERMETHYLATED
IN CANCER 1 (HIC1)” IS SUPPRESSED IN DIFFUSE LARGE
B-CELL LYMPHOMA (DLBCL) BUT IS NOT ASSOCIATED
WITH OVEREXPRESSION OF THE SIRT1 DEACETYLASE
Heike Stöcklein1,2*
, Jana Smardova3
, Jiri Macak3
, Tiemo
Katzenberger1
, Sylvia Höller1
, Swen Wessendorf4
, Grit Hutter5
, Martin
Dreyling5
, Eugenia Haralambieva1
, Uwe Mäder6
, Hans Konrad Müller-
Hermelink1
, Andreas Rosenwald1
, German Ott1,7
and Jörg Kalla1
1
Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany
2
Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Stuttgart, Germany
3
Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty of Masaryk University
and Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic
4
Klinik für Innere Medizin III, University of Ulm, Germany
5
Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik III, University of München-
Grosshadern, Germany
6
Interdisciplinary Cancer Center, University of Würzburg, Germany
7
Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus,
Stuttgart, Germany
Chromosomal deletions of 17p, frequently targeting TP53, occur in
∼20% of DLBCL and are thought to be important for tumor
pathogenesis. The overlap between TP53 deletions and mutations is
poorly understood in DLBCL. Given that TP53 gene deletions are
almost invariably associated with loss of the whole chromosomal arm
17p, it remains unclear whether loss of TP53 locus represents the most
important biological consequence of 17p deletions.
A biallelic inactivation of TP53 was detected in 13/55 DLBCL, while
22/55 cases harbour a monoallelic TP53-alteration. A minimally
deleted region in 17p13.3 was defined in 11/55 cases, including the
tumor suppressor HIC1. Co-deletion of HIC1 and TP53 was found in
28/55 DLBCL. Hypermethylation of the HIC1-promoter was demon-
strated in 30/55 DLBCL, and was associated with monoallelic deletion
of the HIC1 locus in 27/30 DLBCL. Complete inactivation of HIC1
(HIC1-/-
) resulted in significant reduction of HIC1 mRNA expression
when compared to wildtype HIC1 DLBCL (HIC1+/+
) (p=0.033) and
was correlated with worse clinical outcome of DLBCL patients.
Since inactivation of HIC1 has been reported to result in an
overexpression of SIRT1, leading to inactivation of p53 protein, we
investigated SIRT1 mRNA and protein expression. No significant
differences in SIRT1 mRNA expression levels were detected
comparing DLBCL cases with HIC+/+
and HIC1-/-
status (p=0.886).
Performing immunohistochemistry of SIRT1 protein in 23/55 DLBCL
no correlation was shown between SIRT1 mRNA and protein
concentration (p=0.188). Interestingly, ABC-DLBCL presented with
decreased SIRT1 protein level compared to GCB-DLBCL (p=0.033).
These findings strongly suggest HIC1 as novel, clinical relevant tumor
suppressor candidate in DLBCL. SIRT1 mRNA expression is
independent of HIC1 inactivation status, but is probably regulated
on post-transcriptional level in DLBCL. A significant difference of
SIRT1 protein expression was detected in ABC and GCB-DLBCL,
suggesting that SIRT1 may be a useful tool distinguishing DLBCL of
ABC- or GCB-subtype.
LS 65
CONCURRENT HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA AND METASTATIC
BREAST CARCINOMA IN CERVICAL LYMPH NODES
*Parasi-Ismailou A1
, Lydataki E2
, Pantoula P1
, Hager I2
, Karakosta
A1
, Tamvakos H2
Laoutaris N3
Pathology1
, Internal Medicine2
and Hematology3
Department
General Hospital of Nikaia-Piraeus « Agios Panteleimon» Greece
Increased breast cancer risk following treatment for Hodgkin’s
lymphoma is well established, but the opposite is unknown, although
patients with adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy for breast
carcinoma are at increased risk of developing second malignancies.
The coexistence of these two particular malignant tumors in a lymph
node has, to our knowledge, described only once before.
We describe a case of a 75-year old woman with metastatic ductal
carcinoma of the breast and Hodgkin’s lymphoma in left cervical
lymph nodes, presenting as a collision tumor.
The patient presented with weight loss, fever, anemia and slightly
enlarged cervical, subraclavicular, mediastinal and peritoneal lymph
nodes. She had undergone a left mastectomy with axillary dissection
for breast cancer 9 years before. Because of axillary metastasis, she
was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy and hormonal therapy and
was well under surveillance until one year ago.
Histologically, one of the lymph nodes showed mixed cellularity
classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma, while two others showed both
metastatic carcinoma and Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Immunohistochemistry
was typical, highlighting the two populations.
202 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
The pathogenetic mechanisms for the development of lymphoma after
therapy for breast cancer, as well as the problems concerning the
appropriate staging and therapy of both diseases are discussed.
LS 66
HISTONE DEACETYLASE 1, 2, 6 AND ACETYLATED
HISTONE H4 IN B- AND T-CELL LYMPHOMAS
*Lena Marquard1,5
, Christian Bjørn Poulsen1,2
, Lise Mette Gjerdrum1
,
Peter de Nully Brown2
, Ib Jarle Christensen3
, Peter Buhl Jensen4,5
,
Maxwell Sehested1,5
, Elisabeth Ralfkiær1
1
Experimental Pathology Unit, Department of Pathology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Denmark. 2
Department of Haematology, Copen-
hagen University Hospital, Denmark. 3
Finsen laboratory, Copenhagen
Biocenter, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark. 4
Department
of Oncology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark. 5
Topotarget
A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are novel therapeutics in the
treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (PTCLU), and
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), where, for unknown
reasons, T-cell malignancies appear to be clinically more responsive
than B-cell malignancies. However, the expression of HDACs in
DLBCL and PTCLU has not previously been investigated. Thus, the
aim was to investigate by immunohistology the expression of
HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated histone H4 in pre-
treatment, diagnostic samples from 31 DLBCL and 45 PTCLU,
and to correlate these data with the overall survival. The results
showed moderate to high expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6,
and acetylated H4 in 80.6%, 90.4%, 71.0%, and 74.2% of the
DLBCL and in 100%, 86.6%, 66.6%, and 35.6% of the PTCLU. By
contrast, normal lymphoid tissue showed generally weak expression.
HDAC2 was expressed more abundantly than HDAC6 in both
DLBCL (p=0.0006) and PTCLU (p<0.0001). Also, HDAC1 was
more abundantly expressed than HDAC6 in PTCLU (p<0.0001).
HDAC1 was more abundantly expressed in PTCLU than in DLBCL
(p=0.0046), whereas acetylated H4 was more frequent in DLBCL
(p<0.0001), the latter intriguingly suggesting a mechanism for the
higher sensitivity of T-cell lymphomas to HDAC inhibitors. No
differences in expression were detected between GCB vs. non-GCB
DLBCL. Regarding survival, moderate to strong HDAC6 expression
was significantly correlated with favourable outcome (p=0.016) for
DLBCL patients compared to low expression, whereas the opposite
effect was observed for PTCLU patients (p<0.0001). Expression of
HDAC1, HDAC2, and acetylated H4 did not correlate with survival
(p>0.05). In conclusion, it is shown that HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC6, and acetylated H4 are often overexpressed in DLBCL
and PTCLU compared to normal lymphoid tissue. Furthermore, it is
suggested that HDAC6 may be an important beneficial prognostic
marker in DLBCL patients, whereas the opposite effect is observed
in PTCLU.
LS 67
LOW RATIO OF INTERFOLLICULAR CD8/FOXP3-
POSITIVE REGULATORY T CELLS ASSOCIATED
WITH FAVORABLE OVERALL SURVIVAL
IN FOLLICULAIR LYMPHOMA
Magda SAIFI1,2
, Thérèse ROUSSET1
, Mounia BRAZA2
,
Jean François ROSSI2,3
and Valérie COSTES*1,2
:
Pathology1
and Hematology 2
departments, INSERM U847, CHU
Montpellier, 80 Av A Fliche 34295 Montpellier cedex5, France
Several studies have highlighted the importance of the microenvir-
onnement in the behaviour of follicular lymphoma. Immunochemical
analyses were conducted to study CD8, CD68 an forkhead box
protein P3 (FOXP3) positive T regulatory cell numbers and
distributions in 84 patients with follicular lymphoma (58 at diagnosis,
26 at relapse). Since the overall effect of Tregs is considered to
depend on their number in relation to CD8+ effectors T cells, we
determined the corresponding ratio for each patient and correlated the
results with clinical parameters.
The interfollicular CD8/FOXP3+ cell ratio was significantly higher in
patients with grade 3 tumors (2.04 versus 1.63) and with a high risk
FLIPI index (2.99 versus 1.53) compared with those with grade 1-2
tumors or a low–intermediate FLIPI index. The same results were
obtained with the intrafollicular CD8+/FOXP3 + cell ratio. The
interfollicular CD8/FOXP3 ratio was found to have prognostic value
for overall survival with a 5-years OS of 82% versus 59% for a ratio
of less or more than 1.68. Moreover, an interfollicular FOXP3+ cell
number of more than 86 cells/mm2
was correlated with a more
favourable outcome (p=0.03).
When comparing the two groups at diagnosis and relapse, we
observed a significant difference between the number of CD68 cells
both in intrafollicular locations (39.23 at diagnosis versus 32 at
relapse, p=0.07) and interfollicular locations (96 at diagnosis versus
62 at relapse, p=0.05). The CD8/FOXP3 ratio in interfollicular
locations was significantly different (1.66 at diagnosis versus 2.2 at
relapse, p=0.05).
The presence of abundant FOXP3+ cells with a low CD8/FOXP3
ratio is probably the mark of an active immune response during tumor
development, with lymphoma cells acting as targets or bystanders.
LS 68
DIFFERENCES IN GENE EXPRESSION PATTERNS
BETWEEN HODGKIN LYMPHOMA SUBTYPES
ARE SHAPED BY INFILTRATING MACROPHAGES
Birgersdotter A.1
, Baumforth K.R.N.2
, Sjöberg J.3
, Murray P.G.2
,
Ernberg I.1
, Björkholm M.3
Porwit A.4
1) Department of Microbiology, Tumorbiology and Cell biology,
MTC, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
2) C.R.U.K. Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
3) Department of Medicine, Division of Haematology, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
4) Department of Pathology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 203
Background: Nodular Sclerosis (NS) and Mixed cellularity (MC)
constitute most of classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL) cases. Hodgkin/
Reed-Sternberg (H-RS) cells in both subtypes have similar phenotype
but lymph node morphology differs. There are also differences in
epidemiological features and clinical characteristics of patients.
Purpose of study: To define at molecular level differences between
NS and MC HL subtypes and to identify involved cell types.
Methods: The Affymetrix platform was used to determine gene
expression profiles in whole tissue samples of 44 HL (25 NS and 19
MC). Results were validated by RT-PCR and on protein level by
immunohistochemistry. Data was analyzed in relation to morphological
features of tumors and clinical characteristics of the patients.
Results: 265 genes had higher expression in the NS subtype and 20 in
the MC subtype. Microarray analysis clearly distinguished genes
related to NS specific fibrosis. NS samples showed extra cellular
matrix (ECM) deposits similar to wound healing (COL1, COL3,
LUM) and high expression of genes involved in ECM remodeling.
Immunohistochemistry results showed that mainly macrophages and
fibroblasts expressed these proteins. Genes with higher expression in
the MC tumors were inflammation-related: C1Qα, C1Qβ, CXCL9.
The C1Q subunits were mainly expressed by infiltrating macrophages
and levels of expression correlated also with age of the patients.
Conclusion: Gene expression and morphology of NS and MC HL
subtypes are linked with regard to tissue fibrosis and cell composition
of tumors. NS has features of a second phase wound-healing process
while MC samples lack these deposits of ECM. Both subtypes show
variable expression of different inflammation-related genes correlating
to the numbers of macrophages. Our work underlines the role that
macrophages might have in shaping the gene expression to whole
tumor samples.
LS 69
TRANSFORMATION OF B-CELL LYMPHOMA
TO HISTIOCYTIC SARCOMA – REPORT OF TWO CASES
Assia Bassarova1
, Gunhild Trøen1
, Alexander Fosså2
, Ida Munster
Ikonomou1
, Jahn M. Nesland1
, Jan Delabie1
1
Pathology Clinic, The National Hospital - The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway
2
Department of Oncology, The National Hospital – The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Tumors of histiocytes and dendritic cells are extremely rare and
represent less then 1 % of all the tumors in the lymph nodes. Some of
those tumors occur in patients with another malignant tumor. For
example, histiocytic sarcoma occurs in patients with previously
diagnosed mediastinal germ cell tumors, other cases may be
associated with malignant lymphomas. To our knowledge, no
histiocytic sarcomas have been described occurring as transformed
tumors from B-cell lymphomas.
We report two patients who initially presented with B-cell lymphomas
and developed later in the course of the disease tumors with
morphological and immunohistochemical characteristics of histiocytic
sarcoma. The first patient was a 62 year old man, presenting with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma on the tongue. One year later, a second
biopsy from the tongue showed a recurrence with large pleomorphic
cells. A similar lesion subsequently occurred on the abdomen.
Immunohistochemical results showed lack of all B-cell markers,
including PAX-5, but strong positivity for S-100, PU-1, CD68 (PG-
M1) with focal positivity for CD1a instead. Clonal rearrangement
studies performed on both biopsies from the tongue and the skin
showed the same IgH chain rearrangement. The second patient was
53 year old man with follicular lymphoma. Eight years after the first
presentation grade 3B follicular lymphoma was diagnosed. Thirteen
years after the initial diagnosis the patient developed a quickly
growing tumor on the neck and this time the biopsy showed a diffuse
infiltration with pleomorphic tumor which lacked all B-cell markers,
including PAX-5, but expressed S-100, PU-1, CD14, CD68 (PG-M1),
MAF-B and focal positivity for CD1a. Clonal rearrangement studies,
together with cytogenetic data performed on one of the lymph node
biopsies and the tumor on the neck, showed the same IgH chain
rearrangement and karytoype with t (14; 18).
These two cases illustrate a rare form of transformation of B-cell
neoplasia to histiocytic sarcoma. The clonal relationship is proven by
immunoglobulin gene rearrangement studies. These cases demonstrate
an unusual plasticity of mature neoplastic B-cells with downregulation
of B-cell markers and B-cell transcription factors and upregulation of
histiocytic markers and transcription factors.
LS 70
CHLAMYDIA INFECTION AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE OCULAR ADNEXAL LYMPHOMAS
Alessandro Carugi1*
, Anna Onnis1
, Anna Luzzi1
, Gian Marco Tosi2
,
Cristiana Bellan1
, Mario Cocco1
, Giulia De Falco1
, Antonio
Giordano1,3
and Lorenzo Leoncini1
1
Dpt. Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Italy
2
Dpt. of Ophtalmology, University of Siena, Italy
3
Sbarro institute for Cancer Research & Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia PA 19122, USA
Non-Hodgkins lymphomas develop from nodal and extra-nodal tissue.
A particular extra-nodal lymphoma type arises from B cells of the
marginal zone (MZ) of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).
The geographic heterogeneity in the incidence of B-cell non
Hodgkin’s lymphomas and the growing evidence suggest that MZ
lymphomas are associated with chronic antigenic stimulation by
microbial pathogens, among which H. pylori–associated gastric
MALT lymphoma is the best studied.
Recently, MALT lymphomas have been described in the context of
chronic conjunctivitis, which can be associated with Chlamydia
infection. Studies from Italy showed Chlamydia psittaci in 87% of
ocular adnexal MALT lymphomas and complete or partial regression
of the lymphoma after C. psittaci eradication in four of nine cases.
However C. psittaci was not founded in ocular adnexal lymphoma
from other studies. As association with C. psittaci does not seem to be
a constant parameter, this variability may depend on geographic
heterogeneity.
This project was designed to further investigate the role of Chlamydia
psittaci in the development of ocular adnexal MALT lymphomas, by
comparison of cases retrieved from different geographic areas, as
Kenia and Italy.
The presence of C. psittaci DNA in biopsies of ocular adnexal
lymphomas was demonstrated by TETR-PCR, a modified PCR
reaction, used to amplify different DNA sequences in the variable
204 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
regions of the 16S and 23S spacer rRNA genes specific for Chlamydia
psittaci.
DNA was extracted from 31 ocular adnexal lymphomas, retrieved
from two different geographical regions. The prevalence of C. psittaci
infection in MALT lymphoma showed a marked variation between the
two geographical regions. 20% (5/25) of the samples from Italy were
positive for C. psittaci, but no association with this pathogen was
observed in any of the samples from Kenya.
Furthermore, we investigated a possible relationship between C.
psittaci infection and the promoter hypermethylation of p16/INK4a.
This epigenetic alteration has been described in H. pylori–associated
gastric MALT lymphoma. Our results show a partial methylation of
p16/INK4a promoter in 46% (12/26) of C. psittaci-negative cases,
whereas no hypermethylation of this gene was found in C. psittaci-
positive cases. As genetic alterations, as the t(11;18), have been
described in H. pylori-associated MALT lymphomas, we are currently
performing FISH studies to evaluate whether such genetic alterations
may also occur in adnexal lymphomas, besides Chlamydia association.
From these findings, we may conclude that many and different infectious
agents may play a critical role in MALT lymphoma development.
LS 71
EUPHORBIA TIRUCALLI AS A POSSIBLE COFACTOR
IN INDUCING EBV-DRIVEN MALIGNANT
TRANSFORMATION
Mario Cocco1*
, Susanna Mannucci1
, Giuseppina Antonicelli1
,
Alessandro Carugi1
, Anna Luzzi1
, Giulia De Falco1
, Lorenzo
Leoncini1
and Cornelia A. van den Bosch2
1- Dept. Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Italy
2- Health Protection Agency, UK
Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) is a monoclonal B-lymphocytic
malignancy and is the most common childhood cancer in sub-
Saharian Africa. The infection with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
the occurrence of holoendemic malaria are two clearly defined agents
that are associated with the development of eBL. However, it has been
recently postulated a possible role for Euphorbia tirucalli, a plant
commonly used in the traditional medicine, as a cofactor in the
development of eBL. Latex of this plant is usually used as glue and is
played by children in endemic areas of occurrence of BL. Recent
findings suggest that latex of this plant may induce EBV lytic cycle in
latently EBV-infected cells.
The aim of our study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms,
which may be involved in malignant transformation induced by E.
tirucalli. We treated EBV-infected non-transformed B lymphoblastoid
cell lines with different concentrations of plant extracts of E. tirucalli
and monitored cell proliferation. Our results indicate that there was no
difference in cell proliferation upon E. tirucalli treatment. Interestingly,
cells treated with E. tirucalli showed a modulation of LMP-1 and
EBNA2 expression and a marked up-regulation of Bcl-2.
In order to investigate whether treatment with E. tirucalli was able to
induce chromosomal alterations, we performed FISH analysis, using
probes designed to detect c-MYC translocation.
Collectively, our preliminary data suggest that E. tirucalli may
cooperate in inducing malignant transformation, due to its modulation
of the expression of the latency genes of EBV, and the up-regulation
of an anti-apoptotic factor as Bcl-2.
LS 72
ICOS IS EXPRESSED IN FOLLICULAR T HELPER CELLS
AND IN ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T CELL LYMPHOMA
Teresa Marafioti1
, Erica Ballabio1
, Jennifer Paterson1
, Andreas
Chott2
, Stefano Pileri3
, Martin L Hansmann4
, Harald Stein5
, David
Y Mason1
, *Philippe Gaulard6
1
Leukaemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield De-
partment of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, UK; 2
Department of Pathology, University of Vienna,
Austria; 3
Chair of Pathology and Unit of Haematopathology, "L&A
Seragnoli" Institute of Haematology, University of Bologna, Italy;
4
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine,
University Clinic Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 5
Institute of
Pathology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Germany; 6
Département de Pathologie & Inserm U841,
Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France
Follicular T-helper cells (TFH) represent a population of T cells residing
in germinal centres of lymphoid follicles. These cells show a unique
gene expression profile and are believed to be the cell of origin of
angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AITL). We have previously
described new proteins, SAP, PD-1 and CXCL13, that labelled TFH
(Roncador et al., 2007; Dupuis et al, 2006) and the majority of AITL
cases analysed.
We report here an antibody that recognises the Inducible COStimulator
protein (ICOS), a member of the CD28 family that plays a critical role in
Tcell-dependent humoral immunity and is expressed in NK cells, subsets
of regulatory T helper and (especially) in TFH cells.
ICOS antibody was studied in normal and neoplastic paraffin-
embedded lymphoid tissues by immunohistochemistry. In tonsil and
lymph node, ICOS-positive cells were found in the inner part of the
mantle at the periphery of the light zone (suggestive of TFH cells) and
some in the interfollicular area. In the thymic medulla, medium-sized
cells expressed ICOS and only rare scattered ICOS-positive cells were
found in spleen and bone marrow. Double immunolabelling revealed
that ICOS is expressed on TFH cells (as demonstrated by its co-
expression with SAP, PD-1, CD57 and BCL-6), and on a subset of
FOXP3-positive regulatory T-cells.
The analysis of ICOS in 386 neoplasms (comprising almost all types
of B-, T-cell and Hodgkin lymphomas) revealed that B-cell lympho-
mas were negative in all instances and among T-cell lymphomas
ICOS expression was restricted to 27/29 of AITL cases and 14/29 of
peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL)-unspecified. The presence of
ICOS-positive PTCLs is an interesting finding, it might indicate the
activation status of neoplastic cells or suggest the existence of a
biologically distinct group of “AITL-like PTCLs” as described by
recent gene expression profiling studies (de Leval et al., 2006).
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 205
LS 73
THREE DISTINCT PROTEOMIC SIGNATURES
FOR CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA LYMPH
NODES
Corine Jansen1
, Martijn de Prenter1
, Konnie Hebeda1
MD, PhD,
Marian Stevens-Kroef2
PhD, Annet Simons2
PhD, Reinier
Raymakers3
, MD, PhD, Johan van Krieken1
MD, PhD, and Patricia
JTA Groenen1
PhD*
Dept. of Pathology, Dept of Human Genetics, dept of Hematology,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
Background: Lymph nodes from nodal (lymphoma) and leukemic
CLL patients were analysed using Surface Enhanced Laser Dissection/
Ionization-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (SELDI-TOF MS) to
generate specific protein signatures of the lymph node protein
homogenates. In addition, the IGH-mutation status, VH-family usage,
and the genomic aberrations were determined on the same set of CLL
lymph node specimens.
Aim of study: To identify correlations between the distinct protein
signatures seen in CLL and IGH-mutation status, VH-usage, genomic
aberrations or nodal/leukemic presentation of CLL.
Results: Using protein profiling by SELDI-TOF MS we have
identified three distinct protein signatures, i.e.: 1A, 1B and 2, in 12,
11 and 12 of the lymph nodes from CLL patients, respectively.
The protein signatures do not correlate with the prognosis of the patients,
as defined by the unmutated IGH- status, or by VH3-21 usage, which is
adverse prognostic factor in CLL independent of the mutation status.
Neither, can we find a correlation with the VH1-69 family usage, which
is the most frequently rearranged IGHV gene in CLL.
Preliminary data provide evidence that protein signature 2 is not found
in the lymph nodes of leukemic CLL patients, although the group
assessed is very limited. It is expected that the proteomic signatures
will associate with specific genomic aberrations in the samples. Data
analysis on the occurrence of trisomy 12 and of genomic aberrations
at ATM (11q22), DLEU and RB1 (13q14), TP53 (17p13) gene, which
will be determined with the multiplex ligation dependent probe
amplification technique, are in progress.
In conclusion: Specific proteomic signatures are identified in lymph
nodes of leukemic and nodal CLL patients. The distinct proteomic
signatures do not correlate with the IGH-mutation status, but it is highly
likely that a correlation with the genomic aberrations will be found.
LS 74
ASSESSMENT OF THE MICROBIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
IN PULMONAL EXTRANODAL MARGINAL ZONE B-CELL
LYMPHOMAS OF MALT-TYPE (BALT-LYMPHOMA) BY 16S
rDNA HETEROGENEITY ANALYSIS USING RFLP
AND PHYLOGENETICS (SHARP-SCREENING)
P. Adam1*
, U. Hentschel2
, C. Gernert2
, S. Schmitt2
, E. Haralambieva1
,
G. Ott1
, H.K. Müller-Hermelink1
1
Institut für Pathologie, Universität Würzburg
2
Zentrum für Infektionsforschung, Universität Würzburg
Background: For different localisations of extranodal marginal zone
B-cell lymphoma of MALT type (eMZBCL) an association with
chronic inflammation caused by microbiological agents (e.g. Heli-
cobacter pylori in the stomach) is known. In the lung a link between
lymphomagenesis and a defined causative organism is still missing.
Purpose: A comprehensive diversity survey using 16S-rDNA library
construction followed by restriction-fragment-length-polymorphism
(RFLP) analysis, sequencing and phylogenetic tree construction was
employed on nine cases each of BALT lymphoma and control lung
tissues (normal fetal lung, pneumonitis, emphysema, cancer) to assess
the respective bacteriological microenvironment.
Results: This highly sensitive method, hereafter termed “SHARP-
Screening”, allowed for the identification of the entire bacterial
population in the tissue in a cultivation-independent manner.
Noteworthy, in eight of the nine cases of BALT lymphoma, bacteria of the
Alcaligenaceae family (Alcaligenes, Achromobacter, AKIW733), were found,
whereas none of the control cases showed the presence of these clades.
Conclusions: 16S-rDNA library construction in combination with
RFLP-screening and phylogenetic analyses, hereafter described as
“SHARP-Screening” is a cultivation-independent tool for the analysis of
the bacteriological microenvironment in chronic inflammation processes,
giving rise to extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of MALT-type.
Betaproteobacteria of the Alcaligenaceae family may be affiliated with
and possibly involved in the lymphomagenesis of BALT lymphomas.
LS 75
CURRENT ROUTINE CLONALITY DETECTION
DOES NOT DISCRIMINATE BETWEEN HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA AND B-CELL NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA.
Konnie M. Hebeda* MD, PhD , Margarethe C. van Altena, Paul
Rombout, Johan H.J.M. van Krieken MD, PhD and Patricia J.T.A.
Groenen, PhD.
Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Background: B-cell clonality detection in whole tissue sections is
considered indicative of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL).
Although Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a B-cell lymphoma, due to sparse
tumor cells, heavy somatic hypermutation load and lack of immunoglob-
ulin expression, the clonal B-cell nature is considered difficult to detect.
Aim of study: To investigate the possibility to detect clonality in
Hodgkin lymphomas by using multiplex PCR-primer sets for IGH and
IGK gene rearrangements.
Results: We tested 25 classical HL with a varying tumor cell load
with multiplex PCR primer sets for the incomplete (DJ) and complete
(VDJ) IGH gene rearrangements as well as the IGK-VJ and IGK-DE
gene rearrangements (BIOMED-2).
A clonal population was found in 15 cases with the IGH FR1-3 PCRs.
Using the IGK-VJ and IGK-DE PCRs an additional 5 cases had a
dominant clonal cell population, resulting in a detection rate of 80%.
This detection was obtained by using frozen tissue. Paraffin-
embedded tissue samples of the cases with sufficient PCR-amplify
ability allowed detection of the same targets.
No correlation was found with the presence of Epstein Barr Virus in
the tumor cells. None of the HL cases showed evidence of B-cell
lymphoma during follow-up of 1 to 6 years.
206 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
In conclusion: The present routine PCR methods are sensitive enough
to detect small numbers of malignant cells in HL, with a similar
rearrangement pattern as B-NHL. Therefore the presence of a clonal
B-cell population does not differentiate between HL and NHL.
LS 76
AP-1 DEPENDENT GALECTIN-1 EXPRESSION
DELINEATES CLASSICAL HODGKIN AND ANAPLASTIC
LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS FROM OTHER LYMPHOID
MALIGNANCIES WITH SHARED MOLECULAR FEATURES
Scott J. Rodig1*
, Jing Ouyang2
, Przemyslaw Juszczynski2
, Treeve
Currie1
, Kenneth Law1
, Donna S. Neuberg2
, Gabriel A. Rabinovich3
,
Margaret A. Shipp2
, and Jeffery L. Kutok1
1
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and
2
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
3
Laboratory of Immunopathology. Institute of Biology and Experimental
Medicine (IBYME-CONICET), C1428- Buenos Aires, Argentina
Background: Galectin-1 (Gal1) is an immunomodulatory glycan-
binding protein regulated by an AP1-dependent enhancer in Hodgkin
cell lines. In recent studies, we found that Hodgkin cell derived Gal1
promotes the development of the immunosuppressive T helper 2/ T
regulatory cell skewed microenvironment that is typical of classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL).
Purpose and results: We wished to determine whether AP1-
dependent Gal1 expression is a feature of primary cHL and whether
this signature can distinguish cHL from other lymphoid malignancies.
We found that Gal1 is selectively expressed by Reed-Sternberg cells
in >90% of an extensive series of primary cHLs and that Gal1
expression is concordant with that of the activated AP1 component, c-
Jun. In contrast, aggressive B-cell lymphomas, including diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and
nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, do not express
Gal1. However, an aggressive tumor of T-cell lineage, anaplastic large
cell lymphoma (ALCL), consistently expresses both Gal1 and its
transcriptional regulator, c-Jun. The presence of activated c-Jun,
indicative of functional AP1 activity, was confirmed by phospho-c-
Jun immunostaining in cHL and ALCL.
Conclusions: These findings establish a functional AP1 signature that
includes Gal1 expression in cHL and ALCL, and suggests a common
mechanism for tumor immunotolerance. In addition, Gal1 and c-Jun
serve as diagnostic biomarkers that delineate cHL and ALCL from
other lymphomas with shared morphologic and/or molecular features.
LS 77
EXTRANODAL FOLLICULAR DENDRITIC CELL SARCOMA.
A REPORT OF THREE NEW CASES
D Meseure* (1), M Trassard (1), S Boudjemaa (2), JM Guinebretière
(1), C Copie (3) si tu es OK
Department of pathology of (1) centre René-Huguenin Saint-Cloud,
(2) Hôpital Trousseau Paris, (3) Hôpital Henri Mondor Créteil
FRANCE
Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) are among the rarest of
tumours affecting the lymphoid tissue. Their nodal location, the most
frequent, is well characterized. It is composed of spindle and ovoid
cells in a lymphocytes rich background. Sometimes FDCS is
associated with other disease (Castelman disease, EBV infection,
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour, follicular lymphoma...). In their
extranodal location, only 46 cases FDCS have been reported. It is
often misdiagnosed due to numerous distinctive histologic features
which can mimic a wide range of other tumours.
The 3 patients, 53 (a), 63 (b) and 73 (c) year-old women, presented
with an intra abdominal mass, respectively located in perirectal (b),
mesentery (c) and perihepatic region (a). Surgical resections were
performed. The tumours which measured from 3 to 12 cm (a) were
well delineated, whitish, fleshy or fasciculate. Histologically, they all
associated areas with typical low grade FDCS, diffuse for one, limited
and associated with predominant epithelioid and spindle areas () and
for one high grade areas (necrosis, >20 mitoses/10 HPF).The tumoral
cells diffusely expressed the FDC markers CD21 (3/3), CD23 (2/3)
and CD35 (2/3) in typical areas, focally for S100 and CD68 while
negative for other mesenchymal markers, and EBV (LMP1, EBER).
Additional markers, clusterin (3/3), EGFR (1/3), podoplanin (3/3)
fascin (1/3) were positive in typical and interestingly in atypical areas.
One local recurrence occurred 18 months after incomplete surgical
resection (a).
In conclusion, extranodal FDCS are rare and misdiagnosed neoplasm,
due to the morphologic diverse histologic features. Recently, different
new markers have been reported in FDCS and as we found them
positive in non morphological evocative area, might be particularly
helpful to recognize this aggressive neoplasm.
LS 78
MYC TRANSLOCATION-NEGATIVE CLASSICAL BURKITT
LYMPHOMA CASES: AN ALTERNATIVE PATHOGENETIC
MECHANISM INVOLVING MIRNA DEREGULATION
Leucci Eleonora1
, Cocco Mario1
, Onnis Anna1
, van Cleef Patricia2
,
Bellan Cristiana1
, van Rijk Anke2
, De Falco Giulia1
, Nyagol Joshua1
,
Byakika Bessie3
, Lazzi Stefano1
, Tosi Piero1
, van Krieken Han 2
,
Leoncini Lorenzo1*
1.Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of
Siena, Italy
2.Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
3. The Nairobi Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya
The molecular feature of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is the translocation,
that places c-Myc under the control of immunoglobulin gene
regulatory elements. However, there is recent evidence that infrequent
cases may lack an identifiable MYC translocation. In addition, during
the EUROFISH project, aiming at the standardization of FISH
procedures in lymphoma diagnosis, we found that 5 cases out of 35
classic endemic BLs were negative for MYC translocations by using a
split-signal as well as a dual-fusion probe.
In this study we investigated the expression pattern of miRNAs
predicted to target c-Myc, in BL cases, to clarify whether alternative
pathogenetic mechanisms may be responsible for lymphomagenesis in
cases lacking the MYC translocation. MiRNAs are a class of small
RNAs that are able to regulate gene expression at the post-
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 207
transcriptional level. Several studies have reported their involvement
in cancer and their association with fragile sites in the genome. They
have also been shown to control cell growth, differentiation and
apoptosis, suggesting that these molecules could act as tumour
suppressors or oncogenes.
Our results demonstrated a modulation of specific miRNAs. In particular,
a down-regulation of Let7c was observed in BL cases, compared to
normal controls. More interestingly, hsa-mir-34b was found to be down-
regulated only in BL cases that were negative for MYC translocation,
suggesting that this event might be responsible for c-Myc deregulation
in such cases. This hypothesis was further confirmed by our in vitro
experiments, which demonstrated that increasing doses of synthetic
hsa-mir-34b were able to modulate c-Myc expression. These results
indicate for the first time that hsa-mir-34b may influence c-Myc
expression in Burkitt lymphoma as the more common aberrant control
exercised by the immunoglobulin enhancer locus.
LS 79
B CELL DIFFERENTIATION IN EBV-POSITIVE
BURKITT LYMPHOMA IS IMPAIRED
AT THE POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL LEVEL
BY MIRNA ALTERED EXPRESSION
Leucci E1
, Onnis A1
, Cocco M1
, De Falco G1
, Costanzo V1
, Cerino
G1
, Manucci S1
, Cantisani R1
, Nyagol J1
, Mwanda W2
, Iriso R3
,
Schurfeld K4
, Bellan C1
, Lazzi S1
and Leoncini L1*
.
1. Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of
Siena, Siena Italy.
2. Department of Pathology, Kenyatta National Hospital, University
of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
3. St. Mary’s Hospital, Lacor, Gulu, Uganda.
4. Dpt. of Human Pathology, Montevarchi, Arezzo, Italy.
Endemic, sporadic and HIV-associated Burkitt lymphoma (BL) all
have a similar B-cell phenotype and a MYC translocation, but a
variable association with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). According to
immunoglobulin gene mutation analysis, EBV-negative BLs may
originate from early centroblasts, whereas EBV-positive BLs appear
to arise from post-germinal center cells. The appearance of a germinal
center phenotype in EBV-positive cells might thus derive from a block
in B cell terminal differentiation. The exit from the germinal center
involves a highly complex series of events that is regulated at multiple
levels. These events require the activation of BLIMP-1, the master
regulator of B cell terminal differentiation, which in turn represses
several target genes, including c-MYC and BCL6.
Recent data indicate that only a small number of genes implicated in
immune responses, such as BCL6, SMAD7, BLIMP1, NFAT5, EP300,
are preferentially targeted by miRNAs, a class of small RNAs (∼22nt)
that are capable of post-transcriptionally regulating hundreds of protein-
coding genes and are expressed in a tissue-specific manner during
development.
We investigated the expression of specific miRNAs predicted to be
involved in B cell differentiation. Among the miRNAs studied, we
show here that hsa-miR-127 is strongly up-regulated in EBV-positive
BL samples, and that this miRNA is implicated in physiological B cell
differentiation. We also demonstrate for the first time that this effect is
due to the post-transcriptional regulation of BLIMP-1 and XBP-1.
LS 80
COMPARATIVE PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF PRIMARY
MEDIASTINAL LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA AND HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA USING iTRAQ-LABELING AND TANDEM
MASS SPECTROMETRY
Kojo S.J. Elenitoba-Johnson*, Damian Fermin, Venketesha Basrur,
Kevin P. Conlon, Charles Seiler, Ian Waxman, Mitchell S. Cairo and
Megan S. Lim
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA and Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York
City, NY, USA
Primary mediastinal large cell lymphoma (PMBCL) is a rare subtype of
extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) that is difficult to
distinguish from other types of DLBCL and classical Hodgkin lymphoma
(cHL). Recent studies reveal similar gene exression profiles in PMBCL
and cHL suggesting a common cell of origin. We utilized a differential
isotopic strategy to determine the global proteomic differences between a
cell line derived from PMBCL (Karpas 1106P), DLBCL (SUDHL-9), and
a cHL (L428). Protein was collected from the cell lysates and subjected to
labeling by isobaric tags (iTRAQ) for relative quantification and analyzed
by reverse-phase liquid chromatography and electrospray ionization
tandem mass spectrometry. 200 g of total cell lysate was analyzed and
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in duplicate. The proteins were
identified using X!Tandem. After normalization, quantitative data were
subjected to false discovery rate (FDR) calculation to identify differen-
tially expressed proteins through Mixture Modeling. Differentially
expressed proteins were scored at a FDR of 0.13. This approach revealed
66 proteins with differential expression patterns that were discriminative
for the 3 different lymphoma cell lines. Several proteins that have been
previously reported to be differentially expressed in these lymphomas
were identified including Fascin, Galectin-1, Galectin-3, STAT1 and
SWAP70. In addition, several previously unreported proteins involved in
numerous cellular functions were differentially expressed (cell adhesion,
signaling, immunity). We have validated a subset of these by western blot
analysis and immunohistochemistry. This study demonstrates the utility of
large-scale mass spectrometry-based proteomics for the elucidation of
proteins that may serve as potential diagnostic marker panels for the
distinction of PMBCL, DLBCL and cHL.
LS 81
IS THERE AN IMMUNOPHENOTYPE FOR PLASMABLASTIC
LYMPHOMA? IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL EVALUATION
OF THE PHENOTYPE WITH NEW SPECIFIC MARKERS
AGAINST XBP1, BLIMP1, GCET1 AND KLHL6.
*Santiago Montes-Moreno, Ana-Rosa Gonzalez-Medina, Socorro-María
Rodriguez-Pinilla, Lorena Maestre, Lydia Sanchez-Verde, Miguel A Piris.
CNIO. Madrid. Spain.
Plasmablastic lymphoma is a clinicopathological variant of DLBCL,
and is considered to derive from terminally differentiated B-cells.
Differential diagnosis with ABC-DLCBL and plasma cell myeloma re-
presents a common problem because of the lack of a distinctive phenotype.
208 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Here we show the results of an immunohistochemical study of 38 cases
of Plasmablastic Lymphoma (7 EBV -, 31 EBV+) using antibodies
against CD20, PAX5, BCL6, CD10, GCET1, KLHL6, MUM1,
PRDM1/Blimp1, XBP1, CD38, CD138 and ISH for EBV-EBER.
We found here that cases with plasmablastic morphology carry on two
different immunophenotypes:
& Full plasmablastic phenotype (Blimp1pos, nucXBP1pos, Pax5 -/+)
in 20 cases (53%). Of these, the majority shows expression of
surface CD138 (13 cases).
& A defective plasmablastic phenotype was observed in 18 (47%)
cases, divided into:
○ (Blimp1pos, nucXBP1neg, Pax5-/+) was seen in 14 cases
(36%). Of these, only half showed expression of CD138.
○ Of the remaining 4 cases one was Blimp1neg, nucXBP1 pos,
Pax5neg and 3 Blimp1neg, XBP1neg, Pax5-/+.
These full an defective plasmablastic immunophenotypes are rare
among conventional DLBCL (including ABC subtypes) (26%
positivity for Blimp1 and less than 5% for nuclear XBP1 in a large
series of 113 DLBCL)
Interestingly, while Bcl6 was absent in all cases, CD10 and two novel
GC markers, GCET1 and KLHL6 were present in a fraction of
samples (9 cases positive for GCET1 (24%), 5 cases for KLHL6
(13%) and 7 for CD10 (18%). MUM1 was positive in all cases.
Differences in expression among EBV pos and negative cases were only
significant respective to expression of B cell markers CD20 and Pax5. 57%
of EBVneg cases were CD20pos and 42% PAX5pos while only 13% and
16% of EBV positive cases were positive for CD20 and Pax5 respectively.
Our results demonstrate a highly characteristic phenotype of Plasma-
blastic Lymphoma with the simultaneous double expression of
Blimp1 and nuclearXBP1. This particular phenotype helps to
differentiate these tumours from DLBCL, independently of EBV
status. Moreover, the expression of novel GC markers among these
cases facilitates the differential with anaplastic myeloma.
LS 82
INTRATUMORAL PLASMACYTOID DENDRITIC CELLS
AND T CELLS ASSOCIATE WITH INCREASED SURVIVAL
IN PATIENTS WITH FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA (FL)
R Butsch1
, S Schaerer1
, D Korol2,1
, E Levi3,4
, C Renner1
, N Probst-
Hensch2,1
, H Moch1
and *M Kurrer5,1
.
1
Pathology and Oncology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
2
Cantonal Cancer Registry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
3
Pathology, John D. Dingell VAMC, Detroit, Michigan, United States;
4
Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United States and
5
Pathology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
Background: Gene array studies on FL have associated intratumoral
macrophage/dendritic cell and/or T cell signatures with both increased
and decreased survival. FL has been reported to depend on T cell help
for progression. Interferon-alpha, produced by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDC), has been used in the therapy of FL. We wanted to test
whether this would translate into prognostic factors detectable by
immunohistochemistry.
Design: A TMA was constructed with duplicate cores from 252
archival follicular lymphoma samples biopsied between 1990 and
2004. Immunohistochemistry was performed for CD123+ pDC (clone
3H3, eBioscience) and CD3+ T cells (clone SP7, Lab Vision) on a
Ventana Discovery module and quantified by counting stained cells or
by stained area fraction determinations. Quantifications were corre-
lated with survival and clinical data including FLIPI in 131 patients.
Result: High numbers of CD3+ cells or CD123+ cells associated with
increased survival. Low numbers of CD123+ cells further correlated
with B symptoms and elevated LDH. Numbers of CD123+ cells
correlated with CD3+ cells. In multivariate models, however, both
CD123 and CD3 proved to be comparable independent prognostic
factors. CD123 was more significant than CD3 in predicting B
symptoms and advanced tumor stage, and CD123 was also more
significant than grading, FLIPI or age in predicting survival.
Conclusion: T cells and pDC associate with and/or influence the
clinical course of patients with follicular lymphoma. Association of
CD3+ T cells and CD123+ pDC with survival suggests that the
preservation of the preexisting interfollicular T cell compartment
associates with prognosis. The findings may also suggest, that FL with
numerous T cells is still dependent on T cells for growth and may
therefore carry a better prognosis. CD123+ pDC may associate with
longer survival as they endogenously produce the interferon in situ that
otherwise would need to be provided by external sources for therapy.
LS 83
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL DATA OF LEUKEMIAS
AND LYMPHOMAS SUGGEST AND SUPPORT
DISTINCT BIOLOGICAL GROUPS
D Poncini1
, V Stucki1
, S Giger1
, D Korol1,2
, R Maurer3
, C Renner1
,
N Probst-Hensch1,2
, H Moch1
, E Levi4,5
and *M Kurrer1,6
.
1
Pathology and Oncology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; 2
Cancer Registry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzer-
land; 3
Pathology, City Hospital Triemli, Zurich, Switzerland; 4
Pathol-
ogy, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, Michigan, United
States; 5
Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United
States and 6
Pathology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
Background: Epidemiological data on leukemias and lymphomas
(LL) have - in the past - mainly been used for clinical or differential
diagnostic purposes. We gathered and reviewed epidemiological data
in order to gain insights into the biology of LL.
Design:We performed a retrospective analysis of 11000 LL registered
from 1980 until 2004 in the Cancer Registry of the Canton of Zurich
(population 1.1 million) to obtain age dependent incidence curves for each
entity, corrected for age distribution of the population and year of incidence
Result: LL generally show an exponential increase with age, that is
genuine to B-cell lymphoma (BCL), T-cell lymphoma (TCL) and
hematopoietic stem cell (HPSC) disease, each. LL show a sex ratio
(MF) of about 1.75. LL deviating from this include hairy cell
leukemia (flat age curve, MF 4) and HL. Nodular sclerosis (NS) HL
shows an age peak at age 25, mixed cellularity (MC) HL shows an
exponential increase with age, HL show a MF closer to 1. PMBCL
peaks at age 33 and has a MF of 0.5. ALL/AML drop during
adolescence to later show an exponential increase with age. Both
marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) and follicular lymphoma (FL) shows
a MF of 0.8. FL, however, shows an exponential increase with age
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 209
only until age 65 followed by a leveling off of the incidence curve.
Mantle cell lymphoma shows a MF of 6 in the 65-75 year old but a
MF of below 2 in the younger and older.
Conclusion: Cancerogenic events affect B-cells, T-cells and HPSC
differently. In HPSC diseases epidemiological curves confirm the
biological distinction of juvenile forms from senile forms. In LL the
epidemilogical incidence curves suggest closer relationships of NSHL
with MBCL, and MCHL with other BCL, respectively. Within BCL
MCL, FL/MZL and HCL form epidemiologically distinct subgroups
in need for biological explanations
LS 84
EARLY OR LATE DEFECT IN T CELL DEVELOPMENT
DIFFERENTLY AFFECT MATURATION
AND ORGANIZATION OF THYMIC EPITHELIAL
CELLS : LESSON FROM HUMAN PRIMARY
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
(*) Poliani P.L.1
, Ravanini M1
, Roifman CM2
, Villa A4
, Facchetti F1
,
Notarangelo LD3
1
Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, Italy; 2
Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 3
Division of Immunology, Children’s
Hospital, Boston, USA; 4
CNR-ITB, TIGET- HSR Milano Italy
Severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) comprises a heteroge-
neous group of genetic disorders affecting genes of both early
(gamma-common (γc) chain, IL-7R, RAG1/2, ADA) and late (MHC
class-II, ZAP70) steps of T cell development.
Although SCID are characterized by a similar clinical phenotype, it is
being increasingly recognized that hypomorphic mutations in the
same genes may result in a more complex phenotype with
immunodysreactivity (e.g. Omenn Syndrome, OS).
Cross-talk between thymocytes and thymic epithelial cells (TECs) in
the thymus is essential to preserve thymic architecture and function.
We have previously shown that the severe lymphoid defect in OS
results in disrupted thymic architecture and impaired expression of
AIRE (AutoImmune REgulator), a transcription factor expressed by a
subset of medullary TEC, and critically involved in negative selection.
We have extended this analysis of thymic epithelial cells maturation in
eight patients with different forms of SCID, including both early and
late defects in T cell differentiation.
Compartmentalization and maturation of TEC have been studied by
expression of cytokeratin-8 and 5, UEA-1 ligand, claudin-4 and
AIRE, and intrathymic generation of regulatory T cells (Treg) by
Foxp3 expression.
Our data show that early defects in T cell development result in
profound abnormalities of TEC differentiation, characterized by lack
of Claudin-4 and AIRE expression.
Later defects in thymic development allow for cortico-medullary
demarcation, and normal claudin-4 and aire expression, although in
patients with ZAP70 deficiency the medullary-to-cortex ratio is
reduced, possibly reflecting impaired thymocyte signalling.
These data may help to explain why immunodysreactivity is most
often associated with hypomorphic defects in genes that affect early
stages of T-cell development, in which severe TEC abnormalities
cause impaired negative selection and inability to convert autoreactive
T cells into Tregs.
LS 85
ASSESSMENT OF PRESERVATION OF B CELL FOLLICLES
IN CLASSICAL HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA RESULTS
IN CLINICALLY RELEVANT SEPARATION
OF LYMPHOCYTE RICH FROM MIXED CELLULARITY
HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
S. Giger1
, D Korol2,1
, E Levi3,4
, C Renner1
, N Probst-Hensch2,1
, H
Moch1
and *M Kurrer5,1
.
1
Pathology and Oncology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; 2
Cantonal Cancer Registry, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; 3
Pathology, John D. Dingell VAMC, Detroit, Michigan,
United States; 4
Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan,
United States and 5
Pathology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau,
Switzerland.
Background: The WHO classification of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL)
distinguishes nodular lymphocyte predominant (LP) HL from classi-
cal HL (cHL). cHL is divided into nodular sclerosis (NS), mixed
cellularity (MC) and lymphocyte rich cHL (LR). The WHO
classification failed to detail criteria for separation of MC from LR.
Follicular and interfollicular patterns of cHL have been described to
complement the WHO criteria. We hypothesized that preservation of
follicular architecture would separate MC from LR.
Design: Histological slides and clinical follow-up were reviewed from
119 patients diagnosed from 1991 to 2007. Preservation of B cell
follicles and absence of sclerosis was used to separate MC and NS
from LR. Profiles for EBER, CD20, CD30 and CD15 were used to
separate LP from LR.
Result: Review of histologies resulted in 65 NS, 19 MC, 20 LR and
15 NP cases. B-symptoms were more frequent in MC compared to LR
and LP. Patients died in 8/65 NS, 6/17 MC, 1/15 LR and 3/14 LP
cases. Male to female ratio was for NS 33:32, MC 13:6, LR 14:6 and
LP 14:1. MC patients were older, higher stages and B-symptoms were
more frequent at diagnosis than in NS and LR. EBER positivity was
similar all cHL.
Conclusion: Separation of LR from MC and NS can be achieved by
the sole absence of sclerosis and preservation of B cell follicles to
result in a follicular and/or interfollicular pattern of infiltration. These
criteria result in a clinically and prognostically relevant separation of
patients. They result in an expansion of the LR subgroup with a
favourable survival to the detriment of MC. With this, MC shows a
worse survival than NS and LR. In MC, patients are older, B-
symptoms, advanced stage disease and eventual death are more
frequent. The data support a concept of progression from LR to MC.
210 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 86
A NOVEL DENDRITIC CELL TYPE FROM HUMAN
LYMPHOID TISSUE EXPRESSES
AIRE (AUTOIMMUNE REGULATOR)
P.L. Poliani1
, V. Marrella2
, M. Ravanini1
, L.D. Notarangelo3
,
A. Villa2
, P. Peterson4
, (*) F. Facchetti1
1
Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy;
2
CNR-ITB IRCSS Humanitas, Rozzano, Italy; 3
Division of Immu-
nology, Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA;
4
Molecular PathologyGMP, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Self-reactive T-cells from the developing T-cell repertoire are
eliminated in the thymus by central tolerance (CT) mechanisms, a
process predominantly mediated by medullary epithelial cells express-
ing AIRE. Although remarkably efficient, few potentially autoreactive
T-cells escape CT selection and reach the periphery, where peripheral
tolerance (PT) induction is then required to prevent autoimmunity.
Recent data (Lee et al., Nat Immunol 2007; 8(2):181-90) have shown
that “stromal” cells in murine lymph nodes (LN) express AIRE and
could play a role in the induction of PT. Using immunohistochemistry,
we investigated AIRE expression in a large number of different
human lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues and characterized the
phenotype of AIRE+ cells.
AIRE+ cells were exclusively identified in LN (with predilection of
abdominal LN), tonsils and mucosal-associated lymphoid tissues.
AIRE+ cells were rare and localized in the paracortical area, close to
high endothelial venules. Double immunohistochemistry showed that
AIRE+ cells consistently co-expressed membranous HLADR and
fascin (that highlight their dendritic morphology), and about 50% of
them were positive for S100 and DC-LAMP/CD208, while only a few
AIRE+ cells also expressed CD11c. Antigens of the lymphoid/
myeloid lineages (including CD45RB, CD45RA, CD45RO, CD34,
CD163, CD68, CD123, CXXL13/BCA1), stromal and endothelial
cells (smooth muscle actin, desmin, vimentin, CD34, Factor-VIII-
RA), and cytokeratins 8/18/19 (CAM5.2) were negative. Cells with a
similar phenotype were found in the thymic medulla. AIRE staining
on cytospins obtained from magnetic beads cell sorting from
mesenteric LNs confirmed the presence of a population of CD45-/
HLA-DR+/AIRE+ cells. On FACS analysis the CD45- sorted cells
comprise about 5% of the total cell population and HLA-DRhi+
cells
represent about 2.3% of this CD45- fraction. Taken together, these
data show that human lymphoid tissues contain a novel rare subset of
dendritic cells that express AIRE, partially show an activated
phenotype (DC-LAMP+, HLA-DR+) and are possibly involved in PT.
LS 87
FOXP3-POSITIVE REGULATORY T-CELLS IN CUTANEOUS
T-CELL LYMPHOMAS
*Lise Mette Gjerdrum1
, Anders Woetmann2
, Niels Odum2
,
Elisabeth Ralfkiaer1
1
Depatment of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University
Hospital, 2
Institute for Medical Microbiology and Immunology and
Institute of Molecular Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Background: FOXP3 is regarded as a unique marker for CD4+ CD25+
regulatory T-cells (Tregs). In solid tumours, high numbers of Tregs are
associated with a poor prognosis. Knowledge about the implications of
Tregs for the behaviour of haematological malignancies is more
limited. We studied 86 skin biopsies from patients with Mycosis
Fungoides (MF) and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) unspecified
for the expression of FOXP3 on tumour cells and tumour-infiltrating
Tregs. In addition, 27 cases with CD30-positive lymphoproliferations
(14 cases of lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP), 13 primary cutaneous
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (cALCL) were stained with FOXP3.
Results: Labelling of more than 10% of the neoplastic cells was seen
in two cases classified as aggressive epidermotropic CD8+ cytotoxic
CTCL and cALCL. Another 7 cases contained only very occasional
weakly positive tumour cells. In the remaining cases, the neoplastic
infiltrate was FOXP3-negative. By contrast, all biopsies showed
varying numbers of strongly FOXP3-positive tumour-infiltrating Tregs.
MF with early or infiltrated plaques had significantly higher numbers of
FOXP3-positive Tregs than CTCL unspecified or advanced MF with
tumours or transformation to large cell lymphoma. Survival analysis
demonstrated that increasing numbers of FOXP3-positive Tregs were
associated with improved survival in both MF and CTCL unspecified.
Similar results were obtained in the 27 cases of primary cutaneous
CD30-positive lymphoproliferations. In these conditions, the propor-
tion of Tregs was significantly higher in LyP than in cALCL.
Conclusion: In conclusion, our data indicate that the presence of
FOXP3-positive Tregs in CTCL is associated with disease stage and
patient survival.
LS 88
A CASE OF NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA FOLLOWED WITHIN A MONTH
IN THE SAME SITE BY T-CELL AND HISTIOCYTE RICH
DIFFUSE LARGE B- CELL LYMPHOMA
*S Nikulshin1
, U Mickys2
, L Griskevicius2
1
University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia
2
Vilnius University Hospital, Lithuania
A 15 y.o. boy presented with enlargement of right axillary lymph
nodes for about 3 weeks without signs of infection or B-symptoms; a
week before biopsy the nodes had begun to grow faster. USG showed
a chain of several deep and more superficial axillary lymph nodes 2×
3 cm in diameter. No other sites were found. One of the nodes was
excised; histological diagnosis was nodular lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL).
The patient was hospitalised for staging and treatment one month after the
biopsy. At admittance USG showed polycyclic hyperdense conglomerate
8×9 cm in the same right axillar region that included deep, superficial,
intrapectoral and paramamillar lymph nodes. Still no other sites were
visible. No B-symptoms. A large 6 cm superficial node was excised.
Histologically the second biopsy was morphologically and phenotypi-
cally different from the first one; histological diagnosis was T-cell and
histiocyte rich diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (TCRBCL, CD30 positive.
Bone marrow biopsy showed minimal specific involvement.
Retrospectively, similar fields could be found in diffuse areas of the
first biopsy, too. Clonality studies are in progress.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 211
The patient was treated according to NHL-BFM-95 (B-cell branch)
and is currently in complete remission for 1 year, PET-negative.
Discussion. Occasional cases of nodular lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma progressing to TCRBCL after treatment have
been described, but simultaneous occurrence seems to be extremely
rare. The case could support the hypothesis of a possible biological
relationship between these two entities.
LS 89
PAX5: A VALUABLE IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL MARKER
IN THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF LYMPHOID
NEOPLASMS
Mohamed M Desouki(1)
, Ginell R Post(1)
, Daniel Cherry(2)
,
John Lazarchick(1)
(1)
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Medical University
of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina,(2)
Department of Pathol-
ogy, Trident Medical Center, Charleston, South Carolina, USA
Background: The grey zone lymphomas constitute a diagnostic
challenge due to overlap of morphologic features and antigen
expression. PAX5 is a transcription factor which plays an important
role in B cell differentiation and proliferation. PAX5 is normally
expressed throughout B cell maturation and is detectable in poorly
differentiated B cell neoplasms that fail to express CD45 or pan B-cell
markers (CD20 and CD79a). Our results highlight the beneficial role
of including PAX5 in an immunohistochemical panel to differentiate
lymphoid neoplasms of B cell origin, especially Hodgkin lymphoma
(HL) and anaplastic non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Purpose of study: To assess PAX5 expression in previously diagnosed
B- and T- lymphoid neoplasms and undifferentiated tumors. Lymph
node, bone marrow and soft tissue tumor sections from 107 archived
paraffin blocks were immunohistochemically stained using a monoclo-
nal antibody to PAX5. The corresponding H and E stained sections
were reevaluated for the presence of malignancy and PAX5 immuno-
reactivity in neoplastic cells scored.
Results: PAX5 staining was positive in the following cases: 85% (34/
40) HL, 100% (15/15) DLBCL, 100% (2/2) small B cell lymphomas
and 100% (5/5) B-ALL and biphenotypic leukemias with B cell
lineage. PAX5 was not detected in anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL; n=14), T-LBL and biphenotypic leukemias with T cell
lineage (n=5), AML (n=3), carcinoid tumor (n=5), melanoma (n=3),
and undifferentiated/metastatic tumors (n=8). Non-neoplastic bone
marrow sections (n=7) showed scattered positive nuclear staining in
small B lymphocytes. The detection of PAX5 immunoreactivity
resulted in the reclassification of two cases of ALCL to HL.
Conclusion: The inclusion of PAX5 in a panel of immunohistochem-
ical stains is valuable in differentiating CD30 positive T cell
lymphomas such as ALCL, from B cell neoplasms (e.g. HL and
DLBCL). Furthermore, absence of PAX5 expression is helpful to rule
out non lymphoid tumors with anaplastic cell morphology (undiffer-
entiated and metastatic tumors).
LS 90
INTERPHASE FISH ANALYSIS ON “STARRY-SKY”
APPEARANCE IN PRIMARY CNS LYMPHOMA
Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan
*Hidekazu Kayano, Eiichi Asami, Toshinori Nagai,
Keisuke Ishizawa, Shio Shimada, Eiichi Arai, Takanori Hirose
Backgrounds: According to the WHO classification, the vast
majority of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is
categorized as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), whereas
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) rarely presents as a PCNSL. In PCNSL,
perivascular infiltration of lymphoma cells is commonly observed, but
diffuse growth area containing scattered tingible-body macrophages,
resembling “starry-sky” appearance of BL, is also often observed.
Although some extracranial DLBCLs with or without BL-like
morphology show MYC abnormalities as seen in BL, little information
is available on cytogenetic changes in PCNSL.
Purpose of the study: In order to get more insights into the
histological resemblance of PCNSL to BL, we conducted morpho-
logical and interphase FISH analysis on paraffin-embedded sections
from eleven patients with PCNSL.
Results: All cases were adult (age, 55 to 75 years) and im-
munocompetent. Histological diagnosis in each case was DLBCL.
In addition to perivascular infiltration, “starry-sky” appearance
mimicking BL was commonly observed in all but one case presenting
with a spinal cord tumor. Immunophenotyping analysis was per-
formed and confirmed an activated B-cell profile of PCNSL (CD20+,
CD79a+, CD10-, BCL2+, BCL6+/-, MUM1+). MIB1 (Ki67) staining
ranged from 50 to 100%. Using paraffin sections, interface FISH
analysis with break-apart rearrangement probes for BCL6 and MYC
genes was performed and revealed BCL6 breakage in 2 cases. MYC
abnormality was not detected in any of the cases analysed.
Conclusion: In spite of histological resemblance to BL, PCNSLs in
this study showed different immunophenotypic and molecular
features from those seen in BL. “Starry-sky” appearance in PCNSL
may be surrogate for molecular mechanisms involving genes other
than MYC.
LS 91
THE SYNCYTIAL VARIANT OF NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE
PREDOMINANCE HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
REPORT OF A CASE AND REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Drakos Elias*
, L. Jeffrey Medeiros, Vassiliki Leventaki, Claudiu V.
Cotta, Fransisco Vega, and George Z. Rassidakis
Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA
Background: Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin lymphoma
(NLPHL) shows immunohistologic and clinical features distinct from
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL). However, in addition to typical
histology, variant histologic patterns of NLPHL have been recently
described, which may have clinical significance.
Purpose: We present a case of NLPHL in a 41-year-old man with long
clinical follow-up. We discuss an uncommon histologic variant of
212 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
NLPHL mimicking syncytial variant of nodular sclerosis cHL and we
review the literature.
Results: The patient presented with an inguinal mass, and stage IIA
disease. Histology revealed a high-grade lymphoma with a distinctly
nodular pattern, and clustering of a variable number (6 to more than 100)
of L&H-like cells within the nodules associated with heavy neutrophil
infiltrates, areas of internodular fibrosis and, focally, lacunar morphology
of the neoplastic cells. Immunophenotypic analysis demonstrated that the
neoplastic cells were CD30-, CD15-, CD45+, CD20+, PAX5+ EMA+,
BCL6+, BCL2-, PU.1-, and LMP1-. The neoplastic cells also were found
to be cJUN-, JUNB-, and Id2+. CD21+ follicular dendritic meshwork
defined all nodules. Treatment of this patient with 4 cycles of ABVD and
involved field irradiation (30 Gy) resulted in complete response. The
patient remains without evidence of disease until today, 14 years after
initial diagnosis. In the literature, cases with nodular and clustered variant
pattern of NLPHL, but without fibrosis and neutophil infiltrates, are
extremely rare, and show excellent survival.
Conclusions: Recognition of uncommon histologic variants of NLPHL
would facilitate accurate differential diagnosis and enable future clinical
studies to address the optimal treatment of these patients.
LS 92
INCREASING INCIDENCE OF OPHTHALMIC LYMPHOMA
IN DENMARK FROM 1980 TO 2005
*Sjö LD1
, Ralfkiaer E2
, Prause JU1
, Petersen JH3
, Madsen J4
,
Pedersen NT5
, Heegaard S1
1: Eye Pathology Institute,Dept. of Neuroscience and Pharmacology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
2: Department of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
3: Department of Biostatistics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark
4: Department of Hematology, Aalborg Hospital, University of
Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark
5: Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark
Background: Ophthalmic lymphoma (lymphoma localized in the
ocular region, i.e. orbit, lacrimal gland, lacrimal sac, eyeball,
conjunctiva or eyelid) constitutes approximately 10% of all extranodal
NHL, and lymphoma is the most common orbital malignancy. Most
lymphomas arising in the ocular region are low-grade B-cell
lymphomas, with a high frequency of extranodal marginal zone B-
cell lymphoma (MALT lymphoma).
Knowledge of both the geographic distribution and time trends of
ophthalmic lymphoma may be helpful in formulating new aetiologic
hypotheses. However, the co-existence of multiple NHL classification
systems (e.g., Kiel, Lukes-Collins, Rappaport, Working Formulation)
has complicated epidemiologic research of NHL, and incidence data
on ophthalmic lymphomas are sparse. Two reports based on register
data indicate that the incidence of ophthalmic lymphoma in the United
States of America is increasing at an even higher rate than NHL in
general. The implementation of the REAL classification and the
WHO-classification system provides new possibilities to perform
reliable epidemiological studies on ophthalmic lymphoma.
Purpose: To evaluate patient characteristics and incidence of
ophthalmic lymphoma in Denmark during the period 1980 to 2005.
Results: A total of 228 patients with a histologically verified
diagnosis of ophthalmic lymphoma were included. There was an
equal distribution of men and women. The most frequent lymphoma
subtype was extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MALT
lymphoma, 55.5%) and most cases were located in the orbit (56.8%).
High-grade lymphoma subtypes were found more frequently in men
than in women. Incidence rates were highly dependent of patient age.
For all ages a statistically significant annual average increase of 3.4%
during the 26-year-period was found. This was primarily due to a rise
in incidence of MALT lymphoma.
Conclusions: In the Danish population ophthalmic lymphoma
consists primarily of orbital MALT lymphoma. Although a rare
disease of elderly patients, the incidence of ophthalmic lymphoma is
increasing rapidly.
LS 93
miRNA PROFILING AND MIRNA TARGET GENES
IN HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Anke van den Berg, Lu Ping Tan, Johan Gibcus, Geert Harms, Rikst
Nynke Schakel, Tjasso Blokzijl, Rogier Reijmers, Steven pals, Ralf
Küppers, Peter Möller, Sibrand Poppema, Bart-Jan Kroesen
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen and
University of Groningen, The Netherlands. Department of pathology,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
Department of Cell Biology, University of Duisberg-Essen, Germany,
Institute of Pathology, University of Ulm, Germany
Background: Based on several recent publications it has become
evident that miRNAs play an important role in the pathogenesis of B
cell lymphoma. MiRNAs inhibit protein translation of multiple targets
based on binding to the 3’-UTR.
Purpose: Elucidate the role of miRNAs in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL).
Methods: Microarray analyses were performed to generate miRNA
profiles of HL. Validation of the most abundant and differentially
expressed miRNAs was performed by miRNA-ISH and qRT-PCR.
Identification of miRNA target genes by immunoprecipitation (IP) of
the AGO2-RISC complex followed by microarray analysis to identify
the target genes enriched in the RISC-IP fraction. Target gene
validation was performed in various HL cell lines using a luciferase
reported system.
Results: miRNA profiling indicated that the overall expression levels
were markedly increased in HL. Specifically, most members of the
oncogenic C13ORF25 cluster, miR-21 and miR-155 were highly
expressed. For a selection of the miRNAs detected in the profiling,
expression in HRS cells could be confirmed by RNA-ISH. 7/13
miRNAs, differentially expressed between cHL and PMBL & cHL
and EBV transformed B cells were confirmed as differentially
expressed miRNAs in a panel of 33 cell lines. RISC-IP in two HL
derived cell lines followed by gene expression profiling to identify the
miRNA target genes enriched in the IP fraction resulted in
experimental identification of approximately 100 consistent target
genes. Experimental validation in a luciferase reporter assay resulted
in reduced luciferase activity for five miR-155 target genes (ZIC3,
ZNF537, AGTR1, IκBκε and KGF) and two miR-17 target genes
(GPR137B and RBJ).
Conclusions: HL displays a unique miRNA expression signature,
with high expression of miR-155, several members of the C13ORF25
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 213
cluster, and miR-21 and low expression of miR-150. Five genes were
identified as putative miR-155 targets and two as putative targets for
miR-17 in HL.
LS 94
ROSETTING T CELLS IN HL, CHARACTERIZATION
AND CROSS-TALK WITH HRS CELLS
Anke van den Berg, Yue Ma, Tjasso Blokzijl, Geert Harms, Çiğdem
Atayar, Sibrand Poppema, Lydia Visser
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Background: Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells in Hodgkin
lymphoma (HL) secrete factors that interact with inflammatory
background cells and may serve as biomarkers for disease activity.
The majority of the infiltrating cells are T-cells and the cross-talk of
these cells with the HRS cells is important for the survival of the HRS
cells. The rosetting CD4+CD26- T-cells are characteristic for classical
HL.
Purpose: To characterize the rosetting CD4+CD26- T-cells from cHL
and to detect potentially new players involved in the cross-talk by
characterizing the secretome of HRS cells.
Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR for 46 genes on stimulated and
resting CD4+CD26- and CD4+CD26+ T cell subsets from cHL and
tonsil. Identify proteins in cell culture supernatant of four HL cell
lines using 1DGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and protein
identification using LC-MS/MS.
Results: CD4+CD26- T-cells in HL showed higher mRNA levels of
CD25, CTLA4, OX40 and CCR4 compared to LN, supporting a Treg
cell type. Based on high IL17 levels Th17 cells may also exist in HL.
Upon stimulation in vitro, mRNA levels of most cytokines remained
low indicating an anergic character for the CD4+CD26- T-cell subset.
In total, 368 secreted proteins were identified in the HL cell culture
supernatant, including 37 proteins involved in immune response,
including TARC known to attract CCR4 positive Treg and Th2 cells;
IL25 inhibiting Th1 and Th17 cells, but stimulating Th2 cells; MIF,
blocking cytotoxic T cells. Most proteins were validated in HL cell
lines and patient tissue. Seven proteins revealed significantly elevated
levels in patient plasma compared with healthy controls.
Conclusions: Cytokine profiling of CD4+CD26- T-cells in cHL
indicates that they are anergic Treg cells, explaining the lack of an
effective anti-tumor response in HL. Absence of Th1 and cytotoxic Tcell
responses might be caused by IL25 and MIF produced by HRS cells.
LS 95
TONSILLAR EBV POSITIVE DIFFUSE LARGE B CELL
LYMPHOMA WITH ANAPLASTIC PHENOTYPE
*Metka Volavšek, M.D., Ph.D.
Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, SLOVENIA
Background: Etiology of primary tonsillar lymphoma which is usually
of the diffuse large B cell (DLBL) type is mostly unknown. In minority of
patients an underlying immune deficiency can be proven and lymphomas
are then mostly associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).
Purpose of the study: A case of bilateral asymetrical tonsillar
enlargement in a promiscuous patient with anamnesis of hepatitis B is
reported.
Results: In a patient with cough and pharyngeal irritation of a year
duration asymetrical tonsillar enlargement was discovered, with more
painful somewhat larger left tonsil and one painful enlarged left neck
lymph node. Bilateral tonsillectomy was performed, the neck lymph
node was not excised.
Histology of both tonsils was similar. In addition to reactive follicular
hyperplasia there were areas of surface ulceration with underlying
mostly interfollicular proliferation of medium sized and large
anaplastic cells which were focally invading the follicles. Immuno-
phenotype of anaplastic cells was: CD20+, CD30+, CD3-, CD4-,
CD8-, CD5-/+, CD56-, perforin-, CD23-, cyclin D1-; in situ
hybridization for kappa and lamba light chains-, EBER+, Ki-67 cca
70%. Molecular-genetic analyses were not performed. A diagnosis of
DLBL with anaplastic phenotype, EBV positive, probably originating
from lymphomatoid granulomatosis grade III was rendered. Addi-
tional serology suggested by pathologist proved patient’s HIV
positivitiy and the staging procedures determined clinical stage IIA.
After 4 cycles of chemotherapy (CHOP and Neupogen) severe
neutropenia (0,2×106
Ne/g) developed and 14 days ago the
chemotherapy was temporarily disconnected.
Conclusion: Differential diagnosis (DD) of tonsillar neoplasms is
wide and in addition to malignant lymphomas includes epithelial
neoplasms, especially lymphoepithelial carcinoma (EBV positive).
EBV positivity (EBER) narrows the DD of lymphoid neoplasms to
various types of malignant lymphoma occuring in immunocompro-
mised patients, but in noncompromised individuals Burkitt lympho-
ma, lymphomatoid granulomatosis, DLBL and T cell lymphoma-nasal
type are the prime candidates. To reach a definite diagnosis testing for
EBV infection and anamnestic data of immune deficiency/HIV
infection are of outmost importance.
LS 96
JUNB / CD30 SIGNALING CONTRIBUTES TO CELL CYCLE
PROGRESSION THROUGH REGULATION OF p14 AND p21
IN ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA
V. Atsaves1,2
, L. Lekakis 1
, Μ. Feretzaki 1
, V. Leventaki 1
, Ch. Liakou 1
,
E. Drakos1
, F.X. Claret1
, D. Jones1
, L.J. Medeiros1
, E. Patsouris2
,
G.Z. Rassidakis1,2
1
The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
2
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Background: JunB is a member of the jun family of AP-1
transcription factors involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis. JunB
positively regulates CD30 gene expression at the transcriptional level in
Hodgkin lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) cells.
Purpose: We hypothesized that JunB may contribute to uncontrolled
cell cycle progression through CD30 signalling in ALCL.
Results: Two ALK+ ALCL cell lines, Karpas299 and SUDHL-1, as
well as a control cell line (Jurkat) were used. Silencing of JunB using
siRNA in ALCL cells resulted in decreased AP-1 binding activity
assessed by EMSA and a significant decrease in S-phase assessed by
214 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
BrdU incorporation studies. These changes were associated with
increased levels of the CDK inhibitors p21 and p14 with simultaneous
decrease of the unphosphorylated fraction of Rb and expression levels
of cyclins A, D2 and D3. Silencing of JunB in ALCL cells also
resulted in decreased CD30 expression and CD30 promoter activity
using luciferase assay. In addition, silencing of CD30 using siRNA in
ALCL cells led to decreased AP-1 binding activity, which was
associated with changes in cell cycle and levels of p21 and p14 similar
to those seen after JunB silencing. Similar findings were observed
after treatment of ALCL cells with an anti-CD30, antibody, SGN30,
which is currently tested in clinical trials.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that JunB/CD30 signalling
controls cell cycle progression through deregulation of cell cycle
inhibitors representing a novel therapeutic target in ALCL.
LS 97
THE DIAGNOSTIC DILEMMA OF SPLENIC
T CELL / HISTIOCYTE RICH LARGE B CELL
LYMPHOMAS
Oner Dogan1
, Mehmet Agan1
, Gulsah Kaygusuz2
, Aptullah Haholu3
,
Aysegul Uner4
, *Isinsu Kuzu2
1
Istanbul University School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Istanbul,
2
Ankara University School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara,
3
Gulhane Medical Academy Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital Istanbul,
4
Hacettepe University School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara.
Background: Micronodular T cell/ histiyocyte rich large B cell
lymphoma of the spleen (M- TCRBCL-S) is a unique lymphoma
which poses diagnostic difficulties. The clinical presentation and the
symptoms that are similar to some infectious or autoimmune
hematological diseases may cause the delay in diagnosis.
Aim: The aim of this study is to examine the clinical and
histopathological characteristics of the lymphomas diagnosed as M-
TCRBCL-S in 12 of our cases and discuss the difficulties in
diagnosis.
Results: The median age of the patients were 37,5 (ranging between
19-63) with female dominance (8 Female / 4 Male). Splenomegaly,
pancytopenia, weight loss and fever were the most frequent symptoms
or findings. One patient had developed the disease, under follow up
for common variable immune deficiency syndrome (CVID). Except
for one case all the patients had bone marrow infiltration with
increased T lymphocytes, histiocytes with or without few neoplastic B
cells. All patients had lymph node involvement in splenic hilus. Liver
involvement was present in 6 of 7 cases in whom liver biopsies were
available. On gross examination of the splenectomy specimens, the
cut surfaces were congested with millimetric nodules. The neoplastic
large cells were all CD20 positive and half of the cases showed faint
CD30 positivity whereas all were CD15 negative. As a first sample
examined, the bone marrow biopsy findings for all cases were not
found sufficient to render the diagnosis of B cell lymphoma. Half of
the cases were treated with steroids before splenectomy.
Conclusion: Bone marrow and/or liver biopsies were the most
common initial specimens examined in our series of M- TCRBCL-
S. These biopsies were suspicious but not diagnostic because of
sparce neoplastic B lymphocytes present in a reactive background.
Steroid treatment could have also contributed to the interpretation
difficulties in some cases.
LS 98
SPECIFIC EXPRESSION OF MIR-17-5P AND MIR-127
IN TESTICULAR AND CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
*1
Jan-Lukas Robertus, 1
Geert Harms, 1
Tjasso Blokzijl, 1
Marije
Booman, 3
Daphne de Jong, 2
Gustaaf van Imhoff, 1
Stefano Rosati,
1
Ed Schuuring, 1
Philip Kluin, 1
Anke van den Berg
1
Department of Pathology & Molecular Biology, 2
Department of
Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
3
Department of Pathology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Background: Recent studies have shown that certain non-coding
short RNAs (22nt) called miRNAs play an important role in diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Patients with DLBCL have a great
diversity in both clinical characteristics, site of presentation and outcome.
Purpose of the study: To validate the differential expression in GCB
and non-GCB DLBCL and to determine to what extent the primary
site of presentation is associated with the miRNA expression profile.
Materials and Methods: We studied 50 cases of de novo DLBCL for
the expression of 15 miRNAs (miR-15a, miR-15b, miR-16, miR-17-
3p, miR-17-5p, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-19b, miR-20a, miR -21,
miR-92, miR-127, miR-155, miR-181a and miR-221). Apart from 19
nodal cases without extranodal dissemination (stage I and II) we
selected two groups with unambiguous stage I and II extranodal
presentation, nine cases of primary central nervous system (CNS)
DLBCL and 11 cases of primary testicular DLBCL as well as 11 other
primary extranodal DLBCL. All cases were analyzed with qRT-PCR.
In situ hybridization (ISH) performed for the most differentially
expressed miRNAs demonstrated that they were expressed in tumor
cells and not in background cells.
Results: MiR-21 and miR-19b showed the highest expression levels.
No significant differences were seen between GCB and non-GCB
DLBCL in the total or nodal DLBCL group for any of the 15
miRNAs. Two miRNAs showed significant differences in expression
levels for DLBCL subgroups according to site of presentation. MiR-
17-5p showed a significant higher expression level in CNS DLBCL
compared to testicular and nodal DLBCL (p<0.05). MiR-127 levels
were significantly higher in testicular DLBCL when compared to
CNS and nodal DLBCL (p<0.05). ISH for miR-127 and miR-17-5p
showed high expression in tumor cells and not in reactive or normal
cells.
Conclusion: We conclude that location of DLBCL is an important
factor in determining differential expression of miRNAs.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 215
LS 99
THE ONCOGENIC MIR-17-92 SHOWS B-CELL MALIGNANCY
SPECIFIC EXPRESSION PATTERNS
*1
Jan-Lukas Robertus, 1
Miao Wang, 1
Lu Ping Tan, 1
Veera Nadarjan,
1
Geert Harms, 1
Evert-Jan Boerma, 3
Rogier Reijmers, 3
Steven Pals,
1
Stefano Rosati, 1
Ed Schuuring, 2
Gustaaf van Imhoff, 1
Philip Kluin,
1
Anke van den Berg
1
Department of Pathology and Molecular Biology and 2
Department of
Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands.
3
Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Introduction: The primary miR-17-92 (pri-miR-17-92) microRNA
(miRNA) polycistron or C13ORF25 has recently immerged as an
important oncogene in various cancers. C13ORF25 is located at
13q31-32 and has been shown to be amplified and over expressed in
various non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) subtypes.
Purpose of the study: To determine differences in processing and or
stability between separate NHL of the seven individual miRNAs
present in C13ORF25 and to compare if the absolute abundance of
each miRNA is specific for different NHL.
Materials and Methods: C13ORF25 and miR-17-92 expression
levels were determined using qRT-PCR in 121 cases of NHL which
included diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), chronic lymphatic
leukemia (CLL), pediatric Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL). In addition we also analyzed NHL cell lines and
three B-cell subsets.
Results: Analysis of C13ORF25 showed significantly higher expres-
sion levels (p<0.05) in BL and DLBCL. The expression pattern of
miR-17-92 showed that miR-92 was the most highly expressed
miRNA in MCL, CLL and BL cases but also in the cell lines and
normal B-cell subsets. Interestingly, in the DLBCL cases miR-19b
expression levels were the highest. Unsupervised hierarchical cluster-
ing of the absolute abundance of each miRNA in the 121 NHL cases
revealed three main clusters. The first and second cluster contained
respectively all MCL cases and all CLL cases. The third cluster
contained three subgroups. The first subgroup contained most of the
DLBCL cases. The second and third subgroup contained BL cases
characterized by respectively low expression of miR-17-5p and high
expression of miR-92.
Conclusion: The four NHL each showed a different expression
pattern for the seven miRNAs and C13ORF25 which may be caused
by differences in processing and or stability. The characteristic
clustering pattern of the four malignancies showed that the abundance
for each separate miRNA is specific for the four NHL.
LS 100
BENDAMUSTINE (TREANDA) CYTOTOXICITY IN B-CELL
NEOPLASMS REQUIRES PRODUCTION OF REACTIVE
OXYGEN SPECIES AND CASPASE-UNRELATED PROCESS
IRRESPECTIVE OF P53 STATUS
* Gaël Roué,1
Mónica López-Guerra,1
Pierre Milpied,1
Patricia Pérez-
Galán,1
Neus Villamor,1
Emili Montserrat,2
Elias Campo,1
and Dolors
Colomer1
1
Hematopathology Unit, Department of Pathology and 2
Department
of Hematology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.
Background: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) are two types of B-cell lymphoid neoplasms
characterized respectively by a relatively indolent natural history and
an aggressive course. These two diseases remain incurable. Bend-
amustine hydrochloride (TREANDA) is a multifunctional, alkylating
agent with a purine-like ring system that exhibits activity in multiple
cancer models, but whose mechanism of action is partially unknown.
Purpose of the study: to analyse the apoptotic pathways activated by
bendamustine in CLL and MCL, together with the relevance of p53
mutation in determining the response of malignant B cells to this drug
alone or combined with nucleoside analogues.
Methods: 13 CLL/MCL cell lines and primary tumour cells from
8 MCL and 25 CLL patients were cultured for up to 24 hours with
bendamustine (Treanda, provided by Cephalon Inc.). Cytotoxic
assays, flow cytometry, immunofluorescence and western blot
analysis of DNA-damage response pathway and apoptosis-related
factors.
Results: we show that bendamustine exerts a cytotoxic effect on most
CLL and MCL primary cells and cell lines, irrespective of ZAP-70
expression and p53 status. Bendamustine cytotoxicity was mediated
by the generation of reactive oxygen species, and p53-dependent and
p53-independent triggering of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway involving
up-regulation of PUMA and NOXA, conformational activation of BAX
and BAK, and cytosolic release of caspase-related and caspase-
unrelated mitochondrial apoptogenic proteins. More importantly, bend-
amustine was found to act synergistically with nucleoside analogues,
this combination being effective in non-functional p53 CLL and MCL
cases resistant to standard chemotherapy.
Conclusions: our findings support the use of bendamustine as a
therapeutic agent for CLL and MCL and establish the basis for its
combination with conventional genotoxic agents.
LS 101
ANCILLARY TECHNIQUES IN CYTOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS
OF B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
*V. Kloboves Prevodnik, Lavrenčak J. Koković I, Novaković S.
Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Background: The cytological differentiation between B-cell lympho-
mas and reactive lymphocytic proliferation based only on microscopic
examination of cytological slides is difficult and quite often
216 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
inaccurate. Therefore, ancillary techniques, such as multiparametric
flow cytometric immunophenotyping (FCI) and determination of gene
rearrangements, should be used to establish a more accurate diagnosis.
Purpose of the study: To assess which ancillary technique is more
helpful in routine cytological diagnostics of B-cell lymphomas we
performed both FCI and PCR-based gene rearrangement analysis in
40 cases where B-cell lymphoma was suspected by microscopical
examination of cytological slides. The cytological diagnosis was
verified by surgical biopsy and histological examination in 11 and by
clinical follow-up data in 29 cases.
Results: The final diagnosis was B-cell lymphoma in 11 and reactive
lymphocytic proliferation in 29 cases.
In B-cell lymphomas, FCI detected monoclonality in 9 cases. In the
remaining two cases, light chains were not detected or stained non-
specifically. PCR-based clonality analysis displayed monoclonality in
only 5 B-cell lymphomas. In one case, monoclonality was suspected
and 5 were polyclonal.
In reactive lymphocytic proliferations, FCI displayed polyclonality in
25 and monoclonality in one case. Light chains were not detected in 3
cases. In addition, T-lymphocytes with aberrant immunophenotype
were found in 3 cases. PCR-based clonality analysis showed
polyclonality in 27 reactive lymphocytic proliferations and mono-
clonality in two. However, in one case, monoclonality was only
suspected.
Conclusions: FCI is more sensitive than PCR-based gene rearrange-
ment analysis in detecting monoclonal B-cells and is therefore
considered to be more helpful in routine cytological diagnostics of
B-cell lymphomas. PCR-based clonality analysis could be beneficial
only when light chains are stained non-specifically or are not detected
by FCI.
LS 102
NON HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMAS
IN CHILDREN AND TEENAGERS
K. MEKHELEF- ITATAHINE* , M. BOUFAMA*, K. BOUZID –
BENDISARI*
* : Beni-Messous Pathology Institute, Algiers , Algeria
Background: Among children and teenagers cancers examined in
Beni-Messous pathology institute Non Hodgkin’s lymphomas constitute
the most frequent malignancies. They are high grade lymphoma. Extra
nodal sites represent approximatively all the cases, particularly
abdominal and mediastinal sites.
Purpose of the study: Our study brings the histopathological types
according to the 2001 who’s classification, the problems of differential
diagnosis helped by markers used and prognosis.
Description of results: Burkitt’s lymphoma without the Jaw’s
location knowed in Algeria with its association to EBV predominates
in abdominal sites.
High grade B cell lymphomas are particularly mediastinal but
lymphoblastic lymphomas are more rare in our institute.
Conclusion: They are aggressive malignancies, which respond to
heavy chemotherapy with good prognosis and out come despite
pejorative cases due to the toxicity and infections still noted in our
country.
LS 103
CYCLIN D1 EXPRESSION IN NODULAR
LYMPHOCYTE-PREDOMINANT HODGKIN’S
LYMPHOMA IS RELATED TO TRISOMY
OF THE CYCLIN D1 GENE.
*Brigiet Hoevenaars MD1
, Jos Meijer MD, PhD2
, Konnie Hebeda
MD, PhD1
, Johan van Krieken MD, PhD1
1
Dept of pathology Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
The Netherlands.
2
Dept of pathology Rijnstate Arnhem Medical Centre, The Netherlands.
Background: Cyclin D1 is a promotor of progression of the cell cycle
and its overexpression is mostly observed in mantel cell lymphomas
(>95%) due to a translocation of the BCL1 locus (t(11;14)). Cyclin D1
expression has also been reported in other B-cell lymphoproliferative
diseases (ea chronic lymphocytic leukemia, plasmacytomas, hairy cell
leukemia). Coincidentally Cyclin D1 expression was detected in a
case of nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Therefore a study for Cyclin D1 expression was performed in 13
cases of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 7
cases of lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 10 cases
of nodular sclerosing Hodgkin’s lymphoma. In addition, in two Cyclin
D1 positive cases fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was
performed for the detection of t(11;14).
Results: Immunohistochemistry of Cyclin D1 showed nuclear
positivity of the tumor cells in 8 of 13 cases of the nodular
lymfocyte-predominant Hodgkin’s lymphoma. In 2 of 8 Cyclin D1
positive cases FISH was performed, which showed in both cases
trisomy of the Cyclin D1 locus but not of the centromere of
chromosome 11. There was no t(11;14). In none of 7 classical
lymphocyte-rich Hodgkin’s lymphomas and in only 1 of 10 nodular
sclerosing Hodgkin’s lymphomas Cyclin D1 protein expression was
found. FISH analysis in these cases is in progress.
In conclusion: A substantial part of nodular lymphocyte-predominant
Hodgkin’s lymphomas shows overexpression of Cyclin D1, in this
study 8 cases of 13 of which at least 2 show a trisomy of the Cyclin
D1 gene. This is in contrast with classical lymphocyte-rich Hodgkin’s
lymphomas and nodular sclerosing Hodgkin’s lymphomas.
LS 104
IMMUNOPHENOTYPICAL FEATURES OF PRİMARY
TESTICULAR DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
Ergin M*
, Bağır E, Gönlüşen G
Cukurova University Medical School Dept of Pathology, Adana/
TURKEY
Background: Primary non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of testicle is rare.
The most common type is diffuse large B-cell type (DLBCL).
Recently, DLBCL has been subclassified as germinal center B-cell-
like and non-germinal center B-cell types. Such distinction is
performed possible using the immunohistochemical expression of
CD10, Bcl-6 and MUM1.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 217
Purpose of the study: The aim of this study was to subclassify primary
testicular DLBCL according to this sheme. Immunohistochemical sudy
using antibodies against CD10, Bcl-6 and MUM1 were carried out.
Results: We investigated 12 patients with primary testicular DLBCL.
Immunohistochemistry showed 0/12 for CD10, 4/12 for Bcl-6, 11/12
for MUM1. The expression pattern of CD10 (-) MUM1 (+) in primary
testicular DLBCL corresponded to the nongerminal center B-cell
group for 11 cases.
Conclusion: The most primary testicular DLBCL (91.6%) has a
nongerminal center B-cell phenotype. These features might therefore
be associated with poor prognosis.
LS 105
PLASMABLASTIC. LYMPHOMA ASSOCIATED
WITH COINFECTION OF BOTH EBV AND HHV-8
IN A HIV SERONEGATIVE PATIENT : A CASE .REPORT
Emine Dündar1
, *Serap Isiksoy1
, Zafer Gulbas1
, Mukerrem Safali2
,
Aysegul Uner3
, Isinsu Kuzu4
1
Osmangazi Unversity School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara,
2
GATA Faculty of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara, 3
Hacettepe
University School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara, 4
Ankara
University School of Medicine Dept of Pathology Ankara,
Plasmablastic lymphomas has been described as a variant of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma These lymphomas are often seen in the
extranodal sites and HIV positive individuals Tumor consists of
plasmacytoid transformed cells with a phenotype more like plasma
cells than large lymphoid cells. .An exclusive predilection to the male
gender and frequent association to EBV and immunodeficiency are
known, however the disease spectrum has been expanding with a
number of single case reports. We present a female young HIV
negative patient . Plasmablastic lymphoma diagnosed at supraclavic-
ular lymph node examination. Tumor cells were CD20,CD3, ALK-1,
CD30, Bcl-6, Pax-5, kappa, lambda negative, most of the tumor cells
were CD38, CD138, HHV-8 and EBV LMP-1 positive. EBV and
HHV8 colocalisation was also confirmed with PCR. We encountered
only two other cases in the literature to be associated with coinfection
of these two lymphotrophic viruses in HIV negative patients. The
patient applied with a complaint of abdominal pain.and leg swelling.
Ultrasonographic examination revealed intraabdominal fluid accumu-
lation. Cytological examination of the abdominal fluid suggested
lymphoma. She had generalised lympadenopathy, hepatomegaly and
bilateral renal involvement.
LS 106
USE OF A CHIP-BASED MICROFLUIDIC APPARATUS
FOR THE DETECTION OF B-CELL CLONALITY
USING THE MULTIPLEX BIOMED-2 PCRs
Anna Bertolaso1*
, Patricia J.T.A. Groenen2
, Annemiek W.M. van
Raaij2
, Francesca Mancini1
, Marina Montresor1
, Maria Scardoni1
,
Marco Chilosi1
, Fabio Menestrina1
, Aldo Scarpa1
and Alberto Zamò1
1
Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
2
Dept. of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Background: The multiplex BIOMED-2 PCRs for detection of B-cell
clonality recognize almost all immunoglobulin gene rearrangements by
using gene-scanning and capillary electrophoresis (CE) or heteroduplex-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Chip-based microfluidic electropho-
resis (CME) represents a viable alternative because of its good
discriminative power, sensitivity, speed, ease of use and relative low-cost.
Purpose of the study: To test the potential of the CME-technology
for B-cell clonality detection.
Results: We tested 54 B-NHL and 15 reactive lymph nodes (RLN) for
clonality detection using CME technology (Agilent 2100 Bioana-
lyzer). Clonal rearrangements were detected in 95% (22/23) non-FL
B-NHL cases (18 CLL, 3 DLBCL, 1 SMZL, 1 LPL) and in 90% (28/
31) FL-cases. No clonal products were detected in the RLN.
We also compared the use of CME to gene-scanning by CE (ABI-3730;
Applied Biosystems) using 11 samples, including: 3 clonal samples, 1
RLN and 6 “borderline” cases that gave ambiguous results using CME.
Of the three clonal samples, two were confirmed by Genescanning
and CE. One sample that showed a weak clonal rearrangement in the
IGH-FR2 PCR by CME was interpreted as polyclonal by CE.
Clonal rearrangements in multiple targets were detected by CE in 6/6
borderline cases, which was in concordance with the CME method. An
isolated IGK-DE rearrangement was detected in the RLN by CE, however
was not considered clonal by CME. We propose a rule for interpreting CME-
peak patterns. In addition, a time and cost analysis has been performed.
Conclusion: CME may be a viable alternative analysis method for
assessment of the BIOMED-2 PCRs. It shows a slightly lower
sensitivity when compared to CE, but shows some advantages in
terms of costs, ease of performance and personnel time. It is however
essential to stress that clonality results should be interpreted in the
context of the morphology and the clinical findings.
LS 107
COMPARATIVE STUDIES OF CYTOGENETIC PROFILES
OF FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMAS GRADE 3 REVEAL
A SIGNIFICANTLY HIGH FREQUENCY OF BCL6
REARRANGEMENT IN FL GRADE 3B.
Moreau A1
, Leclair F1
, Talmant P2
, Gaillard F1
, Bossard C1
,
Soubeyran I3
, Rousselet MC4
, Avet-Loiseau H2
.
Anatomie Pathologie A1
, Hématologie Biologie2
, Hotel Dieu, 44093
Nantes, France, Departement de Pathologie3
, Institut Bergonié, 33076
Bordeaux, France Anatomie Pathologique4
, CHU, 49933 Angers,
France
Background: Follicular lymphoma (FL) grade 3 is recognized as a
distinct entity in the WHO classification , and is subdivided into grade 3a
and 3b. In the recent literatture, there are conflicting results regarding the
biological differences between FL 3a and 3b. Aim of the study was to
determine cytogenetic profiles of FL grade 3 by FISH and conventional
cytogenetics in a large series. Methods : 56 nodal FL grade 3 were
retrieved from the files of participating institutions and included in the
study. All the cases were reviewed and graded according to the WHO
classification by two pathologists. Immunohistochemistry with anti-bcl2
and CD10 was performed according to standard methods . The presence
of the t(14;18) translocation and of a 3q27/bcl6 rearrangement were
investigated and compared using FISH analysis on whole paraffin
sections. Conventional cytogenetics was also available in 10 cases.
218 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Results: 38 FL were classified as grade 3a, and 18 as grade 3b with
(n=3) or without (n=15) a diffuse large B cell component. Follicular
structures were present in at least 75% of the infiltrated areas. CD10
positivity was observed in 31 of 38 (81.5%) FL 3a and 11 of 17
(64.7%) FL 3b (p=0.009). The bcl2 protein was expressed in 29 of 37
(78.4%) FL 3a and in 16 of 17 (94.11%) FL 3b (p=0.0001).
Cytogenetic data were obtained in 50/56 cases, including 38 FL 3a
and 12 FL 3b. FISH analysis and conventional cytogenetics showed:
1- the presence of the t(14;18) translocation in 68.4% (26/38) of FL
3a, including 24 t(14;18)+/bcl6- cases, and in 66.6% (8/12) of FL 3b
(p=0.9); 2-the presence of a 3q27/bcl6 rearrangement in15.78% (6/
38) of FL 3a and in 66.6% (8/12) of FL 3b (p=0.00062). The 3 cases
of FL 3b with DLBCL component were shown to harbor a 3q27/bcl6
rearrangement. The 9 double negative cases corresponded all to FL
3a. Most of the double positive cases corresponded to FL 3b (4/6).
Conventional cytogenetics showed a high frequency of chromosomal
abnormalities involving gains and deletions in both FL grade 3a and
3b (9/10).One case of FL 3b was characterized by a combination of t
(14;18) translocation, bcl6 and c-myc rearrangement.
Conclusions: This study confirms that bcl6 rearrangement occurs
significantly more frequently in FL 3b ± DLBCL than in FL 3a,
indicating different genetic pathways in the development of the 2
types of FL grade 3. On the other hand, there is a relatively high
frequency (66%) of t(14;18) translocation in our series of FL 3b in
comparison with the majority of reported data. These FL 3b with
t(14;18) translocation were more likely to express CD10. Bcl6
rearrangement and t(14;18) translocation were not mutually exclusive
in our series. These results support the view that the separation of FL
grade 3 into FL 3a and 3b is of biological significance.
LS 108
THE IMMUNE INHIBITORY RECEPTORS BTLA
AND HVEM ARE DOWNREGULATED IN GERMINAL
CENTER CELLS AND PREDOMINANTLY EXPRESSED
IN NEOPLASTIC B-CELLS FROM SMALL
LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
B Chetaille*, H M’Hidi, Y Guillaume, ML Thibult, R Bouabdallah,
D Olive, L Xerri
Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France
Background: In order to prevent excessive activation, the immune
response is tightly regulated by membrane lymphoid inhibitory
receptors, including the B and T Lymphocyte Attenuator (BTLA).
The interaction of BTLA with its ligand, the Herpes Virus Entry
Mediator (HVEM), leads to inhibition of lymphocyte activation.
Recent data suggest that the BTLA/HVEM pathway may play a role
in the physiopathology of autoimmune, infectious and neoplastic
diseases. So far there is no description of their expression in human
normal lymphoid tissue and lymphomas.
Purpose: To characterize the expression of BTLA and HVEM in
human normal and neoplastic lymphoid tissues using immunohisto-
chemistry.
Results: In hyperplastic lymph nodes (n=13 both BTLA and HVEM
are expressed in T lymphocytes within interfollicular areas and in B
lymphocytes within mantle zone and marginal zone. Within germinal
centers (GC), B lymphocytes are negative for both BTLA and HVEM,
whereas T lymphocytes are BTLA positive and follicular dendritic
cells are HVEM positive. In lymphomas (n = 86), both BTLA and
HVEM are strongly expressed in chronic lymphoid leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL, 15/15) and more weakly in
marginal zone lymphomas (MZL, 8/8). Neither BTLA nor HVEM
were detected at significant levels by immunohistochemistry in mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL, 0/5) and follicular lymphoma (0/16).
Conclusion: The extinction of BTLA and HVEM expression in
normal GC B-cells suggests that downregulation of BTLA/HVEM
pathway may be involved in the process of antigen-driven B-cell
activation. The preferential expression of BTLA and HVEM in SLL
could be used as a help for the diagnosis of small cell lymphomas
LS 109
PRE-TREATMENT OF HAEMATOLOGICAL
SAMPLES REVEALS NUCLEAR EPITOPES DURING
IMMUNOCYTOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS
Göran Mattsson1, 3
, Susan Turner2
, Margaret Jones1
, Nithiya Pillai2
,
Teresa Marafioti1
, Helle Grann Wendelboe3
, Wendy Erber4
, David
Mason1
1
Leukaemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield
Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, 2
Department of Haema-
tology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK; 3
R&D Pathology, Dako
A/S, Glostrup, Denmark; 4
Department of Haematology, Adden-
brooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK
Background:
Rapid diagnosis of leukaemia and lymphoma in haematology today is
dependent upon specialised laboratory services including immuno-
phenotyping of haematological material. Immunophenotyping by flow
cytometry allows the identification of different cell populations within
a sample and several antigens may be evaluated simultaneously.
Unfortunately the technology has its limitations and cannot detect
different patterns of expression of intracellular antigens e.g. nucleo-
phosmin. Therefore, additional test methods for cell markers that can
be performed on haematological samples are of potential value.
Immunocytochemistry is an obvious candidate; however, many
antibodies fail to provide staining on fresh cell material.
Purpose of the study: To evaluate pre-treatment to improve
immunocytochemistry on fresh haematological material.
Methods: Bone marrow and blood smears were fixed in a number of
different fixatives before target retrieval in pressure cooker with either
Citrate (pH 6.0) or Tris/EDTA (pH 9.0). The slides were then
incubated with primary antibodies (e.g. nucleophosmin, TdT, PML,
Pax-5, CD20, Bcl-2). A traditional Dako APAAP visualization system
was used and signals developed with Fast Red. The cell smears were
counter stained with haematoxylin and evaluated by conventional
light microscopy.
Results: The morphological outcome after pre-treatment depends on
the fixative used and the combination of acetone/methanol/formalin
performed well. Fixatives without formalin did not preserve the
cellular morphology. Some markers, e.g. nucleophosmin, were
completely negative on the blood smears without target retrieval.
After target retrieval in the pressure cooker nucleophosmin could be
detected by immunocytochemistry. Cytoplasmic and plasma mem-
brane markers performed usually well without target retrieval.
Conclusion: Morphology preservation is dependent on the fixative.
Target retrieval creates greater chances of positive staining with
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 219
nuclear markers on cell smears. This technique provided positive
immunostaining results on blood smear e.g. for nucleophosmin. The
described technique opens up for further usage of immuncytochem-
istry on blood smears.
LS 110
INTERPHASE LYMPHOMA: REPORT OF FOUR CASES
FROM PERU
Carlos Barrionuevo (*), Oswaldo Grados (**), Henry Gómez (**),
Luís Mas (**), Luís Casanova (**), Sandro Casavilca (*), Jaime
Montes (*), Natalia Valdivieso (**), Milagros Abad and Eduardo
Zevallos-Giampietri (*)
(*) Departments of Pathology and Medicine (**) from the National
Institute of Neoplastic Disease (INEN), Lima, Perú
Background: The sequential occurrence of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (interphase lymphoma) is
considered rare. More attention on this condition has been recently
pointed up to understand the pathogenesis of lymphomas.
Purpose: Herein, we report four such cases from the INEN with
complete clinical data, histological and immnunohistochemistry
studies, and a review of the current medical literature of this topic.
Results: The age of patients ranged between 7 and 57 years at initial
diagnosis of lymphoma. Two of them were diagnosed as Classical
Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL) and Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant
HL. Both developed Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (LCGBD) after
receiving chemotherapy. The other two patients were diagnosed as
Low grade Follicular Lymphoma and DLBCL and after receiving
chemotherapy both developed CHL. The subsequent lymphomas were
diagnosed between 2 and 38 years later.
Conclusion: The cases described above are consistent with the proposal
of a single cell origin of both LH and mature NHL of B lineage.
Remarkably, these cases prove not only the possibility of HL to NHL, but
also the inverse situation, NHL to HL. The time of diagnosis between the
two types of lymphoma is variable and can be as long as 38 years.
LS 111
IGVH GENE MUTATION STATUS AND GENOMIC
IMBALANCES IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKAEMIA
WITH INCREASED PROLYMPHOCYTES (CLL/PL)
*Zsófia Balogh, Lilla Reiniger, Linda Deák, Csaba Bödör, Judit
Csomor, Ágota Szepesi, Éva Gagyi, László Kopper and András
Matolcsy
1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research,
Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) with increased prolympho-
cytes (CLL/PL) has been defined by the World Health Organization
(WHO) classification and considered as a progressive and clinically
aggressive variant of CLL. To further characterize the biological
features of this disease, we performed IgVH gene mutational status,
FISH and high resolution comparative genomic hybridization (HR-
CGH) analysis in 17 cases of CLL/PL. All CLL/PL utilized members
of VH1, VH3 and VH4 families, with the highest prevalence of the
VH1-69 gene. In all but one cases analyzed, the VH genes were
unmutated. The FISH and HR-CGH analyses showed frequent
occurrence of trisomy 12, del(11)(q23), del(17)(p13) and genetic
imbalances, but recurrent genetic lesion characteristic for CLL/PL was
not found. The follow-up HR-CGH analysis of two cases showed that
increase of prolymphocytes in the course of CLL or CLL/PL are
associated with clonal evolution and selection of the tumour clone.
In conclusion, this study suggests that CLL/PL is a relatively
homogeneous disease regarding VH gene mutation, but heterogeneous
regarding genetic lesions. The heterogeneity and high number of
genomic imbalances found in CLL/PL suggest that a genome-wide
instability of the neoplastic cells may play a role in the development
of the disease.
LS 112
DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SPORADIC
BURKITT’S LYMPHOMA AND DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
LYMPHOMA
Cuiling Liu1
, Yuanjie Huang1
, Liping Gong2
, Min Li1
, Xin Huang1
,
Zifen Gao1
*
1 Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100083, China
2 Department of Pathology, Capital Medical University, Beijing
100069, China
*Corresponding author: Zifen Gao (E-mail: wjshgao@bjmu.edu.cn)
BL and DLBCL share some overlapping morphological features. To
investigate the pathological features and their differential diagnosis of
sporadic Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), 20 cases of sporadic BL and 20 cases of DLBCL were
retrospectively studied by analyzing their light microscopy features,
immunohistochemical expression, EBV infection detected by in stiu
hybridization, chromosomal breakage of c-myc and/or IgH genes by
interphase fluorescence in stiu hybridization (FISH), and their clinical
manifestation. Studies showed that all the 20 cases of sporadic BL
occurred in children (younger than 14 year-old), while all the DLBCL
patients were older than 15 year-old. Microscopically, the medium-
sized tumor cells were monomorphic and proliferated in a diffuse
pattern in both BL and DLBCL cases. But comparing with DLBCL,
BL showed marked “starry-sky” with numerous karyorrhectic debris,
and mitotic figures were more frequently seen in BL. Immunohis-
tochemically, the tumor cells of both BL and DLBCL were positive
for CD20 and negative for TdT, CD99, MPO. CD10 were positive in
100% of BL cases, while positive in 43% of DLBCL cases. No EBV
infection was found by in situ hybridization in all the detected cases.
Interphase FISH analysis detected c-myc gene breakage or amplifica-
tion and/or IgH/c-myc gene breakage in all detected BL cases, but
none in DLBCL cases. So, it seems that molecular and immunohis-
tochemical analysis plays a vital role on their correct diagnosis and
differential diagnosis. EBV infection is not related with sporadic BL
and DLBCL in China.
220 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 113
EXPRESSION OF CD43 IS AN IMPORTANT PROGNOSTIC
FACTOR IN A DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
*I. Ilic1
, Z. Mitrovic2
, I. Aurer2
, S. Basic-Kinda2
, I. Radman2
, R.
Ajdukovic3
, B. Labar2
, S. Dotlic1
, M. Nola1
1
Pathology and 2
Hematology, University Hospital Center and Medical
School, Zagreb, Croatia; 3
Hematology, University Hospital Dubrava,
Zagreb, Croatia
Background. CD43 is a membrane protein expressed on all
hematopoetic cells except resting B-cells and erythrocytes with a
postulated role in adhesion, T-cell activation and apoptosis. CD43 is
expressed in about 20% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
but its prognostic significance in DLBCL is still unknown.
Purpose of the study. To define the prognostic significance of CD43
on DLBCL.
Methods. With a use of a standard immunohistochemistry we
analyzed the protein expression of CD43 and its prognostic
significance in 101 patients with DLBCL consecutively collected
from our archive. All patients were treated with anthracycline-based
chemotherapy or with antracycline-based therapy combined with
rituximab.
Results. CD43 was expressed in 25/101 patients (25%). The median
follow-up of survivors was 36 months (range 1-177 months). CD43+
patients had significantly lower complete response rates (56% vs.
84%, p<0.001), inferior event-free survival (EFS) (26% vs. 66% at
2 years, p<0.001) and overall survival (OS) (44% vs. 71% at 2 years,
p=0.001) than CD43- patients. The prognostic impact of CD43 was
not affected by rituximab treatment. CD43 expression was not related
to IPI score, stage, LDH, age, performance status or GCB vs. non-
GCB type as determined by immunohistochemistry.
Conclusion. The expression of CD43 in patients with DLBCL
identifies a subgroup of patients with significantly inferior response
rates, EFS and OS. This effect is independent of the IPI score or
rituximab treatment. The data presented suggest that expression of
CD43 is an independent prognostic factor in DLBCL.
LS 114
GERMINAL CENTERS CONTAINING NUMEROUS
EBER-POSITIVE CELLS IN RESIDUAL GERMINAL
CENTERS IN HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
Martin P, Gomez-Lozano N, Lozano M, Provencio M, Soutar D, Salas
C, Montes S, Bellas C.
Accumulated evidence suggests that EBV (Epstein Barr virus) has an
etiological role in the pathogenesis of cHL, as was initially suspected
on the basis of epidemiological and serological findings.
The neoplastic cells of Hodgkin tumours are clonal and derived from
GC-B cell (germinal center) because they carry somatic mutations of
their rearranged IgVH genes. These findings strongly suggest that
EBV infected precursor cells should be found in GCs. In contrast to
this assumption, GCs are generally believed to be devoid of EBV-
infected cells. Although EBER-positive lymphoid cells have been
found in GC of hyperplastic tonsils from children living in developing
regions (with high frequency of EBV-associated lymphomas),
concomitant infection in residual GC of cHL has not been reported.
In this study, we describe 4 cases of cHL EBV associated, with
presence of EBV infection in B-cells of GC.
Material and Methods: Diagnosis of cHL was made on the basis of
histology and immunohistology examination, according with the
WHO classification. DNA was isolated from paraffin-embedded
tissue. Freshly frozen material for DNA extraction was available in
2 cases. Molecular studies were done using PCR in DNA of whole
tissue and microdissected cells, to identify the specific cellular
location of the viral sequences present in different cellular populations
(HRS cells and GC-cells). EBV typing was performed by amplifying
a strain-specific sequence in the nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA-3C) and
also we tested the 30 bp deletion in the C-terminal end of the LMP-1
gene.
Results: All specimens of cHL had reactive residual GC. EBERs were
detected in the nuclei of the malignant cells (HRS), and LMP-1
stained the cell membrane and the Golgi region. Moreover the
majority of the GC cells expressed EBERs, and LMP-1 was negative.
Molecular studies showed the same strain of EBV in microdissected
GC cells and HRS cells.
Conclusions: Our results show that latently EBV-infected cells
participate in GC reaction in cases of cHL with down regulation of
LMP-1 expression.
These findings demonstrate in vivo a pool of EBV–infected cells in
the compartment from which Hodgkin’s lymphoma are thought to
arise.
LS 115
A PATHOLOGIC STUDY OF HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
IN MOROCCO AND ITS ASSOCIATION
WITH EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
*L. Jabri, A. Belbachir, A. Benkirane, M. Quachouh, A. Quessar, A.
Madani, S. Zamiati
Pathology Department;
Hematology department
Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca, Morocco
Background: The epidemiological data of Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL)
shows a high incidence in children and a predominance of Mixed
cellularity in developing countries. The association of Epstein- Barr
virus (EBV) and HL is well known and correlates with the histologic
subtype, age of presentation and geographic location. Objectives: the
aim of this study is to determine the epidemiological and histopath-
ological profil of Moroccan Hodgkin Lymphoma and to evaluate the
incidence of EBV in this population.
Methods: We evaluated the clinical and morphological data of 324
patients diagnosed between January 2000 et December 2005.
Immunohistochemical features were available for 278 patients and
234 were analyzed for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) using latent
membrane protein (LMP1).
Results: There were 53% males and 47% females, with a mean age of
32 years. The peak of incidence was seen in the 15-39 years age group
(53%). 16% of the cases were seen in children under fifteen. Nodular
sclerosis was the most prevalent subtype (60% versus 24% for mixed
cellularity. Expression of CD30 was detected in 255 of 278 cases
(92%), CD15 was positive in 228of 278 (82%), Bcl2 was detected in
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 221
55% . LMP1 was seen in 124 of 234 cases (53%): 74 of 155 (48%)
with nodular sclerosis; 42 of 56 (75%) with mixed cellularity. There
was no difference in LMP1 positivity between localised clinical stages
and dvanced clinical stages. LMP1 positivity was higher in children
and older adults than in adults aged between 15-50 years.
Conclusions: HL in Morocco showed a high incidence of nodular
sclerosis subtype and a high prevalence of EBV. EBV detection
showed correlation with mixed cellularity subtype and age under
Fifteen. LMP1 was more frequently seen in children and older adults,
suggesting a different pathophysiology of HL among different age
groups
LS 116
APPROACH TO IDENTIFY THE GENES WHICH
ARE INVOLVED IN THE EXTINCTION OF THE B-CELL
PROGRAM IN CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
BY EPIGENETIC REPROGRAMMING OF NEOPLASTIC
B-CELLS
Harald Stein1
, Anke Ehlers1
, Elisabeth Oker1
, Stefan Bentink2
,
Dido Lenze1
, Michael Hummel1
.
1
Institut für Pathologie, Charité – Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin;
2
Institut für funktionelle Genomik, Computational Diagnostics Group,
Regensburg
Background: The tumour cells of aggressive B-cell lymphoma
(aBCL) consistently show an immunophenotype of mature B cells
with expression of all B-cell typical and transcription factor genes. In
contrast, the B-cell derived tumour (HRS) cells of classic Hodgkin
lymphoma (CHL) have almost completely lost their B-cell identity. In
addition, HRS cells acquired several B-cell lineage inappropriate
antigens. The purpose of our study is to investigate a) whether
epigenetic mechanisms play a role in the development of the unique
phenotype of HRS cells, b) whether this approach aids to answer the
question whether the typical CHL gene expression program is caused
by a down- or up-regulation of genes and c) whether the genes can be
identified which are involved in the trans-differentiation of B-cells to
HRS cells.
Material and methods: CHL and aBCL lines were treated with
DNA-demethylation (5-aza-dC) and histone-acetylation (TSA)
reagents. Treated and untreated cell lines were analysed by Affymetrix
GeneChips. Numerous up- and down-regulated genes were verified by
quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Chromatin-immuno-
precipitation was carried out to determine the epigenetic modifications
in the promoter region of the corresponding genes.
Results: The treatment of CHL lines with 5-aza-dC and TSA had no
significant effects on the reactivation of the B-cell expression
program. Instead, the treatment of aBCL lines resulted in a complete
loss of their B-cell phenotype and – in parallel – to an up-regulation of
Hodgkin-characteristic genes. Our data clearly demonstrate that DNA-
demethylation and histone-acetylation is able to re-program B cells
into cells with a Hodgkin-like phenotype. In contrast, no re-activation
of B-cell typical genes or suppression of B-cell inappropriate genes
was observed in HRS cells.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that in CHL the silencing of the
B-cell expression program is not due to a down-regulation but rather
due to an up-regulation of certain genes and simultaneous demonstrate
the plasticity of B-cells.
LS 117
ALK POSITIVE (+) DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
(DLBCL) OF BONE - CASE REPORT
*L. Jabri 1, A.Benkirane 1, M. Karkouri 1, S. Benayad 1 , A. Madani 2,
A. Quessar2, S. Zamiati 1
1Pathology departmemt
2Heamatology depertment
University Hospital Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco
Background: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase+
(Alk+
) DLBCL is a rare
subtype of B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL), originally
described in 1997 by Delsol et al. It has a plasmoblastic morphology
and is characterized by positive CD138, and negative CD20, and in
comparison to anaplastic large cell lymphoma it is also positive to
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), but negative to CD30. The Alk
protein has a unique cytoplasmatic granular pattern and the associated
karyotype may be t(2;5) but more often t(2;17)(p23;q23) fusing Alk to
CLTC gene.
Objective: To describe a case of an extranodal Alk (+) DLBCL, and
review the literature.
Case report: This is the report of a case of a 56-years old patient,
male, who presented with lombar pain which he was experiencing
from 4 months in a context of a bad general health status (?).
Clinically, there was no peripheral adenomegaly. Spine plain radio-
graphs showed a vertebral lysis of L4-L5 and there was a
pancytopenia on the hemogramm. Vertebral biopsy showed diffuse
large cells proliferation, with vesicular and round nuclei and
prominent nucleoli, remaining sometimes of plasmablastic pattern.
On immunohistochemistry, the tumoral celles expressed EMA, CD45,
CD138. CD79a, CD20, Kappa, Lambda. CD30, CD15 and KL1 were
negative. Tumoral cells show a cytoplasmic granular positivity with
ALK1. Then the diagnosis of ALK1 positive diffuse large B cell
lymphoma was made. The bone marrow biopsy of this patient was
positive, invade by the same proliferation.
The patient died within the first line of a mutiagent chemotherapy.
Conclusion: Only very few cases of Alk(+) B-cell lymphoma were
reported in the literature. Outcome on the different protocols and
modalities was grave. Effort is needed to investigate this rare
aggressive lymphoma for a better diagnostics, treatment and outcome
in the future.
LS 118
CD34+
CORD BLOOD CELL-TRANSPLANTED MICE
AS A MODEL FOR EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS INFECTION
OF THE HUMAN IMMUNE SYSTEM. A MORPHOLOGICAL,
IMMUNOPHENOTYPICAL AND MOLECULAR STUDY.
*Mario Cocco, Cristiana Bellan, Roxane Tussiwand, Davide Corti,
Elisabetta Traggiai, Stefano Lazzi, Susanna Mannucci, Lucio Bronz,
Nazzareno Palummo, Piero Tosi, Antonio Lanzavecchia, Markus G.
Manz, Lorenzo Leoncini.
Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, Division of Patholog-
ical Anatomy, University of Siena, Siena, Tuscany, 53100, Italy.
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Bellinzona, CH-6500, Switzerland.
Ospedale San Giovanni, Bellinzona, CH-6500, Switzerland.
222 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Recent studies suggest that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects naïve B
cells, driving them to differentiate into resting memory B cells via the
germinal center reaction. This has been inferred from parallels with
the biology of normal B cells but has never been proved experimen-
tally. Rag2-/-
γc
-/-
mice, transplanted with human CD34+
cord-blood
cells as newborns, were recently shown to develop human B, T, and
dendritic cells, constituting lymphoid organs in situ. Accordingly, we
reasoned that this model would be useful to better define the strategy
of EBV infection of human B cells in vivo and to compare this with
different conditions of EBV infection in humans.
Fourteen mice were constituted with CD34+
cord blood cells obtained
from four different donors. Among them, twelve were infected by
intraperitoneal injection with of EBV B95-8 supernatant and were
subsequently sacrificed at different time points. Two uninfected mice
were used as uninfected controls. In the four groups of mice tested at
different interval after infection two outcomes of experimental
infection have been observed. One characterized by follicular
hyperplasia with florid germinal centers and one characterized by
nodular and diffuse lymphoid proliferation. Indeed, the only differ-
ence found among cases showing different morphology, immunophe-
notype and molecular characteristics was the type of T cell infiltration.
Our results suggests that the outcome of EBV infection in Rag2-/-
γc
-/-
cord blood reconstituted mice does not depend on the source of
CD34+
cord blood cells used and the level of pre-infection human
peripheral blood engraftment, but rather on the quality of the immune
response against infected cells. Furthermore they reveal different
strategies of EBV infection in B cells, possibly resulting from
variations in the host immune response.
LS 119
EXPRESSION OF CANNABINOID RECEPTORS TYPE 1
AND TYPE 2 IN NON HODGKIN LYMPHOMA: GROWTH
INHIBITION BY RECEPTOR ACTIVATION
Gustafsson, K., Wang, X., Severa, D., Eriksson, M., Kimby, E., Merup,
M., Christensson, B., Flygare, J. and Sander, B.*
Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge,
Stockholm, Sweden
Background: Cannabinoids exert anti-proliferative effects in various
types of cancer and in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL).
Purpose of the study : To investigate the expression of cannabinoid
receptors type 1 and type 2 (CB1 and CB2) in non Hodgkin lymphoma of
the B cell type and to evaluate the functional response of receptor targeting.
Summarized description of the results : MCL uniformely expresses
higher levels of CB1 and CB2 than reactive lymphoid tissue. In
indolent and aggressive lymphomas (small lymphocytic lymphoma,
follicular lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma,
diffuse large B cell lymphoma) the levels of cannabinoid receptor
mRNA expression was highly variable, ranging from 0.1-224 times
the expression in reactive lymph nodes. By immunohistochemistry
CB1 expression was detected in the tumour cells. The stable analogue
of endogenous cannabinoids, methanandamide, induced cell death in
MCL and CLL but not in Burkitt lymphoma. In vivo treatment with
methandamide caused a significant reduction of tumor size and
mitotic index in mice xenografted with MCL.
Conclusion: Therapies using cannabinoid receptor ligands could be
part of a future therapy for malignant lymphoma
LS 120
NASAL NK/T CELL LYMPHOMA
REPORT OF 13 CASES
*L. Jabri 1, F.Marnissi 1, A. Benkirane1 , M. Rachid 2 , A. Quessar 2,
S. Zamiati 1
1 Department of pathology
2 Department of Hematology
University Hospital Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco
Nasal NK/T cell lymphoma occurs in the nasal cavity and nasopharynx,
with variable regional extension. It is called “NK/T” instead of “NK”
because there is still some uncertainty concerning its exact lineage. This
lymphoma is rare in western populations and much more prevalent in
some Asian and Latin American countries. There is a very strong
association of this lymphoma with Epstein-Barr (EBV) (>95%) and this
later is considered to be the etiologic agent.
We studied 13 cases of Nasal NK/T cell lymphoma collected in our
Department between 2000 and 2005 to characterize their clinico-
pathologic features and to study the prevalence of EBV using
immunohistochemical detection of latent membrane protein LMP1.
Nine patients were men and 4 were women. Their age ranged from 17
to 70 years old with a median age of 40 years. All cases displayed an
immunophenotypic profile of CD3 (epsilon) +, CD20-, except three
cases that were CD3 (epsilon) negative and among them two cases
were CD43 positive. Granzyme B was positive in 10 cases. LMP1
was positive in 5 cases.
Our sample is certainly small but our results are in keep with previous
studies published. The causality of EBV in nasal NK/T cell lymphoma
is highly suspected.
LS 121
AN AGGRESSIVE NASOPHARYMGEAL LYMPHOMA
WITH PLASMABLASTIC FEATURES
IN AN IMMUNOCOMPETENT PATIENT: Case report
*L. Jabri 1, F.Marnissi 1, A. Benkirane1 , A. Madani 2 , A. Quessar 2,
S. Zamiati 1
1 Department of pathology
2 Department of Hematology
Lymphomas with plasmablastic differentiation are a heterogeneous
group of neoplasm. Plasmablastic morphology and phenotype can be
identified in dedifferentiated (plasmablastic) myelomas / plasmacytomas,
in Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) a variant of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) and in other aggressive DLBCLs. These tumours
exhibit overlapping features leading to difficulties in differential
diagnosis. We report a case illustrating this difficulty diagnostic dilemma.
A 56 year-old woman presented epitasis due to an enlarging nasopha-
ryngeal mass. Biopsy showed a tumour composed of sheets of large cells
with a cohesive pattern, a large nuclei, moderately coarse chromatin, and
prominent nucleoli. Many of the cells had abundant, eccentric cytoplasm,
suggesting plasma-cell differentiation. The cells were positive for EMA
and CD138 and were negative for cytokeratine, CD45, CD20, CD3 and
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 223
immunoglobulin light chains lambda and kappa. The tumor proliferation
rate was shown to be approximately 50%.
The diagnosis proposed was plasmablastic lymphoma or an extra-
medullary Plasmablastic Tumor Secondary to Plasma Cell Neoplasm.
Correlation with clinical feature disclosed a history of kappa light
chain myeloma thus diagnosis of plasmablastic myeloma was
retained.
Plasmablastic lymphoma is a distinctive type of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma found predominantly in the oral cavity mainly of HIV-
positive individuals. The cellular morphology resembles immunoblas-
tic DLBCL, the immunophenotypic features show the plasma cell
differentiation.
PBLs are morphologically and phenotypically similar to extramedul-
lary large cell transformation of plasma cell neoplasms. The
distinction between these neoplasms may be impossible without
clinical correlation.
Because these lymphomas don’t express the more common lymphoid
and/or B-cell markers, they may be mistaken for a poorly differentiated
carcinoma.
LS 122
GENOMIC PROFILING IN SPLENIC MARGINAL ZONE
LYMPHOMA: DELETIONS ON 7Q TARGET 7Q32
Watkins AJ*1
, Johnson N1
, Ye HT1
, de Leval L2
, Huang Y1
,
Chanudet E1
, Hamoudi R1
, Liu H1
, Isaacson PG3
, Attygalle AD4
,
Wotherspoon A4
, Du MQ1
1
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;
2
Department of Pathology, CHU Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium;
3
Department of Histopathology, University College London Hospitals,
London, UK; 4
Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital,
London, UK.
Background: Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is a poorly
characterised low grade B-cell lymphoma with highly heterogeneous
clinical and histological presentation. Clinical risk stratification and
histological diagnosis of SMZL, in particular its differential diagnosis
from other primary or secondary splenic lymphomas, remain a
challenge. This is largely due to a lack of specific phenotypic as well
as genetic markers. In order to characterise the genetic makeup of this
enigmatic lymphoma, we investigated the genomic profiles of a series
of well characterised cases using array comparative hybridisation
(aCGH).
Methods: A total of 26 cases of SMZL (18 frozen tissue, 8 formalin
fixed tissue) were successsfully investigated using an in house 1 Mb
resolution aCGH platform. Recurrent copy number changes in
chromosome 7 were further studied by chromosome 7 tile-path
aCGH. Somatic hypermutation in the rearranged IGH genes was
examined by PCR and sequencing.
Results: Array CGH at 1 Mb resolution revealed recurrent gain of 3q
(4/26=15%, including 2 cases showing trisomy 3), 8q (5/26=19%),
9q33.3-34.3 (5/26=19%, including 1 showing a focal amplification),
12q (3/26=12%, including 1 with trisomy 12), 18 (2/26=7%), and
recurrent loss of 7q (10/26=38%) and 8p (3/26=12%). Chromosome
7 tile-path aCGH analysis of the cases with 7q deletion showed an
11 Mb region spanning 119 Mb-130 Mb at 7q31.32-32.3 as the
minimal common deleted region (MDR). Bioinformatic search of this
MDR showed no recognised tumour suppressor genes, but nonethe-
less revealed several microRNAs that may be potentially relevant to
the pathogenesis of this lymphoma. Somatic hypermutation of the
rearranged IGH gene was seen in 23/35 (66%) SMZLs investigated.
There was no significant correlation among the CGH findings, IGH
somatic mutation, clinical and histological parameters.
Conclusion: Deletion of 7q, with an 11 Mb MDR at 7q31.32-32.3, is
a frequent event in SMZL. We are in the process of investigating
further the incidence and extent of this deletion in a large cohort of
both primary and secondary splenic lymphomas by interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridisation.
LS 123
GENOMIC PROFILES OF ENTEROPATHY-TYPE T-CELL
LYMPHOMA AND PRIMARY INTESTINAL NK/T CELL
LYMPHOMA
*Joaquim Carreras1
, Shih-Sung Chuang 2
, Anne Lavergne-Slove,3
Rifat Hamoudi1
, Estelle Chanudet1
, Hongxiang Liu1
, Lakshmi
Venkatraman4
, Ahmet Dogan5
, Peter G. Isaacson6
, Jeremy Woodward7
,
Nadine Cerf-Bensussan8
, Ming-Qing Du1
.
1
Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, UK; 2
Department
of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan; 3
Anatomie
Pathologique, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France; 4
Department of
Histopathology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, UK; 5
Department of
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester USA; 6
Department of Histopa-
thology, University College London, London, UK; 7
Department of
Gastroenterology, Addenbrooke’s NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK;
8
INSERM U793, Paris, France.
Background: Enteropathy-type T-cell lymphoma (ETL) and intestinal
NK/T-cell lymphoma (NK/TCL) of nasal-type are very aggressive
lymphomas with poor prognosis. ETL is assumed to originate from
intraepithelial T cells (IEL) of the small intestine in patients with
celiac disease and it is often preceded by type II refractory celiac
disease (RCD), which is characterised by immunophenotypically
aberrant and monoclonal IELs. Intestinal NK/TCL is believed to
derive from NK cells or cytotoxic T lymphocytes and is invariably
associated with EBV infection. The molecular genetics underlying
the development of these aggressive intestinal lymphomas is
unknown.
Methods: DNA samples extracted from IEL cell lines of 3 RCD, the
tumour cells microdissected from 27 ETL and 17 NK/TCL were
successfully profiled for genomic copy number alterations using an in
house 1 Mb resolution array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH). Recurrent changes in chromosomes 1, 6, 7 and 9 were
further investigated by corresponding chromosome tilling path array
in selected samples.
Results: RCD IEL cell lines showed gains of 1q21.1-25.5 (2/3),
6p22.3-25.3 (2/3) and +21 (1/3); and deletions of 1p31 (1/3), 6q16.1-
22.1 (1/3), 10q24.32 (1/3) and 13q21.31-34 (1/3). ETL displayed
recurrent gain of 9q34.11-34.3 (44%), 1p36.32 (44%), 7p22.3 (41%),
13q34 (33%), 4p16.3 (30%), 7q36.3 (30%), 2q37.1 (19%) 1q22
(15%) and 18q23 (15%). NK/TCL was characterized by gains of
9q34.11-34.3 (27%), 1p36 (9%), 7p22.3 (9%), 13q34 (9%) and losses
of 6q (32%), 9p (23%), 7p (18%) and 10q (9%).
Conclusion: There are common and distinct genomic copy number
changes among RCD-II, ETL and intestinal NK/TCL. Identification of
these recurrent genomic alterations provides a basis to further
224 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
investigate their role in multistage development of ETL and their
value in RCD diagnosis.
LS 124
PRESENCE OF MONOCLONAL T-CELL POPULATIONS
IN B-CELL POST TRANSPLANT LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS.
* Hazem AH Ibrahim, Lia Menasce, and Kikkeri N Naresh.
Departments of Histopathology, Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial
College London, UK & Christie Hospital, Manchester,UK.
Background: Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs)
arise as a result of immune suppression and loss of immune surveillance.
Most cases are B-cell PTLDs. Rare cases of T-cell PTLDs are described.
Purpose of the study: We hypothesised that the lack of immune
surveillance in B-PTLD should also be affecting the T-cells, though
they may not be histologically identifiable. We investigated 18 cases
of well established B-PTLD for presence of clonal T-cell populations.
Description of results: DNA was extracted from paraffin sections of
18 cases of B-PTLD, 10 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) and 5 reactive lymph nodes (RLN). Clonality assessment
was carried out by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using T-cell
receptor gamma chain gene primers and the amplicons were subjected
to heteroduplex analysis. Six of 18 B-PTLDs showed evidence of a
monoclonal T-cell expansion. One of 18 PTLDs and one of the 10
DLBCLs showed presence of a dominant amplicon in the background
of polyclonal/oligoclonal T-cell expansion suggesting a minor clone.
Rest of PTLDs and DLBCLs and all RLNs did not show evidence of
monoclonal T-cell expansion. Among PTLD cases, CD3, CD4 and
CD8 positive cells were counted and expressed as cells/mm2
on tissue
microarry sections. All cases of B-PTLD with a monoclonal T-cell
population showed dominance of CD8 positive cells, and 4/6 of them
had a CD4:CD8 ratio of <0.2. None of the cases without monoclonal
T-cell expansion had a ratio <0.2. Review of histological features in
one of the cases suggested features that were morphologically
compatible with a co-existing T-PTLD of small cell type.
Conclusion: Monoclonal expansion of T-cell population occurs
frequently in the post-transplant lymphoproliferative setting. These
clonal T-cell populations co-exist with monoclonal B-cell population
in B-PTLD.
LS 125
B-CELL POST TRANSPLANT LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE
(B-PTLD) DISORDERS ARE NOT ASSOCIATED
WITH THE CHARACTERISTIC LYMPHOMA-ASSOCIATED
CHROMOSOMAL TRANSLOCATIONS.
* Hazem AH Ibrahim, Lia Menasce, Mark Bower, and Kikkeri N
Naresh.
Departments of Histopathology, Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial
College London, UK & Christie Hospital, Manchester,UK.
Background: PTLDs are group of lymphoproliferative disorders that
develop in the background of immune suppression. They are often
associated with Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) and thought to be
associated with accumulation of genetic and epigentic changes. It
has been reported that the characteristic lymphoma-associated
chromosomal translocations are rare among PTLD.
Purpose of the study: We intended to confirm the previous
observation of lack of classical lymphoma-associated chromosomal
translocations in PTLDs and to widen the translocatoin loci
investigated.
Description of the results: We carried out fluorescent in-situ
hybridization (FISH) on tissue microarray sections in 15 cases of
B-PTLD, 14 HIV-associated B-cell lymphomas (7 Burkitt Lympho-
ma, 7 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)), and 40 cases of
immunocompetent (IC)-DLBCLs, using split-apart probes for
BCL2, BCL3, BCL6, CMYC, PAX5, and IGH loci. One out of 15
B-PTLD showed both CMYC and IGH translocations. The case had
morphology of monomorphic B-PTLD (DLBCL, plasmablastic
subtype). Fourteen out of 15 PTLDs were negative for BCL2,
BCL3, BCL6, CMYC, PAX5, and IGH translocations. On the other
hand, 6/7 HIV-BL were positive for CMYC and IGH translocations.
All HIV-DLBCL were negative for all translocations investigated.
Among IC-DLBCL, 12/39, 7/40, 4/38, 1/36, and 1/36 were positive
for IGH, BCL6, BCL2, CMYC and BCL3 translocations respec-
tively. All the translocations were mutually exclusive. One case was
positive for BCL6 translocation and negative for IGH suggesting a
different partner chromosome. All cases were negative for PAX5
translocation.
Conclusion: Characteristic lymphoma-associated chromosomal trans-
locations are very rare among PTLDs and mechanisms other than
chromosomal translocations, are more likely to be involved in the
pathogenesis of this disorder.
LS 126
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA PRESENTING WITH HIGH
GRADE TRANSFORMATION AND DISCORDANT RESULTS
OBTAINED BY COMMERCIAL FUSION AND BREAK
APART FISH PROBES
Tomas Balharek1
, Martina Barthova1
, Marcela Mrhalova2
, Peter Szepe1
,
Zora Lasabova3
, Tatiana Burjanivova1
, Juraj Marcinek1
, Lukas Plank1
1
Department of Pathology and National Consultation Centre of
Haematopathology, Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of Med-
icine and Faculty Hospital, Martin, Slovak Republic
2
Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Charles University,
2nd Medical School and Faculty Hospital in Motol, Prague, Czech Republic
3
Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University, Jessenius
Faculty of Medicine, Martin, Slovak Republic
Background: Rearrangements involving BCL2 gene characteristic for
follicular lymphomas (FL) may be detected by PCR and FISH. FISH may
be performed using fusion or break apart/split probes. Break apart/split
probes are reported to be more sensitive with minimized false positivity. In
recently examined FL we noticed some discordancies of results obtained
by commercial FISH probes detecting BCL2 rearrangement.
Methods: Diagnosis FL grade 1 was established according to typical
morphology and immunophenotype (CD20+, CD10+, bcl-2+, bcl-6+) in
the biopsy of skin tumour. Two months later patient presented with
gastric tumour which was classified as DLBCL, centroblastic variant
with GCB phenotype (CD10+/-, bcl-6+/-, MUM-1-, bcl-2+). The blastic
transformation of previously diagnosed low grade FL was supposed. We
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 225
examined paraffin-embedded tissue sections from both materials for
BCL2 rearrangement and IgH/BCL2 translocation by FISH and PCR.
Three different commercial FISH probes were used: 1.) LSI IGH/BCL2
dual color dual fusion probe (Vysis), 2.) LSI BCL2 dual color break apart
rearrangement probe (Vysis) and 3.) BCL2 split signal probe (Dako).
PCR was performed according to BIOMED-2 protocol using primers
covering MBR and mcr regions.
Results: Both materials were negative for IgH/BCL2 translocation
examined by BIOMED-2 PCR. FISH demonstrated that both tumours
carry identical genetic abnormality and are clonally related. Vysis IGH/
BCL2 fusion probe showed abnormal FISH pattern 2O1G1F, so that the
rearrangement of BCL2 accompanied with deletion of IgH gene was
supposed. In contrast, Vysis BCL2 break apart probe showed only 2
fusion signals corresponding to 2 virtually non-rearranged BCL2 genes.
However, the hypothesis of BCL2 rearrangement was supported by Dako
BCL2 split probe finding of abnormal FISH pattern 1R2F.
Conclusions: Presented results show that due to slight construction
differences Vysis and Dako rearrangement FISH probes may not
provide equal results in all types of BCL2 rearrangement. Supported
by Grant of Comenius University No. UK/432/2008.
LS 127
STRONG IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL EXPRESSION
OF HEAT-SHOCK PROTEINS (HSPs) IN CLASSIC
HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA (cHL)
* A Santón, A Pascual, E Cristóbal, J García-Laraña, M García-Cosío.
Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain
Background: HSPs comprise several families of proteins which besides
functionig as molecular chaperones play a pivotal role in apoptosis
inhibition and cell survival. Over-expression of HSPs have been reported
in many tumor types and associated with chemo-resistance and worse
prognosis. However, the immunohistochemical (IHC) profile of HSP
expression in cHL, together with its possible role in the apoptosis-
resistant phenotype of tumor H/RS cells are not well established.
Purpose: To analyze the IHC expression of main HSP families and
the heat-shock transcription factor-1 (HSF-1) in cHL and their
possible relationship with caspase signaling pathways.
Methods: Tissue-microarrays containing duplicate tumor cores from
100 pre-treatment-cHL cases were stained with antibodies against HSF-
1; HSPs 27, 32, 60, 70, 90 and 110, and co-chaperones HSP10, HSP40
and cdc37. To determine the status of intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic
pathways in H/RS cells, IHC expression of active caspases 3, 8 and 9,
cleaved PARP-1/p89, c-FLIP, XIAP, and Bcl-2 was also evaluated.
Results: Almost all cHL cases showed strong expression of HSF-1
(100%), HSP10 (100%), HSP32 (95.5%), HSP60 (98%), HSP105
(99%), and cdc37 (93%).The percentage of cases showing positive
staining for the remaining HSPs was lower: 39% for HSP27, 66%
HSP40, 50% HSP70, and 58% HSP90. Active caspases 3, 8, and 9
were detected in 100%, 56%, and 97% of cases, respectively. Despite
the detection of active caspase-3 in all samples, cleaved PARP-1 (the
main product of caspase-3 proteolytic activity) was observed only in
15.5% of cases. Apoptosis inhibitors Bcl-2, XIAP, and c-FLIP were
expressed in 61%, 74%, and 66% of biopsies, respectively.
Conclusions: Most cHL cases show strong IHC expression of HSF-1
and HSPs in tumor cells. Although functional studies are indeed
required, expression of HSPs could contribute to unproper functioning
of apoptotic machinery in HRS cells, as it happens in other tumor types.
LS 128
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN
EXPRESSION AND THE PRESENCE OF EPSTEIN-BARR
VIRUS IN CLASSIC HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
* M García-Cosío, E Cristóbal, A Pascual, J García-Laraña, A Santón.
Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain
Background: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are proteins that play
important roles in regulating cellular homeostasis and responses to
stress stimuli including viral infections. Viruses use HSPs to facilitate
takeover of the cellular DNA replication machinery and HSPs
associate with key viral products that control cell cycle progression.
The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is commonly associated with classic
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (cHL), especially the mixed-cellularity subtype,
where is detected in the neoplastic H/RS cells. It remains in a latent
state limiting expression to few genes. Among them, the most
abundantly expressed are the 2 EBV-encoded small RNAs (EBERs)
of which 1-10 million copies are transcribed per H/RS cell.
Purpose: To analyze the possible relationship between EBV and HSP
expression in H/RS cells of cHL.
Methods: Tissue-microarrays containing duplicate tumor cores from
100 pre-treatment-cHL cases were stained with antibodies against
HSF-1; HSPs 27, 32, 60, 70, 90 and 110, and co-chaperones HSP10,
HSP40 and cdc37. Presence of EBV was assessed by EBER in situ
hybridization. As EBERs have been shown to up-regulate Bcl-2 and
to increase resistance to apoptosis, immunohistochemical (IHC)
expression of c-FLIP, XIAP, p21, p53, and Bcl-2 was also evaluated.
Results: EBER detection was possible in 88 o 100 cases. EBV was found
in the neoplastic H/RS cells in 37 of them (42%). Statistical analysis
showed significant association between the presence of EBV and the
expression of HSP 27 (p=0.009) and HSP 70 (p=0.030) in H/RS cells.
Conclusions: HSP 27 and HSP70 expression seems to correlate with
latent EBV infection in malignant cells of cHL, as it has been reported
for other viral infections like HIV.
MS 129
GENE PROFILING COMBINED WITH TMA ANALYSIS
OF CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA UNCOVERS
A SPECIFIC TH1/ANTIVIRAL RESPONSE IN EBV+ TISSUES
AND IDENTIFIES THE B-CELL/ PLASMACYTOID
DENDRITIC CELL–SPECIFIC GENE BCL11A
AS A POWERFUL IHC MARKER OF FAVOURABLE
OUTCOME.
B Chetaille, F. Bertucci, P Finetti, B Esterni, A Stamatoullas, JM
Picquenot, MC. Copin, F Morschhauser, O Casasnovas, T Petrella, T
Molina, A Vekhoff, P Feugier, R Bouabdallah, L. Xerri*.
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France; and GELA, Rouen, Lille,
Dijon, Paris, Nancy, France
Background: After treatment for classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL),
about 40% of patients present either refractory disease or relapse.
Identification of these patients who would require more intensive
therapy is thus a crucial challenge.
226 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Material and Methods: A training set of 63 cHL frozen tissue
samples was profiled using Affymetrix DNA microarrays. We searched
for gene expression signatures associated with relevant features of
disease, including EBV status and survival. Ten tissues samples T-cell
rich B-cell lymphoma (TCRBCL) and from benign adenitis were
included as controls. A validation set of paraffin tissue samples from
146 cHL patients (median follow-up of 77.8 months) was analyzed
using immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microrrays (TMAs).
Results: Unsupervised clustering showed that cHL samples were
more heterogeneous than were TCRBCL and adenitis samples.
Supervised analysis on the basis of the EBV status tissues provided
a highly significant gene signature of 425 genes, showing that EBV+
HL tissues overexpressed genes characteristic of Th1 and antiviral
responses including IFNG. A signature of 38 genes were significantly
overexpressed in cHL patients with complete remission, when
compared to those with refractory disease or relapse. These genes
were involved in the function of B-cells and plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs), like BCL11A. IHC validation on TMAs confirmed that
high numbers of BCL11A+ reactive cells, using both univariate and
multivariate Cox models, correlated with both overall survival (OS)
and event free survival (EFS) (p<0.001). Multivariate Cox model
showed a significant correlation between OS and the IHC expression
of FOXP-3, CD20 and topoisomerase IIA. No prognostic value was
found for IHC detection of BCL2, LMP-1, PD-1, CD57, tryptase,
granzyme-B, PS100, CD8, STAT1 and CD123.
Conclusions: Identification of BCL11A as a powerful IHC prognostic
marker might help to select cHL patients who would benefit from
reduced therapy. Our results indicating a Th1 and anti-viral response
in EBV+ HL tissues provide a basis for novel treatment strategies.
LS 130
EXPRESSION PROFILING OF 554 MRNA SPECIES CODING
FOR ENZYMES INVOLVED IN GLYCOSYLATION
OF PROTEINS IDENTIFY A PLASMA CELL
DIFFERENTIATION SIGNATURE IN INDOLENT
B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
Barbara Petit1,2
, Nathalie Gachard2,3
, Lionel Forestier4
, Sophie
Duchez2
, 5
Dominique Bordessoule, Raymond Julien4
, Jean Feuillard2,3
.
1
Laboratoire d’Anatomie Pathologique and 2
UMR CNRS 6101,
3
Laboratoire d’Hématologie, 4
UMR INRA 1061, 5
Service d’Hématolo-
gie Clinique, Dupuytren Hospital and University of Limoges, France
Background: Glycosylation is essential for maturation of numerous
proteins, particularly immunoglobulins, a key feature of plasma cell
differentiation, which significance is matter of debate in indolent B-
cell lymphomas, mainly in marginal zone lymphomas (MZL).
Material and methods. To asses the expression profile of 554
glycosylation related genes (glycogenome) in indolent B-cell lym-
phomas, we have designed 3 different TaqMan Low Density Arrays
for high throughput QPCR. Total RNA was extracted from a series of
35 cases of B-CLL, Follicular Lymphomas (FL), MZLs of lymph
node and spleen, MALT, lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas (LPL), and
plasmocytoma (PL) and of 10 cases of reactive lymphoid tissues and/
or purified B-cell suspensions from tonsil, lymph nodes and spleens.
Results: Supervised analysis led to define a set of 168 significant genes
among the 484 (87%) expressed in at least 75% of patients. Clustering of
patients and controls with these 168 genes showed that both B-CLL and
PL were correctly segregated. FLs were clusterised with purified B-cells
from lymph nodes. MZL were separated in 2 groups, roughly equal in
size, those close to plasmocytoma and those close to B-CLL. A
glycogenome plasma cell signature was clearly identified with both
down-regulated genes such as CD22, CD69, CD72, CD83 or the glucose
transporters GLUT1 and GLUT3 and up-regulated genes such as
CD138/SDC1, or the mannosyltransferase ALG1, ALG2 and ALG3,
essential for protein N-glycosyslation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
or the mannosidase MAN1A1. Moreover, 3 genes, CHST11, LGALS1
and NDST1 were found to be expressed specifically in MZL and/or LPL.
Conclusion: Analysis of the glycogenome revealed that up-regulation
of genes coding for enzymes essential for mannosylation of proteins
in the ER constitute a signature of plasma cell differentiation and that
such signature separate MZLs in 2groups, those with and those
without plasma cell differentiation features, independently of the
organ origin of the tumour.
LS 131
EXPRESSION OF PLASMA CELL DIFFERENTIATION
MARKERS CD38, CD138 AND MUM1/IRF4
AND OF ZAP70 SUGGESTS THAT MARGINAL ZONE
AND LYMPHOPLASMACYTIC LYMPHOMAS
FROM LYMPH NODES MAY CORRESPOND
TO A MORPHOLOGICAL SPECTRUM OF THE SAME
ENTITY.
1
Isabelle Soubeyran1
, Marie Parrens2
, Barbara Petit3
, Nathalie
Gachard4
, Valérie Coste-Martineau5
, Camille Laurent6
, F Labrousse3
,
D Bordessoule7
, Jean-Philippe Merlio2
, Antoine de Mascarel2
, J Feuillard4
.
1
Department of Pathology and INSERM U916, Institute Bergonié,
Bordeaux;
2
Department of Pathology and Molecular Biology, EA 2406 CHU of
Bordeaux ;
3
Department of Pathology and UMR CNRS 6101, CHU Dupuytren,
Limoges;
4
Laboratory of Haematology, and UMR CNRS 6101, CHU Dupuyt-
ren, Limoges;
5
Department of Pathology, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier;
6
Department of Pathology, Hospital Purpan, and INSERM-U563,
Toulouse ;
7
Department of Haematology and UMR CNRS 6101, Hôpital
Dupuytren, Limoges;
Introduction: Among indolent lymphomas, Lymphoplasmacytic
Lymphomas (LPL) and Marginal Zone Lymphomas (MZL) are still
very difficult to separate when originated from lymph nodes (LN) due
to both cellular heterogeneity and frequent features of plasma cell
differentiation (PCD) in MZLs. We raise the question of the interest of
immunophenotypic PCD markers to separate these 2 categories of
tumours. Moreover, we studied expression of the tyrosine kinase
ZAP70, a surrogate marker of IgVH mutation status in CLL.
Material and Methods: We have designed a Tissue-Micro-Array of
250 cases of MZLs and LPLs, among them a series of 38 CD20pos
CD5neg CD23neg cases from LNs. Nine were diagnosed as LPL,
based on a diffuse infiltration pattern with PCD, and 29 as nodal MZL
(NMZL), based mainly on the persistence of nodularity, residual
germinal centers and/or presence of monocytoid/marginal zone B-cell
morphology.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 227
Results: Among NMZL, 58% showed no significant, 21% interme-
diate and 21% marked morphological PCD. Among LPL, 22%
showed intermediate and 78% marked PCD. Expression of the 3
markers CD38, CD138 and MUM1/IRF4 was significantly associated,
CD138 and MUM1/IRF4 being the most closely associated together
(p=2.10-4
). Expression of these 3 markers was significantly associated
with PCD whatever the morphological diagnosis. Interestingly, marked
expression of CD138 and/or MUM1/IRF4 was found in 31% of
NMZLs with no morphological PCD. Expression of ZAP70 was
negative in all cases; even in 4 IgVH unmutated cases among 12 tested.
Conclusion: CD38, CD138 and MUM1/IRF4 expression did not
allow to separate LPL and MZL from LN. Moreover, these markers
revealed a subset of NMZL with marked immunophenotypic features
of PCD despite the lack of significant morphological PCD. Finally,
ZAP70 was constantly negative in these cases, whatever the PCD and
the IgVH mutational status. Altogether, these results suggest that
LPLs and MZLs from lymph nodes correspond to a morphological
spectrum of the same entity.
LS 132
LMO2 GERMLINE GENETIC VARIATION IS ASSOCIATED
WITH LMO2 TUMOR EXPRESSION IN DLBCL
*A. Dogan1
, Y. Natkunam2
, L. Morton3
, M. Maurer1
, T. Habermann1
, S.
Chanock3
, W. Cozen4
, C. Lynch5
, R. Severson6
, C. Allmer1
, I. Lossos7
,
R. Levy2
, N. Rothman3
, S. Slager1
, P. Hartge3
, S. Wang3
, J. Cerhan1
.
1
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; 2
Stanford U, Stanford, CA;
3
NCI, Bethesda, MD; 4
USC, Los Angeles, CA; 5
U of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA; 6
Wayne State, Detroit, MI; 7
U of Miami, Miami, FL.
Background: Both LMO2 mRNA and LMO2 protein expression in
DLBCL have been associated with better survival. In a population-
based sample of DLBCL cases, we evaluated the association between
LMO2 germline variation and LMO2 protein expression.
Methods: We studied 186 DLBCL patients who participated in a
population-based study conducted from 1998-2000 using cancer regis-
tries in Detroit, Seattle, Iowa, and Los Angeles. Immunohistochemistry
for LMO2 was conducted on 5 micron section of tumor tissue from
diagnostic biopsies, and results were read by two independent patholo-
gists. Germline DNA was extracted from a venous blood sample or a
buccal cell sample, and 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from
LMO2 were genotyped using the Illumina GoldenGate platform
Results: LMO2 protein was expressed in 46% of patients; expression
was associated with better survival (HR=0.61; 95% CI 0.35-1.07, p=
0.08). Two SNPs (rs941940 and rs7941248) in the promoter region of
LMO2 were associated with protein expression in the tumor. Patients
with rs941940AA (66%) or rs7941248CT/TT (55%) genotypes were
more likely to have tumors that expressed LMO2 than rs941940AG/GG
(41%), and rs7941248CC (36%) genotypes, p=0.009 and p=0.01
respectively.
Conclusions: Genetic variation in LMO2 promoter SNPs correlates
with LMO2 protein expression. This data suggests that some of the
fundamental biological characteristics of DLBCL, such as germinal
center phenotype, may be determined by host genetic background.
LS 133
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY IMMUNOMODULATOR-
RELATED LYMPHOID PROLIFERATIONS (MAIR-LPD)
*Dennis P. O’Malley, M.D. Clarient Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA. Steve
Chen, M.D. Clarient Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA. Sherrie L. Perkins, M.D.,
Ph.D. University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT. Robert P. Hasserjian,
M.D. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, Marsha Kinney,
M.D. University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio Texas,
Todd Barry, M.D. PhenoPath, Seattle, WA, Jonathan Said, M.D.
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, Megan Lim, M.D.,
Ph.D. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, William J. Finn,
M.D. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, Matthew Snyder, M.D.
WakeMed, Raleigh, NC.
Introduction: Monoclonal antibodies therapies have been successful for
autoimmune disorders. These targeted therapies are designed to modulate
the immune response. As with all therapies, these new monoclonal
antibody (Mab)-based therapies are not without side effects and
complications. One specific class of these therapies, anti-tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) agents, has been reported to be associated with lympho-
proliferative disorders. Further, many of the other Mab agents are also
associated with lymphoproliferative disorders. We evaluate the clinico-
pathologic features of 10 cases of monoclonal antibody immunomodu-
lator-related lymphoproliferative disorders (MAIR-LPD).
Materials and methods: Cases were obtained from several institu-
tions. In all cases, clinical information and pathologic material was
reviewed with respect to institutional safeguards for patient privacy.
Demographic information, medication information (type, duration),
and available follow-up information were reviewed. H&E stained
sections and immunohistochemical stains were reviewed. In cases
where paraffin block were available, additional studies were
performed. Studies for EBV (EBER) and PCR studies for IgH
rearrangements, and when appropriate, TCR, were evaluated.
Results: The cases submitted illustrate a broad range of lymphopro-
liferative disorders. A variety of autoimmune disorders is represented
and highlights the effects of Mab agents. A summary of results are
presented in Tables 1 and 2.
Discussion: This case series illustrates a broad range of lymphoid
proliferations associated with the Mab agents. The MAIR-LPD have
considerable overlap with other iatrogenic lymphoid proliferations,
such as those seen in post-transplant settings (e.g. PTLD) and those
seen in association with methotrexate therapy. EBV was present in
most B cell derived lymphoma types, while those “atypical” lesions or
those of T cell derivation lack the EBV association.
228 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Table 1. Clinical information
UC: ulcerative colitis, RA: rheumatoid arthritis, MS: multiple
sclerosis
TNF: tumor necrosis factor, NA: not available, ND: not done
PAPA: Pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne
Table 2. Summary of pathologic findings
Case
number
Morphology EBV IgH TCR
1 Atypical hyperplasia - (EBER) - -
2 SPTCL - (EBER,
LMP)
ND ND
3 Atypical T cell,
suspicious for PTCL
- (EBER) - -
4 FL, grade 2/31
+ ND ND
5 DLBCL + (EBER) ND ND
6 CHL, LR + (EBER) ND ND
7 DLBCL + (EBER) ND ND
8 Atypical with necrosis ND NA NA
9 Atypical: Nasal type
NK/TCL vs.
LyG
- (EBER) Oligo NA
10 ALCL, ALK+ - (EBER) ND ND
SPTCL: subcutaneous panniculitic T cell lymphoma, PTCL: periph-
eral T cell lymphoma, DLBCL: diffuse large B cell lymphoma, CHL:
classical Hodgkin lymphoma, LR: lymphocyte-rich, EBER: Epstein-
Barr virus early RNA, LMP: latent membrane protein
LyG: Lymphomatoid granulomatosis, 1. Negative for t(14;18), IgH, or
bcl-6 translocations by FISH.
LS 134
REGULATORY T-CELLS AND NK CELLS IN B-CELL
POST-TRANSPLANT LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS (B-PTLD), HIV-ASSOCIATED B-CELL
LYMPHOMAS AND IMMUNE COMPETENT
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS.
* Hazem AH Ibrahim, Lia Menasce, Mark Bower, and Kikkeri N
Naresh.
Departments of Histopathology, Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial
College London, UK & Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK.
Background: PTLDs are a group of lymphoproliferative disorders
that develop in the background of immune suppression. Regulatory T-
cells (T-regs) play an important role in the inhibition of transplant
rejection and autoimmune disease. Fox-P3, a forkhead box transcrip-
tion factor, has been shown to be expressed in T-regs. It has been
shown that the T-regs can suppress the growth of some tumours in
addition to its role in suppression of the anti-tumour immune response
through inhibition of cytokine production by the tumour cells. The
latter effect allows the tumour cells to escape the host anti-tumoural T-
cell immune response. Natural killer (NK) cells are an important
component of the innate immune response against tumours.
Purpose of the study: We intended to investigate whether B-PTLDs
and HIV-associated B-cell lymphomas significantly differ from
immunocompetent (IC) diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL)
with respect to infiltration by T-regs (Fox-P3+
) and NK cells (CD56+
).
Description of the results: We carried out immunohistochemistry for
expression of Fox-P3 and CD56 among 19 cases of B-PTLD, 14 HIV-
associated B-cell lymphomas (7 Burkitt Lymphoma, 7 Diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)), and 37 cases of immunocompetent (IC)-
DLBCLs. The number of cells positive for Fox-P3 and CD56 was
counted and the numbers were expressed as cells/mm2
. The number of
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 229
Case
number
Age gender Presentation/clinical Medication Class Disorder Duration F/U Outcome
1 – 40 M Diffuse adenopathy,
night sweats, weight
loss
Daclizumab TNF MS 2+ years Reduced dosage NED. 9
mos.
2 – 49 F Skin lesion Infliximab TNF RA NA NA
3 33 M Infliximab TNF UC NA NA
4 55 M Lymphadenopathy Eflizumab CD11a Psoriasis Unk NA
5 71 F Infliximab TNF Crohn
Disease
3 yrs. Died
6 63 F Infliximab TNF Crohn
disease;
arthritis
NA NA
7 44 M Rectal mass Infliximab TNF Crohn
disease
6 weeks R-CHOP x
8 cycles; NED
7.5 months
8 24 M Enlarged lymph node Anti-TNF (unspecified) TNF
PAPA Syndrome unk NA
9 49 M Skin lesion Anti-TNF (unspecified) TNF
Ankylosing spondylitis unk NA
10 55 F Skin lesion Etanercept TNF RA unk NA
Fox-P3+
cells/mm2
among B-PTLD, HIV-BL, HIV-DLBCL and IC-
DLBCL was 159+94, 53+54, 142+90 and 64+22 respectively. B-
PTLD had higher Fox-P3+
cells as compared to IC-DLBCL (p=0.08).
The number of CD56+
cells/mm2
among B-PTLD, HIV-BL, HIV-
DLBCL and IC-DLBCL was 11+8, 1+1, 4+4 and 1.5+1 respectively.
B-PTLD had significantly higher CD56+
cells positive cells as
compared to IC-DLBCL (p=0.008).
Conclusion: Tissue samples from B-PTLD have significantly higher
numbers of Fox-P3 and CD56 positive cells as compared to
immunocompetent DLBCLs.
LS 135
THE MORPHOLOGIC OVERLAP BETWEEN HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA AND OTHER LYMPHOMPROLIFERATIVE
DISEASES. A WELL KNOWN BUT STILL DIFFICULT
PROBLEM.
Martin CA*
, Sapia S+
, Zanetto U&
, de Dios Soler M#
, Narbaitz MI#
.
From the Departments of Pathology, *
San Roque Hospital, +
Fundaleu, #
National Academy of Medicine, ARGENTINA; and &
City Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
The borderline between Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and so called “Non-
Hodgkin’s Lymphomas” (NHL) is sometimes difficult to delineate.
Recently, “Grey Zone Lymphomas” (GZL), from mediastinal and
non-mediastinal origin have been described. We present our experi-
ence with a group of these lesions.
Cases of GZL from four institutions were retrieved. After careful
evaluation, seven cases (5 males and 2 females, aged 12 to 63 years
old) were selected and grouped according to the scheme of Stein
(2005) as follows: one case was of type I, one of type II and 4 cases of
type III. In addition, there was a case of a reactive lymphadenitis
mimicking HL. GZL type I included a case of DLBLC coexisting
with isolated foci of NLPHL at presentation. Type II included one
case of HL with T-cell marker expression (CD30+, CD15+, CD3+,
CD5+, CD45+) and reactivity for PAX5, with no TCR or IgH
rearrangement. Type III group included a case of PMLBCL (CD30+,
CD15+) with strong positivity for CD20. Two further cases showed
Reed-Sternberg and anaplastic large cells positive for CD20, CD15,
CD30 and CD45. One of these was EMA+ and the other PAX5,
MUM1 and Oct2 +ve. The remaining case showed a CD20+, TIA-1+
DLBCL with clusters of CD15+ R-S and Hodgkin cells. Lastly, the
case of diffuse lymphadenitis featured large mononuclear CD30+ cells
and a T-cell rich background. This was followed overtime and a
diagnosis of HL was made in a second lymph node biopsy at another
institution.
Lymphoid proliferations with borderline features between HL and
NHL or reactive lesions are infrequent. The use of selected antibodies
combined with meticulous morphological assessment allows for the
correct diagnosis in most cases, and ancillary molecular studies permit
correct assignment of lineage in more difficult ones. However, some
cases remain difficult to classify. Newer strategies are needed to solve
these unusual situations.
LS 136
TITLE
THE ROLE OF HGAL PROTEIN EXPRESSION
IN THE GERMINAL CENTER MICROENVIRONMENT
C Temmins, MD1
S Zhao, MS1
IS Lossos, MD 2
Y Natkunam, MD,
PHD1
1
Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA;
2
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami,
Miami, FL
Background: HGAL is a germinal center (GC) B-cell-specific marker
whose expression is associated with a favorable outcome in diffuse
large B-cell (DLBCL) and classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL).
Mouse studies showed that HGAL expression is dispensable for GC
formation and function; however, IL-6-induced phosphorylation of
HGAL modulates lymphocyte migration, and may play a role in
confining B-cells to the GC microenvironment.
Purpose and design: In order to characterize profiles of HGAL
protein expression in disorders involving GC disruption, 75 cases
including 23 progressive transformation of GC (PTGC), 25 follicle
lysis (FLy) and 27 Castleman disease (CD: 17 hyaline-vascular (HV),
4 plasma cell (PC) and 6 multicentric (MC) variants), were studied.
Results: HGAL protein expression uniformly correlated with the
presence of GC B-cells in all categories including PTGC, Fly, PC-CD
and MC-CD but was absent in a subset of HV-CD that showed severe
regression or absence of GCs. HGAL staining highlighted dismantled
GCs in PTGC; in majority of cases, pockets of GC B-cells were
highlighted by HGAL in contrast to weak or absent CD10 and BCL6
staining. In FLy, HGAL expression was comparable to that of CD10,
BCL6 and CD21 in highlighting lysed follicles; however, HGAL
staining was stronger in florid FLy.
Conclusions: HGAL protein expression is intimately associated with
GC B-cells and effectively discriminates clusters of GC B-cells in
disrupted follicles. Its persistence in disrupted GCs in the absence of
CD10 and BCL6 suggests that it may be necessary for GC maintenance.
This expression pattern supports its proposed role in confining B-cells
to the GC by modulating lymphocyte migration. Given that IL-6 plays a
role in CD, increased HGAL expression in extrafollicular plasmacytoid
cells suggests a role for HGAL signaling in the pathogenesis of CD.
The favorable outcome of HGAL-positive DLBCL and CHL patients is
likely related to decreased dissemination (low stage disease) and
suggests a putative role for HGAL in the GC microenvironment.
LS 137
JNK IS CONSTITUTIVELY ACTIVE IN MANTLE CELL
LYMPHOMA: INHIBITION OF CELL PROLIFERATION
AND CELL CYCLE PROGRESSION BY JNK INHIBITOR
SP600125
*
Miao Wang, Stefano Rosati, Cigdem Atayar, Edwin Spithoven, Hans
Vos, Philip Kluin, Lydia Visser
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
230 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), is a lymphoma with a poor prognosis
for which any effective treatment is still lacking. Different signaling
pathways are activated in MCL cells and may be possible targets for
therapeutic intervention.
We investigated the role of the MAPK signaling pathway in MCL.
Normal tonsillar B cells and MCL cells were isolated from cell
suspensions by negative isolation and were used in a MAPK array.
Paraffin embedded tissue of MCL cases was used for immunohisto-
chemistry. MCL cell lines Jeko-1, HBL-2, UPN-1 and Granta-519
were used for functional studies.
We used a MAPK array to compare MAPK kinase activity in mantle cell
lymphoma cells with normal B cells and found upregulation of JNK in
MCLValidation by immunohistochemistry showed that phospho-JNK is
overexpressed in 81% (30/37) of MCL cases. We concluded that JNK is
constitutively activated in MCL lymphoma cases. Western blot analysis
on MCL cell lines showed further upregulation of phospho-JNK upon
stimulation with CD40L & IL4 but not with anti-IgM. Inhibition of JNK
activation with SP600125 resulted in growth arrest and apoptosis in all
MCL cell lines, an effect that could be overcome by the addition of
CD40L & IL-4. This effect was JNK specific since inhibition of ERK or
p38 did have any effect. Furthermore, we found that in MCL cell lines
SP600125 leads to G2-M phase arrest on day 1 and to an obvious increase
in endoreplication on day 2 and day 3. All effects were p53 independent.
G2-M arrest was probably induced by a concomitant downregulation of
the transcription factor EGR-1. Endoreplication could be blocked by
inhibition of Bcl-2, using the Bcl-2 inhibitor YC 137. These data suggest
that basal JNK activity is required for the growth of MCL and plays an
important role in progression of MCL cells through the cell cycle.
LS 138
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL PROFILING OF DIFFUSE
LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS IN A PROSPECTIVE
RANDOMIZED TRIAL
Heinz-Wolfram Bernd1*
, Michael Pfreundschuh2
, , Marita Ziepert3
,
Alfred C. Feller1
1
Institut für Pathologie, UKSH, Campus Lübeck, Germany; acting for
the German Reference Pathology Centers for Lymph Node Pathology
2
Klinik für Innere Medizin I, Universitätsklinik Homburg/Saar,
Germany
3
Institut für Medizinische Informatik, Statistik und Epidemiologie,
IMISE, Universität Leipzig, Germany
The effords to develop a robust immunohistochemical classifier for
prognostic class prediction in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma yielded
in inconclusive and conflicting results so far. In this study, we
performed IHC profiling in DLBCL cases from a large prospective
randomized trial to possibly disclose prognostic subgroups and to test
the published immunohistochemical classifiers in an independent
prospective cohort.
In our study, 414 cases of DLBCL, all of which are enrolled in the
NHL-B trial of the DSHNHL, have been immunohistochemically
analyzed with a broad panel of antibodies using tissue micro arrays.
Results were correlated to clinical data and compared to published
classifiers.
Amongst other results, the presence of CD23-positive FDC mesh-
works, a clonal light chain secretion by the tumour cells and
expression of HLA-DR emerged as independent markers of improved
OS in multivariate analyses. By applying to all cases previous
published algorithms for classification into a GCB and a non-GCB
group, we observed a strong trend for better OS in the GCB cases, but
this was not significant (p=0,055).
In conclusion, the previously reported significant IPI-independent
prognostic value of class prediction according to suggested IHC
classifiers could not be reproduced in our series. Results of several
IHC studies are heterogeneous and disclose a limited reproducibility.
Robust and reproducible immunohistochemical class prediction needs
highly standarized work up and evaluation criteria that are universally
accepted. None of the proposed IHC predictors is yet ready for
clinical application.
LS 139
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL EXPRESSION
OF CHECKPOINT KINASE-1 IN NORMAL
HUMAN TONSILS AND BURKITT LYMPHOMA
*S. Rosati, S. van Nierop, E.J. Boerma, P.M. Kluin
University Medical Center Groningen - Department of Pathology
Groningen, The Netherlands
Background: In the germinal center (GC) dark zone, centroblasts
proliferate despite AID-induced DNA damage. In the DNA damage
response (DDR), checkpoint-kinase-1 (Chk1) is phosphorylated by
ATR and triggers the S- and G2 phase checkpoints, phosphorylating
TP53 and the CDC25 phosphatases. In centroblasts, Bcl-6 attenuates
the DDR by transcriptional repression of among others ATR. Bcl-6
inhibition restores ATR transcription, Chk1 phosphorylation and the
DDR. Disabling the ATR-Chk1 signalling could favour the growth of
rapidly proliferating lymphomas. This is supported by our unpub-
lished array CGH data on Burkitt lymphoma (BL), showing a
hemizygous deletion at 11q24 (Chk1 locus) in 4/16 cases.
Purpose: Immunohistochemical investigation of Chk1 could contribute
to understand its regulation and function. We determined Chk1 expression
in 4 tonsils and 24 BLs, using IHC with an anti-Chk1 rabbit MoAb.
Results: in tonsils, Chk1 was almost exclusively expressed in the GC
dark zone, with strong nuclear and weak cytoplasmic positivity. 19
BLs (including 2 with 11q-) could be evaluated. The 2 11q- cases
showed minimal nucleocytoplasmic staining. 5/17 cases showed
mainly or exclusively cytoplasmic expression. 12 cases showed
nuclear and cytoplasmic positivity of variable intensity, including 5
cases with a strong expression similar to normal centroblasts.
Conclusion: by IHC on normal tonsils, Chk1 is seen mainly in
proliferating cells and particularly in the dark zone centroblasts.
Recent data suggest that Chk1 constitutively associates with
chromatin; ATR-mediated Ser317 and Ser345 phosphorylations
mediate, respectively, Chk1 release from chromatin and Chk1
activation, followed by nuclear export and proteasomal degradation.
Our IHC findings are consistent with this model. Compared to
centroblasts, in BLs the heterogeneous staining intensity and
subcellular localization may reflect acquired abnormalities in gene
dosage, phosphorylation or mutation. Currently we are performing
IHC studies with antibodies against different phopshorylated forms of
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 231
Chk1 (pChk1-Ser317, pChk1-Ser345 and pChk1-Ser280) to further
explore Chk1 function.
LS 140
NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT HODGKIN
LYMPHOMA AND T CELL/ HISTIOCYTE RICH B
CELL LYMPHOMA-CLINICAL, MORPHOLOGICAL
AND IMMUNOPHENOTYPICAL FEATURE
AND THEIR IMPORTANCE FOR DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS
Dr. Aurelia Tatic, Dr. Iulia Ursuleac, Dr. Camelia Dobrea, Dr. Razvan
Stoia, Dr. Emilia Niculescu Mizil, Dr. Bogdan Ionescu
Fundeni Clinical Institute, Department of Hematology
Background: grey zone lymphomas include those lymphoid malig-
nancies that shows overlapping morphological , immunophenotypical
features; main entities are : classical Hodgkin lymphoma , T cell/
histiocyte-rich large B cell lymphoma(TCHRLBCL), nodular lym-
phocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL). The diagnosis
between these entities may be difficult, but is very important because
the therapeutical options , the course and prognosis are different for
each form of lymphoma. The incidence of TCHRLBCL and NLPHL
is very low (6-7% respectively 4-5%).
Method and material: in Fundeni Clinical Institute between 2002-
2008, were diagnosed 4 cases of TCHRLBCL , 2 cases of NLPHL
and 1 case of NLPHL transformed in TCHRLBCL from a total of
1653 malignant lymphomas ( 444 Hodgkin Lymphomas and 1209 non
Hodgkin Lymphomas).
The NLPHL patients were males, with a median age of 39 years old,
diagnosed in early stages(I B/Ann Arbor), based on clinical,
morphological and immunophenotypical assessments; the course was
favorable with ABVD chemotherapy and even at relapse(recorded in
one case)the chemosensitivity was proven.
The TCHRLBCL patients were women, with a median age of
52,5 years old; all of them were diagnosed in advanced stages( IIIB,
IVB/Ann Arbor) and were refractory to chemotherapy.
Conclusion: the differential diagnosis between TCHRLBCL and
NLPHL is very important, because the evolution of disease and the
responsiveness to chemotherapy is different; NLPHL has a more
indolent course and good remission may be obtained with
conventional chemotherapy. TCHRLBCL is an aggressive disease
and should be treated with aggressive regimens of chemotherapy;
despite of the treatment, complete response is rare and for short
time installed.Because morphological appearance may be similar,
immunohistochemistry is the main method for differential diagno-
sis. The incidence of these 2 entities among all of malignant
lymphomas was very low ( 1% ), but there is a question about the
possibility of misdiagnosed cases ( confusion with other types of
lymphomas).
LS 141
TRANSLOCATIONS INVOLVING 8Q24 IN BURKITT
LYMPHOMA AND OTHER MALIGNANT LYMPHOMAS –
A HISTORICAL REVIEW OF CYTOGENETICS
IN THE LIGHT OF TODAYS KNOWLEDGE
EG Boerma1
, R Siebert2
, PhM Kluin1
, M Baudis3
1
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2
Institute
of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Kiel, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany, 3
Institute of
Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) has a characteristic translocation t(8;14)(q24;
q32) or its variants, however, diagnostic dilemmas occur as there is
overlap with other lymphomas such as a subset of diffuse large B cell
lymphomas (DLBCL). Recently two gene expression studies found
that BL has a distinct molecular profile, but also that some cases
intermediate between BL and DLBCL exist. An alternative approach
is to consider chromosomal abnormalities. We explored the “Mitel-
man database” to define a cytogenetic profile of “true” Burkitt
lymphoma. The core subset of 481 BL showed a very low complexity
of chromosomal changes, 40% of the cases having the 8q24
translocation with IG-MYC fusion as a sole abnormality. In the
remaining cases recurrent, partially exclusive abnormalities included
gains at chromosomes 1q, 7 and 12, and losses of 6q, 13q32-34 and
17p. No differences existed between the 205 pediatric and 215 adult
BL. This profile was different from that of the 13 BL with an 8q24
breakpoint not affecting the IG loci, the 44 BL that had a second
translocation involving a breakpoint at 18q21, 3q27 or 11q13 (double-
hit lymphomas), and other morphological types of lymphomas with an
8q24 breakpoint (N=327). These lymphomas showed a much higher
cytogenetic complexity than the core subset. BL without a cytogenet-
ically detectable 8q24/MYC breakpoint (N=108) also had a higher
complexity than the core BL but might be heterogeneous and therefore
deserves further studies. We conclude that a diagnosis of BL should be
restricted to cases with a proven IG-MYC co-localization and a typical
profile of imbalances without evidence of a double-hit and that classical
cytogenetic analysis is of supplementary diagnostic value. Secondly,
since the age distribution shows a steady increase of lymphomas that
mimic BL, there is no distinct age at which a pathologist can safely
make a diagnosis of BL without any ancillary studies.
LS 142
FOXP3+ REGULATORY T-CELLS IN ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC
T-CELL LYMPHOMA (AITL): ARE THEY CORRELATED
WITH THE BIOLOGY OF THIS LYMPHOMA ?
IMMUNOPHENOTYPING STUDY BY FLOW CYTOMETRY
AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY.
J Bruneau (1); V Asnafi (1); L Lhermitte (1); E Macintyre (1); N
Brousse (2); * D Canioni (2);
(1) Hematobiology Department, (2) Pathology Department, Hôpital
Necker, Paris, FRANCE
232 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Background: AITL is a distinct clinicopathological entity among
peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The abnormal infiltrate is constituted of
atypical T lymphocytes CD4+, CD10+, Bcl6+ admixed with an
abundant reactive micro-environment cells. The cellular origin of
AITL seems to derive from follicular helper T-cells but little is known
about AITL biology. These patients have immune dysfunctions
appearing to be secondary to the neoplastic process rather than
preceding it. CD4+, CD25+, FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells (Tregs)
represent important lymphoma/host environment modulators and their
role in the regulation of immune response appears more and more
predominant.
Purpose of the study: We assessed the role of Tregs number in AITL
lymph nodes (LN) by an immunohistochemical study performed by
flow cytometry (FCM) on 33 cases (5 AITL, 8 reactive LN, 20 B-cell
NHL) and on formalin-fixed biopsies on 23 cases (15 AITL, 3
reactive LN, 3 follicular NHL and 2 large B-cells NHL) using FOX-
P3 antibody (Abcam,1/40). The Tregs were evaluated on slides by
counting stained nuclei on five different fields on high power field
(×400).
Results: FCM revealed that the median infiltration of Tregs / CD4+
CD25- T-cells was statistically different between reactive LN: 2.9%
(2.3%-6.5%) and B-cells NHL: 11.4% (0.7%-25.4%) and between B-
cells NHL and AITL: 2.4% (0.3%-7.5%) (p<0.01). Immunohistochem-
istry on slides confirmed the significant difference of nuclei FOXP3+
number stained in AITL: 82 (51-121) comparing to B cell NHL: 251
(166-298) (p<0.01) and was less significant between reactive LN :196
(140-265) and AITL (p<0.05). FCM revealed also that tumoral T cells
CD4+, CD10+ were CD25- and FoxP3-.
Conclusion: The alteration of T-cell regulators lymphoid functions
seems to be implicated in AITL biology. This decrease of Tregs
number may favor the development of AITL, or may be secondary to
AITL. This study could also propose new targeted therapies for this
lymphoma of bad prognosis.
LS 143
MICRORNA SIGNATURES OF DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
LYMPHOMAS AND FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMAS
Christoph Thorns1
*, Anja Roehle1
, Kai P Hoefig1
, Dirk Repsilber2
,
Marita Ziepert6
, Markus Loeffler6
, Wolfram Klapper3
, Michael
Pfreundschuh4
, András Matolcsy5
, Heinz-Wolfram Bernd1
, Lila
Reiniger5
, Hartmut Merz1
& Alfred C Feller1
1 Institute for Pathology, University Clinic Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Luebeck, Germany
2 Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals FBN,
Dummerstorf, Germany
3 Institute for Pathology, University Clinic Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Germany
4 Department of Internal Medicine I, University Clinic Saarland,
Homburg / Saar, Germany
5 1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research,
Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
6 Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology
IMISE, University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
MicroRNAS (miRNA, miR) are small (∼22nt) RNAs that function as
translational repressors by binding to the 3′UTR of the target mRNA.
They play key roles in many cellular pathways and can have tumour
suppressor and oncogenic properties. Recent data from Lawrie et al.
suggest that miRNAs are differentially expressed in the germinal
center B cell-like and activated B cell-like subtype of diffuse large B-
cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and may serve as prognostic markers
(Lawrie et al.: Br J Haematol 2008; 141:672-5 and Int J Cancer 2007;
121:1156-61).
Here we analyzed the expression signatures of 157 miRNAs in 58
DLBCL, 46 follicular lymphoma (FL) and seven non-neoplastic
lymph nodes (LN). Comparison of DLBCL-, FL- and LN resulted in
specific DLBCL- and FL-signatures, which include miRNAs with
previously published function in haematopoiesis (miR-150 and miR-
155) or tumour development (miR-210, miR-10a, miR-17-5p and
miR-145). As compared to lymph nodes, some miRNAs are
differentially regulated in both lymphoma types (miR-155, miR-210,
miR-106a, miR-149 and miR-139), whereas other miRNAs seem to
be differentially expressed in a lymphoma-specific manner such as
miR-9/9*, miR-301, miR-338 and miR-213 in FL and miR-150, miR-
17-5p, miR-145, miR-328 and others in DLBCL. In a multivariate
analysis adjusted for IPI-factors, a group of eight miRNAs were
identified, that are of prognostic relevance for tumour outcome.
Reduced expression levels of six miRNAs (miR-19a, miR-21, miR-
23a, miR-27a, miR-34a and miR-127) reveal poor event-free survival
(EFS) and/or overall survival (OS), whereas the opposite is true for
the remaining two (miR-195 and let-7g). Only miR-127 significantly
influences both OS and EFS in a multivariate analysis.
In conclusion DLBCL and FL show different miRNA-signatures.
Moreover, a rather low number of miRNAs seem to be of prognostic
relevance for tumour outcome in DLBCL in a multivariate analysis.
LS 144
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL
FEATURES OF HIGH-GRADE TRANSFORMATION OF 20
CASES OF LOW-GRADE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
*Mine Hekimgil1
, Nazan Ozsan1
, Neslihan Incili1
, Seckin Cagirgan3
,
Murat Tombuloglu3
, Guray Saydam3
.
1
Department of Pathology and 3
Hematology, Ege University Faculty
of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.
Several independent studies have already reported progression to
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in indolent lymphomas such
as follicular lymphoma (FL), marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type
(MALT lymphoma), chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocyt-
ic lymphoma (CLL/SLL), and nodular lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL). The aim of the study is to describe
the histopathological and immunohistochemical features of high-grade
transformation in patients previously diagnosed and treated as low-
grade lymphomas. From 1990 to 2008, 20 patients with low-grade
lymphomas were diagnosed with biopsy-proven transformation, all to
DLBCL, except one case with CLL/SLL which had transformed to
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). The initial diagnoses were FL in three,
MALT lymphoma in four, NLPHL in five, and CLL/SLL in eight
cases. The median follow-up period between the initial diagnosis of
low-grade lymphomas and transformation to high-grade disease was
2 years. Of the FL cases one with grade 1 and the other with grade 3
disease have relapsed with diffuse large cell morphology within 2 and
3 years, respectively. Interestingly, the third case was diagnosed as
DLBCL initially, and received the diagnoses of FL grade 1 within a
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 233
month before the initiation of chemotherapy. All four cases of MALT
lymphoma presented with a high-grade morphology on initial
endoscopic biopsies. All of the five cases of NLPHL relapsed with
DLBCL within 2 to 9 years of follow-up. Of eight cases of CLL/SLL,
one presented prolymphocytic transformation and was followed-up
for four years with multiple biopsies which were all diagnosed as
infiltration of CLL/SLL, two presented Richter transformation to
DLBCL on the year of diagnosis, and the rest relapsed within 1 to
4 years after diagnosis as DLBCL and interestingly one as HL. Our
cases and review of the literature suggest that large-scale research is
needed to validate the biological signals that influence the high-grade
transformation of indolent lymphomas.
LS 145
THE THYMUS DURING HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
AND PRIMARY MEDIASTINAL B LYMPHOMA
DEVELOPMENT: A LIGHT MICROSCOPICAL
AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STUDY
*M. Marino (1), S. Buglioni (1) , A. Papadantonakis (1), R. Martucci (1), E.
Gallo (1), F. Pisani (2), F. Facciolo (3) and R. Perrone- Donnorso (1)
1) Dept. of Pathology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome,
Italy
2) Hematology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy
3) Thoracic Surgery, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy
Background- Distinct lymphoma entities among NHL, such as
Primary Mediastinal B Lymphomas (PMBL), and also Hodgkin
Lymphomas (HL) arise in the thymus. However, due to destructive
lymphoma growth, very limited informations are available concerning
thymus changes during lymphoma development or spreading.
However, the origin in the thymus of both HL and PMBL has been
related to thymic lymphoid cells, and, for PMBL, to CD23+ large
asteroid B cell in the thymic medulla.
Study purpose- We show here the pathological features of 2 cases of
primary lymphomas ( 1 HL and 1 PMBL) developing in the thymus,
simulating during preoperative investigations a thymic epithelial cell
(TEC) tumor and resected by radical thymectomy.
Results- Case 1 - A case of partially cystic HL occurred in the
anterior mediastinum of a 63 year-old woman. In the thymic tissue
distant from the tumor a distinctive type of lymphoid nodule was seen
“budding” from the medullary border in the adipous tissue or,
elsewhere, “in” the medulla, formed by small monotonous B cells
and a central focus of large atypical CD30+ cells .The network of
medullary TEC was surrounding this central nodule and it was
dislocated from the nodular growth. Case 2 - The case of PMBL
occurred in a 42-year old woman and it simulated a thymic carcinoma,
both macroscopically and, at first glance, microscopically. The CD20+,
CD23+ lymphoid cells, coexpressing BCL6 and MUM1/IRF4, grew
in a cohesive way, surrounding areas containing small mature
lymphocytes, simulating thymoma “perivascular areas”. These “peri-
vascular areas”, by immunohistochemistry, were found to be
medullary remnants . At tumor periphery, normal medullary thymic
tissue was seen, compressed and focally invaded from the “lymphoid”
tumor ; CD23+ lymphoid emboli were seen in the vessels of
corticomedullary junction.
Conclusions Our morphological observations in 2 lymphoma cases
could contribute informations about the origin of HL and PMBL from
thymic lymphoid cells , the early spreading and the microenvir-
onmental features associated to lymphoma development .
LS 146
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISEASES IN MYELODISPLASTIC
AND /OR SPLENOMEGALIC PATIENTS:
A MULTIDISCIPLINARY DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
*M. Marino (1), L. Dessanti (2) , M. D’Andrea (2), S. Buglioni (1), R.
Martucci (1), P. Canalini (1), S. Conti (1), E. Vico (3), R. Perrone-
Donnorso (1) and I. Cordone (4)
1) Dept . of Pathology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome,
Italy
2) Hematology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy
3) Clinical Pathology, Cytogenetic Unit, Regina Elena National
Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy
4) Clinical Pathology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome,
Italy
Background and purpose of the study- The current diagnostic
approach in myelodisplasia includes Peripheral Blood (PB) film and
Bone Marrow (BM) aspirate, morphological examination as well as
classic cytogenetic and/or FISH BM analysis. The role of BM biopsy
is not fully established. Moreover, the diagnostic value of PB flow
cytometry immunophenotyping in splenomegalic / myelodisplastic
patients has to be evaluated.
Results- In our series of 63 bone marrow biopsies for pancytopenia
and suspected myelodisplasia (form August 2001 to April 2008) a
diagnosis of BM infiltration by previously occult lymphoma was done
in 6 cases. All lymphoma patients were splenomegalic. Five cases
were B-cell lymphomas (3 DLBL, 1 Follicular Lymphoma, 1 Primary
Splenic Extranodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma ) whereas in 1 case a
diagnosis of Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma (PTCL) was done. No
cytogenetic aberrations were found in 4/6 cases evaluated on the BM.
In the PTCL a splenectomy was performed subsequently due to the
splenic size (24×10×8 cm, 1600 gm); the flow cytometryc analysis of
the splenic lymphocytes identified as prevalent a CD4 positive
population. A biclonal rearrangement of the gamma chain gene of
TCR was established at the Dept. of Pathology of the Würzburg
Institute.
In further 3 patients splenomegalic / non myelodisplastic a diagnosis
of Hairy Cell Leukaemia (HCL) was done by flow cytometry PB
immunophenotyping, and confirmed by BM core biopsy. The minimal
residual disease (MRD) evaluation was done by PB flow cytometry in
all the HCL cases after treatment.
Conclusions- The BM biopsy should be considered in the manage-
ment of myelodisplastic / splenomegalic patients. In our experience an
occult lymphoma could was identified in 6/63 cases. Moreover, flow
cytometry PB immunophenotyping was diagnostic in all the HCL
cases, splenomegalic / non myelodisplastic, diagnosed at our Institute
in these years. A significant correlation with the BM trephine biopsy
was found in all the cases.
234 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 147
HDM4 IS OVEREXPRESSED IN MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
AND ITS INHIBITION INDUCES THE EXPRESSION OF P21
M Liang, X Han, M Fernandez, M Nguyen, GZ Rassidakis, I Drakos,
LJ Medeiros and *CE Bueso-Ramos
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX,
United States.
Background: Alterations of human homolog of murine double
minute 2 (HDM2)/HDM4 contribute to the tumor development and
progression. HDM4 inhibits p53-mediated transcriptional activation
and synergistically promotes p53 and p21 degradation with HDM2.
The role of HDM4 in lymphomas is unclear. We assessed HDM4
expression in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL).
Result: HDM4 expression was assessed using immunohistochemical
techniques and routinely fixed and processed tissue sections of
reactive lymph nodes and MCL. HDM4 nuclear expression was
observed in 18 of 19 (95%) MCL, but was negative in mantle zone B-
cells of reactive lymph nodes (n=19) (p<0.01). HDM4 overexpres-
sion was confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) in 4 MCL cell lines and 6 MCL tumors and both
splicing variants, HDM4-S (containing only p53 binding domain), and
HDM4-full-length were increased compared with normal CD19+ B-
cells. The HDM4-S to HDM4-full-length ratio was also increased in
MCL compared with normal CD19+ B-cells (p<0.05). Using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) to inhibit HDM4 in two MCL cell lines, SP53
(wild type p53) and Mino (mutant p53), p21 protein levels were induced
as shown by Western blotting. Immunocytochemical analysis also
showed increased p21 and active Caspase-3-positive cells (see table).
P21 Active Caspase-3
siRNA
control
siRNA
HDM4
siRNA
control
siRNA
HDM4
Mino
(%)
5 12 7 10
SP53
(%)
15 42 9 15
Conclusion: Aberrant expression of the HDM4-S variant in MCL cell
lines and tumors suggests that HDM4 may have a pathogenetic role in
this neoplasm. HDM4 is a potential therapeutic target in MCL.
LS 148
INDOLENT CD8-POSITIVE LYMPHOID PROLIFERATION
OF THE FACE. A DISTINCT PRIMARY CUTANEOUS
T-CELL LYMPHOMA?
Tony Petrella, Eve Maubec, Pascale Cornillet-Lefebvre, Rein Willemze,
Eduardo Marinho Jean-Luc Benhamou, Patty Jansen, Chalid Assaf,
Alistair Robson and Florent Grange.
The authors report six cases of cutaneous lymphoproliferation unusual
by their histology and their clinical presentation. Each presented with
a history of a slow growing nodule on the ear or nose. Despite the
indolent clinical evolution, the histology suggested a high-grade
lymphoma. All lesions consisted of a dense, diffuse proliferation of
monomorphous medium-sized T-cells throughout the dermis and
subcutis. There was no epidermotropism and a grenz zone was clearly
present in each case. The tumour cells displayed irregular blast-like
nuclei, with small nucleoli and clear chromatin and had a CD3+, CD8
+, CD4-, TiA1+, granzyme B- immunophenotype with a loss of other
T-cell antigens. The five cases with available material for PCR studies
displayed a monoclonal T-cell rearrangement of the T-cell receptor
gamma chain. These cases do not correspond to a recognised
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma as described in the recent WHO/EORTC
classification. The apparent striking propensity for the face (ear and
nose) suggests that they might represent a specific entity. Further
cases are needed to confirm this hypothesis. It is important for such
indolent lesions to be known in order to avoid over treatment.
LS 149
p65 ACTIVITY AND ZAP-70 STATUS PREDICT
THE SENSITIVITY OF CLL CELLS TO A NEW
AND SELECTIVE IKK INHIBITOR
Mónica López-GuerraÚ
BS, Gaël Roué PhD, Patricia Pérez-Galán
PhD, Roberto Alonso PhD, Neus Villamor MD, Emili Montserrat
MD, Elias Campo MD and Dolors Colomer PhD
Hematopathology Unit, Department of Pathology and Hematology,
Hospital Clínic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Background: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a clinical entity
derived from the monoclonal expansion of long-life B-lymphocytes
with deregulated proliferation. Constitutive activation of the NF-κB
pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of this malignancy.
The NF-κB signaling pathway plays a crucial role in tumorigenesis by
its capacity to modulate apoptosis and cell survival, as well as
proliferation, inflammation, tumor metastasis and angiogenesis.
Purpose of the study: In the present work, we have analyzed the in
vitro antitumoral effect of a new and selective IKK inhibitor, BMS-
345541, in 34 primary CLL cells.
Results: BMS-345541 selectively induced apoptosis in CLL cells in
the low micromolar range, irrespective of p53 or ATM status.
Noteworthy, the ZAP-70high group was significantly more sensitive
to BMS-345541 than the ZAP-70low group, in correlation with high
levels of p65 phosphorylation and DNA binding activity. Following
NF-κB inhibition, BMS-345541 led to induction of the mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway and activation of both caspase-dependent and
independent factors. Moreover, apoptosis induced by this inhibitor
was accompanied by downregulation of several antiapoptotic NF-κB-
target genes, including both Bcl-2 family members (Bcl-XL, Mcl-1,
Bcl-2 and Bfl-1/A1) and apoptotic endogenous inhibitors (cFLIP,
XIAP, cIAP2 and survivin). In this context, we demonstrated a strong
synergism between BMS-345541 and conventional chemotherapeutics
such as mitoxantrone and dexamethasone, as well as with new
promising drugs such as the BH3-mimetic GX15-070/Obatoclax or
the anti-TRAIL-R1 monoclonal antibody mapatumumab.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 235
Conclusion: Taken together, these data confirm that NF-κB is a
relevant target in CLL and indicate that inhibitors of IKK, alone or in
combination, represent a promising therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of CLL patients, especially for the high-risk prognosis
group with ZAP-70 high expression.
LS 150
EBV ASSOCIATED EXTRA-NODAL NK CELL LYMPHOMA
NASAL TYPE OF THE BREAST IN BEHCET DISEASE:
A CASE REPORT
*L.Jabri, A. Benkirane, S. Benayad, M. Karkouri, S. Zamiati
Department of Pathology
University Hospital Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco
Primary non Hodgkin lymphoma of the breast is uncommon. Most are
of B-cell phenotype, with only rare cases showing a T-cell phenotype,
NK-cell lymphomas are extremely rare, only 2 cases are reported so
far in the literature. The association of Behcet’s disease with
malignancies has rarely been reported. Only 6 cases of lymphoma
have been reported, of whom one is a nasal NK-cell lymphoma.
We report a case of NK-cell lymphoma extranodal nasal type of the
breast
It is a 20 year-old woman followed up for Behcet disease under
immusuppressive treatment for 4 years. She presented with a
mammary nodule of 3 cm. The biopsy of the lesion revealed the
infiltration of medium to large sized lymphoma cells with necrosis
and angiocentric pattern. The cells were positive for cytoplasmic CD3,
CD56, CD8, TiA1 and Granzyme B, negative for surface CD3.
Analysis of T-cell receptor fails to show clonal rearrangement. EBV
studies show clonal episomal integration of EBV (EBER-1 positive).
She underwent chemotherapy and radiotherapy and achieved com-
plete remission.
To our Knowledge this case report is the first to describe NK-cell
lymphoma of breast arising in Behcet disease.
LS 151
APOPTOSIS, MACROPHAGE INFILTRATION
AND REGULATORY T-CELLS IN DIFFUSE LARGE
B-CELL LYMPHOMA
*Tamasin N Doig (1)
, Chris Gregory (1)
, Donald Dunbar (1)
and John R
Goodlad (2).
(1) Centre for Inflammation Research, The Queen’s Medical Research
Institute, University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent,
Edinburgh, EH16 4TJ, UK.
(2) Department of Pathology, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road
South, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK.
Background: The presence of apoptotic cells in tumours may exert
effects on tumour associated macrophages for the benefit of the
tumour by both modulation of the immune response to tumour and
provision of growth or survival signals. One mechanism by which the
immune response to tumour may be controlled is by the action of
regulatory T-cells. Using pre-treatment human biopsy material of
Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) we examined whether a
relationship exists between tumour cell apoptosis, proliferation,
macrophage infiltration and presence of regulatory T-cells.
Purpose: To establish whether the presence of FOXP3+ regulatory T-
cells is dependent on the relationship between apoptotic lymphoma
cells and macrophages, a tissue microarray containing 82 cases of
DLBCL was analysed for proliferation, apoptosis, macrophage
infiltration and presence of regulatory T-cells by immunohistochem-
ical expression of ki67, activated caspase-3, CD68 and FOXP3
respectively and indices of positive cells calculated for each.
Results: The percentage of FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells in areas of
tumour varied from 0 to 18% of total cells, with a median value of
2.1% of total cells. Median values for proliferation, apoptosis and
macrophage infiltration were 70%, 1.5% and 11% of total cells
respectively. There was no significant difference in percentage of
FOXP3+ cells, proliferation, apoptosis or extent of macrophage
infiltration between DLBCL of germinal centre and non-germinal
centre type. While there were weak associations between apoptosis,
proliferation and macrophage infiltration, there were no associations
between the percentage of FOXP3+ cells and indices of either
proliferation, apoptosis or macrophage infiltration.
Conclusion: In DLBCL a weak relationship exists between presence of
apoptotic cells, macrophage infiltration and proliferation, but no such
relationship appears to exist with FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells. Thus, in
this series there is no evidence that apoptotic tumour cells exert an
influence on the immune response via FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells.
LS 152
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA IS CHARACTERIZED
BY THE UPREGULATION OF SEVERAL MICRORNAS
IN COMPARISON TO NORMAL FOLLICULAR
B-CELL POPULATIONS
Malpeli G*^, Barbi S^, Bertolaso A^, Zamò A^, Zupo S0
, Amato E^,
Mosna F+
, Krampera M+
, Croce C§
and Scarpa A^
^Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
0
Lymphoproliferative Diseases Unit, National Institute for Cancer
Research, Genova, Italy
+
Department of Clinic and Experimental Medicine, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy
§
Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical
Genetics and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, USA
Background. Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a neoplastic proliferation
of B-cells, putatively derived from the follicle center B-cells. FL
displays peculiar cytogenetic abnormalities responsible of early
events, but yet unidentified secondary alterations are needed for
progression to malignancy.
Purpouse. microRNAs are known to participate to normal B-cell
development and lymphomagenesis but scarce data regard their
involvement in FL.
Results. To evaluate this aspect, we performed the expression analysis
of microRNAs by microarray in 25 FL at different clinical stages and
compared it to pure normal naïve, germinal center and post-germinal
center B-cell populations. As already reported in the literature,
proliferating normal germinal center B-cells are characterized by the
downregulation of mir-150, but our data indicated other microRNAs
varied during the normal B-cell development. Moreover, we identified
236 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
26 microRNAs significantly differentially expressed between FL and
normal B-cells Most of expression differences between FL and normal
B-cells regarded higher rather than lower expression in FL. All FL
showed a recurrent pattern of microRNA expression alterations and
the expression of a single microRNA was a promising marker for
identification of FL cells. Expression data were validated by
quantitative PCR and further confirmed by in situ hybridization with
LNA probes on paraffin-embedded FL.
Conclusions. Our findings indicated that expression of many micro-
RNAs is deregulated in FL and some of them could be involved in the
pathogenetic mechanism of FL.
LS 153
E2F1 AND APOPTOSIS IN HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
I. Doussis-Anagnostopoulou1*
, E. Georgiadi1
, T.P. Vassilakopoulos2
,
M.C. Kyrtsonis2
, M.K. Angelopoulou2
, G.A. Pangalis2
, V. Gorgoulis1
,
C. Kittas1
.
1
Laboratory of Histology and Embryology and 2
Department of
Haematology, “Laikon” General Hospital, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Greece.
Background: E2Fs is a family of transcription factors critical in the
progression of cell cycle. E2F1, the first and best characterized
member, is a transcriptional activator, due to its ability to induce S-
phase entry in quiescent cells, that is mainly dependent on the
phosphorylation state of the retinoblastoma protein, pRb. Further-
more, E2F1 can induce apoptosis in both a p53-dependent and p53-
independent ways. Its interchanging roles, either as an oncogenic or as
a tumour suppressive molecule, makes E2F1 an interesting participant
in tumorigenesis. Although its role has been investigated in various
tumours, information in lymphomas is limited.
Purpose of the study: We have previously established the
expression of E2F1 in Hodgkin’s lymphoma and demonstrated no
relationship neither with proliferation nor with morphological
apoptosis. In the present study, we expand our series studying
apoptosis both morphologically and using the Tdt-mediated dUTP
nick end labeling (Tunel) method in 84 cases of HL. Additionally,
the expression of p53 protein was also investigated immunohisto-
chemically. Our results were correlated with E2F1 immunohisto-
chemical expression, clinicopathological parameters and patient
prognosis.
Results: Morphological apoptosis ranged from 2-37 (median
10.1%), while when evaluated by the Tunel method it ranged from
3-59 (median 11.3%). P53 expression ranged between 0-96 (median
32.9%). E2F1 showed a positive correlation with p53 expression
(Spearman’s Rho=0.31, p=0.01), while p53 was also positively
correlated with MIB1 expression (Spearman’s Rho=0.268, p=
0.028). No other statistically significant correlation was found.
The expression of E2F1, p53 and all apoptotic indices were similar
both in patients who had failed primary chemotherapy and those
who were in sustained first complete remission at the time of the
analysis.
Conclusion: In the context of Hodgkin’ lymphoma, E2F1 does not
seem to be directly associated neither with proliferation nor with
apoptosis, evaluated morphologically or by Tunel. These results are
intriguing, in view of the central role of E2F1 in cell cycle progression
LS 154
LYMPH NODE HISTOMORPHOLOGY DOES
NOT CORRELATE WITH ZAP-70 EXPRESSION IN CLL/SLL
Tomas Balharek, Lukas Plank, Peter Szepe, Juraj Marcinek, Zuzana
Kviatkovska, Martina Barthova
Department of Pathology and National Consultation Centre of
Haematopathology, Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of
Medicine and Faculty Hospital, Martin, Slovak Republic
Background: Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma (CLL/SLL) typically presents as diffuse proliferation with
pseudofollicular growth centres (PFCs) completely effacing normal
lymph node (LN) architecture. Only small subset of CLL/SLL cases
shows a partial LN involvement with preserved reactive lymphatic
follicles, so-called interfollicular growth pattern. Number and size of
PFCs vary from case to case, but there is no evidence that
identification of various patterns of PFCs morphology in LN biopsies
is of biological relevance. Because ZAP-70 is a strong prognostic
indicator defining cases with potentially aggressive behaviour, in this
study we analyzed relation between histomorphology of LN infiltrates
and ZAP-70 expression.
Methods: We analyzed LN biopsy specimens in 45 CLL/SLL cases
diagnosed according to principles of WHO classification (2001). LN
involvement pattern (total effacement versus interfollicular growth)
and size of PFCs (,,typical“ versus prominent occupying >30% of LN
area) were analyzed. ZAP-70 expression was detected immunohis-
tochemically (IHC) in paraffin-embedded tissue sections using ZAP-
70 antibody (clone 2F3.2, Upstate). ZAP-70 expression was scored as
negative, weak positive (1+) or strong positive (2+).
Results: Interfollicular LN involvement with residual LF was
recognized in 9 cases (20%). Analyzed types of LN involvement did
not differ in presence of ,,typical“ or prominent PFCs. Prominent PFCs
were present in 33% of interfollicular CLL/SLL and in 44% of cases
with complete infiltration. Cases with and without interfollicular
pattern also did not show significant differences of ZAP-70 expression.
The proportion of ZAP-70 2+, 1+ and negative cases was relatively
equal in both groups (44,5%/33,5%/22% versus 47%/19,5%/33,5%).
Conclusions: We did not identify any significant relation between
type of LN involvement, morphology of PFCs and ZAP-70
expression. Biological and prognostic sense of interfollicular involve-
ment and prominent PFCs in LN specimens remains unclear.
Supported by grants of Slovak Ministry of Health Nr. 2005/12-
MFN-04 and VEGA Nr. 1/4285/07.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 237
LS 155
DELINEATION OF MATURE AGGRESSIVE B-CELL
LYMPHOMA BY MICRORNA EXPRESSION PROFILING
*
Dido Lenze1
, Michael Hummel1
, Korinna Jöhrens3
, Eleonora
Leucci2
, Anna Onnis2
, Stefano Volinia4
, Chang-Gong Liu4
, Carlo
Croce4
, Lorenzo Leoncini2
and Harald Stein1
1
Institute of Pathology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Univer-
sitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
2
Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena,
Italy
3
Institute of Pathology, Campus Mitte, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Germany
4
Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical
Genetics, Ohio State University, USA
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma (BL)
show a heterogeneous clinical outcome. Conventional methods (e.g.
histology, immunohistochemistry, FISH analysis) are not sufficient to
reliably identify clinical subgroups within DLBCL or to delineate
DLBCL from BL. By gene expression profiling molecular subgroups
have been described which subdivide DLBCL into two clinical groups
(ABC- and GCB-DLBCL) with adverse outcome. Furthermore, BL
can be accurately distinguished from DLBCL by robust expression
signatures. Despite this progress a significant proportion of patients
cannot unequivocally be assigned to a certain clinical subgroup. In
search for additional molecular criteria with discriminating power, the
analysis of microRNA expression appears to be a promising approach.
RNA was extracted from paraffin specimens of 450 DLBCL patients
enrolled in the German RICOVER-60 trial, which were treated with
CHOP or with R-CHOP, respectively. A total of 70 endemic BL (eBL)
and sporadic BL (sBL) paraffin samples was additionally included in
this study. ANOVA, hierarchical and partitioning clustering methods
were employed in order to detect differentially expressed microRNAs
and to correlate the corresponding subgroups with the clinical outcome.
Several microRNAs were found to be differentially expressed
between DLBCL and BL, whereas only few microRNAs distinguish
between ABC- and GCB-types of DLBCL as defined by immunohis-
tochemistry. In addition, microRNAs were able to create own
subgroups independent from previous molecular or histological
classifications. The correlation of these microRNA subgroups with
clinical data revealed discrimination into prognosis related groups.
Although eBL and sBL are indistinguishable based on established
molecular expression signatures, some microRNAs are differentially
expressed between both types of BL.
Our data show that microRNA profiles provide a further important
tool to distinguish BL from DLBCL, which is also applicable for
RNA from paraffin-embedded tissues. The detection of new prognos-
tic molecular groups within DLBCL might lead to an alternative
diagnostic approach which appears to be valid also in patients treated
with R-CHOP. Furthermore, some microRNAs are differentially
expressed between sBL and eBL supporting the concept that they
represent different lymphoma subtypes of BL.
LS 156
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL FEATURES
AND MICROSATELLITE INSTABILITY (MSI)
STATUS OF LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
(LPD) IN INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
(IBD) FROM THE FRENCH COHORT CESAME.
P. Cuillière-Dartigues (1), B. Fabiani (1), JF. Fléjou (1), A. Duval (2),
L. Beaugerie (3), N. Brousse (4).
(1) Pathology, (3) Gastroenterology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, APHP,
Paris, France.
(2) Inserm U893, Paris, France.
(4) Pathology, Hôpital Necker, APHP, Paris, France.
Background: Chronic inflammation and immunosuppression enhance
incidence of mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumors. We analyzed
the clinicopathological features and evaluated the MSI status of LPD
developing in IBD.
Methods: Among 20,802 IBD patients, 22 cases of LPD were
reviewed and tested for Epstein Barr Virus (EBV). MSI was evaluated
in 13/21 LPD, by using a PCR-based molecular assay and IHC of
hMLH1, hMSH2 and hMSH6 MMR proteins.
Results: 17 Crohn disease, 4 ulcerative colitis, 1 indeterminate colitis
were included. Median age at diagnosis of LPD was 56 years (19-79),
with 13 males and 9 females. Primary site of involvement was
extranodal (15): gastrointestinal tract (8), skin (2), liver (2), central
nervous system (1), bone marrow (1), retroperitoneum (1). Histopath-
ological examination showed 2 polymorphic LPD, 10 monomorphic
LPD including 9 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 1
anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma (ALCL-T), 1 follicular lymphoma, 2
Hodgkin lymphomas (HL). The bone marrow case corresponded to an
unclassified small B-cell proliferation. 9/13 cases (69%) tested for
EBV were positive:100% of B-cell polymorphic LPD and HL, and 5/
8 DLBCL (62%). The ALCL-T was EBV-. The 6 patients naive for
immunosuppressive drug (IS) had follicular lymphoma (3), DLBCL
(2), angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (1) solely EBV+. None of
LPD tested was MMR deficient.
Conclusion: IBD-related LPD belong to the heterogeneous group of
immunodeficiency-associated lymphoproliferative disorders by shar-
ing several clinicopathologic features: occurrence in patients
receiving IS, frequent extra nodal involvement mainly GI tract in
the damaged segment by aggressive B-cell proliferation associated
with EBV.
Finally, we failed to show a MSI in our limited series of LPD arising
in IBD, unlikely as we demonstrated previously in HIV and post-
transplantated patients (*). More cases and especially T-cell neo-
plasms are needed to confirm hypothesis that IS favours expansion of
MMR deficient clones (**).
* Duval et al, PNAS 2004.
** Offman et al, Blood 2004.
238 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 157
EXPRESSION PATTERN OF XBP-1s IN HUMAN B CELL
LYMPHOMAS
*Maestre L1
, Cañamero M2
, Ramos R1
, Baena S1
, Montes-
Moreno S3
, Tooze R4
and Roncador G1
1
Monoclonal Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Programme, Spanish
National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
2
Comparative Pathology Unit, Biotechnology Programme, CNIO,
Madrid, Spain.
3
Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, CNIO, Madrid,
Spain.
4
Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine. University of Leeds, Leeds,
UK.
Background: XBP-1 (X-box-binding protein 1) is a member of the
CREB/ATF (cyclic AMP response element binding protein/activating
transcription factor) family of transcription factors. It has been shown
to be essential for plasma cell differentiation and for immunoglobulin
synthesis by B lymphocytes.
Purpose of the study: Using tissue-microarrays (TMA) and Western
Blotting analysis, we have investigated the expression of XBP-1s
protein in a large series of both normal and neoplastic lymphoid
tissues using a novel specific monoclonal antibody reactive on
paraffin-embedded tissues.
Results: XBP-1s protein was expressed in the nucleus by all plasma
cells, plasma cell-derived neoplasms and lymphomas with plasma cell
differentiation (myelomas/plasmacytomas, lymphoplasmacytic lym-
phomas). Among diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL) cases
only plasmablastic subtype showed XBP-1s expression, with different
signal intensities (weak and strong), in a high percentage of cases. A
more extensive immunohistochemical analysis of these cases, using
CD138, PRDM1/Blimp-1, PAX5, CD20 monoclonal antibodies, was
performed. Different patterns of expression of the studied B cell
markers were found depending on the intensity of XBP-1 expression.
Follicular lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia, no- plasmablastic DLBCL and T cell lymphomas cases
were mainly negative.
Conclusion: We describe a new monoclonal antibody that may be of
use for the diagnostic pathologists in the identification of plasma cell
differentiation in different B cell lymphomas as well as normal plasma
cells in routinely processed tissue samples. Due to its specific
associations with other B cell expression markers, this new antibody
can also be used to achieve a better understanding of the pathogenic
role of XBP-1s in malignant diseases.
LS 158
PERSISTENT ABERRANT IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
AND MONOCLONALITY OF INTRAEPITHELIAL
T-LYMPHOCYTES ARE FEATURES OF REFRACTORY
COELIAC DISEASE AND THE PRESENCE OF BOTH
ABNORMALITIES IS ASSOCIATED WITH CASES
THAT EVOLVE TO ENTEROPATHY TYPE T-CELL
LYMPHOMA
*H Liu1
, R Brais1
, A Lavergne-Slove2
, Q Zeng3
, Z Liu3
, K Payne1
, H
Ye3
, J Carreras3
, Y Huang3
, CM Bacon3
, V Save1
, L Venkatraman4
,
PG Isaacson5
, J Woodward6
and M-Q Du3
.
1
Dept of Histopathology and 6
Dept of Gastroenterology, Addenbrooke’s
Hospital, Cambridge, UK; 2
Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Lariboisière,
Paris, France; 3
Dept of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK; 4
Dept of Histopathology, Royal Victoria Hospital,
Belfast, UK; 5
Dept of Histopathology, University College London
Hospitals, London, UK
Background: Patients with refractory coeliac disease (RCD) have an
increased risk for development of enteropathy-type T-cell lymphoma
(ETL) and early diagnosis of both conditions is difficult. Although
abnormal immunophenotype and monoclonality of intraepithelial T-
lymphocytes (IELs) are associated with RCD, their value in RCD
diagnosis and ETL surveillance remains to be investigated.
Design: Multiple consecutive duodenal biopsies from 33 CD, 7
suspected RCD, 30 RCD and 19 ETL (including 10 with RCD
biopsies) patients were investigated for IEL immunophenotype by
CD3/CD8 double immunohistochemistry and clonality by PCR for the
rearranged TCR genes using BIOMED-2 protocols.
Result: An aberrant immunophenotype, defined as greater than 40%
of IELs having a CD3+
CD8-
immunophenotype (the mean + 3SD of
the percentage of CD3+
CD8-
IELs in the initial diagnostic biopsies of
20 CD cases), was found in 1/33 (3%), 26/37 (70%) and 12/14 (86%)
diagnostic biopsies of CD, RCD and ETL, respectively. Monoclon-
ality was seen in 7/41 (17%), 25/37 (68%) and 16/16 (100%)
diagnostic biopsies of CD, RCD and ETL, respectively. During
follow up, persistent aberrant IEL immunophenotype or progressive
increase of CD3+
CD8-
IELs, reaching the cut-off value on the latest
biopsy, was found in 19/24 (79%) RCD cases including 6 with
normal IEL immunophenotype at the diagnosis of RCD, and in 4/7
(57%) suspected RCD. Such persistence of, or progressive increase
in, aberrant IELs was not seen in 16 CD cases, although a transient
aberrant IEL immunophenotype was found in 2/6 CD cases not
compliant with a gluten free diet (GFD). Similarly, persistent
identical monoclonality or progression from polyclonality to mono-
cloanlity was seen in 18/24 (75%) RCD and 2/7 suspected RCD, but
only in 1/9 CD cases not compliant with a GFD and in none of the
CD cases compliant with a GFD. Together, persistence of, or
progressive increase in aberrant IELs and/or persistent monoclonality
or progression from polyclonality to monoclonality were seen in 23/
24 (96%) RCD, 6/7 suspected RCD but only in 2/9 CD cases not
compliant with a GFD. Importantly, 6/12 RCD cases with both
persistent aberrant IELs and persistent identical monoclonality
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 239
progressed to ETL, while only 1 of the remaining 12 RCD cases
developed the lymphoma.
Conclusion: The appearance of a persistent aberrant IEL immuno-
phenotype and persistent identical monoclonality is a feature of RCD.
The presence of both abnormalities is strongly associated with RCD
cases that develop ETL. Continuous monitoring of both IEL
immunophenotype and clonality is more important than snapshot
analysis of single biopsies in the diagnosis and follow up of RCD.
LS 159
BIOMED-2 PCR ANALYSIS OF IGK GENE
REARRANGEMENTS IS MORE SENSITIVE THAN THAT
OF IGH GENE REARRANGEMENTS FOR DETECTION
OF B-CELL CLONALITY IN FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMAS.
*Karen Payne1
, Yuanxue Huang2
, Rifat Hamoudi2
, Chris M Bacon2
,
Penny Wright1
, John W. Grant1
, Ming-Qing Du2
, Hongxiang Liu1
1
Department of Histopathology, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge,
UK
2
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Background: B-cell clonality analysis in routine haematopathological
practice is commonly performed by PCR targeting the IGH genes but
this has a high rate of false negativity in germinal centre and post-
germinal centre B-cell derived lymphomas that are known to have
high rates of somatic hypermutation (SHM) in the rearranged IGH
genes. The present study assessed the value of analysis of the
rearranged IGK genes as compared with that of the IGH genes in
follicular lymphomas (FL) using the BIOMED-2 PCR primers and
protocols, and determined the frequencies of SHM in the rearranged
IGK and IGH genes.
Design: Clonality analysis was performed on paraffin-embedded
tissues of FL from 39 patients. The specimens were assessed for
DNA quality followed by IG gene rearrangements using a full set of
BIOMED-2 reactions and heteroduplex treatment/polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. The clonal IGH and IGK PCR products were
sequenced and analysed for SHM.
Results: Apart from two cases that yielded PCR products of less
than 300 bp in size, the quality of DNA samples from all other
cases was adequate for the clonality analysis. With the full set of
BIOMED-2 reactions, 36 of 39 (92%) cases, including two with
suboptimal DNA quality, were found to be clonal. Clonal IG gene
rearrangements were detected by two IGK reactions (VK-JK and
VK/intron-Kde) in 33 cases (85%), while three IGH VH-JH
reactions (VHFR1-JH, VHFR2-JH and VHFR3-JH) and the three VH-
JH reactions plus two DH-JH reactions (DH1-6-JH and DH7-JH)
detected clonality in only 15 cases (38%) and 21 cases (54%)
respectively. Combined use of the two IGK reactions with one or
more of the VHFR1-JH, VHFR2-JH and DH1-6-JH reactions increased
the detection rate to over 90%. Sequence analysis showed a mean
mutation rate of 11.0% for the rearranged IGH genes (n=11) and
5.2% for the IGK genes (n=20, P=0.02).
Conclusion: BIOMED-2 PCR assays targeting IGK gene rearrangements
are more sensitive than those targeting IGH gene rearrangements for B-
cell clonality analysis in FL. The high false-negative detection rate of the
clonal rearranged IGH genes may result from the presence of frequent
SHM in the rearranged IGH genes leading to failure of primer annealing.
LS 160
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL
ANALYSIS OF LYMPHOMAS PRESENTING IN THE SKIN
*Nazan Ozsan1
, Mine Hekimgil1
, Taner Akalin1
, Gulsen Kandiloglu1
1
Department of Pathology, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir,
Turkey.
Cutaneous lymphomas show different clinical presentations, prognoses
and geographical incidence. The recent WHO/EORTC classification for
cutaneous lymphomas based on clinical, histological, phenotypical and
molecular characteristics, aimed to be clinically relevant for the
management and treatment of patients with cutaneous lymphomas.
The goal of this study is to recognize the T- and B-cell lymphoma
distribution among the cases diagnosed with skin presentation, reclassify
them based on the recent WHO/EORTC classification and also analyse
them in the aspect of some morphological and immunohistochemical
features. Forty-five cases diagnosed as lymphoma presenting in the skin,
other than mycosis fungoides between 1999-2008 were examined.
Among them, 25 of the cases (55.5%) were B-cell lymphomas (22
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 1 marginal zone lymphoma, 1 follicular
lymphoma, 1 cutaneous infiltration of acute lymphoblastic lymphoma),
and 19 (42.2%) were T-cell lymphomas (6 anaplastic large cell
lymphoma, 5 CD30+ cutaneous lymphoproliferative disease, 5 periph-
eral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified, 2 NK/Tcell lymphoma, nasal type, 1
subcutaneous panniculitis like T-cell lymphoma) and one was Hodgkin
lymphoma. Four of the B-cell lymphoma cases were proven to be the
secondary involvement; three were diagnosed as diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma in nodal biopsies and one was diagnosed as precursor B-cell
leukemia/ lymphoblastic lymphoma in the bone marrow biopsy. In two
patients, bone marrow involvement was seen, without any biopsy-
proven systemic involvement of other organs. Among T-cell lymphoma
cases, five cases were proven to be secondary involvement; two were
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, two were peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
unspecified in nodal biopsies, and one was extranodal NK/T cell
lymphoma, nasal type. None of the T-cell lymphoma cases, either
primary or secondary, showed bone marrow involvement. On compar-
ision of our cases with review of the literature, the predominance of B-
and T-cell lymphomas are between those reported from Europe and Asia.
240 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
LS 161
BCL-2 REARRANGEMENT AND FOXP1 EXPRESSION
PREDICT SURVIVAL IN DIFFUSE LARGE B CELL
LYMPHOMAS PATIENTS TREATED WITH R-CHOP.
A GELA (LNH98-5) STUDY
Christiane Copie-Bergman*1; Philippe Gaulard 1; Karen Leroy 1;
Jean-Philippe Jais 2 ; Josette Briere 3 ; Maryse Baia1 ; Gilles Andre
Salles 4 ; Françoise Berger 5 ; Corinne Haioun 6 ; Herve Tilly 7 ;
Jean-François Emile 8 ; Pierre Feugier 9 ; Bertrand Coiffier 4 ;
Thierry Jo Molina 10.
1
Pathology, Hôpital Henri Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France; 2
Statis-
tics, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France; 3
Pathology, Hôpital Saint-
Louis, AP-HP, Paris, France; 4
Hematology, Centre Hospitalier
Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite, France; 5
Pathology, Centre Hospitalier
Lyon-Sud, Pierre Bénite, France; 6
Hematology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor,
AP-HP, Créteil, France; 7
Hematology, Centre Becquerel, Rouen,
France; 8
Pathology, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne, France;
9
Hematology, CHU de Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France;
10
Pathology, Hôtel-Dieu, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Background : Diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) have been
classified according to gene expression profiling in two main
pronostically subgroups « germinal-center type » (GC) and « non-
germinal-center type »(n-GC) related to the cell of origin (COO). In
DLBCL patients treated with R-CHOP, the COO classification based
on RNA profiling remained of prognostic value whereas immunohis-
tochemical assessment of COO according to Hans’algorithm has
proved controversial. Our group recently identified a 16 gene RNA
signature predicting survivl in elderly patients with DLBCL treated
with R-CHOP
Purpose of the study : (1) To evaluate the prognostic value of one of
these 16 genes FOXP1 and of the Hans’ algorithm using immunohis-
tochemistry on tissue microarrays of 172 patients enrolled in the
GELA LNH98-5 trial that compared CHOP and R-CHOP. (2) To
determine the clinical impact of BCL2, BCL6 and c-MYC gene
rearrangements by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) using split-signal DNA probes (Dako).
Results : The GC/nGC profile did not show a significant prognostic
impact on survival in R-CHOP patients . BCL2 rearrangement highly
correlated with GC subtype and had a favourable impact on Overall
Survival (OS) (p=0,05) in R-CHOP treated patients whereas BCL6
rearrangement tended to be associated with an unfavourable outcome
(p=0.07). Among 150 patients with evaluable FOXP1 staining, 19
(13%) showed strong nuclear reactivity, 86 (57%) displayed variable
expression and 45 (30%) were negative. FOXP1 expression was
highly correlated with n-GC subtype (p=0.0003). Interestingly, in a
Cox Model incorporating aaIPI (age-ajusted International Prognostic
Factor) and FOXP1, both significantly influenced EFS in R-CHOP
patients (p=0.0012 ; 0.0446, respectively).
Conclusion: We showed the prognostic value of BCL2, BCL6 gene
rearrangements and FOXP1 expression in DLBCL patients treated
with R-CHOP. Our study underlines the major interest of combining
FISH with immunohistochemistry to build an histoprognostic index
on paraffin embedded tissue.
LS 162
THE SUBCELLULAR SOX11 DISTRIBUTION PATTERN
IDENTIFIES SUBSETS OF MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA:
CORRELATION TO OVERALL SURVIVAL.
Wang, X., Asplund, C., Porwit, A., Flygare, J. Smith, C.I.E.,
Christensson, B. and Sander, B.*
Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Stockholm,
Sweden
Background: Most mantle cell lymphomas (MCL) over-express cyclin
D1 as a result of the t(11;14)(q13;q33). However, this translocation is
not sufficient to induce MCL and other, yet uncharacterized genetic
events are needed in order to establish the lymphoma.
Purpose of the study: Oligonucleotide microarray expression
analysis was used in order to identify genes differentially expressed
in MCL compared to reactive lymphoid tissue.
Summarized description of the results : The neuronal transcription factor
Sox11 was significantly overexpressed in MCL compared to reactive
lymphoid tissue. By RT-PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry,
Sox11 was not only detected in MCL, but also weakly expressed in
reactive lymphoid tissue and in small lymphocytic lymphoma and
follicular lymphoma. In contrast to other lymphomas and reactive
lymphoid tissue, most MCL (tumor samples from 48/53 patients)
expressed Sox11 in the nucleus. Therefore, nuclear Sox11 is a new tumor
marker for MCL. However, in approximately 10% of MCL (5/53 tumors)
Sox11 was only expressed in the cytoplasm. MCL patients with non-
nuclear expression of Sox11 in their tumors had a significantly shorter
survival compared to MCL with Sox11 expression in the nucleus.
Conclusion: The results of this explorative study suggest that
expression of Sox11 in MCL is not only a new tumor marker but
may also carry information related to the clinical and biological
behaviour of MCL.
LS 163
LOSS OF T CELL IDENTITY AND BY-PASS OF TCR
SIGNALLING BY ONCOGENIC TYROSINE KINASE
ACTIVITY IN ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA.
*Ambrogio C1,2
, Voena C1,2
, Manazza AD1,2
, Martinengo C1
, Costa
C3
, Kirchhausen T4
, Tondat F1
, Hirsch E3
, Inghirami G1,2,5
and
Chiarle R.1,2
1
Center for Experimental Research and Medical Studies (CERMS),
2
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology and
3
Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences and Molecular
Biotechnology Center (MBC), University of Torino, 10126 Italy,
4
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115-5701, USA, 5
Department of Pathology and New York Cancer
Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 10016
USA.
The oncogenic tyrosine kinase Nucleophosmin (NPM)-Anaplastic
Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) is expressed after the t(2;5) translocation in
the majority of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas (ALCLs), which
are clinically characterized by the loss of T cell associated molecules.
Here we show that NPM-ALK activity down-modulated the expres-
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 241
sion of the T cell associated molecules ZAP70, LAT and SLP76 both
in vitro and in vivo in transgenic mice. NPM-ALK suppressed ZAP70,
SLP76 and LAT expression by STAT3 mediated gene methylation as
showed by NPM-ALK knock-down through lentiviral inducible
shRNA and by NPM-ALK activity inhibition. Despite the lack of T
cell associated molecules which mediate TCR signalling, ALCL cells
proliferate and display an activated phenotype similar to TCR
stimulated T cells. The inhibition of NPM-ALK activity resulted in
decreased T cell lymphoma survival, proliferation and migration
together with a loss of anaplastic morphology due to a rearrangement
of actin filaments. To this end, NPM-ALK specifically enhanced Rac1
and Cdc42 activity through the phosphorylation of VAV1, together
with a concomitant inhibition of RhoA activity. In vitro, ALCL cells
knocked-down for Cdc42 or VAV1 by shRNA showed decreased
survival and growth rate and defective motility. Pharmacological
inhibition of Cdc42 activity by secramine resulted in a cell-cycle
arrest and apoptosis of ALCL cells. Importantly, the concomitant
inhibition of Cdc42 and NPM-ALK kinase by a specific inhibitor
acted synergistically to induce apoptosis of ALCL cells. Finally,
ALCL cells depleted for Cdc42 by shRNA completely lost their
tumorigenicity in a xenograft model in immunodeficient mice and
established tumors regressed after the knocked-down of Cdc42. In
conclusion, our data indicate a fundamental role of GTPase activation
in ALK+
ALCL growth and maintenance.
LS 164
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS-ASSOCIATED
LYMPHOMAS RECLASSIFICATION WITH TMA-BASED
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY,
ITS ASSOCIATION TO EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS, HUMAN
HERPESVIRUS-8 INFECTION AND EXPRESSION
OF NFK-B AS PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
Montante-Montes de Oca D, Chablé-Montero F, Martínez-Benítez B,
Marquina B, Lara C, Angeles-Angeles A, and Lome-Maldonado C.
Department of Pathology. Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición, México City.
Objective: To know the clinical and pathological features of HIV-
associated lymphomas, their association to EBV and HHV-8 infection
and their expression of NFkB as prognostics factors.
Material and methods: HIV-associated lymphomas were selected
from 1985 to 2005. All cases were reclassificated on basis of
morphology, TMA-based immunohistochemistry and molecular biol-
ogy. The clinical features were obtained from the clinical files.
Results: We reviewed 57 HIV-positive lymphomas. The average age
was 40 years, 95% were men and 5% women, 92.9% were in C3
stage, and 78 had B symptoms. The most frequent localization was
nodal (22 cases), oral cavity, CNS, colon and rectum (6 cases each)
and pulmonary (5 cases). BM was involved in 13 cases; 31 cases were
in clinical stage IVB. Thirty-six cases were reclassificated; 21 cases
were excluded due to insufficient material. Twenty-five cases were
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 6 Burkitt lymphoma (3 with extensive
plasmacytoid differentiation), 3 plasmablastic lymphomas (PL) and 2
Hodgkin lymphoma. Twenty-one cases were EBER positive, 19
NFkB positive and 12 both positive. One PL was HHV8-positive.
Figure 1 shows the overall survival based in EBV and NF-kB
expression.
Conclusions: In this group of lymphomas, we find some differences
in prognostic factors, according to the expression of EBER and NFkB.
This finding suggests that alternative mechanism could be involved in
oncogenic pathways. However, it is mandatory to study more cases to
determine the possible relationship between of EBV infection and
NFkB pathway as biological and prognostic factors in HIV-associated
lymphomas.
NFkB/EBER
expression
n Follow up
(months)
DOD
n (%)
NFkB+/EBER- 5 1-133 0 (0)
NFkB-/EBER+ 8 0-62 2 (25)
NFkB+/EBER+ 10 0-54 5 (50)
NFkB-/EBER- 7 0-8 4 (57)
Figure 1. Survival of patients with HIV-associated lymphomas
according to NFkB and EBER expression. Double-negative (NFkB-/
EBER-) cases show poor survival followed up for double-positive
(NFkB+/EBER+) cases. The cases with one positive marker show
better prognosis (Kaplan-Meier curve. Long rank test p=0.054).
DOD: dead of disease.
LS 165
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF IGVH GENE REPERTOIRE
AND MUTATION PROFILE IN LYMPHOPLASMOCYTIC
AND MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMAS FROM LYMPH
NODES.
Gachard N.1
, Petit B.2
, Marfak A.1
, Soubeyran I.3
, Coste V.4
, Parrens
M.5
, Laforet M.P.1
, Troadec E.1
, Bordessoule D.6
, Feuillard J.1
1
Laboratory of Haematology, and UMR CNRS 6101, CHU Dupuyt-
ren, Limoges; 2
Department of Pathology and UMR CNRS 6101,
CHU Dupuytren, Limoges; 3
Department of Pathology and INSERM
U916, Institute Bergonié, Bordeaux; 4
Department of Pathology,
Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier; 5
Department of Pathology
and Molecular Biology, EA 2406 CHU of Bordeaux; 6
Department of
Haematology and UMR CNRS 6101, Hôpital Dupuytren, Limoges;
242 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
NFkB/EBER
expression
n Follow up
(months)
DOD
n (%)
NFkB+/EBER- 5 1-133 0 (0)
NFkB-/EBER+ 8 0-62 2 (25)
NFkB+/EBER+ 10 0-54 5 (50)
NFkB-/EBER- 7 0-8 4 (57)
Nodal Marginal Zone lymphomas (NMZL) and lymphoplasmocytic
lymphomas (LPL) from lymph nodes (N-LPL) are rare lymphomas
which share clinical, morphological and immunohistochemical features
that make them difficult to discriminate. Immunoglobulin (Ig) variable
heavy chain gene (IgVH) usage and somatic mutation pattern were
analyzed to try to clarify their relationship and their pathogenesis.
Nodal frozen samples from 22 patients, 8 N-LPL and 14 NMZL, were
studied. B-cell clonality was analysed according to Biomed 2
protocol. Sequence of informative PCR products was analyzed on
IMGT, V-BASE and Ig-Blast websites. Antigen driven selection was
studied according to Lossos multinomial model. Plasma cell differen-
tiation was evaluated morphologically and based on CD38, CD138
and MUM1/IRF4 expression.
There was no predominance of VH usage, notably for VH3 gene.
Diversity of VDJ junction and CDR3 length were similar in N-LPL
and NMZL. Although median somatic mutations rate was higher in N-
LPL (8;6%) than in NMZL (2.8%), there was no significant difference
between the two groups with a mutated threshold of 2% or of 5%.
This could be explained by the presence of two distinct subsets of N-
LPL, one highly mutated (>7%) and the other unmutated (<1%).
Distribution of replacement and silent mutations in Complementary
Determining Regions and Framework Regions argued for an antigen
driven selection process in VH3 positive cases, independently of the
diagnosis. Finally, the presence of plasmocytic differentiation was
associated with a higher degree of mutation, again independently of
the diagnosis.
Altogether, IgVH repertoire and mutational status suggests that N-
LPL and NMZL have a resembling relationship to antigen exposure.
A mutated IgVH profile was associated with VH3 segments and/or
plasma cell differentiation rather than to the diagnosis of N-MZL
versus N-LPL. Our data are also in favor of an antigen driven
selection for these lymphomas displaying VH3 gene.
LS 166
SURVIVIN EXPRESSION IN AGGRESSIVE B-CELL
LYMPHOMA
Korkolopoulou P1
, Angelopoulou MK2
, Salpeas V1,2
, Galani Z2
,
Vassilakopoulos TP2
, Levidou G1
, Anastasopoulou A2
, Sachanas S2
,
Lilakos K2
, Papadaki T3
, Androulaki A1
, Patsouris E1
, Pangalis GA2
.
(1)1st
Department of Pathology,National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens
(2)Department of Hematology, National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens
(3)Department of Hematopathology, Evangelismos Hospital, Athens
Background: Survivin, a member of the Inhibitor of Apoptosis
Proteins, has recently gained attention as a possible therapeutic target
in neoplasia, due to its dual role both as an antiapoptotic protein and a
cell cycle regulator. Survivin has been associated with an adverse
outcome in several malignancies. However its prognostic significance
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is controversial.
Purpose: To investigate Survivin expression and localization, its
correlation with clinical and laboratory characteristics and its
prognostic significance in DLBCL and follicular lymphoma grade
III (FLGIII). Survivin was studied by immunohistochemistry in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues from patients treated and
followed in our Unit.
Results: Among 66 patients [median age 63 years (17-90)], 62% were
males, 39% had elevated LDH and 42% clinical stage III/IV.
Histologic subtypes were: DLBCL 72%, primary mediastinal LBCL
6%, FLGIII 17% and transformed low grade lymphoma 4%. The vast
majority of patients received R-CHOP. Nuclear expression of Survivin
was detected in all patients at a median percentage of 11% of
neoplastic cells (2-90%). Cytoplasmic Survivin expression was
evident in 38% of the patients. Levels of nuclear Survivin expression
were significantly lower in FLGIII compared to other subtypes (p=
0.007). There was no other significant correlation between nuclear or
cytoplasmic survivin expression and baseline patients’ characteristics.
5-year failure free survival was 56% for all patients. Conventional
prognostic factors were valid in this patient population. When FLGIII
were excluded, higher nuclear survivin expression tended to correlate
with inferior FFS at various cut-offs (25-50%), although differences
were not statistically significant. Interestingly the presence of any
cytoplasmic survivin was associated with superior FFS (5-year rates:
93 vs 50%, p=0.01).
Conclusion: Our preliminary data show that Survivin is expressed in
the nucleus of neoplastic cells in aggressive B-cell lymphomas.
Moreover its prognostic significance may vary according to its nuclear
or cytoplasmic localization.
LS 167
OVEREXPRESSION OF CYCLIN D1 IS RARE
IN AGGRESSIVE B-CELL NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMAS
INCLUDING RICHTER’S TRANSFORMATION CASES
T Vela-Chávez1,2
, M Kremer2
, K Bink3
, F Fend4
, and L Quintanilla-
Martínez3
.
1
Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Mexico City, Mexico
2
Pathology, Technical University Munich, Germany.
3
Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Research for Environmental
Health, Germany.
4
Pathology. University Hospital Tuebingen Eberhard-Karls-University,
Germany.
Background: Approximately 5% of B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (B-CLL) patients develop a secondary lymphoma, usually
of diffuse large B-cell type (DLBCL), denominated Richter’s
transformation (RT). We present an index case of RT with the rare
overexpression of cyclin D1 (cycD1), loss of B-cell markers and
clonally related to the B-CLL component. The aim of this study was
to analyze a large series of DLBCL and RT cases for the expression of
cycD1 to know its frequency of expression in aggressive B-NHL
other than MCL.
Material and methods: CycD1 (clone SP4, DCS) was performed in a
group of 75 cases of B-NHL, including 8 cases of RT and 67 cases of
de novo DLBCL. FISH analysis was performed with t(11;14) probe
and a cyclin D1 probe. Double staining for cycD1 and CD20 was
performed using FITC-labeling and IHC; the former was studied
under fluorescence microscope.
Results: Immunohistochemical studies of the index case showed
positivity for CD20, CD23, and CD5 in B-CLL biopsy. RT biopsy
was reactive for CD45, Vs38c, Bcl-6, and MiB-1 60%; B-cell markers
were negative. The DLBCL component showed strong positivity for
cycD1 in 70% of the cells. Molecular analysis confirmed identical
sequences for FR3 of the IgH.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 243
Cyclin D1 was weakly positive and in less than 20% of the tumor
cells in 1/8 cases (12.5%) of RT and in 10/67 (14.9%) cases of de
novo DLBCL. Scattered positive cells showed cross-linking of cycD1
and CD20 in all cases (1 RT case and 10 DLBCL). FISH analysis did
not reveal amplification or translocation of cycD1 in these cases
(including index case).
Conclusions
1) Overexpression of cycD1 in aggressive B-NHL other than MCL,
including RT, is rare, even if the SP4 antibody is used.
2) RT cases with overexpression of cycD1 are not related with
translocation or amplification of CCND1 gene, and molecular
basis remains to be determined.
LS 168
THE EXPRESSION OF TWO MICRORNAS DISTINGUISH
B-CELL ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
FROM BONE MARROW CD34-POSITIVE CELLS
Malpeli G*^, Barbi S^, Bertolaso A^, Mosna F+
, Krampera M+
,
Amato E^, Annunziato F‡
, Tabilio A▪
, Croce C§
and Scarpa A^
^Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
0
Lymphoproliferative Diseases Unit, National Institute for Cancer
Research, Genova, Italy
+
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy
‡
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Firenze, Firenze,
Italy
▪
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy
§
Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical
Genetics and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, USA
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is characterized by the
uncontrolled proliferation and accumulation in the bone marrow of
lymphoblasts unable to undergo physiological differentiation. Recent-
ly, it was reported that microRNA expression profiles permit to
discriminate acute lymphoblastic leukemia from acute myeloid
leukemia. In this study, we determined the expression profile of 353
microRNAs by microarray in five primary B-ALL cases, two CD34+
cell samples from healthy bone marrow and four CD19+ B-
lymphocyte samples from peripheral blood of healthy donors. Micro-
array expression data were validated by quantitative PCR and in situ
hybridization. Our results showed that two and eight of 353 tested
microRNAs were expressed with a significant difference between B-
ALL and CD34+ cells, and between B-ALL and CD19+ B-cells,
respectively. The validation of expression results by quantitative PCR
included 25 additional B-ALL cases. All B-ALL cases were
confirmed to show the same difference in expression. Moreover, in
situ hybridization by LNA probes confirmed that the two differentially
expressed microRNAs are useful markers to highlight B-ALL clones
in the presence of CD34+ cells. Our findings add new insights
potentially useful for the diagnosis and comprehension of the
pathogenetic mechanisms leading to B-ALL.
LS 169
CHROMOGENIC/FLUORESCENT IN SITU
HYBRIDIZATION FOR EVALUTION OF LYMPHOMA
Steve Chen, M.D., Ph.D. Clarient Diagnostics - Aliso Viejo,
California
Dennis P. O’Malley, M.D. Clarient Diagnostics - Aliso Viejo,
California
Anselm Hii, M.D. Clarient Diagnostics - Aliso Viejo, California
Adam Anthony, B.S. Kaiser Permanente San Francisco
Natalia Mangubat, B.S. Clarient Diagnostics- Aliso Viejo, California
Michele Hibbard, Ph.D. Clarient Diagnostics -Aliso Viejo, California
Kenneth Bloom, M.D. Clarient Diagnostics - Aliso Viejo, California
Knowledge of the genetic abnormalities of lymphoma has increased and
techniques for their detection have advanced. In situ hybridization
techniques (ISH) to detect the presence of chromosomal translocations
have become fairly routine for diagnostic purposes. Fluorescent ISH
(FISH) is most commonly used but is typically performed in the
cytogenetics laboratory.
We recently discovered a technique (C/FISH) that modifies a FISH slide,
making the signals visible using a standard light microscope. This
technique applies antibodies with an attached chromogenic substrate to
the fluorophores Texas Red and Fluorescein allowing visualization by light
microscopy. All currently available FISH probes using these fluorophores
can be evaluated by C/FISH. We evaluated a series of lymphomas in our
laboratory to determine the feasibility of this technique for clinical use.
Techniques
Materials and Methods: Individual whole slides and a tissue array
composed of 25 tissue samples were evaluated using the chromogenic/
FISH (C/FISH) technique (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). We analyzed IgH
split probes on our lymphoma array. Samples were evaluated by light
microscopy by two pathologists (DPO, SC). A normal signal was
considered to be two fused signals per cell or split signals less than one
probe size apart. All other signals were considered abnormal. Only
qualitative results were evaluated, with true “abnormal” results requiring
the presence of abnormal signal in the majority of cells.
Results: In our pilot evaluation, we found the following results. 6/25 had
no signal or were considered over-digested. 5/25 had results that were
equivocal. 9/25 had normal results and 5/25 had abnormal results.
Conclusions: C/FISH may be a viable method for evaluation of
chromosomal translocations by light microscopy in lymphoma. We
are working on optimizing protease digestion and counterstaining
procedures to reduce the failure rate. It is anticipated that by the time
of presentation, additional probes and results will be available.
LS 170
TYPE AND MATURATIONAL STATUS OF DENDRITIC
CELLS IN CUTANEOUS B-CELL LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS.
Lesley Christie1
, Carol McKenzie2
, Tim Palmer2
, Lee Baker3
, John R
Goodlad1
*
1 Department of Pathology and Neuroscience, University of Dundee,
Scotland
2 Department of Pathology, Raigmore Hospital Inverness, Scotland.
3 Department of Surgery and Oncology, University of Dundee, Scotland
244 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Background: Emerging evidence suggests that cutaneous B-cell
lymphoproliferations (CBCLPs) represent a spectrum of disease, with
B-cell cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia (B-CLH) at one end, and overt
cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (CMZL) at the other. Whilst a
causative agent can be identified in some cases of CBCLP, the
aetiology of the vast majority remains unknown.
Purpose of Study: This study aimed to explore the hypothesis that
dendritic cells (DCs) play a central role in the generation and
regulation of CBCLPs, by comparing the number, subtype and
maturational status of DCs in biopsy specimens showing features of
B-CLH (n=14) and CMZL (n=18).
Results: Immunohistochemistry was used to identify Langerhan’s
cells (Langerin), dermal DCs (DC-SIGN) and plasmacytoid DCs
(BDCA2), and to differentiate between mature (DC-LAMP) and
immature (CD1a) DCs. FXIIIA was used as a marker of alternatively
activated dermal DCs and macrophages. The mean number of positive
cells/mm2
was calculated for each antibody in all cases. The number
of plasmacytoid and dermal DCs, and the number of DC-LAMP+
cells was significantly greater in B-CLH than CMZL (p=0.0319, p=
0.0101 p=0.0421 respectively). Dermal DCs were present in greater
numbers than Langerhan’s cells. Although there were fewer FXIIIA+
cells in CMZL than B-CLH, the difference was not significant.
Moreover, the relative proportion of FXIIIA+ cells was greater in
CMZL than B-CLH.
Conclusion: The results indicate that mature dermal DCs are the
dominant cell type in B-CLH. Given that mature DCs function as
antigen presenting cells, and are involved in T-cell priming, this
finding is consistent with the hypothesis that persistent antigenic
stimulation is the cause of such lesions. Conversely, the greater
proportion of FXIIIA+ cells in CMZL, leads us to speculate that
alternatively activated dendritic histiocytes play a more important role
at this end of the CBCLP spectrum, possibly by suppressing the anti-
tumour immune response.
LS 171
PRIMARY NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA OF BONE –CLINICAL
AND MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS
V. Janevska1, , L. Spasevska1, G. Zafirovski2, Z. Trajkovski3, R.
Jovanovic1, V. Filipovski1, B. Dukova1, G. Petrusevska1
1. Institute of pathology, Skopje
2. Clinic of orthopedic surgery, University Clinical center-Skopje
3. Institute of radiology, University Clinical center-Skopje, Republic
of Macedonia
The aim of the study is to analyze the morphologic features of primary
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma of bone.
Material and methods: 15 cases of osseous lymphomas were
analyzed using 1. radiographic characteristics and radiological grade
of tumor’s growth, according to Lodwick; 2. localisation, 3. clinical
symptoms, 3. histopathological parameters. The patients were treated
with chemotherapy in 15 cases and adjuvant radiation in 9 cases.
The follow up period was 3 to 7 years.
Results: The most of the patients had solitary, permeative or/and
moth-eaten metadiaphyseal lytic lesion and an extra osseous soft-
tissue mass on plain radiographs. Six cases had periosteal reactions,
and 7 cortical involvement. Femur was the most often involved bone-
7 cases, than humerus- 4 cases, vertebra- 2 cases and tibia 2 cases . 3 cases
had moderate grade, and 20 cases had high radiographic grade of
tumor’s growth.
All the patients had intermittent bone pain, local swelling and weight
loss.
According to the WHO classification of malignant lymphoma, 12
cases were diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 2 lymphoblastic and 1
Burkit like type lymphoma.
Two of the patients died during the follow up period, 3 of them had
recurrence of the disease.
Conclusion: The radiographic features and radiographic grade of
tumor’s growth were important diagnostic strong factors in primary
Non-Hodgkin osseous lymphoma and the most often histological type
were diffuse large cell type of lymphoma.
LS 172
CHARACTERIZATION OF CD4+CD57+ TUMOR-
INFILTRATING LYMPHOCYTES IN FOLLICULAR
LYMPHOMA
Thielen C.*, Goval JJ., Gofflot S., Bisig B., Boniver J. and de Leval L.
Department of Pathology, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéo-
mique Appliqué (GIGA)- Research, CHU Sart Tilman, Universty of
Liège, Belgium.
Background: Over-expression of the BCL-2 anti-apoptotic gene
represents the primary oncogenic mechanism in most follicular
lymphomas (FL). In addition, numerous data lend support to the
crucial role of the microenvironment in the development and clinical
course of FL, especially T cells and accessory cells. In reactive
germinal centers, a subset of CD4+ T cells coexpressing CD57 (TFH)
exerts critical functional help to follicular B cells. Little is known
about the involvement of TFH in FL. Recent studies have suggested a
correlation between higher CD57+ cells count and unfavorable
clinicobiologic factors in FL.
Purpose of the study: to provide further characterization of tumor-
infiltrating lymphocytes with a TFH phenotype, in FL.
Results: By immunohistochemistry on paraffin sections, CD57+ cells
were detected in all FL biopsies (n=24), and at a variance with
reactive follicles, were distributed in both follicular and extrafollicular
zones. A significantly lower density of CD57+ T cells was found in
cytological higher-grade lesions (grades III versus I+II, p<0.001).
Immunophenotypic characterization of the CD4+CD57+ cell suspen-
sions from 17 FL and 6 tonsils was performed by 3 colors flow
cytometry. In both tonsils and FL, most CD4+CD57+ cells coex-
pressed CD45RO and CD28. HLA-DR, CD25, CD26, CD62L,
CCR3, CCR7, CXCR4 and CXCR5 showed a similar expression in
FL and tonsils. The percentage of CD4+CD57+ cells positive for
CD69, CXCR4 and ICOS was significantly lower in FL compared to
reactive samples (80% vs 91%, 51% vs 73%, 41% vs 68%
respectively) whereas the proportion of CCR5+ cells among CD4+
CD57+ cells was higher in FL (71% vs 53%). There was no evident
association between grade and immunophenotypic variation.
Conclusions: The present data (1) confirm the presence of CD57+ in
FL with a density inversely correlated to cytological grade; (2) show
aberrant distribution of CD57+ T cells outside neoplastic follicles in
FL; (3) reveal immunophenotypic modulation of CD4+CD57+ cells in
FL, in respect to the expression of chemokine receptors and activation
markers, which may account for their altered distribution and likely
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 245
reflect modified functional properties. Collectively these data support
that CD57+ cells may be relevant to pathobiology of FL.
LS 173
EXPRESSION OF SURVIVIN IN NEWLY DIAGNOSED
ADVANCED HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
*Ljubomir R. Jakovic1
, Biljana Mihaljevic1
, Maja Perunicic
Jovanovic1
, Andrija Bogdanovic1
, Tatjana Terzic1
, Vesna Cemerikic
Martinovic1
, Darinka Boskovic1
, Vladimir Bumbasirevic2
Institute of Hematology1
, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;
Institute of Histology and Embriology2
, School of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Serbia
Background: Defective regulation of apoptosis plays important role
in carcinogenesis. Survivin, an important member of the inhibitor of
apoptosis (IAP) family, is over-expressed in many cancers and is
suggested to be prognostic marker in monitoring these patients.
Purpose: The aim of the study was to determine the prognostic value
of survivin in newly diagnosed pts with advanced Hodgkin’s
lymphoma (HL). Their significance was correlated with International
Prognostic Score (IPS). It was evaluated regarding the response to
treatment and survival period.
Summary: In a cohort of 89 pts with classical HL in advanced stage
of the disease (CS IIB-IV), treated with ABVD regimen from 1997 to
2004, we analyzed prognostic relevance of survivin expression
determined by immunohistochemistry, at diagnosis. Immunohisto-
chemistry was performed on formalin fixed, paraffin embedded lymph
nodes’ tissue sections using an indirect immunoperoxidase method
and a specific monoclonal antibody following standard procedure.
The percentage of survivin positive neoplastic cells was analyzed on
10 different high power microscopy fields (HPF, ×400). The median
follow-up was 7 years (yrs).
The OS rate was 67% after 7 yrs’ follow-up. Survivin expression was found
in 88.75% of cases. Survivin expression had no statistically significant
influence on OS and EFS (log rank p>.05). There was no significant
correlation between survivin expression and IPS (log rank p>.05).
Conclusion: In pts with advanced classical HL we could not prove the
predictive power of survivin.
LS 174
CLINICOPATHOLOGIC SIGNIFICANCE
AND PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF CHROMOSOMAL
IMBALANCES IN DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
TREATED WITH RITUXIMAB-CONTAINING REGIMENS
Itziar Salaverria1
, Cristina Royo1
, Teresa Cardesa1
, Armando López-
Guillermo2
, Leonor Arenillas3
, Silvia Beà1
, Emili Montserrat2
, Lluís
Colomo1
, Elías Campo1
Departments of 1
Pathology and 2
Hematology, Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 3
Department of Clinical
Hematology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
Background: Different studies of secondary genetic alterations in
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) have been performed in the
pre-rituximab era describing different alterations associated with poor
prognosis such as gains of chromosome 3 and 18q. However, no
studies are available for patients receiving rituximab-containing
regimens.
Purpose of the study: To determine the clinicopathologic signifi-
cance and prognostic value of chromosomal imbalances in patients
with DLBCL treated with rituximab-containing regimens.
Results: We have examined the specimens of 62 patients (34M/28F;
median age 61 years; range 21-91) diagnosed with DLBCL between
2002 and 2007 using comparative genomic hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. All patients received rituximab-containing
regimens (in most cases R-CHOP), with 66% of them achieving
CR. CD10, BCL-6, MUM-1 and BCL-2 were used for the
immunohistochemical study. Chromosomal imbalances gains (n=
143) losses (n=92) and amplifications (n=6) were detected in fifty-
four (86%) cases. The most recurrent alterations were gains of 7q
(22%), 12 (19%), 18q (19%), 1q (13%), 3q (13%), and losses of 6q
(22%), 1p (13%), and 17p (13%). After a median follow-up of
3.1 years, 20 patients have died, with a median overall survival of
4.5 years. Recurrent high-level DNA amplifications were detected in
18q. Tumors with 6q losses and high number of gains (>2) were
significantly associated with poor prognosis. Neither BCL-2 expres-
sion nor the groups defined by immunophenotyping (GC vs non-GC)
had prognostic significance in this series.
Conclusion: These results suggest that treatment with rituximab-
containing regimens may modify the prognostic significance of
chromosomal imbalances. However, additional studies are needed to
assess these observations in larger series of patients.
LS 175
EXPRESSION OF ANGIOGENIC GROWTH FACTOR
RECEPTORS BY NEOPLASTIC CELLS OF CLASSICAL
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Aliste C, *Fraga M, Tojo M, 1
García JF, 1
Piris MA and Forteza J, for
the Spanish Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group
Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago de Compostela,
1
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.
Background. The availability of antiangiogenic drugs has raised
considerable interest in studying the expression of angiogenic
molecules in different types of malignancies. In Hodgkin lymphoma
(HL), however, only few studies have been performed in small series
to address this issue. According to their results, Hodgkin and Reed-
Sternberg (HRS) cells may express angiogenic growth factors and
their receptors. Interestingly, VEGF and VEGFR2 co-expression has
been reported, leading to hypothesize that these molecules could
provide an autocrine pathway of growth stimulation in HRS cells.
Purpose. To study the expression of angiogenic growth factor
receptors (AGFR) by HRS cells in a large series of classical HL,
and its possible association with the expression of cell cycle and
apoptosis regulatory proteins. For this purpose, VEGFR1, VEGFR2
and PDGFRα immunostainings were performed in 238 classical HL
biopsies using tissue microarrays previously studied for cell-cycle and
apoptosis regulatory proteins.
Results. The expression of AGFR by HRS cells (more than 10% of
HRS cells positive) was very frequent (86 to 97% of the cases).
VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 immunostainings were usually cytoplasmic,
246 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
while PDGFRα immunostaining showed also frequent nuclear
localization. High expression of the receptors (more than 30% of
HRS cells positive) was found to be significantly associated with the
expression of different cell-cycle and apoptosis regulatory molecules:
VEGFR1 with MIB1 index and survivin, VEGFR2 with G1/S
transition regulators, and PDGFRα with G1/S and G2/M transition
regulatory proteins, Bcl-XL and MIB1 expression.
Conclusion. HRS cells frequently express AGFR. This is associated
with the expression of cell-cycle checkpoints and apoptosis regulatory
proteins characteristically altered in HL. These findings suggest that
AGFR may play an important role in the proliferation and viability of
HRS cells, thus opening new therapeutic pathways for HL.
LS 176
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC AND CYTOGENETIC
FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION ANALYSIS
IN HIGH GRADE B-CELL LYMPHOMAS WITH BURKITT-
LIKE FEATURES AND BURKITT LYMPHOMAS
Merih Tepeoglu, *Nalan Akyurek
Department of Pathology, Gazi University Medical School, Ankara,
TURKEY
Background: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt
lymphoma (BL) are mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas that have
heterogeneous clinical, morphological, immunophenotypical and
cytogenetic features, and variable clinical course.
Design: We analyzed immunophenotypic and molecular features of 56
lymphomas obtained from patients with typical BL, atypical Burkitt/
Burkitt-like lymphoma (ABL/BLL) and DLBCL. Immunohistochem-
ical staining was performed for CD10, BCL6, BCL2, MUM1 and
Ki67. FISH was performed for BCL2 and C-MYC rearrangements, C-
MYC amplification and PTEN deletion.
Results: In 10 typical BLs, all cases showed an identical immuno-
phenotype (CD10+, BCL6+, BCL2-, and Ki67>99%), C-MYC
rearrangement and no BCL2 rearrangement. C-MYC was amplified
in 8 (80%) cases. In 8 ABL/BLL cases, 8 (100%) were CD10+,
8 (100%) were BCL6+, 4 (50%) were BCL2+ and 3 (37%) were
MUM1+. Ki67 proliferation index was ∼88%. C-MYC was rear-
ranged in 6 (75%), BCL2 was rearranged 2 (26%) and C-MYC was
amplified in 2 (25%) cases. In 38 DBBHL cases, 12 (32%) were ABC
and 26 (68%) were GCB subtype. In eight cases with high Ki67
(>80%), C-MYC was rearranged in 4 (50%), BCL2 was rearranged 2
(25%) and C-MYC amplified in 5 (62%) cases. C-MYC amplification
was found in 21 of 38 (31%) DBBCL cases. High Ki67 proliferation
index did not correlate with morphology, MYC amplification or
survival. PTEN deletion was identified in 10 of 38 (26%) DLBCL, 1
of 10 (10%) BL and 1 of 8 (12%) ABL/BLL.
Conclusions: The application of an immunohistochemical panel
including markers of germinal-center and non–germinal-center B
cells in combination with FISH analysis for MYC and BCL2
rearrangements might be used to distinguish BL from DLBCL in
routine practice. However, many of the high grade B-cell lymphomas
are phenotypically and cytogenetically heterogeneous and most of
them are found in a spectrum between BL and DLBCL.
LS 177
TCL1A EXPRESSION DELINEATES BIOLOGICAL
AND CLINICAL VARIABILITY IN B-CELL LYMPHOMA
Mohit Aggarwal1, Raquel Villuendas1, Gonzalo Gomez3, Socorro M
Rodriguez-Pina1, Margarita Sanchez-Beato1, David Alvarez1, Nerea
Martínez1, Antonia Rodriguez1, Maria E Castillo1, Francisca I.
Camacho1, Jose A. Garcia-Marco2, Eva Kimby4, David G. Pisano3,
Miguel A. Piris1
1Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain; 2Haematology Department,
Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain; 3Bioinfor-
matics Unit, Structural Biology, Spanish National Cancer Centre,
Madrid, Spain; 4Division of Hematology, Department of Internal
Medicine at Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Objectives: To explore the biological and prognostic value of TCL1A
oncogene in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas.
Materials: The microarray data (GSE9327) from 187 cases of all the
major types of B-cell non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (B-NHL) available in
the GEO public repository was studied. In addition, 98 CLL cases
were studied for TCL1A expression (CLL-specific 19K Oligonucle-
otide Microarray from Agilent). Eighty-five patients with MCL were
analysed on tissue microaarrays for TCL1 protein expression. All
cases were histologically reviewed by a team of pathologists (S.M.R.
P. and M.A.P.), in accordance with the WHO criteria.
Results: The assembly of a collection of gene-expression signatures
of the major types of B-cell NHL identified increased TCL1
expression in multiple lymphoma types. Specifically, Burkitt Lym-
phoma cases show a homogeneously strong expression of TCL1,
while Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma, Follicular Lymphoma, Mantle
Cell Lymphoma (MCL), Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL),
Nodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma and Splenic Marginal Zone
Lymphoma display a striking variability in the intensity of TCL1
staining. This was validated in two independent series. A Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis of the genes correlated with TCL1A expression
found that variation in the level of expression of TCL1A was
significantly associated with some of the most important gene
signatures recognizing B-cell lymphoma pathogenesis and heteroge-
neity, such as Germinal center, B-Cell Receptor, NF-kB (and its target
genes), Death, MAP kinases, TNFR1, TOLL, and IL1R. Additionally,
TCL1 microarray expression was correlated with shorter time to
treatment in CLL cases. In MCL the level of protein expression of
TCL1 was correlated with overall survival. These results demonstrate
the clinical and biological significance of TCL1 expression.
Conclusions: TCL1A oncogene plays a crucial role in the pathogen-
esis and heterogeneity observed in B-NHL. Additionally, it has the
potential to be a prognostic marker in patients with CLL and MCL.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 247
LS 178
GENE EXPRESSION PROFILING REVEALS A DISTINCT
MOLECULAR SIGNATURE FOR NASAL NK/T-CELL
LYMPHOMAS.
Yenlin Huang1*
, Aurelien de Réynies2
, Laurence de Leval3
, Nadine
Martin-Garcia1
, Jacques Bosq4
, Barbara Petit4
, Anne-Catherine
Baglin4
, Emilie Thomas2
, Francois Radvanyi5
, Paul Coppo6
, Christian
Schmitt1
, Philippe Gaulard1
.
1
Pathology and Inserm U841, CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France ;
2
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Paris, France ; 3
Pathology, CHU
Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium ; 4
Groupe d’étude des lymphomes de
l’adulte (GELA), Paris, France; 5
Institut Curie, Paris, France;
6
Hematology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.
Nasal NK-/T-cell lymphomas (NK/T) is a rare disease entity derived from
NK or cytotoxic Tcells. Besides its association with EBV, the pathogenesis
and genetic alterations underlying NK/T remain poorly understood.
The aim of this study was to identify the molecular signature of this
rare lymphoma and explore the molecular pathways implicated in its
pathogenesis.
Total RNAs of 7 NK/T tumor samples, 2 NK/T tumor-derived cell lines,
2 normal NK cell samples together with 16 peripheral T-cell lymphoma
unspecified (PTCL-U) were hybridized on Affymetrix HG-U133A
Plus2.0 microarray. In parallel, array-CGH was performed using a DNA
microarray comprising 4434 BAC clones with a resolution of 600 KB.
Compared to normal NK cells, NK/T was characterized by over-
expression of genes involved in cell-cell interaction (integrins, E-
cadherin, VCAM1), extracellular matrix (TIMP1, TIMP2, TIMP3),
innate immune responses (Toll-like receptors), genes encoding
chemokines (CXCL9/Mig, CXCL10/IP-10, CXCL 12/SDF-1), onco-
genes (mafb, c-myc,..), growth factors (PDGFR) and EBV-related
gene (EBI3). NK/T was further compared to PTCL-U to define its
specific molecular signature: it was characterized by overexpression
of genes encoding NK-cell associated molecules (CD56, CD244,
KIRs,..), cytotoxic proteins (Granzymes B, H, perforin,..), chemokines
(CCL5/RANTES, CCL4/MIP-1-beta) and apoptosis-associated mole-
cules such as Fas ligand. By immunohistochemistry, Granzyme H was
demonstrated in all NK/T tested (n=9). Apoptosis, AKT and Jak-Stat
pathways were among the most differentially expressed pathways and
phosphorylated Stat3 (Tyr705) was constitutively expressed in the
nuclei of neoplastic cells (9/10 cases). Genomic profiles determined
recurrent gains on 1q21-q44, 6p11-p25 and 7q11-q36, and losses on
6q16-q25 and 11q24-q25 and identified candidate genes with
correlation with transcriptome.
The current study (1) verifies the cell origin of NK/T from activated NK
cells, (2) identifies a distinct molecular signature for NK/T, suggesting
involvement of pathways potentially implicated in their pathogenesis
and showing correlation with recurrent genomic alterations.
LS 179
IMAGE-GUIDED CORE-NEEDLE BIOPSY (CNB)
IN THE MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH NON-
HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA AND HODGKIN’S DISEASE.
* C Chassagne-Clément (MD), D Ranchère (MD), P Thiesse (MD), E
Callet-Bauchu (MD-PHD), I Tigaud (MD), T Gargi, C Bergeron
(MD), P Biron (MD), H Ghesquières (MD) and C Sebban (MD).
Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, and Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre
Bénite – France.
Introduction: CNB are useful to the tumor diagnosis. We reported
our experience in evaluating the efficacy of CNB in the management
of NHL and HD.
Methods: 251 CNB were performed as the diagnostic procedure on
226 patients treated in our institution for a NHL or a HD between
1997 and 2006. This procedure was achieved in 107 cases without
previous history of lymphoma, in 139 with suspected recurrence and
in 5 as a second procedure after a first inconclusive CNB, and was
performed under ultrasound, CT-scan or radioscopy guidance. Speci-
mens were obtained from deep-seated (120) or peripheral lymph
nodes (76), limbs (18), chest wall or paravertebral areas (18), head
and neck areas (8), breast (7) and bone (4). Standard histology was
completed by immunohistochemistry in all cases but 7. The originality
of our serie is the achievement of a genetic study in 54 cases (9 as a
molecular genetic study on frozen samples and 45 as a cytogenetic
analysis on fresh tissue samples).
Results: Diagnosis of lymphoma was achieved in all but one case
with no need of surgical biopsy. In 101 patients without previous
history of lymphoma, CNB provided sufficient material for the
diagnosis. Cytogenetic was informative in 27 cases (conventional
analysis in 16, fluorescent in situ hybridization in 11) and permitted to
change the initial diagnosis in 1 case. Treatment was initiated solely
on the basis of the diagnosis obtained by the CNB as the first
procedure in 245 out of 251 cases.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that CNB is a suitable and adequate
procedure in the diagnosis of lymphomas, particularly for patients
with previous history of lymphoma. However at the time of initial
diagnosis we recommend the use of CNB only in the absence of
peripheral lesions or for patients inappropriate for surgery.
LS 180
NON GERMINAL CENTER PHENOTYPE IS FREQUENTLY
ASSOCIATED WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS C INFECTION
IN EGYPT
Howayda Abd El All*(1) (2) and Racha Metwally (3)
1) Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal University,
Ismailia
2) Immunohistochemistry Laboratory, Nasser Institute, MOHP, Cairo
3) Oncology Department, Nasser Institute, MOHP, Cairo, Egypt
Background: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major health problem in
Egypt responsible for liver cirrhosis and cancer. The estimated
adjusted national prevalence rate of chronic hepatitis C infection is
248 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
7.8%. Aim: to assess the phenotype of diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) associated with HCV infection in the Egyptian population.
Methods: 35 cases diagnosed as DLBCL were first classified into
germinal centre (GC) B cell like and non GC origin either activated B
cells (ABC) or type 3 based on their immunoreactivity for CD10, bcl-
6 and Mum-1. Bcl-2 and MIB-1 as adverse prognostic factors were
also evaluated. The phenotype was further correlated with the
patients’ clinicopathological characteristics. HCV infection was
estimated by anti-HCV antibody.
Results: twelve cases (34.3%) positive for CD10 and/or bcl-6 were
classified as GC B cell like subtype, 10 cases positive for Mum-1 as
ABC subtype (28.6%), and 13 cases double positive or negative for
bcl-6 and Mum-1 were considered as type 3 (37.1%). HCV infection
was strongly associated with non GC phenotype specially type 3 (p=
0.025 for ABC and p<0.001 for type 3). In addition, the expression of
bcl-2 and MIB-1 was associated with HCV infection (p<0.01 for
both). Extranodal DLBCL were frequently HCV positive and the most
common site was the liver (p<0.01).
Conclusion: DLBCL HCV+ was almost of post GC phenotype
specially type 3, had high proliferation fraction, aggressive phenotype
an extranodal presentation.
LS 181
ECA39/BCAT1, A GERMINAL CENTRE-ASSOCIATED MARKER
EXPRESSED IN B-CELL AND T-CELL LYMPHOMAS
TI George,1
E Ballabio,2
JC Paterson,2
SA Pileri,3
M-L Hansmann,4
W Klapper,5
T Longacre,1
RB West,1
M van de Rijn,1
J Boultwood,2
J Wainscoat2
and T Marafioti2
1
Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA
2
Leukaemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield De-
partment of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, UK
3
Department of Pathology and Unit of Haematopathology, ‘L&A
Seragnoli’ Institute of Haematology, Univeristy of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy
4
Senckenberg Pathology Institute, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University
Clinic, Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
5
Department of Hematopathology and Lymph Node Registry, Kiel,
Schleswig-Holstein University Hospitals, Kiel, Germany
ECA39, also known as branched chain aminotransferase 1 (BCAT1),
is regulated by c-Myc in humans with increased RNA expression
found in Burkitt lymphoma. We document ECA39/BCAT1 expression
at the protein level in human tissues by immunohistochemistry and
western blotting analysis using an antibody reactive with paraffin-
embedded tissues. ECA39/BCAT1 was highly expressed in germinal
centre B-cells, in monocytoid B-cells, in splenic venous endothelium
and in CD34-positive marrow blasts. It was absent in immature and
mature thymocytes, with only a few scattered positive cells coex-
pressing CD20 in the cortical medulla. Rare follicular T cells also
coexpressed ECA39/BCAT1. Among lymphoid neoplasms, ECA39
was found in Burkitt lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
classical Hodgkin lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
Expression in follicular lymphoma was heterogeneous with greater
expression seen in higher grade tumors. Approximately one-half of
chronic lymphocytic leukaemias were positive with strong staining
observed in larger lymphocytes while small lymphocytes showed
weak to negative staining. Expression was generally not seen in
mantle cell lymphoma, hairy cell leukaemia, lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma and myeloma/plasmacytoma. Precursor B and T cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukaemia, peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma, and acute myelogenous leukaemia also showed
expression in a subset of cases. In non-haematopoietic neoplasms,
ECA39 was present in testicular embryonal carcinoma and ovarian
sex cord stromal tumours, with expression seen in a subset of cases of
colon carcinoma, ovarian endometrioid carcinoma, and endometrial
carcinoma of the uterus. ECA39 shows an expression pattern similar
to that of Jaw1/LRMP, HGAL and PAG in human B-lymphoid
malignancies; in T-lymphoid malignancies, ECA39 expression is
similar to that of PAG. The expression of ECA39/BCAT1 may be of
interest in the differential diagnosis and research of haematolymphoid
and non-haematopoietic tumours neoplasms.
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 249
250 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
AUTHOR INDEX
Abad, M. LS 110
Abd El All, H. LS 180
Abraham, E. BMS 26
Abruzzo, L. V. LS 49
Acevedo, A. BMS 15, LS 61
Achille, P. BMS 27
Adam, P. LS 40, LS 74
Agan, M. LS 97
Aggarwal, M. LS 177
Agostinelli, C. BMS 15, LS 15,
LS 18, LS 54
Ajdukovic, R. LS 113
Akalin, T. LS 160
Akkaya, B. K. LS 29
Akyurek, N. LS 176
Algara, P. LS 56
Aliste, C. LS 175
Alkan, G. LS 29
Allmer, C. LS 132
Alonso, R. LS 149
Alvarez, D. LS 177
Amato, E. LS 152, LS 168
Ambrogio, C. LS 163
Anagnostopoulos, A. BMS 16, BMS 19
Anastasopoulou, A. LS 166
Androulaki, A. BMS 32, LS 166
Angeles-Angeles, A. LS 164
Angelopoulou, M. K. BMS 32, LS 153,
LS 166
Annunziato, F. LS 168
Anthony, A. LS 169
Antonicelli, G. LS 71
Arai, E. LS 90
Aralica, M. BMS 31
Arbor, A. LS 133
Arcaini, L. BMS 5
Arenillas, L. LS 174
Arzu Saglam, E. LS 28
Asami, E. LS 90
Asnafi, V. LS 142
Asplund, C. LS 162
Assaf, C. LS 148
Atayar, C. LS 94, LS 137
Athanasiadou, I. BMS 16, BMS 18,
BMS 19
Atsaves, V. LS 96
Attygalle, A. D. LS 122
Auer, I. BMS 20, BMS 30
Aumueller, C. BMS 8
Aurer, I. LS 113
Avet-Loiseau, H. LS 107
Aymerich, M. LS 18
Bacon, C. M. LS 40, LS 158, LS 159
Baena, S. LS 157
Bağır, E. LS 104
Baglin, A. C. LS 178
Bagnara, G. P. LS 54
Bahler, D. W. LS 49
Baia, M. LS 161
Balagué, O. LS 39
Balhárek, T. LS 42, LS 126, LS 154
Ballabio, E. LS 72, LS 181
Balogh, Z. LS 8, LS 111
Banerjee, D. LS 25
Barbi, S. LS 22, LS 152, LS 168
Barrionuevo, C. LS 110
Barry, T. LS 133
Barthova, M. LS 42, LS 126, LS 154
Basic-Kinda, S. LS 113
Basrur, V. LS 80
Bassarova, A. LS 69
Basta-Jovanović, G. BMS 7
Baudis, M. LS 141
Baumforth, K. R. N. LS 68
Beà, S. LS 18, LS 19, LS 43,
LS 44, LS 174
Beaugerie, L. LS 156
Belbachir, A. LS 115
Βelessi, C. BMS 14
Bellan, C. LS 70, LS 78, LS 79, LS 118
Bellas, C. LS 56, LS 114
Benayad, S. LS 117, LS 150
Benedetti, D. BMS 10
Benhamou, E. M. J.-L. LS 148
Benkirane, A. LS 115, LS 117, LS 120,
LS 121, LS 150
Bentink, S. LS 116
Berger, F. LS 161
Bergeron, C. LS 179
Bernardo, A. D. BMS 13
Bertolaso, A. LS 106, LS 152, LS 168
Bertucci, F. LS 129
Bessie, B. LS 78
Bianchi, P. BMS 22
Bianchi, E. LS 22, LS 36
Billings, T. LS 23
Bink, K. LS 167
Birgersdotter, A. LS 68
Biron, P. LS 179
Bisig, B. LS 172
Björkholm, M. LS 68
Blokzijl, T. LS 93, LS 94, LS 98
Bloom, K. LS 169
Bödör, C. LS 8, LS 111
Boerma, E.-J. LS 99, LS 139
Boerma, E. G. LS 141
Bogdanovic, A. LS 173
Boiocchi, L. BMS 22
Bomben, R. BMS 10
Bonetti, F. LS 50
Bonino, L. D. BMS 6
Boniver, J. LS 172
Booman, M. LS 98
Bordessoule, D. LS 130, LS 131, LS 165
Borisch, B. LS 27
Borrebaeck, C. LS 26
Bosari, S. BMS 22
Bosch, F. LS 18
Boskovic, D. BMS 23, LS 173
Bosq, J. LS 178
Bossard, C. LS 107
Bossi, F. BMS 10
Bot, F. BMS 29
Bouabdallah, R. LS 108, LS 129
Boudjemaa, S. LS 77
Boufama, M. LS 102
Boultwood, J. LS 181
Bousquet, M. LS 1
Bouzid-Bendisari, K. LS 102
Boveri, E. BMS 5, BMS 13
Bower, M. LS 125, LS 134
Brais, R. LS 158
Bräuninger, A. LS 14, LS 41
Braza, M. LS 67
Braziel, R. LS 24, LS 43, LS 44
Briere, J. LS 161
Broccardo, C. LS 1
Bronz, L. LS 118
Brousse, N. LS 142, LS 156
Brousset, P. LS 1
Bruneau, J. LS 142
Bueso-Ramos, C. E. LS 147
Buglioni, S. LS 145, LS 146
Bulian, P. LS 31
Bumbasirevic, V. LS 173
Burger, J. A. BMS 28
Burjanivova, T. LS 126
Burroni, B. BMS 5
Butsch, R. LS 82
Caggiari, L. LS 31, LS 33
Cagirgan, S. LS 144
Cairo, M. S. LS 80
Callet-Bauchu, E. LS 179
Camacho, F. I. LS 177
Camarero, C. LS 53
Campidelli, C. BMS 15, LS 13
Campo, E. BMS 15, LS 7, LS 18, LS 19,
LS 39, LS 43, LS 44, LS 100, LS 149,
LS 174,
Canales, M. LS 60
Canalini, P. LS 146
Cañamero, M. LS 157
Cangi, M. G. LS 50
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 251
Canioni, D. LS 142
Cannizzaro, R. LS 32
Cánovas, A. LS 53
Cantisani, R. LS 79
Canzonieri, V. LS 31, LS 32, LS 33, LS 34
Cardesa, T. LS 174
Carreras, J. LS 7, LS 123, LS 158
Carro, A. LS 37, LS 55
Carugi, A. LS 70, LS 71
Casanova, L. LS 110
Casasnovas, O. LS 129
Casavilca, S. LS 110
Castello, A. BMS 5
Castillo, I. LS 56
Castillo, M. E. LS 57, LS 177
Castro, Y. LS 57
Catherwood, M. A. LS 48
Cazzola, M. BMS 5
Cecconi, D. LS 22, LS 36
Čemerikić-Martinović, V. BMS 7, BMS 23,
LS 173
Cerf-Bensussan, N. LS 123
Cerhan, J. LS 132
Cerino, G. LS 17, LS 79
Čermák, M. LS 42
Chablé-Montero, F. LS 164
Chadburn, A. BMS 21
Chan, W.-C. LS 2, LS 43, LS 44
Chanock, S. LS 132
Chanudet, E. LS 122
Chapman, J. BMS 11
Chassagne-Clément, C. LS 179
Chen, D. LS 47
Chen, H.-K. LS 4
Chen, S. LS 133, LS 169
Cherry, D. LS 89
Chetaille, B. LS 108, LS 129
Chiarle, R. LS 163
Chilosi, M. LS 22, LS 36, LS 106
Chiodera, C. LS 38
Chisesi, T. LS 15
Chiu, A. BMS 21
Chiu, L. L. LS 9
Chott, A. LS 14, LS 72
Christensson, B. LS 119, LS 162
Chuah, C. T. H. LS 10
Chuang, S.-S. LS 3, LS 4, LS 6, LS 123
Cigudosa, J. C. LS 37, LS 55, LS 57
Claret, F.X. LS 96
Cocco, M. LS 70, LS 71, LS 78, LS 79,
LS 118
Coggi, G. BMS 22
Coiffier, B. LS 161
Colarossi§, C. LS 31, LS 32
Colleoni, G. W. B. LS 2
Colomer, D. LS 18, LS 19, LS 100, LS 149
Colomo, L. LS 7, LS 39, LS 174
Concepción, R. LS 53
Conde, E. LS 60
Conlon, K. P. LS 80
Connors, J. M. LS 63
Conti, S. LS 146
Copie-Bergman, C. LS 161
Copie, C. LS 77
Copin, M. C. LS 129
Coppo, P. LS 178
Cordone, I. LS 146
Corine, J. LS 73
Corinne, H. LS 161
Cornillet-Lefebvre, P. LS 148
Corti, D. LS 118
Costa, C. LS 163
Costanzo, V. LS 79
Coste-Martineau, V. LS 131
Coste, V. LS 165
Costes, V. LS 67
Cotta, C. V. BMS 11, LS 91
Coyaud, E. LS 1
Cozen, W. LS 132
Cristóbal, E. LS 127, LS 128
Croce, C. LS 152, LS 155, LS 168
Cruz, M. LS 60
Csernus, B. LS 8
Csomor, J. LS 8, LS 111
Cuillière-Dartigues, P. LS 156
Currie, T. LS 76
D’Amore, F. LS 15
D’Andrea, M. LS 146
Dal Bo, M. BMS 10
Dal Cin, E. LS 50
Dastugue, N. LS 1
de Dios Soler, M. LS 135
De Falco, G. LS 17, LS 70, LS 71, LS 78,
LS 79
de Jong, D. LS 98
de Leval, L. LS 122, LS 172, LS 178
de Mascarel, A. LS 131
de Nully Brown, P. LS 66
de Prenter, M. LS 20, LS 73
de Raeve, H. BMS 29
De Re, V. LS 31, LS 32, LS 33, LS 34
de Réynies, A. LS 178
Deaglio, S. BMS 10
Deák, L. LS 8, LS 111
Degan, M. BMS 10
Del Poeta, G. BMS 10
Delabesse, E. LS 1
Deliliers, G. L. BMS 22
Della Porta, M. G. BMS 5
Delsol, G. LS 1
Desouki, M. M. LS 89
Dessanti, L. LS 146
di Celle Paola, F. BMS 27
Di Lisio, L. LS 37, LS 55, LS 58
Di Raimondo, F. LS 15
Diaz de Otazu, R. LS 56
Dictor, M. LS 26
Dimosthenous, K. BMS 18
Ding, H. LS 27
Dirnhofer, S. BMS 12, LS 46, LS 59
Dobrea, C. LS 140
Dogan, A. LS 35, LS 47, LS 123, LS 132,
LS 97
Doglioni, C. LS 50
Doig, T. N. LS 151
Dolcetti, R. LS 50
Domínguez-Franco, P. LS 61
Dotlic, S. LS 113
Doussis-Anagnostopoulou, I. LS 153
Drakos, E. LS 62, LS 91, LS 96
Drakos, I. LS 147
Dreyling, M. LS 64
Du, M.-Q. LS 40, LS 122, LS 123, LS 158,
LS 159
Duchez, S. LS 130
Dukova, B. LS 171
Dunbar, D. LS 151
Dündar, E. LS 105
Duval, A. LS 156
Ehlers, A. LS 116
Eickhoff, J. C. LS 2
Ek, S. LS 26
El Sheikh, S. LS 5
Elenitoba-Johnson, K. S. J. LS 80
Emara, K. A. BMS 2
Erber, W. LS 109
Ergin, M. LS 104
Erickson, L. A. LS 35
Eriksson, M. LS 119
Ernberg, I. LS 68
Espinet, B. BMS 15, LS 18
Esposito, A. LS 54
Estelle, Ch. LS 40, LS 123
Esterni, B. LS 129
Fabiani, B. LS 156
Fabrizio, T. BMS 27
Facchetti, F. LS 38, LS 50, LS 84, LS 86
Facciolo, F. LS 145
Fadlelmola, F. LS 25
Fameli, M. BMS 16
Familiades, J. LS 1
Fan, G. LS 24
Farinha, P. LS 63
Fassas, A. BMS 16
Fedoriw, G. BMS 3
Feldman, A. L. LS 35, LS 47
Feller, A. C. LS 138, LS 143
Fend, F. BMS 8, BMS 25, LS 167
Feretzaki, Μ. LS 96
Fermin, D. LS 80
Fermo, E. BMS 22
Fernández, C. LS 18
Fernandez, M. LS 147
Fernàndez, V. LS 18, LS 19
Ferreira, B. LS 37, LS 55
Ferreri, A. BMS 15
Ferreri, A. J. M. LS 50
Ferry, J. LS 40
Ferry, J. A. LS 2
Feugier, P. LS 129, LS 161
252 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Feuillard, J. LS 130, LS 131, LS 165
Filipovski, V. LS 171
Finetti, P. LS 129
Finn, W. J. LS 133
Fisogni, S. LS 38
Fléjou, J. F. LS 156
Florena, A. M. BMS 13
Flygare, J. LS 119, LS 162
Ford, R. J. LS 62
Forestier, L. LS 130
Forteza, J. LS 175
Fosså, A. LS 69
Fraga, M. LS 175
Francesca, R. LS 54
Francesca, S. BMS 27
Francesco, A. LS 54
Francia di Celle, P. BMS 6
Franco, V. BMS 10, BMS 13
Fresno, M. F. LS 53
Gachard, N. LS 130, LS 131, LS 165
Gagyi, É. LS 111, LS 8
Gaidano, G. BMS 10
Gaillard, F. LS 107
Galani, Z. LS 166
Gallamini, A. LS 15
Gallo, E. LS 145
Gao, Z. LS 112
García-Cosío, M. LS 127, LS 128
García-Laraña, J. LS 127, LS 128
Garcia-Marco, J. A. LS 177
García, J. F. LS 52, LS 53, LS 175
Gargi, T. LS 179
Gariphalia, K. BMS 17, BMS 18
Gascoyne, R. D. LS 43, LS 44, LS 63
Gattei, V. BMS 10, LS 31
Gatter, K. LS 51
Gatter, K. M. LS 24
Gaulard, P. LS 72, LS 161, LS 178
Gazzola, A. LS 54
George, T. I. BMS 4, LS 181
Georgiadi, E. LS 153
Gernert, C. LS 74
Gesk, S. LS 14
Ghaleb, F. M. BMS 2
Gheorghe, G. BMS 21
Ghesquières, H. LS 179
Gianelli, U. BMS 13, BMS 22
Gibcus, J. LS 93
Giefing, M. LS 14
Giger, S. LS 83, LS 85
Giordano, A. LS 70
Gjerdrum, L. M. LS 66, LS 87
Godio, L. BMS 6
Gofflot, S. LS 172
Gomez, G. LS 37, LS 55, LS 177
Gomez-Abad, C. I. LS 37, LS 55
Gomez-Lozano, N. LS 114
Gómez, H. LS 110
Gong, L. LS 112
Gönlüşen, G. LS 104
Gonzalez-Medina, A. R. LS 81
Goodlad, J. R. LS 151, LS 170
Gorgoulis, V. LS 153
Gotic, M. BMS 23
Goval, J. J. LS 172
Grados, O. LS 110
Grande, C. LS 60
Grange, F. LS 148
Grant, J. W. LS 159
Gratwohl, A. BMS 12
Graziani, D. BMS 22
Green, T. M. LS 2
Gregory, C. LS 151
Greiner, T. C. LS 2, LS 43
Griskevicius, L. LS 88
Groenen, P. J. T. A. LS 20, LS 21, LS 73,
LS 75, LS 106
Grogg, K. L. LS 35
Guarnotta, C. BMS 13
Guillaume, Y. LS 108
Guinebretière, J. M. LS 77
Gulbas, Z. LS 105
Gunn, S. R. LS 49
Gustafsson, K. LS 119
Habermann, T. LS 132
Hager, I. LS 65
Haholu, A. LS 97
Hamoudi, R. LS 122
Hamoudi, R. A. LS 7, LS 40, LS 123, LS 159
Han, X. LS 147
Hansmann Martin, L. LS 54
Hansmann, M.-L. LS 72, LS 181
Hanson, C. A. LS 47
Haralambieva, E. LS 64, LS 74
Harald, S. LS 116, LS 155, LS 72
Harms, G. LS 93, LS 94, LS 98, LS 99
Hartge, P. LS 132
Hartmann, E. LS 22, LS 43
Hartmann, E. M. LS 44
Hartmann, S. LS 14, LS 54
Hartmut, B. BMS 28
Hartmut, M. LS 143
Hasserjian, R. P. LS 133
Hazar, V. LS 29
Hazem, A.H.I. LS 134, LS 124, LS 125
Hebeda, K. BMS 29, LS 20, LS 73, LS 75,
LS 103
Hebeda, K. M. BMS 15
Heegaard, S. LS 92
Heinz-Wolfram, B. LS 138, LS 143
Hekimgil, M. LS 144, LS 160
Hentschel, U. LS 74
Hernández, L. LS 19, LS 39
Herreros, B. LS 56
Hibbard, M. LS 169
Hii, A. LS 169
Hirose, T. LS 90
Hirsch, E. LS 163
Hirschmann, P. LS 46
Hoefig, K. P. LS 143
Hoessli, D. C. LS 27
Hoevenaars, B. LS 103
Höller, S. LS 45, LS 46, LS 59, LS 64
Horwitz, J. BMS 11
Howat, W. LS 7
Hsieh, P.-P. LS 3, LS 4
Huang, J. Z. LS 24
Huang, W.-T. LS 3, LS 4
Huang, X. LS 112
Huang, Y. LS 112, LS 122, LS 158, LS 159,
LS 178
Hull, D. LS 48
Hummel, M. LS 116, LS 155
Hüsken, J. LS 14
Hutter, G. LS 64
Ib Jarle, C. LS 66
Ibrahim, S. BMS 2
Ichimura, K. LS 40
Ida Munster, I. LS 69
Ilenčíková, D. LS 42
Ilham, Y. BMS 9
Ilic, I. LS 113
Iman, M. M. BMS 9
Iman, T. LS 5
Imperatore, F. LS 17
Incardona, P. LS 38
Incili, N. LS 144
Inga, N. LS 14
Inghirami, G. LS 163
Ingrao, S. BMS 13
Invernizzi, R. BMS 5
Ionescu, B. LS 140
Iriso, R. LS 79
Isaacson, P. G. LS 4, LS 40, LS 122, LS 123,
LS 158
Ishizawa, K. LS 90
Isiksoy, S. LS 105
Iurlo, A. BMS 22
Jabri, L. LS 115, LS 117, LS 120, LS 121,
LS 150
Jaffe, E. S. LS 43, LS 44
Jaković, L. BMS 7, LS 173
Jakovic, L. J. BMS 23
Jan-Lukas, R. LS 98, LS 99
Jan, D. LS 43, LS 44, LS 69
Janevska, V. LS 171
Jansen, A. LS 20
Jansen, P. LS 148
Jares, P. LS 43
Jares, P. LS 18
Javier, M. LS 57
Javier, S. LS 58
Jean-François, E. LS 161
Jean-Philippe, J. LS 161
Jean-Philippe, M. LS 14, LS 131
Jeffrey Medeiros, L. LS 62, LS 91
Jensen, P. B. LS 66
Jiang, X. BMS 20, BMS 30
Johnson, N. LS 122
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 253
Jöhrens, K. LS 155
Jones, D. LS 96
Jones, M. LS 109
Jonjić, N. BMS 31
Jovanovic, M. P. BMS 7, LS 173
Jovanovic, R. LS 171
Julien, R. LS 130
Juskevicius, R. BMS 24
Juszczynski, P. LS 76
Kalagiakou, E. BMS 14
Kalla, J. LS 45, LS 64
Kamper, P. LS 15
Kandiloglu, G. LS 160
Kanellis, G. BMS 17
Karakosta, A. LS 65
Karayannis, M. BMS 14
Karkouri, M. LS 117, LS 150
Katzenberger, T. LS 45, LS 64
Kavantzas, N. BMS 32
Kayano, H. LS 90
Kaygusuz, G. LS 97
Kelemen, K. LS 24
Kew, A. BMS 24
Kholousy, N. BMS 2
Khorshed, A. M. BMS 2
Kimby, E. LS 119, LS 177
Kinney, M. LS 133
Kirchhausen, T. LS 163
Kittas, C. LS 153
Klapper, W. LS 14, LS 143, LS 181
Kloboves Prevodnik, V. LS 101
Kluin, M. LS 141
Kluin, P. LS 98, LS 99, LS 137
Kluin, P. M. LS 139
Ko, Y.-H. LS 30
Koay, E. S. C. LS 9, LS 10
Koch, I. BMS 8
Koerbel, L. LS 18
Koković, I. LS 101
Koopmans, S. BMS 29
Kopper, L. LS 111
Korkolopoulou, P. BMS 32, LS 166
Korol, D. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Krampera, M. LS 152, LS 168
Kremer, M. BMS 8, BMS 25, LS 167
Kroesen, B. J. LS 93
Ksenija, L. BMS 31
Küppers, R. LS 14, LS 93
Kurrer, M. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Kurtin, P. J. LS 35, LS 47
Kutok, J. L. LS 76
Kuzu, I. LS 97, LS 105
Kviatkovská, Z. LS 42, LS 154
Kyoung-Mee, K. LS 30
Kyrtsonis, M. C. BMS 32, LS 153
Labar, B. LS 113
Labrousse, F. LS 131
Laforet, M. P. LS 165
Lam, K. BMS 29
Langerak, A. W. LS 21
Lanzavecchia, A. LS 118
Laoutaris, N. BMS 14, LS 65
Lara, C. LS 164
Lasabova, Z. LS 126
Laura, G. BMS 27
Laurent, C. LS 131
Lavergne-Slove, A. LS 123, LS 158
Lavrenčak, J. LS 101
Law, K. LS 76
Law, M. E. LS 35, LS 47
Lazarchick, J. LS 89
Lazzarino, M. BMS 5
Lazzi, S. LS 78, LS 79, LS 118
Leclair, F. LS 107
Lee, A. K. W. LS 9
Lee, B. LS 170
Lee, E.-S. LS 11
Legrenzi, L. LS 38
Leich, E. LS 44
Lekakis, L. LS 96
Lenze, D. LS 116, LS 155
Leoncini, L. LS 17, LS 70, LS 71, LS 79,
LS 118, LS 155
Leroy, K. LS 161
Lesley, C. LS 170
Leucci, E. LS 78, LS 79, LS 155
Leventaki, V. LS 91, LS 96
Levi, E. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Levidou, G. BMS 32, LS 166
Levis, A. LS 15
Levy, R. LS 132
Lhermitte, L. LS 142
Li, J. LS 62
Li, M. LS 112
Liakou, Ch. LS 96
Lian-Hua, K. LS 11
Liang, M. LS 147
Liao, Y.-L. LS 4
Lilakos, K. LS 166
Lim, M. LS 80, LS 133
Lim, S. T. LS 10
Lin, F. BMS 1
Lin, O. LS 39
Lister, A. LS 44
Liu, C. LS 112
Liu, C. G. LS 155
Liu, H. LS 4, LS 122, LS 123, LS 158,
LS 159
Liu, Z. LS 158
Liwski, R. BMS 24
Lloveras, N. LS 18
Loeffler, M. LS 143
Lohr, A. LS 45
Lome-Maldonado, C. LS 164
Lonardi, S. LS 38
Longacre, T. LS 181
López-Guerra, M. LS 100, LS 149
López-Guillermo, A. BMS 15, LS 7,
LS 19, LS 39, LS 174
Lopez, A. LS 60
Lorenzo, L. LS 78
Lorenzon, D. LS 31
Lossos, I. LS 132
Lossos, I. S. LS 136
Lozano, M. LS 114
Lucas, S. LS 51
Lucioni, M. BMS 5
Ludovica, R. BMS 27
Luebbert, M. BMS 28
Luider, J. BMS 20, BMS 30
Luigi, T. P. LS 54
Luigi, Z. P. LS 54
Luzzi, A. LS 17, LS 70, LS 71
Lydataki, E. LS 65
Lynch, C. LS 132
M’Hidi, H. LS 108
Ma, Y. LS 94
Macak, J. LS 64
Macintyre, E. LS 142
Macon, W. R. LS 35
Madani, A. LS 115, LS 117, LS 121
Mäder, U. LS 45, LS 64
Madsen, J. LS 92
Maestre, L. LS 58, LS 81, LS 157
Magrini, U. BMS 5
Malavasi, F. BMS 10
Malcovati, L. BMS 5
Malpeli, G. LS 152, LS 168
Malter, J. S. LS 2
Manazza, A. D. LS 163
Mancini, F. LS 106
Mangubat, N. LS 169
Manioudaki, E. BMS 14
Mannucci, S. LS 71, LS 118
Mansoor, A. BMS 20, BMS 30
Mansour, T. BMS 2
Manucci, S. LS 79
Manz, M. G. LS 118
Marafioti, T. LS 72, LS 109, LS 181
Marcinek, J. LS 42, LS 126, LS 154
Marconi, D. BMS 10
Marfak, A. LS 165
Marijić, B. BMS 31
Marin, D. LS 32
Marino, M. LS 145, LS 146
Marnissi, F. LS 120, LS 121
Marquard, L. LS 66
Marquina, B. LS 164
Marrella, V. LS 86
Martin-Garcia, N. LS 178
Martin-Leo H. LS 14, LS 16, LS 41
Martín-Pérez, D. LS 58
Martin-Subero, J. I. LS 14
Martin, C. A. LS 135
Martin, P. LS 114
Martinengo, C. LS 163
Martínez-Benítez, B. LS 164
Martinez, A. BMS 15, LS 7, LS 39
Martinez, D. LS 39
Martinez, M. A. LS 37, LS 55, LS 60
254 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Martínez, N. LS 37, LS 55, LS 58, LS 60,
LS 177
Martucci, R. LS 145, LS 146
Mas, L. LS 110
Masahiro, H. LS 12
Mashali, N. LS 5
Mason, D. LS 109
Mason, D. Y. LS 72
Mate, J. L. LS 39
Matolcsy, A. LS 8, LS 111, LS 143
Mattsson, G. LS 109
Matutes, E. BMS 15
Maubec, E. LS 148
Maura, R. LS 54
Maurer, M. LS 132
Maurer, R. LS 83
Mazorra, P. LS 60
McKenzie, C. LS 170
Medeiros, L. J. LS 96, LS 147
Medinger, M. BMS 12
Meijer, J. LS 103
Mekhelef- Itatahine, K. LS 102
Mellink, C. H. M. LS 49
Menasce, L. LS 124, LS 125, LS 134
Menestrina, F. LS 106
Merli, F. LS 15
Merup, M. LS 119
Meseure, D. LS 77
Mestre, F. LS 53
Mestre, M. J. LS 56
Metwally, R. LS 180
Metzger, M. BMS 28
Meyer zum Bueschenfelde, C. BMS 8
Michieli, M. LS 31
Michiels, J. BMS 29
Mickys, U. LS 88
Mihaljevic, B. BMS 23, LS 173
Milli, A. LS 22
Milpied, P. LS 100
Mitrovic, Z. LS 113
Moch, H. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Mokhtar, D. BMS 9
Molina, T. LS 129
Molina, T. J. LS 161
Mollejo, M. LS 60
Mollejo, Ma. LS 37, LS 55
Möller, P. LS 93
Montalbán, C. LS 53, LS 60
Montante-Montes, de O. D. LS 164
Montes-Moreno, S. LS 52, LS 56, LS 57,
LS 60, LS 61, LS 81, LS 157
Montes, J. LS 110
Montes, S. LS 114
Montresor, M. LS 106
Montserrat, E. LS 7, LS 100, LS 149, LS 174
Montserrat, E. LS 18
Moreau, A. LS 107
Morente, M. M. LS 53
Morettini, F. LS 17
Morice, W. G. LS 47
Moro, A. BMS 22
Morris, T. C. M. LS 48
Morschhauser, F. LS 129
Morton, L. LS 132
Mosna, F. LS 152, LS 168
Mozos, A. LS 19, LS 39
Møller, M. B. LS 2
Mrhalova, M. LS 126
Muenst, S. LS 59
Müller-Hermelink, H.-K. LS 40, LS 43,
LS 44, LS 45, LS 64, LS 74
Murray, P. G. LS 68
Mwanda, W. LS 79
Načinović-Duletić, A. BMS 31
Nadarjan, V. LS 99
Nagai, T. LS 90
Nair, R. BMS 26
Nair, S. BMS 26
Nam-Cha, S. H. LS 52, LS 61
Nanaji, N. BMS 21
Narbaitz, M. I. LS 135
Naresh, K. N. LS 124, LS 125, LS 134
Natkunam, Y. LS 132, LS 136
Navarro, A. LS 19
Nayak , N. BMS 26
Nesland, J. M. LS 69
Neuberg, D. S. LS 76
Nguyen, M. LS 147
Nicholson, A. G. LS 40
Niculescu Mizil, E. LS 140
Nikulshin, S. LS 88
Nola, M. LS 113
Norton, A. J. LS 44
Notarangelo, L. D. LS 84, LS 86
Novaković, S. LS 101
Nyagol, J. LS 78, LS 79
O’Malley, D. P. LS 133, LS 169
Oberley, T. D. LS 2
Obermann, E. C. LS 46
Odum, N. LS 87
Oker, E. LS 116
Olive, D. LS 108
Onnis, A. LS 70, LS 78, LS 79, LS 155
Orazi, A. BMS 21
Ott, G. BMS 25, LS 43, LS 44, LS 45, LS 64,
LS 74
Ouyang, J. LS 76
Ozsan, N. LS 144, LS 160
Palmer, T. LS 170
Pals, S. LS 93, LS 99
Palummo, N. LS 118
Panayotidis, P. BMS 32
Pangalis, G. A. BMS 32, LS 153, LS 166
Pantoula, P. BMS 14, LS 65
Papadaki, E. BMS 17, BMS 18
Papadaki, H. BMS 19
Papadaki, T. BMS 16, BMS 17, BMS 18,
BMS 19, LS 166
Papadantonakis, A. LS 145
Papanikolaou, A. BMS 18
Parasi-Ismailou, A. BMS 14, LS 65
Parisi, A. LS 22, LS 36
Park, S. LS 30
Parolini, C. LS 36
Parrens, M. LS 14, LS 131, LS 165
Pascual, A. LS 127, LS 128
Pascutto, C. BMS 5
Pasini, E. LS 50
Pasquarella, A. LS 17
Passamont, F. BMS 5
Patel, R. BMS 20, BMS 30
Paterakis, G. BMS 19
Paterson, J. LS 72
Paterson, J. C. LS 181
Patsouris, E. BMS 32, LS 96, LS 166
Patti, C. LS 15
Paulli, M. BMS 5
Pavan, A. LS 33, LS 34
Payne, K. LS 158, LS 159
Pedersen, N. T. LS 92
Perea, G. BMS 15
Pérez Guillermo, M. LS 56
Pérez-Galán, P. LS 100, LS 149
Perin, T. LS 31, LS 32, LS 33, LS 34
Perker, M. BMS 8
Perkins, S. L. LS 133
Perrone- Donnorso, R. LS 145, LS 146
Perunicic Jovanovic, M. BMS 23
Peter Collins, V. LS 40
Petersen, J. H. LS 92
Peterson, P. LS 86
Petit, B. LS 130, LS 131, LS 165, LS 178
Petrella, T. LS 129, LS 148
Petrusevska, G. LS 171
Pfreundschuh, M. LS 138, LS 143
Philip, G. LS 51
Philip, W. LS 54
Pich, A. BMS 6
Picquenot, J. M. LS 129
Pier Paolo, P. LS 54
Piero, T. LS 78
Pileri, S. BMS 15, LS 15, LS 18, LS 54,
LS 72
Pileri, S. A. LS 13, LS 40, LS 46, LS 181
Pillai, N. LS 109
Piris, M. A. LS 37, LS 52, LS 53, LS 55,
LS 57, LS 58, LS 61, LS 81,
LS 175, LS 177
Pisani, F. LS 145
Pisano, D. G. LS 37, LS 55, LS 177
Plank, L. LS 42, LS 126, LS 154
Poliani, L. LS 50
Poliani, P. L. LS 84, LS 86
Poncini, D. LS 83
Pontikoglou, C. BMS 19
Ponzoni, M. BMS 15, LS 38, LS 50
Poppema, S. LS 93, LS 94
Porcasi, R. BMS 13
Porwit, A. LS 68, LS 162
Post, G. R. LS 89
J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256 255
Pouliou, E. BMS 16
Poulsen, C. B. LS 66
Prause, J. U. LS 92
Prieto, M. LS 19
Probst-Hensch, N. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Provencio, M. LS 114
Puig, X. LS 19
Purdy, K. BMS 24
Pyrovolaki, K. BMS 19
Quachouh, M. LS 115
Quelen, C. LS 1
Quessar, A. LS 115, LS 117, LS 120, LS 121
Quintanilla-Martinez, L. BMS 8, LS 167
Rabinovich, G. A. LS 76
Racanelli, V. LS 34
Rachid, M. LS 120
Radford, J. LS 40
Radman, I. LS 113
Radvanyi, F. LS 178
Rainey, A. LS 51
Ralfkiaer, E. LS 66, LS 87, LS 92
Ramos, R. LS 53, LS 157
Ranchère, D. LS 179
Rashed, R. BMS 2
Rassidakis, G. Z. LS 62, LS 91, LS 96,
LS 147
Ravanini, M. LS 84, LS 86
Raymakers, R. LS 20, LS 73
Reijmers, R. LS 93, LS 99
Reiniger, L. LS 8, LS 111, LS 143
Remstein, E. D. LS 35, LS 47
Renné, C. LS 41
Renner, C. LS 82, LS 83, LS 85
Repsilber, D. LS 143
Riemke, J. LS 14
Riera, L. BMS 6
Rigacci, L. LS 15
Righi, S. LS 13
Rimsza, L. M. LS 43, LS 44
Rinalducci, S. LS 22
Rizk, S. H. BMS 9
Robetorye, R. S. LS 49
Robson, A. LS 148
Rodig, S. J. LS 76
Rodriguez-Pina, S. M. LS 177
Rodriguez-Pinilla, S.-M. LS 56, LS 81
Rodriguez, A. LS 177
Rodriguez, E. LS 37, LS 55
Rodriguez, H. LS 60
Rodriguez, J. LS 53
Roehle, A. LS 143
Roifman, C. M. LS 84
Rombout, P. LS 20, LS 75
Roncador, G. LS 7, LS 61, LS 63, LS 157
Rosati, S. LS 98, LS 99, LS 137, LS 139
Rosenwald, A. BMS 25, LS 18, LS 19,
LS 22, LS 43, LS 44, LS 45, LS 64
Rossi, G. LS 50
Rossi, J. F. LS 67
Rothman, N. LS 132
Roué, G. LS 100, LS 149
Rousselet, M. C. LS 107
Rousset, T. LS 67
Royo, C. LS 174
Rozman, M. BMS 15, LS 18
Ruiz-Marcellan, M. C. LS 60
Rumi, E. BMS 5
Sachanas, S. LS 166
Sachdev, R. BMS 4
Saez, A. LS 60
Safali, M. LS 105
Said, J. LS 133
Saifi, M. LS 67
Salamero, O. LS 18
Salar, A. LS 53
Salas, C. LS 114
Salaverria, I. LS 19, LS 43, LS 44, LS 174
Salcedo, M. T. LS 52
Salles, G. A. LS 161
Salpeas, V. BMS 32, LS 166
Sanchez-Beato, M. LS 2, LS 37, LS 55,
LS 58, LS 177
Sánchez-Espiridion, B. LS 53
Sanchez-Verde, L. LS 57, LS 61, LS 81
Sánchez, E. LS 58
Sanchez, L. LS 60
Sander, B. LS 119, LS 162
Sansonno, S. LS 33, LS 34
Santón, A. LS 127, LS 128
Sapia, S. LS 135
Sapru, K. BMS 24
Save, V. LS 158
Saydam, G. LS 144
Scardoni, M. LS 106
Scarpa, A. LS 106, LS 152, LS 168
Schaerer, S. LS 82
Schakel, R. N. LS 93
Schlette, E. J. LS 62
Schmitt-Graeff, A. H. BMS 28
Schmitt, C. LS 178
Schmitt, S. LS 74
Schraders, M. LS 20
Schurfeld, K. LS 79
Schuuring, Ed. LS 98, LS 99
Sebban, C. LS 179
Sehested, M. LS 66
Sehn, L. LS 63
Seiler, C. LS 80
Seili-Bekafigo, I. BMS 31
Serour, A. LS 5
Serrano, S. LS 18, LS 53
Severa, D. LS 119
Severson, R. LS 132
Shabani-Rad, M.-T. BMS 30
Shafi, N. BMS 3
Shi, J. BMS 1
Shimada, S. LS 90
Shipp, M. A. LS 76
Siebert, R. LS 14, LS 141
Simona, R. LS 54
Simons, A. LS 73
Simula, M. P. LS 32, LS 33
Sismondi, F. BMS 6
Sista, M. T. LS 15
Sjö, L. D. LS 92
Sjöberg, J. LS 68
Skoda, R. BMS 12
Slager , S. LS 132
Smardova, J. LS 64
Smith, C. I. E. LS 162
Snyder, M. LS 133
Soilleux, E. J. LS 51
Solé, F. LS 18
Soliman, A. H. BMS 2
Soubeyran, I. LS 107, LS 131, LS 165
Soutar, D. LS 114
Spasevska, L. LS 171
Spina, M. LS 31
Spithoven, E. LS 137
Stamatopoulos, K. BMS 16, BMS 19
Stamatoullas, A. LS 129
Staudt, L. M. LS 44
Stavroyianni, N. BMS 16, BMS 19
Stelitano, C. LS 15
Stephanoudaki, E. BMS 17, BMS 18
Stevens-Kroef, M. LS 73
Štifter, S. BMS 31
Stöcklein, H. LS 64
Stoia, R. LS 140
Stucki, V. LS 83
Suat-Cheng, P. LS 11
Sundram, U. N. BMS 4
Swerdlow, S. LS 18
Szepe, P. LS 42, LS 126, LS 154
Szepesi, Á. LS 8, LS 111
Tabilio, A. LS 168
Talmant, P. LS 107
Tamvakos, H. LS 65
Tan, L. H. C. LS 9, LS 10
Tan, L.P. LS 93, LS 99
Tao, M. LS 10
Tatic, A. LS 140
Tauzin, S. LS 27
Tedesco, F. BMS 10
Temmins, C. LS 136
Tepeoglu, M. LS 176
Ternullo, M. P. BMS 13
Teruya-Feldstein, J. LS 39
Terzić, T. BMS 7, BMS 23, LS 173
Tezcan, G. LS 29
Thibult, M. L. LS 108
Thielen, C. LS 172
Thiesse, P. LS 179
Thomas, E. LS 178
Thorborg, T. LS 2
Thorns, C. LS 143
Tichelli, A. BMS 12
Tigaud, I. LS 179
Tilly, H. LS 161
256 J Hematopathol (2008) 1:161–256
Timár, B. LS 8
Timperio, A. M. LS 36
Tojo, M. LS 175
Tombuloglu, M. LS 144
Tondat, F. LS 163
Tongson-Ignacio, J. LS 23
Tooze, R. LS 157
Torchio, P. LS 15
Tosi, G. M. LS 70
Tosi, P. LS 17, LS 118
Traggiai, E. LS 118
Trajkovski, Z. LS 171
Trassard, M. LS 77
Travaglino, E. BMS 5
Trentin, L. LS 15
Tripodo, C. BMS 10, BMS 13
Troadec, E. LS 165
Trøen, G. LS 69
Tsao, L. BMS 11
Tumwine, L. K. LS 13
Turner, S. LS 109
Tussiwand, R. LS 118
Twohig, M. LS 2
Tzankov, A. BMS 12, LS 46, LS 59
Tzenou, T. BMS 32
Uner, A. LS 28, LS 97, LS 105
Ursuleac, I. LS 140
Valdivieso, N. LS 110
Valković, T. BMS 31
van Altena, M. C. LS 75
van Cleef, P. LS 78
van de Rijn, M. LS 181
van den Berg, A. LS 93, LS 94, LS 98,
LS 99
van den Bosch, C. A. LS 71
van Dongen, J. J. M. LS 21
van Imhoff, G. LS 98, LS 99
van Krieken, H. LS 78
van Krieken, J. H. J. M. LS 20, LS 21,
LS 73, LS 75, LS 103
Van Marion, A. BMS 29
van Nierop, S. LS 139
van Raaij, A. W. M. LS 106
van Rijk, A. LS 78
Vassilakopoulos, T. BMS 32, LS 166
Vassilakopoulos, T. P. LS 153
Vega, F. LS 91
Vekhoff, A. LS 129
Vela-Chávez, T. LS 167
Vener, C. BMS 22
Venkatraman, L. LS 48, LS 123, LS 158
Vico, E. LS 146
Viejo, A. LS 133, LS 133
Villa, A. LS 84, LS 86
Villamor, N. LS 7, LS 18, LS 19, LS 100,
LS 149
Villuendas, R. LS 37, LS 55, LS 177
Visser, L. LS 94, LS 137
Vitolo, U. LS 15
Voena, C. LS 163
Volavšek, M. LS 95
Volinia, S. LS 155
Vornanen, M. LS 16
Vos, H. LS 137
Wahab, N. A. BMS 2
Wainscoat, J. LS 181
Wang, M. LS 99, LS 137
Wang, S. LS 132
Wang, X. LS 119, LS 162
Wartenberg, M. BMS 25
Watkins, A. J. LS 122
Waxman, I. LS 80
Weisenburger, D. D. LS 2, LS 43,
LS 44
Wel-Masry, M. BMS 9
Wendelboe, H. G. LS 109
Went, P. LS 45
Wessendorf, S. LS 64
West, R. B. LS 181
Willemze, R. LS 148
Willenbrock, K. LS 41
Woetmann, A. LS 87
Woodward, J. LS 123, LS 158
Wotherspoon, A. LS 122
Wotherspoon, A. C. LS 40
Wright, P. LS 159
Xerri, L. LS 108, LS 129
Xyristaki, S. BMS 14
Yang, S.-F. LS 3
Ye, H. LS 40, LS 158
Ye, H. T. LS 122
Young, A. H. LS 2
Young, K. H. LS 2
Zafirovski, G. LS 171
Žákovičová, A. LS 42
Zamiati, S. LS 115, LS 117, LS 120, LS 121,
LS 150
Zamò, A. LS 22, LS 36, LS 106, LS 152
Zanella, A. BMS 22
Zanetto, U. LS 135
Zeng, Q. LS 158
Zettl, A. LS 43, LS 44
Zevallos-Giampietri, E. LS 110
Zhang, K. BMS 1
Zhao, S. LS 136
Zhao, X. LS 23
Zhou, M. LS 25
Ziepert, M. LS 138, LS 143
Zihler, D. LS 46
Zinzani, P. L. LS 15
Zolla, L. LS 22, LS 36
Zucchetto, A. BMS 10
Zum Bueschenfelde, C. M. BMS 25
Zupo, S. LS 152
