LOCALIZATION OF IMMUNOLOGICAL COMPLEXES FIXING fifo
(C3) IN GERMINAL CENTERS OF LYMPH NODES*
BY K. J. GAJL-PECZALSKA,$M.D., A. J. FISH,§ M.D., H. J. MEUWISSEN,[[ M.D.,
D. FROMMEL,¶ M.D., ANDR. A. GOOD,**M.D.
(From the Pediatric Research Laboratories of the Variety Club Heart Hospital,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455)
(Received for publication 30 June 1969)
Germinal centers of lymphoid follicles, first described in 1885 as sites of
proliferation of lymphocytes, have been intensively studied over the past 15
years (14, 75). Although it has bee~ generally accepted that germinal centers
play an important role in immunological defense, their precise function is not
well known.
Antigen localization within germinal centers after primary and secondary im-
munization has been shown by many authors, using immunofluorescent and radio-
autographic techniques (1, 2, 17, 38, 42, 51, 56). These and more recent studies,
employing electron microscopy (52), have suggested that localization of antigen in
germinal centers occurs on the surface of dendritic processes of reticulum cells. These
dendritic processes in turn are in intimate contact with lymphocytes and blastoid
ceils (52). The lymphocytes in germinal centers, many of which are actively repli-
caring cells, have been regarded as precursors of plasma cells (21, 34-37, 80), or
possible "memory cells" (12, 73, 76, 77).
Other authors have described the presence and production of immunoglobulins and
antibodies in germinal centers (8, 15, 16, 45, 49, 59, 80, 81). However, Pernis has sub-
mitted evidence that at least some of the immunoglobullns present in germinal
centers are not synthesized locally (61).
Germinal centers have been associated with antibody and immunoglobulin pro-
duction in other ways. Germinal centers and plasma cells are regularly absent from
lymph nodes, spleen, appendix, and tonsils of patients with the Bruton-type sex-
linked form of hypogammaglobullnemia (28, 30, 33). When their development in the
*These investigations were supported by grants from the American Heart Association,
The National Foundation-March of Dimes, and the U.S. Public Health Service (AI-08677
and NB-02042).
:~Postdoctoral Fellow of the U.S. Public Health Service (international fellowship Fo5-
TW01270).
§Established Investigator of the AmericanHeart Association.
IfCareer Development Awardeeof the U.S. Public Health Service.
¶ Postdoctoral Fellow of the U.S. Public Health Service (cardiovascular training grant
HE-05222).
**AmericanLegion Memorial Heart Research Professor of Pediatrics and Microbiology.
1367
1368 ~]C ]~IXATION IN LYMPH NODE GER3//NAL CENTERS
chicken is experimentally prevented by sublethal irradiation and with extirpation
of the bursa of Fabricius at hatching, 19S and 7S immunoglobulin synthesis and an-
tibody formation are ablated (9, 19). Similarly, extirpation of the bursa in ~o alone,
when carried out sufficiently early in development (e.g. after 15-17 days of incuba-
tion), will prevent IgG and IgM synthesis and destroy the ability to form plasma
cells and germinal centers (9). Finally, bursectomy alone in 18 or 19 day old chick em-
bryos prevents germinal center formation and 7S IgG synthesis, although plasma
cell development and IgM production are not impaired (18).
Similar distribution of antigen and antibody in germinal centers was shown using
radioautography and immunofluorescence techniques (4, 47, 82). Complement or
complement components, however, have never been shown to be present within
germinal centers. Indeed, Pernis and collaborators have presented data indicating
that tim-globulin component of complement (54) is regularly absent from germinal
centers even though immunoglobulins and antigen are demonstrable (62). They con-
cluded from their observations that antigen-antibody complexes present in germinal
centers are, for reasons as yet poorly understood, unable to bind complementin vivo.
It was the purpose of our study to analyze this question further. We present
data which show that antigen, immunoglobulins (IgG and IgM), antibody, and
/~1care localized within germinal centers, and that all these components have a
similar distribution within these sites. It appears likely that IgG, IgM, and/~le
are not synthesized by cells in the germinal centers, but are deposited there as
antigen-antibody complexes with/~xc. We have achieved complete elution of
IgG, IgM,/~1c, and antigen (bovine serum albumin, BSA) from the germinal
centers in the rabbit. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the capacity of the
complexes in germinal centers of the rabbit to fix heterologous (human) comple-
ment. These data present strong evidence that antigen-antibody complexes
within germinal centers fix/~xo component of complement in vivo. There is indi-
cation that antigen-antibody complexes in germinal centers are located on the
surface of cells, presumably dendritic macrophages; from this extraceUular site
complexes can be readily removed by standard elution procedures.
Materials and Methods
Patients.--28 lymph nodes from 26 patients on the pediatrie, surgical, and medical ser-
vices of the University of Minnesota Hospitals, obtained at surgery or at autopsy (no later
than 6 hr after death), were investigated. The diagnosesof the patients from whom lymph
nodes wereobtained differedwidely, but the grossappearance and general histologicalarchi-
tecture of the lymph nodesused in this study werenormal and revealedno evidenceof malig-
nant infiltration or pathologicaldistortion.
Animals.--60 New 7_~alandwhite rabbits weighing approximately 5-6 lb. were obtained
from a singlebreeder, housed in metal cages,and provided with tap water and Purina rabbit
pellets ad libitum. The rabbits were divided into three groups treated as follows.
Group I: Rabbits immunized with Brucella antigen; A. Popliteal lymph node stimulation: 12
rabbits were immunized initially with Brucella antigen (U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.); 2 X 1010killedBrucdla cells (0.1 nil) were mixedin an equal volume of
complete Freund's adjuvant and injected subcutaneously into a singlefoot pad. 3 wk later
GAJL-PECZALSKA, I~ISH, M~UWISSEN, FROM'~n~.L, AND GOOD 1369
0.I ml containing2 X 101°Br~e~a organisms without adjuvant was injectedinto the same
foot pad in six of the rabbits.Popliteallymph nodes from both ipsilateraland contralateral
sideswere removed afterdeath and examined at varying intervalsafterboth primary and
secondary immunization.
Group I; B. Preauricular lympk node stimulation: 24 rabbits were imm,lni~J~l by intra-
dermal injection of Brucdla antigen in two sites on the mid-dorsal aspect of the right ear.
Preauricular lymph nodes were removed from rabbits killed at intervals following primary
and secondary antigenic stimulation.
12 rabbits were immunized by intradermal injection of 1 X 101° Brucella cells (0.05 ml)
mixed with 0.05 ml of complete Freund's adjuvant. 2 wk later eight of these rabbits were given
the same amount of Brucdla antigen in saline without adjuvant, injected intradermally into
the same ear.
12 rabbits were immunized with i X 1010Brucellacells in saline intradermally in the right
ear as above, and eight of these rabbits received a second, similar intradermal injection of
Brucellaantigen 2 wk later.
In each subgroup rabbits were killed on days 5 and 7 after primary stimulation (four ani-
mals) and on days 5, 10, 15, and 20 after secondary stimulation (eight animals).
Group II: Rabbitsimrauni~edwithbovineserum albumin: 24 rabbits were immunized with
BSA (Armour Pharmaceutical Company, Kankakee, Ill.) diluted in normal saline. Each rabbit
was given 2 nag BSA in 0.1 ml of saline in divided doses intradermally in the ear as described
above. 25 days later 12 of the animals were given 1 nag of BSA in 0.1 ml of saline intrader-
really in the same ear. These rabbits were killed on days 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, and 20 after either
primary or secondary immunization.
Group 1II: Controlnonimmunized rabbits:Nine rabbits, housed under similar conditions,
were not immunized and served as controls. These animals were killed, and the popliteal
lymph nodes from four rabbits and preanricular lymph nodes from five rabbits were removed.
Lymph nodes were prepared for study by routine histological methods and immunofluo-
rescence.
Immunofluorescence.--Human and rabbit lymph nodes were quick-frozen in isopentane,
cooled in liquid nitrogen, and sectioned in a Lipshaw cryostat at --30°C, using a method
standard in our laboratory (22, 50). Serial frozen sections were fixed in acetone and stained
with fluorescein-labeled antisera at room temperature by the method of Mellors (48). Sped-
ficity of the staining reactions was determ~ed by absorption of the fluorescein-lsbeled anti-
sera with its appropriate antigen.
Elution Studies of Tissue Sections.--Elution of hymen and rabbit lymph node tissue sec-
tions was performed by incubation at room temperature for 2-2.5 hr, using 0.05 K citrate-
buffered saline, pH 3.3. Control sections were incubated for the same period of time in phos-
phate-buffered saline, pH 7.35, along with serial sections stained without incubation.
Human Plasma Protein Antigens,--Human plasma protein antigens, IgG, /Sic-globulin,
fihrinogen, and albumin were prepared by methods previously described by Michael et al.
from our laboratory (50). In addition, human ~lc-globulin was absorbed on zymosan particles
using the method of Mardiney and Miiller-Eberhard (46). Human IgM isolated by the method
of Chaplin et al. (11) was generously donated by Dr. Richard Hong, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Minnesota.
Animal Plasma Protein Antigen~.--Rabbit IgG was isolated by column chromatography
on DEAE-cellulose, and the Fc fragment used for immunization in goats was prepared by
papain digestion (64) with the minor modifications of Ishizaka et al. (41). Rabbit IgM was
isolated from sera harvested from rabbits stimulated with endotoxin by the method of Small
and Lamm (66) and purified by the method of Chaplin et al. (11). Rabbit flxo-globniin was
absorbed on zymosan particles using the method of Mardiney and Mtiller-Eberhard (46).
1370 ~1C FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
Goat IgG was prepared by chromatography on DEAE-Seplmdex using 0.01 n phosphate
buffer, pH 6.5.
Rabbit a~M was isolated by the following procedure. 350 ml of normal rabbit serum was
centrifuged at 63,000 g for 20 hr in a Spinco ultracentrifuge. The protein pellet obtained was
combined and suspended in saline and recentrifuged at 40,000 g for 18 hr, and the resulting
protein pellet was resuspended in a few drops of sodium barbital buffer (ionic strength 0.05,
pH 6.8) and subjected to starch block electrophoresis for 18 hr at 4°C. Protein fractions from
the eluted sections of the starch block which contained anodal migrating proteins and were
shown by gel diffusion to be free of rabbit IgM were pooled and applied to a Sephadex G-200
column, using 0.1 • sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.0, containing0.2 Msodium chloride. The first
peak, containing heavy molecular weight material, shown to contain pure rabbit Ot2Mas de-
termined by aerylamide gel electrophoresis and double diffusion analysis,was used for immuni-
zation. Rabbit fibrinogenwas isolated using the method of BlomW~ckand Blomb~ick (5), and
was generously provided by Dr. Roger Herdman, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota.
Preparation of Antisera .for Immunofluoreseence Studies.--Antisera against human IgG,
fibrin,~lc, albumin,and goat IgG were prepared in rabbits as previouslydescribed by Michael
et al. (50). Antiserum against human IgM was prepared in goats and generously provided by
Dr. Richard Hong.
Antisera against rabbit Ot2M,rabbit/3to-globulin,and rabbit fibrinwere prepared in guinea
pigs, and antisera against rabbit Fc fragment and rabbit IgM were prepared in goats. Antibody
against BSA was prepared in rabbits (22, 50). All antisem were tested against normal human
sera and normal rabbit sera and shown to be monospecific with the exception of the anti°
fibrin antisera, which showed, besides the fibrin line, two or three additional fines to other
serum proteins (these antisera were absorbed subsequently as described below). Immuno-
electrophoretic analysis, kindly performed by Dr. Clark West, demonstrated that the anti-
serum prepared by immunizationwith purified/$to contained antibody activity against both
the A and B antigens of f~xc-globnlin, whereas the antiserum obtained by immunizationwith
/$10 absorbed on zymosan particles contained only the A antigen; neither of these antisera
contained any detectable antibody activity to the a2D antigen (79). All antisera were pre-
cipitated with ammonium sulfate as previously described, and the IgG fraction was obtained
by chromatography on DEAE-cellulose (67). This fraction was tagged with fluorescein iso-
thlocyanate, using between 0.015 and 0.018 mg of fluorescein isothiocyanate/mg of protein.
The mixture was chromatographed again on DEAE-celiuloseand eluted in a stepwise fashion,
using increasing concentrations of sodium chloride, by the method of Cebra and Goldstein
(10, 83). Protein peaks with fluorescein/protein ratios of 5.0-9.0 X 10-3, found to give low
background and a high degree of specific staining, were used in these studies. The fluorescein-
labeled proteins were adjusted to a concentrationvarying between 0.5 and 2.0 mg/ml and used
in direct staining procedures.
For the detection of rabbit IgG only, indirect stainingwas employed, using first goat anti-
rabbit Fc, followed by application of a second layer of fluorescein-labeled rabbit anti-goat
IgG antiserum (48).
Goat anti-human IgM and goat anti-rabbit IgM labeled antisera were absorbed prior to
staining, using 1 mg of purified human IgG and 1 rag of purified rabbit IgG, respectively, per
milliliter of fluorescein-labeled antiserum. Similarly, the rabbit anti-human fibrin antiserum
and the guineapig anti-rabbit fibrin antiserum were absorbed with 1 mg of lyophllized normal
human serum and normal rabbit serum, respectively.
In addition to demonstration of the staining specificity of the rabbit anti-human /~1c
antiserum by absorption with purified fllC antigen (kindiy provided by Dr. H. J. Miiller-
Eberhard), the antiserum was absorbed with human fllc bound on BSA-anti BSA complexes,
GAfL-PECZALSKA, FISH, M~UWISSEN, FROMM~.L, AND GOOD 1371
which resulted in completeinhibitionof staining. (Similarabsorptionwith BSA--anti BSA
complexeswhich had beenincubated with fresh human serum in the presenceof EDTA, as
well as absorptionwith BSA-anti BSA complexeswithout human/510,did motinhibit posi-
tive staining.)
Fixation of HeterologousHuman Complonent.--Sectionsof the same rabbit lymph nodes
with germinal centers positive for 3xc, BSA, and immunoglobulinswere incubated for 30
rain at 37°Cwith fresh human serumdiluted 1:5 in phosphate-bufferedsaline.Serialcontrol
sectionsof the samenode wereincubated with the same human serum inactivated at 56°(2,
or with salinealone.The three incubatedpreparationswerethen stained simultaneouslywith
fluorescentlabeledantisera to human fllc, IgM, and IgG.
Rouline Hiatology.--Serialcryostat sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
Part of eachlymphnodewas alsofixedin phosphate-bufferedformalin,embeddedin paraffin,
and stained with hematoxylinand eosin.
P~SU!,TS
Human Lymph Nodes.--fllo, IgM, and IgG in germinal centers were found in 21
of the 28 human lymph nodes studied. When examined in serial sections, the
distribution of the/31c component of complement was identical with that ob-
served for IgMand IgG (Figs. 3 and 4).
Well-developed germinal centers, strongly fluorescent when stained with anti-
/31o, usually showed a strong fluorescence with both anti-IgG and anti-IgM.
When/310 staining was weak, with a delicate reticular pattern, staining with
anti-IgM was often more prominent than was staining for IgG. Usually these
lymph nodes contained larger numbers of plasma cells, especially immature
plasma cells producing IgM. Fibrin was present in lymphoid follicles of very
congested lymph nodes only, and its distribution was completely different from
that of IgG, IgM, and/310 (Fig. 5). Albumin was never observed in the lymphoid
follicles investigated. Treatment of unfixed sections with citrate buffer at low
pH resulted in marked diminution of IgG and IgM, and only some reduction of
14 mesenteric lymph nodes, seven mediastinal lymph nodes, and seven axil-
lary and inguinal nodes were examined; the diagnoses of the patients from whom
these nodes were obtained are shown in Table I. In 12 of the 14 mesenteric
lymph nodes, fllo, IgG, and IgM were present in germinal centers. The remain-
ing two lymph nodes examined, which lacked/31o, IgG, and IgM, were obtained
from a 1 day old infant and a 27 year old agammaglobnlinemic patient with a
normal serum level of complement. Six of the seven inguinal and axillary lymph
nodes contained germinal centers positive for Blo, IgG, and IgM. Three were
obtained from patients with fataI granulomatous disease (32), and three had
been stimulated with antigens to study antibody responses for diagnostic pur-
poses. The single negative lymph node was obtained from the inguinal region of
a healthy 9 year old girl who had received no stimulation. The node was ob-
tained as a source of lymphoid cells to be given along with a bone
marrow transplant to an hypogammaglobulinemic sibling. Three of seven
1372 ~lC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
mediastinal lymph nodes were found to have germinal centers positive for ~1c,
Ig6, and IgM. In each of these patients inflammatory changes were demon-
strated in the lungs at autopsy.
TABLE I
lxcdi~agon of ~tc IgG,and IgM in GerminalCengersof Human Lymph Nodes
Presence
of#tO,Patient Age Diagnosis Lymph node i~gl~
1 day Respiratory distress syndrome Mesenteric --
8 months Hypogammaglobulinemia (an- AxiUary +
tigen stimulation)
1 yr Immunological deficiency dis- Axillary +
ease (antigen stimniation)
1~ yr Congenital heart disease
2 yr Hydrocephalus
5 yr Fatal granulomatous disease
1. S.B.
2. E. F.
3. D.H.
4. s. ol
S. J. R.
6. G.H.
7. M.W. 5 yr Aplastic anemia
8. G.J. 8 yr Mental deficiency
9. J.R. 9 yr Healthy (cell donor)
10. T.H. 11 yr Fatal granulomatous disease
11. G.R. 12 yr Brain tumor
12. B.B. 14 yr Diabetes mellitus
13. J.K. 27 yr Breton-type hypogamnmglob-
ulinemia
14. J. McD. 35 yr Fatal granulomatous disease (?)
15. P.A. 40 yr Aplastic anemia
16. A.W. 42 yr Liver cirrhosis
17. M.N. 43 yr Diabetes mellitus, pneumonitis
18. H.H. 52 yr Hypogamnmglobulinemia (an-
tigen stimulation)
19. B.H. 53 yr Cardiac infarct
20. G.H. 57 yr Peritonitis
21. G.S. 58 yr Perforated gastric ulcer
22. L.C. 59 yr Cardiac surgery
23. L. R' 61 yr Rectal carcinoma, pneumonitis
24. D.W. 63 yr Cardiac failure, pneumonitis
25. F.A. 70 yr Parkinson's disease
26. A.L. 72 yr Pituitary adenoma
Mesenteric +
Mesenteric +
Inguinal +
Mesenteric +
Mesenteric +
Mesenteric +
Inguinal
Inguinal +
Mesenteric +
Mesenteric +
Mesenteri¢
Mediastinal --
Inguinal +
Mesenteric +
Mediastinal --
Mediastinal +
Inguinal +
Mesenteric -{-
Mesenteric +
Mesenteric +
Mediastinal --
Mediastinal +
Mediastinal +
Mesenteric +
Mediastinal --
Lymph Node,s in ExperimontalJy Stlmulated Rabbits.--
Group 1,4: Popliteal lymph node stimulation with Brucella: Results of stimula-
tion of lymph nodes with Brucella by the foot pad route were inconclusive, since
early prominent formation of germinal centers in popliteal lymph nodes on the
unstimulated side and well-developed germinal centers in unstimulated control
GAJL-PECZALSKA~ ~ISII~MEUWISSEN~ ]~RO~L~ AND GOOD 1373
animals were observed. This finding suggested that very frequentlyspontaneous
stimulation of popliteal lymph nodes had occurred, perhaps because of infection
after superficial trauma. Both ipsilateral and contralateral nodes seemed to be
stimulated, and even nodes of control animals often contained numerous ger-
minal centers. To relate the germinal center response more certainly to defined
antigenic stimulation, we turned to analysis of the response of preauricular
nodes after intradermal injection of antigen into the ear.
Group IB: Preauricular lymph nodestimulation with Brucella: On day 5 after
primary stimulation, it was possible to localize/3ao, IgM, and IgG within the
germinal centers of some follicles.The distribution of these proteins was always
similar, most frequentlyin the form of delicate lacy structures, or sometimes as
more granular accumulations. Lymph nodes stimulated with Brucella and
Freund's adjuvant always contained considerable amounts of red ceils in dis-
tended vessels, and featured more plasma ceilsthan did lymph nodes stimulated
with BruceUa alone. On the seventh day after primary stimulation the picture
was basically the same, with more numerous and better formed germinal centers
regularlycontaining/3xc, IgM, and IgG.
After secondary stimulation, well-formed germinal centers were found on day
5 in both groups of rabbits (stimulatedwith Brucdla and Freund's adjuvant and
with BruceUa alone). Approximately 30% of germinal centers contained fifo,
IgM, and IgG in a similar distribution. In contrast to the findings after primary
stimulation, no differences in the number of plasma cells in the lymph nodes
from these two groups of animals was apparent. The structure of lymph nodes
stimulated with Brucdla and Freund's adjuvant was not so well preserved as
that of nodes stimulated with Brucella in saline, because of accumulations of
many lipid-laden macrophages. The number of germinal centers positive for
~1c, IgG, and IgM increased on day 10 to approximately60%, and persisted at
this level when examined on days 15 and 20. Plasma cellswere numerous up to
15 days after secondary stimulation. Changes in preauricular lymph nodes on
both stimulated and unstimulated sides were similar, a finding we attributed to
the high doses of antigen used.
Group H: Rabbits immunized with BSA ; Germinal centers.The appearance of
BSA,/31c,and immunoglobulins in germinal centers (identified in serial sections
stained with hematoxylinand eosin) is shown in Figs. 1 and 2. The numbers ex-
press the mean percentage of positive germinal centers found in two rabbits
killed on the same day. Since the percentage of germinal centers positive for IgG
and IgM varied no more than 15% (usually less than 5%), we have combined
the data for IgG and IgM to simplify graphic representation.
After primary stimulation, the localization of /3xc and immunoglobullns
reached a peak between the fifth and 10th days and decreased gradually over
the ensuing 10 days. Maximal localization of BSA occurred in the germinal
centers on the 10th day after antigenic stimulation and decreased :in parallel
1374 ~IC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
with the other components (Fig. 1). A peak percentage of germinal centers posi-
tive for tim, BSA, and immtmoglobulins was reached on day 7 after secondary
stimulation. Subsequently the number of germinal centers positive for BSA
decreased significantly, in contrast to the percentage of germinal centers posi-
tive for ~1c and immunoglobulins, which persisted up to day 20 (Fig. 2).
ILl
l--
Z
ILl
.--I
Z
rr"
I..LI
(.9
LIJ
>
I--
0
0..
[=-
Z
l.iJ
£.)
l..d
IlL
"tO
6O
50
40
'°ilao i'
,o .~'
PRIMARY STIMULATION
°°°°°° "°.°° o
J !I
!
¢
i
so
s
t
I
........ IgM ~ IgG
.... BSA
-o
°°°%°.
"e.
"'. IgM8=IgG
~ °o
~ i C'~
IL.
%,
BSA "~
0 3 5 7 l0 IS 20
DAY
Fio. 1. Leeal~tion of/31c,immunoglobuHns,and antigen in rabbit lymph nodes after
primarystimulationwith BSA.
As in group I, there was a str~klng and consistent correlation between distri-
bution and appearance of specific staining for BSA,/~1c, IgG, and IgM in ger-
minal centers (Fig. 6-8). These deposits appeared to be located on the surface
of reticulum cells and on their dendritic processes, giving a characteristic retic-
ular or granular pattern. Similar staining with fluorescein-labeled BSA was
observed, which suggested that at least some of the immunoglobulins within
germinal centers possessed specific anti-BSA activity. As in the material from
human patients, the localization of fibrin was always different from that of fl~o,
IgM, and IgG and was observed primarily in lymph nodes with vascular conges-
GAJI,-PECZALSK.A, ~FISH, M~EUWISSEN~ XrROM3M~EL,AND GOOD 1375
tion. asM was not found in germinal centers. Deposits of the immune reactants
in germinal centers frequentlyshowed a "crescentic" distribution occupying an
area which was identified by light microscopy as a zone of lighter staining den-
dritic reticulum cellsand relativelyfew lymphoidcells (Fig. 9).
Or}
fY
LU
I--
Z
w 6o
0
-J
<~
z 50
fY
IJJ
40
LU
>
I--
-- 30U)
o
EL
~- 20
Z
bJ
0
n- I0
IJJ
EL
SECONDARY STIMULATION
........ IgM 81 lOG
70 ~IC
I .... esA
bgOmQQ
IgM 8~ IgG .e
o,***"
IC
I
I
t
I
I
I
I
I
t
I
t
!
%
%
%
BSA
I I ! I I I I
0 3 5 7 I0 15 20
DAY
Fro. 2. Localization of/~lC, immunoglobulins, and antigen in rabbit lymph nodes after
secondarystimulationwith BSA.
Elution Studies and Fixation of Heterologous Complement.--Treatment of
unfixed sections with citrate buffer at low pH resulted in complete elution of
immunoglobulins, /3xo, and BSA from rabbit lymph node germinal centers
(Fig. 10)./31o granules within macrophages in the medullary part of the node
were almost completely eluted as well. However, IgG and IgM within plasma
cells were not eluted (Fig. 11). No elution was observed in sections incubated
with sMine.
After exposure of rabbit lymph node sections to fresh human serum, it was
1376 ~IC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
possible to demonstrate specific fixation of heterologous complement in germinal
centers. Human/3~ was observed in the same distribution as rabbit/31o and
immunoglobulins (Fig. 12). Control sections incubated with heat-inactivated
human serum were negative, as were all sections stained for IgG and IgM.
In group II, preauricular lymph nodes on the unstimulated side often did not
show formation of germinal centers. When germinal centers were present, al-
though in very reduced numbers in the contralateral node, it was possible to
demonstrate IgG, IgM, and ~1c in the same area. In contrast to the ipsilateral
node, minimal deposits of BSA were present in the germinal centers of the con-
tralateral node,
Plasma Cd/s.--Plasma cells were most numerous on day 5 and were located
mainly in medullary cords, while later, at days 15 and 20, they accumulated
around secondary follicles, primarily adjacent to the medulla of the node.
L~mphocytes.--The lymphocytes in primary follicles, diffuse cortex, and
medullary cords showed faint cytoplasmic fluorescence with anti-IgG and anti-
IgM between days 3 and 7 after primary stimulation and on day 3 after second-
ary immunization (Fig. 13). (Similar, faintly fluorescent lymphocytes were
observed in human lymph nodes containing early germinal centers and numer-
ous immature plasma cells.) At later stages of lymph node stimulation, germinal
centers positive for ~1cand immunoglobulins were surrounded by an inner ring of
"dark" or nonstaining lymphocytes, and an outer ring of fluorescent lympho-
cytes and plasma cells (Fig. 14).
Eosi~wI~hils.--Eosinophils were often noted in maximal numbers on day 3
after both primary and secondary stimulation, and were located mainly at the
periphery of follicles and in meduUary regions of lymph nodes. Between days
7 and 10 after stimulation, the number of eosinophils decreased.
MacroI~hage.s.--Insome lymph nodes, mainly in the early period after stimu-
lation but infrequently as late as the 20th day, macrophages lining medullary
sinuses contained small, brightly fluorescent granules when stained for/3to.
Some of these macrophages contained other granules with orange-red auto-
fluorescence. It was ditticult to determine whether ~,c was located in the cyto-
plasm or on the surface of such ceils. In a single rabbit, on day 3 after primary
stimulation, small granules of BSA were observed within macrophages in the
medullary part of the lymph node. "Tingible body" macrophages were present
in the germinal centers during all periods of observation and contained orange
autofluorescent granules. Some of these also seemed to stain weakly for BSA
and ~1c.
DISCUSSION
These observations establish, in agreement with the findings of others (7, 57,
61), that germinal centers of human lymph nodes regularly contain IgG and
IgM. In addition, our work confirms the observations of Nowoslawski and
GAJ'L-PECZALSKA,FISH, MEUWISSEN, ~'~ROMM~L,AND GOOD 1377
Brzosko1 that germinal centers contain/~1c. After antigenic stimulation with
either Brucella antigen or BSA, germinal centers in rabbit lymph nodes con-
tained fl~c, IgG, IgM, BSA, and antibodies to BSA. All these components were
shown to be present in the same distribution within germinal centers; we feel
that this presents evidence of an antigen-antibody complex mechanism.
Furthermore, the finding that additional exogenous/~o is bound in the same
distribution within germinal centers of rabbit lymph nodes after treatment with
fresh human serum establishes that immunological complexes actually fix het-
erologous complement components in vitro. Attempts to elute complexes from
germinal centers of human lymph nodes revealed significant diminution of IgG
and IgM, but only minimal reduction of/~1o. However, elution of rabbit lymph
node sections resulted in complete elimination of IgG, IgM,/~1o, and BSA from
germinal centers. In contrast, the IgG and IgM content of plasma cells was not
altered by this treatment.
These findings permit the conclusion that IgG, IgM, and/~1o are located on
the surface of cells within germinal centers of rabbits after antigenic stimula-
tion, and are present in the form of complexes. They also suggest that, at least
for 20 days after either primary or secondary antigenic stimulation, IgG, IgM,
and ~o are not synthesized by cells in the germinal centers but are deposited as
antigen-antibody complexes with ~10 • Furthermore, elution experiments seem
to indicate that the bulk of/~1ocan be eluted from macrophages in the medulla
of the lymph node; this finding is somewhat incongruous with observations of
others, who have presented evidence of complement component synthesis in
lymph nodes (3, 23, 26, 39, 65, 68-72, 74).
It seems unusual that following deposition of biologically active antigen-
antibody complexes with/~1o, little tissue injury occurs in germinal centers (13,
24, 40, 58, 60, 78). This observation cannot be explained on the basis of un-
favorable antigen-antibody ratios, because we have shown/~10 to be present at
the same sites as the antigen-antibody complexes and have demonstrated fixa-
tion of exogenous/~1c in vitro. Perhaps attachment of the complexes to the
surface of dendritic macrophages partially inhibits chemotactic influence, which
would otherwise be expected to operate when antigen-antibody and complement
are deposited in tissues. Alternatively, it is possible that activation of the more
terminal components of complement, such as C5 or the C5,6,7 ~ triraolecular
complex (55), does not take place under the conditions prevailing in germinal
centers.
Much evidence indicates that lymphocytes, perhaps of a special thymus-
independent line of differentiation (31), proliferate in germinal centers (25),
and it has been proposed that antigen is located on the surface of the dendritic
1Nowoslawski,A., and W. J. Brzosko.Unpublishedobservations.
mComplementnomenclatureaccordingto WorldHealthOrganization.
1378 /~lC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
reticulum cells to stimulate lymphoid cells at these sites (20, 51, 52, 56). Our
findings are consonant with this view. The known ability of complement to alter
cell membranes suggests that the complexes could alter either the membranes
of lymphocytes or dendritic macrophages to contribute to this postulated differ-
entiative influence.
Evidence has also been presented that germinal centers are linked in some
way to the enhanced antibody synthesis associated with immunological memory
(27, 76, 77). Immunological memory, as usually defined, is known to be asso-
ciated with synthesis of IgG molecules (27). Investigations from both the phylo-
genetic and the ontogenetic perspective link germinal centers to the synthesis
and delivery of IgG (27-29, 63). For example, chickens bursectomized at 18-19
days in ovo can produce abundant IgM and possess plasma ceUs,but lack IgG
and germinal centers (9, 18). Perhaps germinal centers function chiefly either as
sites of further differentiation of the line of thymic independent immunoglobu-
lin-producing cells or as sites capable of exercising an inductive influence in this
direction on surrounding lymphocytes. In the latter case, antigen-antibody com-
plexes, particularly in the presence of complement, could play an inducing role
different from that exercised by antigen alone. This type of reaction within the
germinal center could, for example, stimulate lymphoid ceils to proliferate with-
out maturing to immunoglobulin secretion. After some proliferation of an ap-
parently wasteful nature at this site, "antigen-insensitive" cells could effect a
derepression and then become "antigen-sensitive" cells capable of IgG synthesis
and secretion.
The faint staining of lymphocytes for IgG and IgM in the mantle zones about
germinal centers and the development of plasma ceils in these regions are of
interest, Such lymphocytes faintly staining for immunoglobulins appear prior to
the development of germinal centers. Morphological evidence for transforma-
tion of lymphocytes into plasma cells between days 1 and 4 following antigenic
stimulation has been reported in rabbit lymph nodes (43) and spleen (44), with
subsequent development of germinal centers. Similar findings, using electron
microscopic techniques, have demonstrated that in rabbit lymph nodes lympho-
cyte transformation to plasma ceils begins in the diffuse cortex before develop-
ment of the germinal centers (53). Recently Bosman et al. showed by radioanto-
graphic techniques and electron microscopy that after stimulation of rats with
BSA lymphocytes constituted the majority of cells producing specific antibodies
in draining lymph nodes (6).
In this study, the role of germinal centers in immune responses and the body
economy still remains enigmatic. Understanding of this role must take into
account the facts that germinal centers contain antigen-antibody complexes
with complement, and that for a prolonged period after both primary and sec-
ondary antigenic stimulation such complexes account for the bulk of the immu-
noglobulins and probably the bulk of antibodies at these sites.
GAJL-PECZALSKA~I~ISH,MEUWISSEN,FROMMEL,AND GOOD 1379
$IY~XMARY
28 human and 60 experimentally stimulated rabbit lymph nodes were studied
by means of light microscopy and immunofluorescence. 21 of the 28 human
lymph nodes showed well-developed germinal centers. IgM, IgG, and the/~1c
component of complement were found in the same distribution within germinal
centers when examined in serial cryostat sections. 36 rabbits were stimulated
with Brucella antigen, and 24 rabbits with BSA. A strikingly consistent correla-
tion between distribution and appearance of specific staining for rabbit ~1c,
IgM, and IgG was observed; when lymph nodes were stimulated with BSA,
antigen and specific antibody were present. Treatment of unfixed sections with
citrate-buffered saline at low pH resulted in complete elution of immunoglobu-
lins, f~lc, and BSA from rabbit germinal centers, and in marked diminution of
IgG and IgM in hurna~ germinal centers, while at the same time plasma cells
remained strongly fluorescent. Specific selective fixation of heterologous (hu-
man) complement in rabbit germinal centers positive for ~10, IgG, IgM, and
BSA was also obtained.
These data present strong evidence for the existence within germinal centers of
antigen-antibody complexeswhich fix at least the ~tc component of complement
in vivo. The possibility of complete elution of immunoglobulins from rabbit
germinal centers can be taken as evidence that, at least for 20 days after primary
and secondary stimulation, a major component of the immunoglobulins present
in germinal centers is not produced locally but accumulates at the surface of
cells.
We wouldlike to acknowledgethe valuablehelpand advice providedin this work by Dr.
A. Michael,Dr. W. Brzosko,Dr. A. Nowoslawski,Dr. R. Picketing, Dr. R. Hong, and Dr.
H. Gewurz.We are indebted to Dr. Hans J. Mtiller-Eberhard,whoprovidedpurified human
fllc for this study and reviewedthe manuscript.The technicalassistanceof Mrs. Lore Lang,
Miss AgnesOpstad, and MissMary Ann Morrisand the secretarial assistanceof Mrs. Betty
Duquesnoyare greatly appreciated.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Ada, G. L., G. J. V. Nossal, and C. M. Austin. 1954. The ability of cells in
lymphoid foUiclesto recognize foreignness. Aust. ]. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 42:331.
2. Ada, G. L., G. J. V. Nossal, and J. Pye. 1965.The uptake of antigens in animals
previously rendered immunologically tolerant. Aust. ]. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci.
48:337.
3. Asofsky, R., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1961. Sites of formation of immune globulins
and of a component of C'3. II. Production of immunoelectrophoretically
identified serum proteins by human and monkey tissues in vitro. ]. Exp. Med.
114:471.
4. Balfour, B. M., and J. H. Humphrey. 1967. Localization of gammaglobuUn and
labeled antigen in germinal centers in relation to the immune response. In
1380 ~IC FIXATIONIN LYMPHNODE GERMINALCENTERS
Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R.
Schindler, and C. C. Coagdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 80.
5. Blomb/ick, B., and M. Blomb~ck. 1956. Purification of human and bovine fibrino-
gen. Ark. Kemi. 10:415.
6. Bosman, C., J. D. Feldman, and E. Pick. 1969. Heterogeneity of antibody-form-
ing cells. An electron microscopic analysis. J. Exp. Med. 129:1029.
7. Brzosko, W. J. 1966. Immnnopatologia zapalenia pluc u dzieci wywolanego
przez Pneumocystis carinii (Immunopathology of Pneumocystis carinii pneu-
monitis in infants). PZH, Warsaw.
8. Burfin, P., and D. Buge. 1967. Synthesis of human immunoglobulins in germinal
centers. In Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odart-
chenko, R. Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New
York. 120.
9. Cain, W. A., M. D. Cooper, P. J. Van Alten, and R. A. Good. 1969. Develop-
ment and function of the immtmoglobulin producing system. II. Role of the
bursa in the development of humoral immunological competence. J. Immunol.
102:671.
10. Cebra, J. J., and G. Goldstein. 1965. Chromatographic purification of tetra-
methylrhodamine-immunoglobulin conjugates and their use in the cellular
localization of rabbit gammaglobulin polypeptide chains. J. Immunol. 95:230.
11. Chaplin, H., S. Cohen, and E. M. Press. 1965. Preparation and properties of
the pepfide chains of normal human 19S garnmaglobulin (IgM). Biochem. J.
95:256.
12. Cohen, M. W., E. B. Jacobson, and G. J. Thorbecke. 1966. The secondary
response made by splenic white and red pulp with reference to the role of
secondary nodules. J. Immunot. 96:944.
13. Cochrane, C. G. 1968. The role of immune complexes and complement in tissue
injury. J. Allergy. 42:113.
14. Congdon, C. C., and M. G. Hanna, Jr. 1967. Comparison of existing theories on
the function of germinal centers. In Germinal Centers in Immune Responses.
H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-
Veflag, New York. 1.
15. Coons, A. H., E. H. Leduc, and J. M. Connolly. 1953. Immunohistochemical
studies of antibody response in the rabbit. Fed. Proc. 12:439.
16. Coons, A. H., E. H. Leduc, and J. M. Connolly. 1955. Immunohistochemical
studies of antibody response in the rabbit. J. Exp. Med. 102:61.
17. Coons, A. I-I., E. H. Leduc, and M. H. Kaplan. 1951. Localization of antigen in
tissue cells. VII. The fate of injected foreign proteins in the mouse. J. Exp.
Med. 93:173.
18. Cooper, M. D., W. A. Cain, P. J. Van Alten, and R. A. Good. 1969. Development
and function of the immunogiobulin producing system. I. Effect of bursectomy
at different stages of development on germinal centers, plasma cells, immuno-
globulins and antibody production. Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 35:242.
19. Cooper, M. D., R. D. A. Peterson, M. A. South, and R. A. Good. 1966. The func-
tions of the thymus system and the bursa system in the chicken. J. Exp. Med.
12~:75.
GAJ'L-PECZALSKA,FISH, MEUWISSEN, ~'ROMMEL,AND GOOD 1381
20. Cottier, H., G. Keiser, N. Odartchenko, M. Hess, and R. D. Stoner. 1967. De
novo formation and rapid growth of germinal centers during secondary anti-
body responses to tetanus toxoid in mice. In Germinal Centers in Immune
Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, ed-
itors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 270.
21. Cottier, H., N. Odartchenko, G. Keiser, M. Hess, and R. D. Stoner. 1964.
Incorporation of tritiated nucleosides and amino acids into lymphoid and plas-
mocytoid cells during secondary response to tetanus toxoid in mice. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 113:612.
22. Fish, A. J., A. F. Michael, R. L. Vernier, and R. A. Good. 1966. Acute serum
sickness nephritis in the rabbit. Ar,~er.J. Pathol. 49.@97.
23. Fishman, M. 1961. Antibody formation in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 114:837.
24. Fliedner, T. M. 1967. On the origin of tingible bodies in germinal centers. In
Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartehenko, R.
Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 218.
25. Fliedner, T. M., M. Kesse, E. P. Cronkite, and J. S. Robertson. 1964. Cell pro-
liferation in germinal centers of the rat spleen. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 115:578.
26. Glade, P. R., and L. N. Chessin. 1968, Synthesis of fllcfliA-globulln (C'3) by
human lymphoid ceils./~. Arch. Allergy Appl. I~n~nu~wl.34:181.
27. Good, R. A., W. A. Cain, D. Y. Perey, P. B. Dent, H. J. Meuwissen, G. E. Rodey,
and M. D. Cooper. 1969. Studies on the nature of germinal centers. Interna-
tional Conference on Germinal Centers, Padova, Italy. In Lymphatic tissue
and germinal centers [in immune response. L. Fiore-Donati and M. G. Hanna,
editors. Plenum Publi.~hing Corp., New York. 33.
28. Good, R. A., M. D. Cooper, R. D. A. Peterson, J. R. Hoyer, and A. E. Gabrielsen.
1967. Immunological deficiency diseases of man--relationship to disturbances
of germinal center formation. In Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. H.
Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-
Verlag, New York. 385.
29. Good, R. A., and J. Finstad. 1967. The phylogenetic development of immune
responses and the germinal system. In Germinal Centers in Immune Responses.
H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-
Vedag, New York. 4.
30. Good, R. A., J. Finstad, W. A. Cain, A. J. Fish, D. Y. Percy, and R. A. Gatti.
1969. Models of immunologic diseases and disorders. Fed. Proc. 9-8:191.
31. Good, R. A., and A. E. Gabrielsen. 1968. The thymus and other lymphoid organs
in the development of the immune system. In Human Transplantation. Grune &
Stratton, New York. 526.
32. Good, R. A., P. G. Quie, D. B. Windhorst, A. R. Page, G. E. Rodey, J. White,
J. J. Wolfson, and B. H. Holmes. 1968. Fatal (chronic) granulomatous disease
of childhood: a hereditary defect of leukocyte function. Seminars Hematol.
5:215,
33. Good, R. A., and R. L. Varco. 1955.A clinical and experimental study of agamma-
globulinemia. In Essays on Pediatrics. R. A. Good and E. A. Platou, editors.
Lancet Publication, Minneapolis. 103.
34. Hanna, M. G., Jr. 1964. An autoradiographic study of the germinal center in
1382 ~Ic FIXATIONIN LYMPHNODE GERMINALCENTERS
spleen white pulp during early intervals of the immune response. Lab. Invest.
13:95.
35. Hanna, M. G., Jr. 1965. Germinal center changes and plasma cell reaction during
the primary immune response. Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 26:230.
36. Hanna, M. G., Jr., C. C. Congdon, and C. J. Wnst. 1966. Effect of antigen dose
on lymphatic tissue germinal center changes. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 19.1:286.
37. Hanna, M. G., Jr., D. C. Swartzendruber, and C. C. Congdon. 1966. Morphologic
changes in spleen lymphatic tissue during antibody production. Exp. Mol.
Pathol. 3 (Suppl.):75.
38. Hill, A. G. S., H. W. Deane, and A. H. Coons. 1950. Localization of antigen in
tissue cells. V. Capsular polysaccharide of Friedl~nder bacillus, type B, in the
mouse. J. Exp. Med. 99.:35.
39. Hochwald, G. M., G. J. Thorbecke, and R. Asofsky. 1961. Sites of formation of
immune globulins and of a component of C% I. A new technique for the demon-
stration of the synthesis of individual serum proteins by tissues in vitro. 3".
Exp. Med. 114:459.
40. Ishizaka, K. 1963. Gamma globulins and molecular mechanisms in hypersensi-
tivity reaction. Prog. Allergy. 7:32.
41. Ishizaka, K., T. Ishizaka, and J. Banowitz. 1965. Biological activities of aggre-
gated gamma globulin. VII. Minimum size of aggregated gammaglobulln and
its piece III required for the induction of skin reactivity and complement
fixation. J. Immunol. 94:824.
42. Kaplan, M. H., A. H. Coons, and H. W. Deane. 1950. Localization of antigen
in tissue cells. III. Cellular distribution of pneumococcal polysaccharides types
II and III in mouse. 3.. Exp. Med. 91:15.
43. Kenning, F. J., and A. A. van den Brock. 1968. Role of marginal zone cells of
lymphoid follicles in the immune response of rabbits. Abstracts of the Second
Conference on Germinal Centers of Lymphoid Tissue, Padova, Italy. Exp. He-
matol. 17:4.
44. Langevoort, H. L. 1963. The histophysiology of the antibody response. Lab.
Invest. 12:106.
45. Leduc, E. H., A. H. Coons, and J. M. Connolly. 1955. The primary and secondary
responses in the popliteal lymph node of the rabbit. J. Exp. Med. 102:61.
46. Mardiney, M. R., Jr., and H. J. Miiller-Eberhard. 1965. Mouse beta 1C globulin:
production of antiserum and characterization in the complement reaction.
J. Immunol. 94:877.
47. McDevitt, H. O., B. A. Askonas, J. H. Humphrey, J. Schechter, and M. Sela.
1966. The localization of antigen in rdation to specific antibody-producing
cells. Immunology. 11:337.
48. Mellors, R. C. 1959. Fluorescent antibody method. In Analytical Cytology. R. C.
Mellors, editor. McGraw-Hill, New York. 1.
49. Mellors, R. C., and L. Korngold. 1963. The cellular origin of human immuno-
globulins. 3.. Exp. Med. 118:387.
50. Michael, A. F., K. N. Drummond, R. A. Good, and R. L. Vernier. 1966. Acute
GAJ'L-PECZALSKA,FISH, MEUWISSEN, FROMMEL,AND GOOD 1383
poststreptococcal glomemlonephritis: immune deposit disease. J. Clin. Invest.
45:237.
51. Miller, J. J., and G. J. V. Nossal. 1964. The phagocytic reticulum of lymph node
follides, f . Exp. Med. 120:1075.
52. Mitchell, J., and A. Abbot. 1965. Ultrastructure of the antigen-retaining reticulum
of lymph node follicles as shown by high-resolution autoradiography. Nature
(Lendon). 208:500.
53. Movat, H. Z., and N. V. P. Femando. 1965. The fine structure of the lymphoid
tissue during antibody formation. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 4:155.
54. Miiller-Eberhard, H. J., and N. U. Nilsson. 1960. Relation of beta-lC-glyco-
protein of human serum to the complement system. J. Exp. Med. 111:217.
55. Nilsson, U., and H. J. MiilleroEberhard. 1967. Studies on the mode of action of
the fifth, sixth, and seventh components of human complement in immune
haemolysis. Immunology. 13:101.
56. Nossal, G. J, V., G. L. Ada, and C. M. Austin. 1964. Cellular localization of
x26I and mI-labelled flagella in lymph nodes. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci.
43:311.
57. Nowoslawski, A. 1966. Immunopatologia reumatyzmu pierwotnie przewleklego
(Immunopathology of rheumatoid arthritis). PZH, Warsaw.
58. Odartchenko, N., M. Lewerenz, B. Sordat, B. Roos, and H. Cottier. 1967. Kinetics
of cellular death in germinal centers of mouse spleen. In Germinal Centers in
Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and C. C.
Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 212.
59. Ortego, L. G., and R. C. Mellors. 1957. Cellular sites of formation of gamma
globulin. J. Exp. Med. 106:627.
60. Page, A. R., H. Gewurz, R. J. Pickering, and R. A. Good. 1968. The role of com-
plement in the acute inflammatory response. In Immunolopathology, Vth
International Symposium. P. Miescher and P. Grabar, editors. Grune &
Stratton, New York. 221.
61. Pemis. B. 1967.The immunoglobulins present in the germinal centers. In Germinal
Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and
C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York, 112.
62. Pernis, B., M. Goverua, R. Scelsi, E. Maura, and M. Ferrarini. 1969. Absence
of complement binding by immunoglobulin aggregates in germinal centers.
Second International Conference on Germinal Centers, Padova, Italy. In
Lymphatic tissue and germinal centers in immune response. L. Fiore-Donati
and M. G. Hanna, editors. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York. 431.
63. Pollara, B., J. Finstad, and R. A. Good. 1968. Specific immunoglobulin synthesis
in lower vertebrates lacking germinal centers. Second International Conference
on Germinal Centers, Padova, Italy. In Lymphatic tissue and germinal centers
in immunelresponse. L. Fiore-Donati and M. G. Hanna, editors. Plenum Pub-
fishing Corp., New York. 1.
64. Porter, R. R. 1959. The hydrolysis of rabbit gamma globulin and antibodies
with crystalline papain. Biodt.em. J. 73:119.
1384 ~IC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
65. Siboo, R., and S. J. Vas. 1965. Studies on in vitro antibody production. III.
Production of complement. Can. J. Microbiol. 11:415.
66. Small, P. A., Jr., and M. E. Lamm. 1966. Polypeptide chain structure of rabbit
immunogiobulins. I. gamma G-immunogiobulin. Biochemistry (Washington).
5:259.
67. Sober, H. A., F. J. Gutter, M. W. Wyckoff, and E. A. Peterson. 1956. Chroma-
tography of proteins. II. Fractionation of serum protein on anion-exchange
cellulose. Y. Amer. Chem. Soc. "/8:756.
68. Stecher, V. J., J. H. Morse, and G. J. Thorbecke. 1967. Sites of production of
primate serum proteins associated with the complement system. Proc. Soc.
Exp. Biol. M~. 19.4:433.
69. Stecher, V. J., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1967. Beta-lC and immune globulin forma-
tion in vitro by tissues from germ-free and conventional rodents of various
age. Immunology. 12:475.
70. Stecher, V. J., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1967. Sites of synthesis of serum proteins.
I. Serum proteins produced by macrophages in vitro. J. Immunol. 99:643.
71. Stecher, V. J., mad G. J. Thorbecke. 1967. Sites of synthesis of serum proteins.
II. Medicum requirements for serum protein production by rat macrophages.
J. Immunol. 99:653.
72. Stecher, V. J., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1967. Sites of synthesis of serum proteins.
III. Production of Beta-lC, Beta-lE and transferrin by primate and rodent
cell lines. J. ImmunoI. 99:660.
73. Thorbecke, G. J., M. W. Cohen, E. B. Jacobson, and J. D. Wakefield. 1967.
The production of memory cells by the white pulp of the spleen in rabbits.
In Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R.
Schindler, and C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 259.
74. Thorbecke, G. J., G. M. Hochwald, R. van Furth, H. J. Mtiller-Eberhard, and
E. B. Jacobson. 1965. CibaFound. Syrup. Complement.99.
75. Thorbecke, G. J., and ]. Hnrlimann. 1965. Les nodules lymphoides secondaires.
Nouv. Rev.Ft. Hematol.5:385.
76. Wakefield, J. D., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1968. Relationship of germinal centers
in lymphoid tissue to immunological memory. I. Evidence for the formation
of small lymphocytes upon transfer of primed splenic white pulp to syngeneic
mice. J. Exp. Med. 19.8:153.
77. Wakefield, J. D., and G. J. Thorbecke. 1968. Relationship of germinal centers in
lymphoid tissue to immunological memory. II. The detection of primed cells
and their proliferation. J. Exp. Meal.158:171.
78. Ward, P. A., C. G. Cochrane, and H. J. Miiller-Eberhard. 1965. The role of serum
complement in chemotaxis of leukocytes in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 19.9.:327.
79. West, C. D., N. L. Davis, J. Forristal, J. Herbst, and R. Spitzer. 1966. Antigenic
determinants of human beta-lC- and beta-lG globulins. J. Immunol. 96:650.
80. White, R. G. 1960. The relation of the cellular response in germinal or lympho-
cytopoietic centers of lymph nodes to the production of antibody. In Mecha-
nism of Antibody Formation. Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague. 25.
81. White, R. G. 1963. Functional recognition of immunologically competent cells
GAJ'L-PECZALSKA, FISH, ~fl[EUWISSEN, FROM~EL, AND GOOD 1385
by means of the fluorescent antibody technique. Ciba Found. Study Group.
16:6.
82. White, R. G., V. J. French, and J. M. Stark. 1967. Germinal center formation and
antigen localization in malpighian bodies of the chicken spleen. In Germinal
Centers in Immune Responses. H. Cottier, N. Odartchenko, R. Schindler, and
C. C. Congdon, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 131.
83. Wood, B. T., S. H. Thompson, and G. Goldstein. 1965. Fluorescent antibody
staining. III. Preparation of fluorescein-isothiocyanate-labeled antibodies.
J. Iramunol. 95:225.
1386 ~lC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINALCENTERS
FIG. 3. Localization of human ~xc in a germinal center of a mesenteric lymph node
(case 8). X 200.
FIG. 4. Localization of human IgM in a germinal center of a mesenteric lymph
node (case 8), serial section of Fig. 1. X 200.
FIG. 5. Staining for human fibrin in a mesenteric lymph node. The localization
of the fluorescence is arou~ the germinal center, and thus different from the localiza-
tion of IgM and fllc (case 8). X 200.
1387
1388 ~IC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINALCENTERS
FIG. 6. Distribution of BSA in a germinal center of a rabbit preauricular lymph
node 7 days after secondary stimulation. BSA is found predominantly in between
the cells (arrow). Bright, nonspecifically fluorescent eosinophils can be seen at the
periphery of the follicle. X 200.
FIo. 7. Distribution of IgM in a germinal center of a rabbit preauricular lymph
node 7 days after secondary stimulation with BSA. X 200.
FIG. 8. Distribution of #ic in a germinal center of a rabbit preauricular lymph node
15 days after secondary stimulation with BSA. Bright, nonspecifically fluorescent
eosinophils are interspersed with cells staining specifically for/31c •X 200.
1389
1390 ~IC FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
FIG. 9. Crescentic distribution of IgM in a germinal center of a rabbit preauricular
lymph node 10 days after primary stimulation with BSA. This crescentic distribution
is noted in some instances in germinal centers early after primary stimulation. X 200.
Fla. 10. Elution of IgG from a germinal center following incubation in citrate-
buffered saline, pH 3.3. Very little specific fluorescence remains in the germinal center
after this procedure. In the periphery of the follicle and in medullary cords, plasma
cells remain strongly fluorescent (15 days after secondary stimulation with BSA).
X 200.
FIG. 11. Serial section of the same lymph node as in Fig. 10, iucubated in phosphate-
buffered saline, pH 7.35, and stained with anti-rabbit IgG. IgG is not eluted from
the germinal center. Intensity of fluorescence of plasma cells is almost the same as
in Fig. 10. X 200.
1391
1392 ~10 FIXATION IN LYMPH NODE GERMINAL CENTERS
FIO. 12. Fixation and distribution of heterologous (human) 31c in a germinal center
of a rabbit preauricular lymph node 15 days after secondary stimulation with BSA
(compare with Fig. 8). N 200.
FIG. 13. Faint fluorescence of lymphocytes in a primary follicle (arrow), stained
with anti-rabbit IgG. The strong bright fluorescence of plasma cells in medullary
cords is evident (5 days after primary stimulation with Brucella alone). X 200.
Fro. 14. Lymphoid follicles from lymph node 15 days after secondary stimulation
with Brucella, stained for IgG. In the center of the two follicles the germinal centers
are brightly fluorescent. The zone surrounding the germinal center consists of two
parts: a dark inner zone, and an outer zone containing fluorescent plasma cells and
lymphocytes. X 200.
1393
