STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD.
II. BLOOD DvS~RUCTIO~IN P~.RNmIOUSA~M~A.
BY WINIFRED ASHBY,ProD.
(From the Department of Experimental Bacteriology of the Mayo Foundation,
Rockester,Minnesota.)
(Received for publication, January 31, 1921.)
Many of the older writers inclined to the idea that pernicious
anemia is fundamentally a failure in erythrogenesis, but in the light
of recent investigation it is more generally assumed that increased
blood destruction is the important cause of the anemia seen in this
disease. This assumption rests mainly upon increase in hemosid-
erin deposits in the tissues, increase in bile pigment output, the rapid
falls that are seen in the blood count, and the anemia in the face
of what is apparently a hyperplasia of the bone marrow. My own
results of the study of thirty-three cases of pernicious anemia
patients who received Group IV transfusions have not realized the
intensive blood destruction that I expected to find.
Upon going over the literature of the subject I find it possible
to put more than one interpretation upon these facts of increased
bile pigment excretion, hemosiderin deposits, etc., which areusually
assumed to be evidence of a high rate of blood destruction in per-
nicious anemia. The increased activity of the bone marrow as judged
by the increased density of mitotic figures and immature cells and
the increased mass of erythropoietlc tissue may be only apparent.
If there were some factor present which retarded the speed of the
process of maturation and division, while the physiologic stimulus
to erythrocyte production brought into play by the anemia caused
an increase in the number of cells dividing, we might have such a
picture with a decrease in the total cell output. The hemosiderin
deposit is evidence only that iron is not being kept in circulation.
This may be due to abnormal destruction of hemoglobin, but it is
equally possible that it is due to a failure to utilize sufficiently quickly
147
148 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
in the formation of new hemoglobin, iron released by a normal rate
of blood destruction. Increased bile pigment output cannot be ac-
cepted as evidence of increased blood destruction because Whipple
and Hooper have shown that bile pigment is derived from other
sources besides hemoglobin. It is conceivable that with a depres-
sion in protein synthesis the pigment material which might have
combined with globin to form hemoglobin is diverted to the increase
of the bile pigment output. Urobilin and urobilinogen in the duo-
denal content and urine, although they may appear in these excre-
tions when there is blood destruction, are only evidence that bili-
rubin has been reduced before it reaches the intestinal tract or that
it was incompletely synthesized. Rapid falls in the blood count
can just as plausibly be explained on the basis of a failure of produc-
tion and the physiologic end of the corpuscle as of its abnormal
destruction. All these facts of hyperplastic bone marrow, increased
bile pigment, etc., which from one angle seem to point collectively
towards excessive blood destruction can, by changing the point of
view, be made to present just as solid a front against it. I do not
feel that our laboratory studies of pernicious anemia offer anything
that can be accepted as absolute proof of excessive blood destruction.
Perhaps we have our best evidence of blood destruction in per-
nicious anemia when upon transfusion the total count fails to increase
or even decreases and when the symptoms of the patient do not in-
dicate any blood volume improvement. Since it is now believed
that there is no intrinsic destructibility of transfused blood, even
of citrated transfused blood, this failure of the corpuscle content to
increase when corpuscles are injected is evidence of corpuscle de-
struction. This situation, however, is the occasional one and, unless
the patient succumbs, is only temporary. It is evidence that there
are at least intermittent periods of destruction, but it does not
support the idea which some investigators have of a continuous
destruction.
On the assumption of an increased blood destruction, the prevailing
opinions as to its cause cover all the possibilities. Most of these can
be included under three headings. We can conceive of an extra-
neous hemolytic toxin as causing injury to the blood corpuscles, result-
ing in their destruction, either by disintegration in the circulation or
WI~RXD ASHBY 149
by later elimination by the body. It is conceivable that a toxin is
produced which does not act directly upon the blood cell in the cir-
culation, but affects the bone marrow so that a type of corpuscle
is produced which either becomes effete more rapidly and, in conse-
quence disintegrates or is removed from the circulation, or which
deviates from normal blood to such an extent that it is removed
because of its foreign quality. Lastly, it is conceivable that with-
out any injury to the corpuscles in the circulation or to corpuscle
production, there might be a speeding up of the physiologic blood
destruction agencies. It is also conceivable that all these effects
might be produced not by a specific toxin, but by the toxic effect of
some abnormal metabolic habit brought about by some past injury.
The most popular conception of the cause of blood destruction in pernicious
anemia is the hemolytic toxin. Wells, in the new edition of his Chemical pathol-
ogy, says: "Putting together the above findings, we see that in pernicious
anemia we have every evidence that excessive hemolysis is taking place, and the
fact that continued poisoning by toluylendiamine and other hemolytic poisons,
such as that of Bothriocepkalus,may give rise to a condition resembling pernicious
anemia very closely, indicates strongly that hemolytic poisons are the cause of
pernicious anemia."
Pappenheim says that other"hyperchrome"anemias, likepernicious anemias and
hemolyticanemias, are at the same time hemotoxic, myelotoxic, and splenopathic,
but for all these manifestations of the disease a single toxin, as in the case of
toluylenediamine, may serve. He is convinced that inallcasesthe"hyperchrome"
anemia is due to a toxin. He points out that these poisons, such as toluylenedia-
mine and pyrodine, which produce the "hyperchrome"anemia, are not hemolytic.
Pyrodine, for instance, does not always produce the "hyperchrome" anemia, but
sometimes first kills the animal from general organpoisoning. When the "hyper-
chrome"anemia isproduced, Pappenheim considers that it is due to a tendency of
the animal organism to transform the pyrodine into hydroxylamine, which is a
hemolytic substance. He thinks it probable that the various conditions, lues,
purpura, pregnancy,Bothriocephalusinfection, etc., which seem sometimes to cause
pernicious anemia, do so because they establish some improper metabolic process,
perhaps by injury to some unknown organ of internal secretion, so that the body
forms the hemolytic toxin, hydroxylamine.
Bunting, who produced a condition resembling pernicious anemia with con-
tinued small doses of ricin, considers it probable that the disease is due to the
long continued action of a hemolytic poison, which produces the blood picture by
causing an overstimulation of the bone marrow. Hunter, Herter, and
others found hemolytic substances in the intestinal tract and considered the
anemia due to their absorption, but no experimental work establishes their view.
150 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
The production by Schauman and Tallquist of Bothriocephalus anemia in dogs
with hemolytic extracts from the worm rests on too meager evidence to be accepted
without further work. These investigators treated seven dogs with worm extract
and pieces of worms and produced only slight changes in the blood in all but one,
which died with a blood count of 3,400,000 and without typical changes in the
blood picture. The claim is made that these dogs clinically showed symptoms of
anemia, but no clinical symptoms typical of pernicious anemia are reported.
Blanchard quotes Vlaiev's negative attempts to produce anemia in rabbits and
pigeons with extracts of Bothriocephalus tapeworm. Seyderhelm, working with
the bot-fly in horses, reports that he was able to reproduce the typical anemia,
not with the extract, which proved to be hemolytic, but with an alcohol-
insoluble material which in vitro has no solvent effeot on red blood corpuscles.
Except for Bunting's ricin, which besides being hemolytic has other strongly
toxic properties, the establishment of anything resembling pernicious anemia
with a hemolytic toxin does not seem to have been clean-cut.
Among the men who incline to the idea that the blood destruction in pernicious
anemia is due to incompatibility or low resistance of the corpuscles brought about
by a toxin are Gulland and Goodall, and Hirschfeld. MacCarty, of this Clinic,
considers it probable that the erythrogenic process has become malignant and
that the corpuscles are eliminated rapidly from the circulation because of their
foreign quality. We have no experimental proof of a lowered resistance of the
corpuscle of pernicious anemia.
The possibility of an excessive activity of the physiologic blood-destructive
process of the body is not emphasized in the literature, although mention is
made of it. The idea that sepsis is the cause of pernicious anemia may be
grounded in such a conception. Sajous points out that hemolysis occurs whenever
toxins, either endogenous or exogenous,appear in the blood in quantities sufficient
to excite a defensive reaction. The antibodies then attack not only the toxins, but
the erythrocytes as well. Clark and Evans suggest the interesting possibility that
the anemia of the so called hemolytic anemias may be due to a reduction in the
power of the blood serum to protect the corpuscles from whatever hemolytic
agencies they may come in contact with normally in the circulation and present
experimental evidence that in these anemias there is a reduction of the protec-
tive power of the serum against sodium oleate.
The following attempt was made to obtain some understanding
of the mechanism by which blood destruction is brought about,
by means of the study of the elimination of Group IV transfused
blood. The technique used was that already described. Thirty-
three patients with pernicious anemia not of Group IV were given
Group IV transfusions. Four of them were under observation for
about 3 months, ten were observed for 1 month or more, eight for
at least 17 days, and the rest for shorter periods of time.
WINIFRED ASHBY 151
The object of the study was first to answer the question as to
whether or not there is any hemolytic toxin at work in pernicious
anemia by comparing the curves of elimination of Group IV trans-
fused blood in these cases with those obtained from patients with-
out any blood disease. As a control, patients with other diseases,
in which it was suspected that there might be increased blood des-
truction, were chosen for transfusion.
It was hoped that if no excessive destruction of Group IV blood
resulted the study might produce data that would give some clue
as to which of the other two possibilities, namely the intrinsic weak-
ness of the corpuscle or the speeding up of normal blood destruction,
is responsible for the anemia.
RESULTS.
Of the four pernicious anemia patients (Text-fig. 1) who were stud-
ied until the elimination of transfused blood was compl.ete or almost
complete, the time taken for complete elimination in two instances
was 91 days (Case 43) and 100 days (Case 59) respectively. In another
(Case 97) elimination was not complete in 100 days, and in the fourth
(Case 57) there were still some transfused corpuscles after 83 days.
These curves compare well with the longest complete curve of elim-
ination obtained in a normal individual and are much longer than the
other seven completed curves obtained for individuals without blood
diseases (Ashby). Of these four patients, in one instance (Case 59)
the transfusion brought about a remission which lasted for over a
year. In the other three cases it was necessary to give repeated
transfusions during the time that the patients were under observation.
Case 43.--The patient was a man, aged 49 years, weighing 163 pounds. He
had no free hydrochloric acid in the stomach. He had glossifis and combined
sclerosis of the cord. The red cell count was 1,900,000, with a hemoglobin of
44 per cent, and color index of 1.4+. The white count was 3,400, with 36 per
cent lymphocytes. There was marked anisocytosisand moderate poildlocytosis.
Diagnosis of pernicious anemia was made. A series of six 500 cc. transfusions
of citrated blood was given.
Case 57.--The patient was a man, aged 63 years, weighing 157 pounds. He
complained of a general increase in weakness, beginning 2 years ago, when he
became sallow,lost his appetite, and his legsswelled. There were glossitis, and
152 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
numbness and tingling in the feet. The red blood count was 1,136,000, hemo-
globin 25 per cent, color index 1.1+, leucocytes 4,200, polynuclear neutrophils
44 per cent, lymphocytes 56.5 per cent, normoblasts 3 per cent; marked anisoey-
tosis and poikilocytosis. Diagnosis of pernicious anemia was made. A series of
eight 500 cc. transfusions of citrated blood was given.
JJ&~ 1u ~u 0U ~u ou t~u ~u ou ~u 1uU
TExT-FzG. 1. The curves of elimination of 500 cc. of Group IV transfused
blood in four pernicious anemia patients, studied until elimination was com-
plete or nearly complete.
- - Unagglutinated corpuscles. - - - - Total red blood count. ~ indi-
cates a Group IV transfusion; $ a like group transfusion.
Case 59.--The patient was a short woman, aged 52 years, weighing 149 pounds.
In February, 1918, when she first came up for examination, she was sallow and
weak, had numbness of hands and feet, and a smooth tongue. Her red blood
count was 1,900,000, color index 1.1 +, leucocytes 3,400, and lymphocytes 72 per
cent. There were moderate anisocytosis and poikilocytosis. Diagnosis of per-
nicious anemia was made. She was given 2,500 cc. of blood in three transfusions
in the course of a month; this was followed 2 months later by two 500 cc. trans-
WINIFRED ASHBY 153
fusions. In May, 1919, she returned, with a red blood count of 1,330,000 and
was given one 500 cc. Group IV transfusion, after which she improved and main-
tained a fairly good count to date.
Case 97.--The patient was a man, aged 42 years, weighing 155 pounds. His
chief complaint was weakness. He had been gradually losing strength for 3
E
t3
Oo ~
E
C. ~
~J
"U
io
8
O
c_J
L)ay~ 10 ZO 50 0 10 zO ~0
TEXT-FIG. 2. Elimination curves of Group IV transfused blood in ten per-
nicious anemia patients under observation for 30 days or more. - - Unag-
giutinated corpuscles. - - - Total red blood count. ~ indicates a Group IV
transfusion; ~ a llke group transfusion.
154 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
years. He had glossitis, absence of free hydrochloric acid in the stomach, and
tingling and numbness of the arms and legs. His red blood count was 2,240,000,
hemoglobin 50 per cent, color index 1.1-, and leucocyte count 4,000. The
diagnosis made was pernicious anemia. The patient received a series of five
(500 cc.) transfusions, of citrated blood. Later he returned for further trans-
fusions.
Case 23.--The patient was a man, aged 57 years, weighing 139½ pounds. He
suffered from weakness, dating back 7 years. 2 years previous to present date,
with a blood count of 3,500,000 and a color index of 0.9+, giossitis, and pos-
terior sclerosis, a diagnosis was made of pernicious anemia, of the neurotic type.
A year later thepatient returned, with a red blood count of 1,090,000, hemoglobin
26 per cent, color index 1+, leucocytes 3,800, and red cell count 830,000. A
series of four 500 cc. transfusions of citrated blood was given.
Case 26.--The patient was a man, aged 44 years, weighing 148½pounds. The
skin was lemon-yellow, the tongue atrophic, and there was a systolic murmur
over the base of the heart. He complained of weakness, which began 7 years ago.
The hemoglobin was 32 per cent, red blood count 1,480,000, color index 1.1+,
and leucocyte count 2,600. A diagnosis of pernicious anemia was made. The
patient received a series of transfusions in 1918. He received transfusions in
January, 1919, and again in May, 1919.
Case 60.--The patient was a man, aged 36 years, weighing 137 pounds. He
was pale, and extremely weak. The neurological examination showed com-
bined sclerosis. There was no glossitis, A test meal was not given. The
blood picture was typical of pernicious anemia. A diagnosis of pernicious
anemia was made. Three transfusions were given, with improvement in the
patient's condition. There have been subsequent remissions.
Case61.--The patient was a man, aged 42 years, weighing 152 pounds. There
were weakness and combined sclerosis. The red cell count was 1,510,000, hemo-
globin 34 per cent, color index 1.1+, leucocyte count 2,000. A diagnosis of
pernicious anemia was made. Four 500 cc. transfusions of citrated blood were
given.
Case 73.--The patient was a woman, aged 47 years, weighing 110 pounds.
Her chief complaint was weakness. July 28,1919. The red count was 1,750,000,
hemoglobin 34 per cent, color index 0.9-, leucocytes 5,000. There was marked
anisocytosis. No test meal was given, but digestion improved with hydro-
chloric acid. Neurological examination showed spinal sclerosis of the per-
nicious anemia type. A diagnosis of pernicious anemia was made. The patient
received a series of transfusions and returned home, where more transfusions
were given. She died May, 1920.
Case 79.--The patient was a man, aged 25 years, weighing 126 pounds. He
had a palpable spleen, and there was no free hydrochloric acid in the stomach.
The neurological examination showed nothing, and there was no evidence of
glossitis. His red ceU count was 1,120,000, hemoglobin 23 per cent, color index 1,
WINIFRED ASHBY 155
leucocyte count 4,800, neutrophilic myelocytes 4.5 per cent, normoblast 4 in a
count of 200, and megaloblasts 1. Diagnosis of pernicious anemia was made.
Three 500 cc. transfusions of citrated blood were given. Since then the patient
has returned twice for transfusions.
Case 80.--The patient was a man, aged 34 years, weighing 154 pounds. He
had a bald tongue, but no evidence of combined sclerosis. His chief complaint
was weakness and indigestion. The red cell count was 1,960,000, hemoglobin
40 per cent, color index 1+, leucocyte count 6,400, with small lymphocytes 48
per cent. There were moderate anisocytosis and poikilocytosis. Diagnosis of
perniciotts anemia was made. (On the 15th day after transfusion the patient
took magnesium sulfate for stool examination.) TWo transfusions of 500 cc. of
citrated blood were given.
Case 89.--The patient was a woman, aged 60 years, who normally weighed 180
pounds and at time of examination weighed 127 pounds. Her chief complaint
was weakness. Transfusions elsewhere had improved her condition. She had
pigmented skin, sore tongue, and no free acid in the stomach. The red blood
count was 1,820,000, hemoglobin 38 per cent, and color index 1. The leuco-
cytes were 6,200, lymphocytes 33.5 per cent, and normoblasts 1 per cent.
There were marked anisocytosis and poikilocytosis. Diagnosis of pernicious
anemia was made. A series of four transfusions of citrated blood (500 cc.) was
given.
Case 91.--The patient was a woman, aged 53 years, weighing 137 pounds.
She showed marked weakness, glossitis, dyspnea, short pulmonic systolic mur-
mur, edema, and early symptoms of combined sclerosis. Her color was lemon-
yellow. Red blood cell count was 1,440,000. hemoglobin 35 per cent, color
index 1.24, leucocytes 6,600, with polynuclear neutrophils 56 per cent, smaU
lymphocytes 39.5 per cent, large lymphocytes 2.5 per cent, eosinophils 1.5 per
cent, neutrophilic myelocytes 0.5 per cent, normoblasts 1.5 per cent, megaloblasts
0.5 per cent; moderate anisocytosis and poikllocytosis. The diagnosis was per-
nicious anemia. Three transfusions (500 cc.) of citrated blood were given.
Case 103.--The patient was a woman, aged 52 years. She complained of
weakness. She was well until a year before, when she had influenza. There were
glossitis, posterolateral sclerosis, soft systolic murmur at the apex of the heart
transmitted to the axilla, and retinitis of pernicious anemia. The spleen was
palpable 1 inch. The red cell count was 960,000, hemoglobin 23 per cent, color
index 1.2+, leucocytes 2,400, polynuclear neutrophils 13.5per cent, small lympho-
cytes 78 per cent, large lymphocytes 8 per cent, neutrophilic myelocytes 0.5 per
cent, normoblasts 12 per cent, megaloblasts 1 per cent; marked anisocytosis and
poikilocytosis. While under observation profuse menstruation took place,
beginning December 20, 1919. A series of four transfusions of citrated blood
(500 cc.) was given.
In the curves in Text-fig. 2 it will be seen that in no case is there
any elimination of Group IV transfused blood that cannot be du-
156 STIFDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
plicated in the control cases with no blood disease (Ashby), and the
majority do not show any drop as great as that which occurred in
normal individuals. In Case 89 the fall up to the 22nd day would
seem to be blood volume improvement, as the patient's blood vol-
ume, calculated from the transfusion data immediately after trans-
fusion, was low, being 6.4 per cent of the body weight, whereas the
blood volume in secondary anemia as found by this method is 8 to 9
per cent of the body weight. The same may be said of the apparent
fall in Case 60. In Case 26 the count of unagglutinated corpuscles
with a blood volume of 8.5 per cent would have been 342,000, so the
count of this patient on the 6th day after transfusion was still more
than the number that would have been present if a normal blood
volume adjustment had been attained. As there was no count taken
between the 6th and 32nd days, the patient having gone home in the
meantime, we have no data as to when the drop which occurred in
the curve between those dates took place. We have no reason,
however, to assume that it was any sooner than would have been
normal.
Group IV blood transfusions in seven cases of pernicious anemia
were studied over periods varying from 15 to 26 days. These pro-
tocols have not been included to save space. In a case studied for
28 days two Group IV transfusions were given during that time.
At the end of the period there were 934,000 Group IV corpuscles
per c.mm. in the circulation. The initial Group IV transfusion
had given 488,000 Group IV corpuscles per c.mm. The count of
934,000 would seem to account for two transfusions. In a case
studied for 24 days the count of unagglutinable corpuscles fluc-
tuated between 738,000 and 596,000 for the first 3 days after trans-
fusion. After 24 days, the count was 627,000. A case studied for
20 days showed an initial count of 509,000 Group IV corpuscles and
a final count of 507,000. Two cases studied for 19 days showed in one
instance no elimination, as the initial Group IV corpuscle count was
436,000 and the final, 428,000. In the other instance there may
have been some elimination between the 17th and 18th days, as the
count changed from 440,000 to 389,000, although judging from pre-
vious fluctuations and the fact that the condition of the patient
markedly improved although the total red blood count also dropped
W~'Z~D ASI-IBY 157
somewhat it would seem possible that this drop was due to a blood
volume increase. A case studied for 15 days gave an unagglutinated
count of 548,000 on the 2nd day after transfusion and 542,000 on the
15th day. In none of these cases does there appear to have been
any elimination of Group IV transfused blood during the periods
studied, except perhaps in the case that was studied for 18 days,
and here the decrease in count, if it was due to elimination and not
to blood volume change, can be duplicated in a normal curve. Eight
other cases studied for shorter lengths of time showed no elimination
of the Group IV transfused blood.
In contrast to the stability of transfused blood in pernicious anemia
cases is the elimination which was found to take place in certain
patients with other conditions. In the cases which came under ob-
servation during the course of this study five appear to have shown
a progressive and rapid elimination of Group IV transfused blood.
This feature was most markedly shown in Case 118, one of hemolytic
jaundice, in which there was a continuous fall in the curve of trans-
fused blood until splenectomy, when the fall ceased sharply. Two
cases of aplastic anemia (Cases 81 and 102, Text-fig. 3) one of mye-
logenous leucemia (Case 39), and one of carcinoma of the kidney
with metastasis show rapid elimination of the transfused blood.
The protocols and chart follow.
Case 39.--The patient was a man, aged 55 years, weighing 166 pounds. He
had myelogenous leucemia with a white blood count of 215,000. A transfusion
was given, followed after 6 days by a radium treatment. Profuse sweating
occurred the 15th day after transfusion, with edema of the eyes and foreheadi
on the 18th day the edema was extreme. The patient died on the 19th day.
Case 81.--A man, aged 45 years, weighing 154 pounds. Diagnosis of apIastic
anemia was made. The patient died August 29, 1919, of bilateral broncho-
pneumonia on the 4th day after transfusion. There were miliary tubercles in the
spleen.
Case 83.--The patient was a man, aged 69 years, weighing 105 pounds. There
was carcinoma of the left kidney, with metastasis. A left nephrectomy was fol-
lowed by a transfusion with 500 cc. of Group IV citrated blood.
Case lO2.--The patient was a man, aged 28 years, weighing 124 pounds. In
October, 1918,he had influenza, which was followed by weakness and bleeding.
There was severe epistaxis in October, 1919. Upon examination in November,
the red blood count was 1,160,000, and the hemoglobin 13 per cent, with a color
index of 0.5+. The leucocytes were 10,800, with polynuclear neutrophils 25
158 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD II
per cent, small lymphocytes 37.5 per cent, large lymphocytes 35.5 per cent,
eosinophils 0.5 per cent, basophils 0.5 per cent, and neutrophilic myelocytes 1
per cent. There was moderate anisocytosis, and the platelet count was 134,000.
December 9. The platelet count was 96,000. A diagnosis of aplastic anemia
was made. Four transfusions were given. December 12. An eruption ap-
peared upon the arms and face, which proved to be smallpox'. January 1, 1920.
The patient died.
t.~ [~-r~l~ h~'- I
l.TTq
O'OD~
' -_ ' i i i o,_1 i i ,,~ i 'i'
-bh -'~-r'?~ "?:i r i i I I I~ 1 i I , , ~ ~ , ,
] j ' till Illl
. . . . I LI~ I
I!T -
I I I~I ! I I I!i T"g|l i i I I I [ [ I I I
i I I I I]'0"
I / illll
,III, !1 LI]TII l I I I I i I I Ii Ii I /] i I I iT! t I I I i I I I I I I I I I
,L-I-LJ~LJ I IIIt I I I I I I I I I I I I I
i~hv---~--~ I I'~1 I I I I I I I I I I I i I
Ilil
TEXT-Fro. 3. Control cases in which there appears to have been some pro-
gressive elimination of Group IV transfused blood. ~ Unagglutinated
corpuscles. - - - Total red blood count. - .... The count of unaggiu-
tinable corpuscles that would be expected in an individual the size of a patient
with a blood volume of 8.8 per cent of the body weight. ~ indicates a Group
IV transfusion; ~ a like group transfusion.
Case 116.--The patient was a boy, aged 13 years, weighing 76½ pounds. He
was jauridiced and weak. He had an enlarged spleen, which had been first
noticed 3 months previously. The red blood count was 1,750,000, and hemo-
globin 30 per cent, giving a color index of 0.8+. The white cell count was
19,500, with 65 per cent polynuclears and 25 per cent lymphocytes~ The plate-
lets were 148,000, and the bleeding time ½minute. There was increased fragility.
The blood picture did not improve after two transfusions. There was no evi-
dence of familial jaundice. A diagnosis of hemolytic jaundice was made.
Splenectomy was performed and the patient regained normal health.
WINIFP~ED ASHBY 159
When the curves of the total red blood counts of the pernicious
anemia patients are examined, it will be seen that, although in
most cases it would be difficult to say that there has been blood
destruction during the preceding transfusion studies, there are some
instances in which blood destruction is definite. In estimating these
curves it must be borne in mind that changes in the blood volume
very materially influence the total count. Changes in the number
of transfused blood corpuscles per cubic millimeter give some indica-
tion of changes in blood volume. When the transfused blood count
rises it is probable that the blood volume decreases, and when the
transfused blood count falls with a subsequent return, showing
that the fall Was not due to elimination, it is probable that the
blood volume increases. This has been assumed in the following
calculations.
In Case 23 on the 10th day after the initial Group IV transfusion
the total count was 1,100,000, the Group IV transfused blood was
520,000 minus the initial unagglutination of 70,000, or 450,000.
Since the subsequent Group II transfusion 2 days previously was
100 cc. larger than the Group IV transfusion, it should account for
at Ieast the same number of corpuscles. The total count before
this transfusion had been 1,170,000 with apparently a larger blood
volume, as the count of the unagglutinable corpuscles was less.
There have been added at least 450,000 corpuscles per c.mm., the
blood volume has decreased, which should have still further increased
the total red cell count, but the total count is still what it was before
transfusion. We have here evidence of destruction. In Case 61
on the 15th day after the Group IV transfusion the total count was
2,250,000. The Group IV corpuscles were 700,000, so the two like
group transfusions which had been given on the 9th and 14th
days should have added 1,400,000, or twice that amount. The
total count 3 days before these transfusions was 1,570,000, when
the blood volume, judging from the tmagglutinable corpuscle count,
was somewhat higher; 1,400,000 corpuscles per c.mm. have been
added to the blood, the blood volume has decreased, which would still
further increase the count, and the total count has increased only
680,000. Here there is a loss of over 700,000 corpuscles per c.mm.
within 8 days. In Case 73 on the 20th day after the Group IV
160 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
transfusion the total count was 3,000,000 and on the 23rd day it
was 2,300,000, with a decrease in blood volume, giving a loss of
more than 700,000 corpuscles per c.mm. In Case 80 between the
10th and 16th days after the Group IV transfusion, during which
time a like group transfusion was given, there was a decrease of
150,000, with a decrease in blood volume, following purgatives, of
nearly one-third. Here the loss was over 800,000 cells per c. ram. In
Case 29, at the time of the like transfusion given February 10, the
total count was lower afterwards than before, although the unagglu-
tinated counts showed the volume to be about the same. I~ a case
studied for 26 days there was a fall of 600,000 in the blood count
within 3 days with no volume increase to account for it.
Of course, it must be admitted that in these estimates we are omit-
ting the consideration of one factor; we do not know what is hap-
pening on the blood production side. The destruction may be greater
than it appears to be. The periods of destruction, however, are lim-
ited to certain parts of the curve. The blood destruction is by no
means of the same order as that seen in the case of hemolytic jaun-
dice studied. It is quite possible that it is of no greater magnitude
than that which is probably connected with the cyclic elimination
of transfused blood (Ashby) which has been seen to take place in
normal individuals.
There are, however, two cases in which blood destruction seems to
have been excessive. These cases are of especial interest because the
blood destruction of the corpuscles of the like group was so great
that practically nothing was left but Group IV transfused blood;
Group II transfused corpuscles were eliminated with the patient's
corpuscles.
In Case 57 (already given) on August 21 the count of unagglu-
tinable corpuscles after two Group IV transfusions, which had been
made subsequent to a Group II transfusion, was 940,000 per c. mm.
The initial unagglutinated count was 10,000 per c.mm., making
the Group IV corpuscles 930,000. The total count was 1,230,000,
making a difference of 300,000 to account for the patient's own
blood and a Group I1 transfusion given 16 days previously, which
would at the time probably have given a count of 450,000 per c.mm.
On the following day the count of unagglutinable corpuscles was
WINIFI~D ASII-BY 161
still 940,000, while the total blood count was 930,000, or, within experi-
mental error, the same. Unfortunately, however, this count was
not checked by a duplicate tube as one of the tubes leaked in transit
and a transfusion was given before we could get another count.
In Case 68 (Text-fig. 4), a woman, aged 36 years, who had had an
excellent remission following splenectomy, received a Group IV trans-
fusion on June 27. The patient's blood volume at the time was
low, as the 500 cc. transfusion gave a count of 930,000 unagglu-
tinated corpuscles per c. ram, On the 5th and 9th days after the
Group IV transfusion she received 500 cc. transfusions of Group
II citrated blood. The day after the second like group transfusion
the count of unagglutinated corpuscles was 1,120,000 per c. ram.
Since the initial count of unagglutinable corpuscles was 230,000
(this is unusually high) we take 890,000 as the count of Group IV
corpuscles. The two Group II transfusions with the same blood
volume should have given 1,780,000 corpuscles per c. mm. The
total count minus the Group IV count was 1,610,000. On the 17th
day after the Group IV transfusion the Group IV transfused corpus-
cles were 950,000 per c. ram.; the Group II transfused corpuscles
should have been at least 1,900,000 per c.mm., or twice the number
of Group IV corpuscles. The total number of Group II corpuscles,
including both the patient's own corpuscles and the transfused,
was 850,000. On the 21st day the total blood count and the count
of the unagglutinable corpuscles were equal within experimental error.
There were practically no clumps in the field, and a large number
of nucleated red cells in the film. The potency of the serum was
checked. A count repeated in the afternoon gave 990,000 for the
unagglutinable corpuscles, 760,000 for the Group IV corpuscles, and
1,100,000 for the total count. This would have left 340,000 Group
II corpuscles per c. ram. Since the count of the transfused Group
II corpuscles alone should have equaled 1,500,000 per c. ram., we
have here undoubtedly an elimination of the Group II transfused
corpuscles as well as the elimination of the patient's corpuscles.
Case 68.--The patient was a woman, aged 36 years, weighing 82 pounds.
She was very weak. Elsewherea diagnosisof perniciousanemia had been made,
and splenectomyperformedApril 28, 1917, afterwhichthere had beenvery great
improvement in the patient's condition. On June 24, 1919, the red blood cell
162 sTtr~y O~P TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
count was 1,060,000, hemoglobin28 per cent, color index 1.3, leucocyte count
7,400, lymphocytes74.5 per cent. In counting 200 white cells, 89 normoblasts
and 3megaloblastswere.seen. There weremarkedanisocytosisand poikilocytosis.
Menstruation was expected on the 21st day after the transfusion but did not
occur. The patient died a month later.
We have two cases (Nos. 64 and 49) which appear to be excep-
tions to the rule that in the pernicious anemia patients so
far studied there is no increased rate of elimination of Group IV
transfused blood. In Case 64 when the total red blood count
was 1,400,000 a 500 cc. Group IV transfusion was given. The
mF,[ I FIl,r/lll i t/ ,.j i i 1 I I I I ILI
I~i~ I I IXI ] I I I r I| ]',,LI I ! I I I I.J_l
l~il~,ll~rllTlll,I il"qIl~ IJ. IIJlJ-I
I[LL_!'~,,.~"ll I I I t I I I I lt/',I t J Itl I ~ tJ_J
;- tp, ill I T] ] I I I,I rl i i i i I I i F,,.I.! I I I I i i ! I
~liilllllll[ liIIl[i l
|lillll]ll~ll]l "l I I III
I i ~ I
~ ,,.OL,4 ~, J"F'lilll } I.'~llT'll,'t',;,"rll
Ill I t I T I ] I I I I I ] I I
~L Ill I t i I I I I i I I I ~ I ~i.T~ I
~- Ill III I I I rl I I I/ I
~:~ 0~:~|111 I i I I I I I I I I | I
,~ Ill I I F I I I I I I I f I I I I
t IJ i I, 1 !
;,.~ O,CI i i i i i i I i i | i j [ ! i-i I i i i i i J i [ i i
TExT-FIO.4. Curves of a patient who showed elimination of the Group II
transfused corpuscles as well as elimination of her own corpuscles.
Unagglutinated corpuscles. Total red blood count. ~ indicates a
Group IV transfusion; ~ a like group transfusion.
next day the count of unagglutinable corpuscles was 600,000. 5
days later when a second count was made the unagglutinable cor-
puscles had dropped to 99,000, which meant practically complete
elimination of the transfused blood. The patient's total count was
then 1,100,000. A Group II transfusion was given and 4 days later
the total red blood count was 700,000. The patient died within a
month. In Case 49 with the patient's initial blood count at 1,100,000
a 500 cc. Group IV transfusion was given, which gave 620,000 un-
agglutinated corpuscles per c. ram. and raised the total count to
1,500,000. The next day the unagglutinated count was 170,000
WINI~RED ASIIB¥ 163
while the total count was 1,200,000. On the following day the
unagglutinated count fell to 50,000, which was practically complete
elimination, with a return in the total count to 1,100,000, the level
before transfusion. There was no hematuria or transfusion reaction.
The transfusion blood apparently was eliminated within 2 days,
while the patient's own blood was unaffected. The only objection
to accepting these data is that at the time the work was done I did
not realize the possibility of a serum becoming non-specifically ag-
glutinating and I did not check the Group IV serum used with this
point in view. When in a third case this same elimination appeared
to be taking place it proved to be the fault of the serum. On going
back over the work I find that in each case on one of the days on which
these counts were made, counts were made on other patients which
gave the expected number of corpuscles, but I am not sure that the
same serum was used. Since I have checked this factor it is true
that I have not had a case in which rapid elimination of Group IV
corpuscles occurred, but it is also true that with one exception I
have not had an opportunity to study patients who were so near the
terminal stage.
Case49.--The patient was a man, aged 68 years. He had had previous re-
lapses. There was no free hydrochloric acid in the stomach. The red blood
count was 1,930,000, hemoglobin 40 per cent, giving a color index of 1. The
white blood count was 2,400. The diagnosis was pernicious anemia.
Case 64.--The patient was a woman, aged 36 years. She was very anemic
and thin. For 18 months she had been growing gradually weaker, and was in
an exhausted condition at the time of examination. There was evidence of
combined sclerosis. The hemoglobin was 22 per cent, the red blood count
1,040.000, color index 1.0+, and leucocyte count 1,900. The diagnosis was
perniciousanemia.
DISCUSSION.
This study of pernicious anemia patients during a series of trans-
fusions seems to indicate that although in some cases at certain
times there is much blood elimination, on the whole, blood destruction
is quiescent. Of course, it must be recognized that in this estimate
the factor of production is an unknown quantity. Group IV trans-
fused corpuscles are, as a rule, not eliminated so quickly as they are
in transfused persons without blood disease, so that so far as Group
164 STUDY OF TRANSFUSED BLOOD. II
IV corpuscles are concerned there is no abnormal blood elimination.
The fact that Group IV corpuscles are not eliminated rules out the
activity of any corpuscle poison during these periods. For in order
to assume the activity of such a poison we will have to make it one
that is not able to attack Group IV corpuscles, in which case the
incidence of pernicious anemia should at least be lower among Group
IV individuals than among others. In the 189 pernicious anemia
patients that have presented themselves at this Clinic during this
study 52 per cent were in Group IV, which happens to be a somewhat
higher incidence than the occurrence of Group IV individuals found in
general among our patients and donors. It must be that at the time
when the patients were under observation there was no hemotoxin
active. It has been argued that transfusion introduces something
which neutralizes the hemotoxin. It does not seem probable that
there would be a complete neutralization of the toxin and that the
patient's symptoms would still persist. Although in some ir~stances
a remission was brought about by the transfusion, in most cases
the patients returned for further transfusions after 3 months. 3
months, it will be remembered,is the average length of time that what
were pl:esumably the youngest Group IV transfused corpuscles lasted
in four pernicious anemia patients who were under observation to
the end of elimination, and it is probably also the length of life of
the like group transfusions. As in a few instances Group IV trans-
fused blood stayed while the patient's total blood count dropped
greatly, it would not seem that the protection of the Group IV
corpuscles was due to an antibody to this hypothetical hemotoxin
introduced by the transfused blood.
In the two cases, Nos. 75 and 68, in which there was the most
marked elimination, the Group IV transfusion was maintained and
both the patients' corpuscles and the transfused like group corpus-
cles were eliminated. Since normal like corpuscles were eliminated,
the elimination in these cases cannot be assumed to be due to any
intrinsic weakness of the corpuscle. Since in this elimination there
was a differentiation between like group corpuscles and Group IV
corpuscles it would seem that the factor bringing it about must have
been the result of an activity of the body itself. If we accept
the two cases in which the transfused blood disappeared rapidly,
WINI~RED ASHBY 165
we have additional data that would seem to bear out this conclusion.
In the case in which there were time data, the normal transfused
blood disappeared in 2 days, while the count of the patient's blood
was maintained. Here again there would seem to be a differentia-
tion between groups which would seem to be attributable only to
a physiologic blood-destroying function.
This speeding up of the blood-destroying activity of the body,
which seems to be the basis of the abnormal periods of blood de-
struction which are seen in transfused pernicious anemia patients,
might be due, it is conceivable, to the indirect effect of a present
toxin, or it might be due to some past injury which makes it difficult
for the organism to maintain a sufficient supply of some substance
necessary to colloidal equilibrium of the corpuscles. The recent
work of Clark and Evans showing a reduction in the hemolytic
inhibitory powers of serum of pernicious anemia patients to a point
markedly below what is found in normal serum, and my own find-
ing that at least as far as transfused blood is concerned physiologic
elimination is brought about by a spasmodic effort on the part of the
organism, are suggestive with regard to the mechanism by which
these sudden excessive eliminations seen in pernicious anemia are
brought about.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
Evidence is presented to show that there is no hemolytic toxin
producing the anemia in pernicious anemia.
Partial evidence is presented to show that the periods of active
blood destruction which are seen as the exception in pernicious anemia
cases during a series of transfusions are due to the activity of the
blood-destroying organs of the body rather than to the intrinsic
weakness of the pernicious anemia blood corpuscle.
It is questionable whether blood destruction is as important a
factor in producing the anemia of pernicious anemia as it is at present
usually assumed to be.
166 STUDY O1~ TRA1WSlelTSEDBLOOD. II
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Ashby, W., Study of transfused blood. I. The periodicity in eliminative activity
shown by the organism, J. Exp. Med., 1921,xxxiv, 127.
BIanchard, R., Substances toxiques prodnites par les parasites animaux, Arch.
Parisitol., 1905,x, 92.
Bunting, C. H., The etiology and pathogenesis of pernicious anmmia, Bull. ]ohm
Hopkins Hosp., 1905, xvi, 222.
Clark, H. M., and Evans, F. A., One factor in the mechanism of hemolysis in
hemolytic anemia, Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1920,xxxl,354.
Gulland, G. L., and Goodall, A., The blood, Edinburgh and London, 2nd edi-
tion, 1914.
Herter, C. A., On bacterial processes in the intestinal tract in some cases of
advanced anmmia, with especial reference to infection with B. avrogenes
capsulatus (B. welchli), J. Biol. Chem., 1906-07, ii, 1.
Hirschfeld, H., Lehrbuch der Blutkrankheiten flit Aertze und Studierende,
Berlin, 1918.
Hunter, W., Further investigations regarding the infective nature and etiology
of pernicious an*emia,Lancet, 1903, i, 283.
Pappenhelm, A., Unsere derzeitigen Vorstellungen vom Wesen, Ursachen und
Zustandekommen der pernizi6sen Aniimie, Folia bernard., 1919,xxiii, 149.
Sajous, C. E. de M., Analytic encyclopedia of practical medicine, Philadelphia,
1918, 7th edition, ix, index suppl., 133.
Schauman, 0., and Tallquist, T. W., Ueber die blutkSrperchenaufl6senden
Eigenschaften des breiten Bandwurms, Deutsch. reed. Woch., 1898,xxiv, 312.
Seyderhelm, R., t~ber die Eigenschaften und Wirkunges des 0strlns und seine
Beziehung zur pernizi6sen Aniimieder Pferde, Arch. exp. Path. u. Pharmakol.,
1918, lxxxii, 253.
Wells, H. G., CherMcal pathology, Philadelphia and London, 3rd edition, 1918,
306.
