BioMed Central
Page 1 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
BMC Medical Informatics and
Decision Making
Open AccessResearch article
Classifying the precancers: A metadata approach
Jules J Berman*1 and Donald E Henson2
Address: 1Cancer Diagnosis Program, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA and 2Department of Pathology, The George
Washington University Medical Center, Washington, D.C, USA
Email: Jules J Berman* - bermanj@mail.nih.gov; Donald E Henson - hensond@comcast.net
* Corresponding author
Abstract
Background: During carcinogenesis, precancers are the morphologically identifiable lesions that
precede invasive cancers. In theory, the successful treatment of precancers would result in the
eradication of most human cancers. Despite the importance of these lesions, there has been no
effort to list and classify all of the precancers. The purpose of this study is to describe the first
comprehensive taxonomy and classification of the precancers. As a novel approach to disease
classification, terms and classes were annotated with metadata (data that describes the data) so that
the classification could be used to link precancer terms to data elements in other biological
databases.
Methods: Terms in the UMLS (Unified Medical Language System) related to precancers were
extracted. Extracted terms were reviewed and additional terms added. Each precancer was
assigned one of six general classes. The entire classification was assembled as an XML (eXtensible
Mark-up Language) file. A Perl script converted the XML file into a browser-viewable HTML
(HyperText Mark-up Language) file.
Results: The classification contained 4700 precancer terms, 568 distinct precancer concepts and
six precancer classes: 1) Acquired microscopic precancers; 2) acquired large lesions with
microscopic atypia; 3) Precursor lesions occurring with inherited hyperplastic syndromes that
progress to cancer; 4) Acquired diffuse hyperplasias and diffuse metaplasias; 5) Currently
unclassified entities; and 6) Superclass and modifiers.
Conclusion: This work represents the first attempt to create a comprehensive listing of the
precancers, the first attempt to classify precancers by their biological properties and the first
attempt to create a pathologic classification of precancers using standard metadata (XML). The
classification is placed in the public domain, and comment is invited by the authors, who are
prepared to curate and modify the classification.
Background
Premalignant lesions are arguably the most important dis-
ease entities of modern man. In theory, the identification
and elimination of cancer precursors would lead to the
near-eradication of cancer [1]. The importance of the pre-
cancers was recently emphasized by the American Associ-
ation for Cancer Research Task Force on the Treatment
and Prevention of Intraepithelial Neoplasia [2]. In this
report, the Task Force recognized IEN [intraepithelial neo-
plasia] as a near-obligate precursor to invasive cancer and
identified IEN as a treatable disease. "Reducing IEN bur-
den, therefore, is an important and suitable goal for
Published: 20 June 2003
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3:8
Received: 31 January 2003
Accepted: 20 June 2003
This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
© 2003 Berman and Henson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted
in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 2 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
medical (noninvasive) intervention to reduce invasive
cancer risk and to reduce surgical morbidity. Achieving
the prevention and regression of IEN confers and consti-
tutes benefit to subjects and, in the opinion of this Task
Force, demonstrates effectiveness of a new treatment
agent."
In February, 2001, the NCI sponsored a workshop on pre-
cancer classification [3]. The task force concluded that
"there has been a lack of uniform terminology for the pre-
cancerous and noninvasive lesions."and recommended
that, "because of the consistent lack of a common diag-
nostic terminology, which is a major impediment to clas-
sification, agreement on the terminology and criteria for
the precancerous lesions in all major sites should be
sought."
Clinical Importance of a Precancer Classification
The best medical discoveries are generalizable. For exam-
ple, if antibiotics were only effective on a single bacteria,
Alexander Fleming's chance discovery would have had
limited medical value. Bacteria have common biological
properties (e.g. a cell wall, small size, etc.) that make them
different from flowers, insects and people. Knowledge of
the general properties of bacteria can inspire therapeutic
strategies that extend its value to all the members of its
class. Bacteriologists learn the names of all the different
bacteria and group the different bacteria based on shared
properties. Bacteriologists use their knowledge of bacterial
classes to develop new antibiotics and new therapeutic
strategies.
Classification efforts typically begin by listing all the
members of the classification domain (i.e. creating a tax-
onomy). Until now, there has been no effort to list the
precancers and or to associate precancer terms with their
synonyms. Any given precancer may have been studied by
different researchers using different terms for the same
lesion. Absent a definitive terminology, distinct lesions
may have been studied under the same name. The absence
of a comprehensive precancer terminology severely limits
the clinical value of research that includes precancer
specimens.
Until now, there has been no effort to group the precan-
cers by shared clinical, morphologic or biomolecular fea-
tures. If an agent were discovered that induced regression
of a particular precancer, there would be no organized
precancer classification prompting anyone to select bio-
logically related lesions likely to respond to the same
agent.
It is the opinion of the authors that precancers should
have a biological classification. Database annotations
using the precancer classification will provide a mecha-
nism whereby each precancer, its' related precancerous
lesions, and the cancers known to develop from these
lesions, can be linked with relevant data contained in bio-
logical data sets (e.g. gene expression arrays and proteom-
ics arrays, tissue microarrays, pathology data sets).
Informatics Aspects of Classification
Modern classifications serve as informatics devices capa-
ble of linking, integrating and retrieving information con-
tained in diverse biological data sets. Creators of
biomedical databases use terminologies to annotate indi-
vidual data elements. Data annotation involves append-
ing descriptive information to experimental data with the
intention of creating an encapsulated data object that can
be intelligently connected to related data in other data-
bases. Annotations are a critical part of the data, because
the annotations assist in the discovery of the biological
relevance of the data element. Lesions annotated with ter-
minology from the same classification can be linked, even
when they occur in heterogeneous data sets.
In the last several years, a new type of data annotation
model has emerged that will greatly enhance the research
value of publicly available datasets. This model is the self-
describing data collection. In this model, all of the data
fields are tagged by metadata. Metadata is data that
describes the data elements. XML (Extensible Mark-up
Language) is the most popular format for metadata anno-
tation [4]. The precancer classification is embodied in an
XML file. The data elements of the classification are
instances of the precancer domain and the properties of
the domain instances. Examples of precancer data ele-
ments are values such as "DCIS" and "Actinic keratosis"
and "000932" and "ENG". The metadata are the flanking
tags such as <concept>, <synonym>, <cui>, and <lan-
guage>. The Precancer XML file itself is annotated with
sufficient information that anyone opening the file can
fully understand the file contents.
Now and in the future, researchers will need to organize
their data in a way that permits thoughtful analysis. Labo-
ratories will be producing terabytes of data, in the form of
images, tissue micoarrays, gene expression arrays and pro-
teomic arrays. None of this data will have any value unless
it is described in a standard manner that computers can
understand. Classifications exist to organize the instances
of a domain so that information assembled from data-
bases can be generalized or related to defined taxonomic
groups.
Definition of Precancer and Common Terms in Use
During carcinogenesis, morphologically identifiable
lesions occur that precede the development of invasive
cancer. These lesions are called precancers, premalignan-
cies, preneoplastic lesions, incipient cancers,
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 3 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
intraepithelial neoplasias, and preinvasive cancers. The
plethora of terms reflects the difficulty of choosing a
"best" canonical class term for the precancerous lesions.
Currently, the term "intraepithelial neoplasia" seems to
enjoy wide usage among the community of pathologists,
but this term has limitations:
1. Not all epithelial precancers are intraepithelial. Most of
the mucosal dysplasias have a well-defined territory
bounded by the junction between the epithelium and the
underlying stroma. But not all premalignant epithelial
lesions can be identified by the presence of atypical cell
populations delimited by a basement membrane. Dys-
plastic lesions of the liver, kidney, thyroid and adrenal are
not delimited by a basement membrane [1].
2. Not all precancers are epithelial [1]. Intratubular germ
cell neoplasms of testis, myelodysplasias, and non-auton-
omous lymphomas are examples of non-epithelial
precancers.
3. Not all intraepithelial neoplasms are precancers. Neo-
plasms that are intraepithelial but that are not precancers
include: seborrheic keratoses, intraepidermal nevi, com-
mon warts and most so-called benign epithelial tumors.
Likewise, the term pre-invasive cancer raises an existential
question. Use of the term "pre-invasive cancer" implies
that precancers have attained the biological properties of
a cancer. This assumption may not be true. Precancers
may lack constitutive properties of cancer or may have cer-
tain attributes that are absent in cancers. At this point,
there is insufficient knowledge to conclude that precan-
cers are types of cancer. In this article, the authors use the
term precancers because this term conveys only the defin-
ing features: occurrence prior to cancers, and existence as
an identifiable lesion.
When considering all the possible classes of precancers, it
is worth noting that:
1. Not all precancers are neoplastic. A diffusely hyperplas-
tic lesion with no known neoplastic properties, but with a
frequent association with cancer arising from the hyper-
plastic tissue, would be considered a precancer. Examples
include diffuse atypical endometrial hyperplasia, AIDS-
associated lymphoid hyperplasia, helicobacter-associated
gastric MALT hyperplasia, diffuse gastric intestinal meta-
plasia, etc.
2. Precancers need not progress to cancer and often have a
high rate of regression [5,6]. The low-risk of progression
to cancer suggests a strategy for treatment based on
enhancing the intrinsic regression rate of precancers [6].
However, when a precancer progresses, cancer is the obli-
gate outcome (i.e. precancers never progress into types of
lesions other than cancer). This biological property allows
us to infer that agents that induce precancers are
carcinogens.
3. The different kinds of precancers may vary in every bio-
logic feature except those specified in their definition
(identifiable lesions that precede the development of can-
cer). Since precancers, by definition, are the morphologic
lesions that precede cancers, one can expect precancers to
occur in a somewhat younger population than the popu-
lation of people who have cancers. Using the same line of
reasoning, one can expect agents (chemical or biological)
that induce precancers to also induce cancers.
The biological diversity of precancers
When the different precancers are listed, it becomes
apparent that they fall into very different biological
classes. Consider the following three lesions, all of which
are usually considered to be precancers:
1. Squamous dysplasia of the uterine cervix. Squamous
dysplasias are microscopic foci of atypical squamous cells.
They are not tumors in the sense that they do not present
as a growing mass. In the cervix, they are almost always
associated with a viral etiology.
2. Tubular adenoma of colon. Tubular adenomas are
benign tumors that can measure several centimeters in
diameter. Nuclear atypia can be minimal or marked.
3. Barrett's esophagus. This is a glandular metaplasia
occurring in the esophageal mucosa caused by local
chronic inflammation. These lesions typically show no
nuclear atypia. They are associated with an increased risk
of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
What do these lesions have in common? They are identi-
fiable lesions that can precede the development of cancer.
Other than that, they would seem to have very few fea-
tures in common. The diversity of biological types of pre-
cancers calls for the creation of a precancer classification.
Creating the Precancer Classification
A classification is a hierarchy of taxa (informative features
that characterize an entity and distinguish it from other
entities) and a set of generalizable features that apply to
groups of taxa. For instance, if "chair" is classified under
"furniture," then we can expect that all of the generaliza-
tions that we can form on the topic of furniture will apply
to chairs. This is actually a remarkable concept as it allows
us to apply general knowledge to specific items. Even if I
know nothing about chairs, knowing that a chair is a type
of furniture allows me to infer many things about chairs
based on my general knowledge of furniture. If furniture
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 4 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
is something that belongs in a house, then a chair belongs
in a house.
The task of classification usually begins by listing every
member of a domain (in this case, every precancer) and
then choosing groups that carry the greatest number of
informative biological generalizations to every member of
the group. The list of every member of a domain is called
a taxonomy. A classification is a grouped taxonomy [7].
The process of classifying lesions is different from the
process of identifying lesions. Identification involves
assigning a name [from an existing classification] to a
lesion. The distinction between classification and identifi-
cation is of great importance, because classification
schemes, unlike identification schemes, have properties
that can be of immense importance in medical research
[7].
1. A classification contains every instance in its domain,
and every instance has a single and unique slot in the clas-
sification. This facilitates the design of experiments that
include every instance of related lesions.
2. Good classifications contain classes carefully selected to
have the maximally informative set of generalizable fea-
tures common to all the class instances. Having a classifi-
cation allows us to compare two different instances based
on the inherited properities of their classes.
3. Classifications support annotation using the elements
of the classification (classes and instances) as keys. Data-
base annotation can be used to improve the classification
system.
Classifications are also different from ontologies. Ontolo-
gies create logical rules between specified members of a
group [8]. Ontologies are expected to have "competence",
the ability to respond to queries that draw from the formal
relationships among group members. A classification
approach was chosen, because the two primary goals of
this effort were to create a comprehensive listing of pre-
cancer terms and to provide a broad hierarchy for precan-
cer concepts. Establishing a set of logical rules for the
precancers is, at this time, not feasible.
What precancer classification is currently available?
ICD-O (International Classification of Diseases – Oncol-
ogy) lists virtually no precancerous lesions [9]. The ICD-O
is used by cancer registrars to annotate, in a uniform way,
cases of treated malignancies. With a few exceptions (such
as ductal carcinoma in situ of breast) the cancer registries
do not collect information on precancers. The National
Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology and End
Results (SEER) and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention use data collected by the cancer registries to
compile national statistics on the incidence of cancer. The
most comprehensive summary of the clinical and patho-
logic features of precancers is found in "Pathology of
Incipient Neoplasia", edited by Henson and Albores-
Saavedra [10]. None of these sources provides a classifica-
tion of the precancers.
Precancer Classification
The following six classes were used: 1) Acquired micro-
scopic precancers; 2) acquired large lesions with micro-
scopic atypia; 3) Precursor lesions occurring with
inherited hyperplastic syndromes that progress to cancer;
4) Acquired diffuse hyperplasias and diffuse metaplasias;
5) Currently unclassified entities; and 6) Superclass and
modifiers.
1. Acquired microscopic precancers
These are the lesions that most people think of when they
hear the term precancer. All of the so-called intraepithelial
neoplasias fall into this category. Most examples of the
microscopic precancers occur commonly (actinic kerato-
sis, cervical dysplasia). They tend to be multifocal. They
tend to be non-inherited lesions, often with an identifia-
ble causation (e.g. sunlight, human papillomavirus infec-
tion). They seldom occur in children. Exceptions are
inherited diseases that heighten sensitivity to a causal
agent, such as the early appearance of actinic keratoses in
children with Xeroderma Pigmentosum. Morphologi-
cally, they tend to have a high degree of nuclear atypia.
The microscopic epithelial precancers grow by a subtle
replacement of the normal mucosa, without producing a
mass, despite many replicative cycles of growth. They
progress to invasive cancer while still relatively small. The
term dysplasia is often applied to these lesions. Dysplasia,
in the context of precancer, is somatically inherited
nuclear atypia. Cytologists use the morphologic features
of dysplasia to identify precancer cells. Class 1 precancers
often have an identifiable non-dysplastic stage that pre-
cedes the appearance of nuclear atypia (e.g. squamous
metaplasia of bronchus, Barrett's esophagus without aty-
pia, junctional nevus, intestinal metaplasia of stomach)
2. Acquired large lesions with morphologic atypia
These lesions tend to have a uniform appearance through-
out most of their long existence, even from the smallest
size (i.e. they have a long, stable growth phase). They tend
not to have precursor lesions from identifiable micro-
scopic precancers (e.g. class 2 lesions do not seem to arise
from class 1 lesions). Their chance of becoming malignant
usually increases as the size of the lesion increases. When
they become malignant, there is usually a morphologi-
cally apparent focus from within the large lesion that has
crowding, irregular growth pattern and marked cellular
atypia that is strikingly different from the surrounding
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 5 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
cells. This focus enlarges, shows frank invasion, and is the
presumed origin of the cancer that develops from the pre-
cancer. These lesions tend not to regress spontaneously.
They tend to be long-lived and do not progress to cancer
without first growing to a large size. These lesions are
often multiple but do not occur in large numbers (hun-
dreds) unless there is a germline mutation. Prototypical
acquired large precancers are colon adenoma and
myelodysplasia
3. Precursor lesions occurring with inherited hyperplastic syndromes
that often progress to cancer
These lesions tend to occur very rarely in the general pop-
ulation, but may occur with a high probability (some-
times 100%) in patients carrying the germline mutation.
The prototypical lesions are the Ret-gene disorders. Muta-
tions in the RET gene are associated with the disorders
multiple endocrine neoplasia, type IIA (MEN2A), multi-
ple endocrine neoplasia, type IIB (MEN2B), and heredi-
tary medullary thyroid carcinoma.
Lesions in this general category tend to have a single gene
mutation that may be the only lesion found in the precur-
sor lesions. The precuror lesions tend to have the mor-
phology of simple hyperplasias, without much nuclear
atypia. Precursor lesions tend to be multiple, sometimes
occurring in the hundreds, and bilateral in paired organs.
These lesions tend to occur in a much younger population
than the acquired precancers. The resulting cancers can
also occur at a relatively young age.
4. Acquired diffuse hyperplasias and diffuse metaplasias
With few exceptions, acquired small focal metaplasias and
hyperplasias have a very low chance of progression to can-
cer, and have been excluded from the classification
schema because they rarely result in cancer without first
growing into diffuse lesions (the class 4 lesions) or acquir-
ing nuclear atypia (class 1 lesions).
Diffuse metaplastic lesions commonly precede cancers. It
is presumed that all bronchogenic squamous dysplasia
arises from squamous metaplasia. The normal bronchus
simply does not have any squamous cells. The squamous
cells in bronchial squamous dysplasia must have origi-
nated from a metaplastic focus for directly from non-
squamous bronchial cells that differentiated directly to a
dysplastic squamous phenotype.
The prototypical lesions are the diffuse Barrett's esopha-
gus, diffuse intestinal metaplasia of stomach, and diffuse
endometrial hyperplasia. These lesions tend to have
chronic identifiable causes (e.g. gastroesophageal reflux
disease, post lye ingestion esophagus, chronic gastritis,
long-term tamoxifen therapy), and tend not to regress so
long as the causation persists. Small foci of dysplastic pre-
cancers (Class 1) may arise from the diffuse hyperplasias
and metaplasias.
This class of precursor may include the so-called regress-
ing cancers, such as helicobacter-associated maltomas and
AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma that can grow as multi-
ple tumors, all of which can quickly regress when the caus-
ative agent is withdrawn (e.g. after antibiotic treatment for
Helicobacter or after normal immune status is restored
after withdrawal of cyclosporine in transplant recipients).
This class may also include secondary aplastic anemia
(e.g. benzene toxicity), where the marrow is repopulated
by an emerging population of hyperplastic cells that carry
a a heightened risk of progressing to acute leukemia.
5. Currently unclassified entities
Most precancers will fall into one of the first four
described classes. However, classifications may contain a
subset of cases that defy facile classification. For example,
the platypus has challenged animal classifiers. Aristotle
had no trouble recognizing that dolphins were mammals,
but it took the scientific community two millennia to
agree.
We have created an "unclassified" category of precancers
for the current draft classification
6. Superclass and modifiers
A superclass is created to contain general precancer terms
(e.g. precancer, dysplasia)
Methods
The National Library of Medicine's UMLS (Unified Medi-
cal Language System) is a set of tools that facilitate the use
of medical terminologies and the semantic relationships
between terms and vocabularies. The UMLS Metathesau-
rus is one of three knowledge sources within the UMLS
and contains concepts and terms from about 100 different
medical vocabularies. The primary UMLS metathesaurus
file used in the construction of the precancer terminology
is MRCON. The 2003 MRCON file is over 150 Mbytes in
length and contains over two million different terms
belonging to nearly a million different concepts. MRCON
and the entire UMLS metathesaurus are available at no
cost from the National Libary of Medicine at:
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
An example of some records from the MRCON file is
shown:
C0004763|ENG|P|L0004763|VO|S1397347|Barretts
Esophagus|0|
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 6 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
C0004763|ENG|P|L0004763|VO|S1397348|Esophagus,
Barrett's|0|
C0004763|ENG|P|L0004763|VO|S1459012|barrett's
esophagus|2|
C0004763|ENG|P|L0004763|VO|S1940341|Barretts
esophagus|0|
C0004763|ENG|P|L0004763|VW|S0038968|Esophagus,
Barrett|0|
C0004763|ENG|S|L0292386|PF|S0364034|Columnar-
lined esophagus|3|
C0004763|ENG|S|L0292386|VCW|S0369397|ESOPHA-
GUS, COLUMNAR-LINED|0|
C0004763|ENG|S|L0292386|VO|S0842892|Columnar-
lined oesophagus|3|
Notice that numerous variant terms for Barrett's esopha-
gus all map to the same number in the first column,
C0004763. This is the UMLS CUI (Concept Unique Iden-
tifier) for Barrett's esophagus.
The authors collected precancer terms from the UMLS.
After review of the terms, the authors added supplemental
terms from their own knowledge. Every additional term
added by the authors matched a pre-existing UMLS con-
cept. About 10% of the precancer synonyms were contrib-
uted by the authors.
After the terminology was assembled, the authors created
a classification system and assigned each precancer term
to one of the precancer classes. The entire classification
was prepared as a metadata document using XML (eXten-
sible Markup Language) annotation.
Results
The XML document containing the precancer classifica-
tion and all accompanying metadata is PRESUM.XML
(425 kilobytes) [see Additional file: 3]. An example of the
metadata annotation in the XML file is:
<concept><cui>0432487
</cui> <precancer_class>Acquired diffuse hyperplasias/
metaplasias </precancer_class><synonym>
<term> Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder </
term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> PTLD – Post-transplant lymphopro-
liferative disorder </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> Post-transp lymphoprolif dis </term>
</synonym>
<synonym> <term> PTLD-Post-trns lymphprolif dis </
term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> PTLD </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> PTLPD </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> PT-LPD </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> post transplantation lymphoprolifer-
ative disorders </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> post transplantation lymphoprolifer-
ative disorder </term> </synonym>
<synonym> <term> post transplantation lymphoprolifer-
ative disease </term> </synonym> </concept>
In the example, five metadata tags are employed: <con-
cept>, <cui>, <precancer_class>, <term>, <synonym>,
along with and their corresponding closure tags (marked
by a slash character). Because XML is case-sensitive, lower-
case letters were consistently employed to simplify imple-
mentation. The <concept> tag indicates that a new con-
cept will follow. Since all of the precancer concepts derive
from or correspond to existing UMLS concepts, it was con-
venient to assign each precancer concept with the UMLS
Concept Unique Identifier and mark these with a <cui>
tag. Each precancer concept is assigned one of the precan-
cer classes. In this case, the term "PTLD, post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder" is assigned to the precancer
class of "Acquired diffuse hyperplasias/metaplasias." The
term is flanked by <term> tags and the class designation is
flanked by <precancer_class> tags. Because the term is a
synonymous variant, it is nested in <synonym> tags. Term
and synonym tags are used for each of the term variants of
the single concept.
Raw XML files are made difficult to read by the large quan-
tity of markup (XML tags) that annotate data elements.
Typically, XML files are made readable with transforma-
tion scripts or with embedded presentation instructions
(cascading style sheets) [11]. A Perl script (PRESUM.PL)
was created to parse the XML file, counting the classified
lesions and outputting a viewable HTML file
(PRESUM2.HTM) and a summary statement as follows:
The total number of precancer terms => 4700
The total number of precancer concepts => 568
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 7 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
(a single concept has, on average, 8.3 near-synonymous
terms)
Number of concepts falling in the six precancer classes:
Acquired microscopic precancers => 262
Acquired diffuse hyperplasias/metaplasias => 37
Acquired large lesions with cancerous potential => 110
Precancers in Inherited hyperplastic syndromes => 25
Precancer superclass and associated modifiers => 42
Unclassified => 92
Number of Non-English terms
Russian => 184
German => 320
Finnish => 59
Italian => 63
Portuguese => 188
French => 145
Spanish => 206
The viewable html file is provided as a supplemental file
[see Additional file: 1] with this article.
The most current versions of the Precancer Classification
XML and the transforming Perl script are avaliable from
the following URL:
http://65.222.228.150/jjb/presum.tar.gz
Discussion
The different precancers have only their definition in com-
mon: they are the morphologically distinctive lesions that
precede the development of cancer. Beyond that, precan-
cers can differ from one another by almost every conceiv-
able property. A microscopic cervical dysplasia seems to
be fundamentally different from a RAEB (refractory ane-
mia with excess blasts). However, both lesions are consid-
ered cancer precursors. A single tissue may have
fundamentally different precancer entities, all preceding
the same type of cancer. A bowel diffusely involved by
ulcerative colitis, an aberrant crypt, and a colon adenoma
are seemingly disparate lesions. But they all precede the
development of colon carcinoma. In classifying the pre-
cancers, the authors tried to distinguish the precancers
based on the intrinsic properties of lesions. The exercise of
creating a comprehensive classification brought forth a
variety of issues.
Limitations of the Precancer Classification
The history of the classification of living organisms runs
through thousands of years and numerous revisions. In a
recent editorial by Thiele and Yates, the authors observed
that taxonomy projects are often bypassed by funding
agencies that prefer high profile experimental efforts [12].
Stephen Gould has commented that taxonomy is por-
trayed as the dullest of all fields, "But classifications are
not passive ordering devices in a world objectively divided
into obvious categories. Taxonomies are human decisions
imposed upon nature – theories about the causes of
nature's order. The chronicle of historical changes in clas-
sification provides our finest insight into conceptual revo-
lutions in human thought. Objective nature does exist,
but we can converse with her only through the structure of
our taxonomic systems" [13].
Classifications are suggested by individuals, subject to
modification by peers. Several issues, in particular, require
community review.
Issues of inclusion
The authors chose to err on the side of inclusion when
developing the taxonomy. If a lesion was considered a
putative precancer (even when the evidence seemed
doubtful), it was added to the taxonomy.
Issues of exclusion
How does the classification deal with conditions associ-
ated with cancer but for which no precancerous lesion is
known? These conditions are often called cancer syn-
dromes. Persons identified (possibly through genetic test-
ing) with a cancer syndrome who have not yet developed
cancers may be considered to be in a precancerous stage of
their disease. In the absence of morphologically identifia-
ble precancerous lesions, these conditions were excluded
from the classification. Since these syndromes may have
enormous relevance to our understanding of the carcino-
genic process, they were collected as a separate listing.
When the precancer classification undergoes community
review, these syndromes may be added as a distinct class.
It is available as a supplemental file with this publication
[see Additional file: 2].
Issues of unclassifiability
Not all precancerous lesions fit into a biological group. In
most cases, the unclassifiable lesions are concept "place-
holders", such as "atypical squamous cells of undeter-
mined significance."
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 8 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
Issues of omission
Because the classification was completed by two authors,
it is presumed that researchers in the field of precancers
will wish to add lesions to the taxonomy. This may be par-
ticularly important for veterinary and comparative pathol-
ogists, as the current classification is heavily weighted
toward human lesions.
Issues of incorrect classification
Classifications are hypotheses about the nature of their
subject domain. A taxonomist needs to place every known
instance (precancer, in this case) somewhere in the classi-
fication. Once this is done, the classification can be tested
and re-organized.
Conclusions
This work represents the first attempt to create a compre-
hensive listing of the precancers, the first attempt to clas-
sify precancers by their biological properties and the first
attempt to create a pathologic classification of the precan-
cers that recognizes fundamental biologic and morpho-
logic distinctions (taxons) among the precancers. A draft
classification, placed into the public domain, is a first step
toward a clinically useful classification of the precancers.
The metadata format (XML) provides researchers with
access to a comprehensive, organised listing that can be
used to annotate and link precancer lesions contained in
biomedical data sets. Public comment is welcomed.
Competing interests
None declared.
Table 1: Class Examples
Acquired Small or Microscopic Precancers
HGSIL (High grade squamous intraepithelial lesion of uterine cervix)
AIN (Anal intraepithelial neoplasia)
Dysplasia of vocal cord
Aberrant crypts (of colon)
PIN (prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia)
Acquired Large Lesions with Nuclear Atypia
Tubular Adenoma
AILD (angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy with dysproteinemia)
Atypical meningioma
Gastric Polyp
Large plaque parapsoriasis
Myelodysplasia
Papillary transitional cell carcinoma in situ
Refractory Anemia with Excess Blasts
Schneiderian papilloma
Precursor lesions occurring with inherited hyperplastic syndromes that progress to cancer
Atypical mole syndrome
C cell adenomatosis
MEA
Acquired diffuse hyperplasias and diffuse metaplasias
AIDS
Atypical lymphoid hyperplasia
Paget's Disease of Bone
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease
Ulcerative colitis
Superclass and modifiers
ATYPIA
Atypical cell
Atypical hyperplasia
Atypical regeneration
Dysplasia
Dysplastic
In situ cancer
Inflammatory atypia
Mild dysplasia
Premalignant
Preneoplastic state
Publish with BioMed Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK
Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and publishedimmediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp
BioMedcentral
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2003, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8
Page 9 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
Authors' contributions
Dr. Berman wrote the first drafts of the paper and the clas-
sification. Dr. Berman designed the XML metadata and
wrote the Perl script that transforms the XML file to
HTML. Dr. Henson organized the NIH workshop that
developed the conceptual framework for the classifica-
tion. Dr. Henson edited multiple drafts of the article and
the classification.
Additional material
Acknowledgements
The opinions and assertions included in the article and accompanying files
are the opinions of the authors and do not represent the policies of the
NIH or any other Federal agency. This work was previously presented as
an abstract to APIII, Advancing Pathology Informatics, Imaging and the
Internet, October 2–4, 2002, in Pittsburgh, PA. The presentation abstract
will appear in the Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine in the fall,
2003.
References
1. Seidman JD and Berman JJ: Premalignant non-epithelial lesions:
a biological classification. Modern Pathology 1993, 6:544-554.
2. O'Shaughnessy JA, Kelloff GJ, Gordon GB, Dannenberg AJ, Hong WK,
Fabian CJ, Sigman CC, Bertagnolli MM, Stratton SP and Lam S et al.:
Recommendations of the American Association for Cancer
Research Task Force on the Treatment and Prevention of
Intraepithelial Neoplasia. Treatment and Prevention of
Intraepithelial Neoplasia: An Important Target for Acceler-
ated New Agent Development. Clin Cancer Res 2002, 8:314-346.
3. Henson DE, AlboresSaavedra J, Berman JJ, Chung D, Czerniak B,
Franklin WA, Hamilton SR, Hruban RH, Jaffe ES, Stanley E, Shackney
SE, Sobin L, Srivastava S, Tavassoli F, Travis W and Wolfe HJ: Meet-
ing Summary: A Molecular Classification for Precancerous
Lesions, Report of an Early Diagnosis Research Network
Working Group. [http://www3.cancer.gov/prevention/cbrg/mol
class.html]. February 1–2, 2001
4. W3C Architecture Domain. Extensible Markup Language
(XML) [http://www.w3c.org/XML/]
5. Foulds L: Neoplastic Development. Academic Press, New York
1969.
6. Berman JJ and Moore GW: The role of cell death in the growth
of preneoplastic lesions: a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Cell Proliferation 1992, 25:549-557.
7. Mayr E: The growth of biological thought: diversity, evolution
and inheritance. Belknap Press, Cambridge 1982.
8. Ahmed K, Ayers D, Birbeck M, Cousins J, Dodds D, Lubell J, Nic M,
Rivers-Moore D, Watt A, Worden R and Wrightson A: Profes-
sional XML Meta Data. Wrox, Birmingham 2001.
9. Fritz A, Percy C, Jack A, Shanmugaratnam K, Sobin L, Parkin DM and
Whelan S: International Classification of Diseases for Oncol-
ogy (ICD-O). World Health Organization, Lyons Third2001.
10. Henson DE and Albores-Saavedra JA: Pathology of Incipient
Neoplasia. Oxford University Press, New York 2001.
11. White C, Quin L and Burman L: Mastering XML: Premium
Edition. Sybex, San Francisco 2001.
12. Thiele K and Yeates D: Tension arises from duality at the heart
of taxonomy: Names must both represent a volatile hypoth-
esis and provide a key to lasting information. Nature 2002,
419:337. inclusive
13. Gould SJ: Full house: The spread of excellence from Plato to
Darwin. Harmony, New York 1996.
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/3/8/prepub
Additional File 1
Presum.htm is the classification file for the precancers, in viewable HTML
format.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1472-
6947-3-8-S1.htm]
Additional File 2
Omimprec.htm contains inherited conditions associated with cancer risks,
in HTML format. OMIM (online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) num-
bers are provided for each lesion.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1472-
6947-3-8-S2.htm]
Additional File 3
Presum.tar.gz is a tarballed-gzipped compressed file containing pre-
sum.xml, the XML data file of the precancer classification, and presum.pl,
a Perl script that transforms the XML file into a viewable HTML file,
presum2.htm
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1472-
6947-3-8-S3.gz]
