RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
Ubiquitin fusion expression and tissue-dependent
targeting of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco
Li Tian1,2,3
and Samuel SM Sun2,3*
Abstract
Background: Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (hG-CSF) is an important human cytokine which has
been widely used in oncology and infection protection. To satisfy clinical needs, expression of recombinant hG-CSF
has been studied in several organisms, including rice cell suspension culture and transient expression in tobacco
leaves, but there was no published report on its expression in stably transformed plants which can serve as a more
economical expression platform with potential industrial application.
Results: In this study, hG-CSF expression was investigated in transgenic tobacco leaves and seeds in which the
accumulation of hG-CSF could be enhanced through fusion with ubiquitin by up to 7 fold in leaves and 2 fold in
seeds, leading to an accumulation level of 2.5 mg/g total soluble protein (TSP) in leaves and 1.3 mg/g TSP in
seeds, relative to hG-CSF expressed without a fusion partner. Immunoblot analysis showed that ubiquitin was
processed from the final protein product, and ubiquitination was up-regulated in all transgenic plants analyzed.
Driven by CaMV 35S promoter and phaseolin signal peptide, hG-CSF was observed to be secreted into apoplast in
leaves but deposited in protein storage vacuole (PSV) in seeds, indicating that targeting of the hG-CSF was tissue-
dependent in transgenic tobacco. Bioactivity assay showed that hG-CSF expressed in both seeds and leaves was
bioactive to support the proliferation of NFS-60 cells.
Conclusions: In this study, the expression of bioactive hG-CSF in transgenic plants was improved through
ubiquitin fusion strategy, demonstrating that protein expression can be enhanced in both plant leaves and seeds
through fusion with ubiquitin and providing a typical case of tissue-dependent expression of recombinant protein
in transgenic plants.
Keywords: hG-CSF, plant bioreactor, recombinant protein, tobacco, ubiquitin
Background
Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (hG-CSF)
is a hematopoietic growth factor which plays an impor-
tant role in neutrophil-based immune defense against
invading bacteria and other microorganisms due to its
regulatory role in the proliferation, differentiation, survi-
val and activation of neutrophils and their precursors
mechanism [1,2]. Several reports showed that hG-CSF
can be used to reinforce the immune system in patients
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), pneumonia,
diabetic foot infections, leukemia and febrile neutropenia
[3] and to treat cancer patients undergoing chemother-
apy to alleviate the depression of white blood cell levels
produced by cytotoxic therapeutic agents [4,5]. Human
G-CSF is now one of the important pharmaceutical pro-
teins in cancer treatment. To satisfy the clinical needs of
hG-CSF, recombinant hG-CSF has been produced in sev-
eral different organisms, such as mammalian cells, yeast
and Escherichia coli [6-8].
In the last twenty years, many recombinant therapeutic
proteins have been expressed in plant production plat-
forms [9,10] and the potential of large-scale production
of pharmaceutical proteins using plant bioreactors as effi-
cient and economical systems has been demonstrated
[11-15]. However, there are only a few reports on the
expression of hG-CSF in plants. Hong et al. [16]
expressed recombinant hG-CSF in rice cell suspension
culture with a maximum yield of 2.5 mg/L after 13 days
incubation, but the expression in cell culture was not
stable and dropped quickly. Besides this rice cell culture
* Correspondence: ssun@cuhk.edu.hk
2
Life Science Division, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University,
Shenzhen 518055, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
© 2011 Tian and Sun; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
example, to our knowledge, there was only one report
[17] on the expression of hG-CSF in plant, in which hG-
CSF was expressed in the amount of 500 mg/kg fresh
tobacco leaves through a transient expression system.
While transient expression of recombinant proteins has
its value more in laboratory research, stable expression in
transgenic plants is desirable for large-scale field produc-
tion at low cost. However, low protein yield has been a
persistent challenge in further development of transgenic
plants as a practical recombinant protein production
platform. In previous studies in an attempt to express
hG-CSF in plants, we experienced only low levels of its
expression (lower than 0.05% total soluble protein) in
transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco [18].
It has been reported that expression of recombinant
proteins could be enhanced by fusion with ubiquitin in
E.coli [19,20] and yeast [21,22] by several hundred times.
During such expression, ubiquitin was cleaved accurately
from the fusion protein by endogenous ubiquitin-specific
proteases (Ubps) in yeast, while unprocessed fusion pro-
tein accumulated in E. coli due to the lack of Ubps in pro-
karyotes. Transgenic plants had been reported capable of
processing ubiquitin from its fusion partner proteins,
including b- glucuronidase, luciferase and cholera toxin B
subunit, and enhancing their expression in transgenic
leaves by 2 to 4 fold in yield [23-25].
Here we demonstrated the application of ubiquitin
fusion strategy to substantially enhance the accumula-
tion and yield of hG-CSF in both tobacco leaves and
seeds.
Results
Construction of expression vectors
The CaMV 35S promoter in binary vector pBI121 was
used to construct hG-CSF chimeras and the phaseolin sig-
nal peptide was introduced to direct hG-CSF into the
plant cell secretory pathway. As shown in Figure 1, Con-
struct SH, carrying the phaseolin signal peptide/hG-CSF
gene, would direct the expression and entry of hG-CSF
into endoplasmic reticulum (ER) for secretion and Con-
struct USH, containing ubiquitin and signal peptide/hG-
CSF genes, would allow an examination on the influence
of ubiquitin fusion on the activities of Construct SH. After
plant transformation and regeneration, 10 transgenic
tobacco plants were obtained for Construct SH and 8 for
USH.
hG-CSF expression in leaves
The expression of hG-CSF in tobacco leaves carrying
different gene constructs were detected by SDS-PAGE
and immunoblot analysis (Figure 2). For total soluble
protein sample, no distinct difference in protein banding
patterns was observed between wild-type (WT) and
transgenic plants (Figure 2A). For Construct SH, hG-
CSF was synthesized with the same molecular weight
(MW) of 18.6 kD as commercially available hG-CSF
produced in E.coli (Figure 2B). As to Construct USH,
i.e. hG-CSF in fusion with ubiquitin, if ubiquitin could
be cleaved, the signal peptide would direct the expressed
hG-CSF polypeptide into ER and the final product
would have a MW of 18.6 kD as SH transgenic plants; if
not, the fusion protein would remain intact with a MW
about 30 kD. The results of immunoblot analysis (Figure
2B) showed that the synthesized hG-CSF was of 18.6
kD, indicating both ubiquitin and signal peptide were
absent in the final protein product. Because the removal
of signal peptide generally occurs at ER while ubiquitin
in cytosol, it appears that ubiquitin was processed before
the nascent protein entering into the ER. When ubiqui-
tin antibody was used to detect the total soluble pro-
teins in SH and USH plants, no protein band of similar
molecular weight (18.6 kD) was detected (Figure 3B),
Figure 1 Schematic presentation of expression cassettes. (A) Construct SH, hG-CSF chimeric gene with phaseolin signal peptide; (B) USH, as
(A) but fusion with ubiquitin. RB, right border and LB, left border of Agrobacterium T-DNA; CaMV35S pro, cauliflower mosaic virus 35S gene
promoter; and NOS ter, nopaline synthase gene terminator.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 2 of 14
confirming that ubiquitin was not present in the final
product.
The accumulation levels of hG-CSF in leaves were esti-
mated by immunoblot through comparison with known
amounts of commercial hG-CSF (Figure 2C, Figure 3A
and Table 1). On average, the level was about 0.3 mg/g
total soluble protein (TSP) in SH transgenic plants while
0.89 mg/g TSP in USH transgenic plants. When individual
plants were considered, the maximum accumulation of
hG-CSF in transgenic USH leaves could reach 2.58 mg/g
TSP, 7 fold higher than the 0.38 mg/g in SH transgenic
plants, suggesting that ubiquitin fusion did enhance the
accumulation of hG-CSF significantly in transgenic
tobacco leaves.
Analysis on transgenic tobacco leaves carrying a single
transgene
To investigate the impact from ubiquitin fusion on the
expression of hG-CSF, three individual plants carrying a
single copy of target gene (based on Southern blot analy-
sis, data not shown) were selected from SH and USH
transgenic plants, respectively, and real-time PCR (RT-
PCR) was used to quantify the relative expression of hG-
CSF at steady-state mRNA level. As shown in Figure 3A,
upper panel, the relative expression of hG-CSF at tran-
scription level in SH and USH transgenic plants showed
no significant differences. However, the expression of
hG-CSF at protein level in leaves of these plants dis-
played marked differences (Figure 3A, middle and lower
panels) and the accumulation levels on average were 0.21
mg/g TSP for SH plants and 0.42 mg/g TSP for USH
plants while the maximum level was about 0.23 mg/g
TSP for SH and 0.89 mg/g for USH, suggesting that even
among the transgenic plants carrying single transgene,
ubiquitin fusion could still notably enhance the accumu-
lation of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco leaves.
To examine the transgene effect on endogenous ubiqui-
tin and ubiquitination in transgenic plants, dot immuno-
blot analysis of total soluble protein from leaves was
performed using antibody against plant ubiquitin (Figure
3B). At the level of 2 μg/dot of protein and film exposure
time of 2 minutes during immunoblotting, clear signals
were detected for all samples transformed with Construct
SH or USH while no positive signal was detected in WT
Figure 2 Expression analysis of hG-CSF expressed in tobacco leaves. (A) SDS-PAGE of total soluble protein samples (20 μg/lane) exracted
from tobacco leaves. Lanes SH, USH, see Figure 1; WT, wild type tobacco; and M, Precision Plus Protein standards (Bio-Rad). (B) Immunoblot
analysis of total soluble protein (20 μg/lane for plant samples, 10-20 ng/lane for comercial hG-CSF as positive control) using anti-hG-CSF
antibody. (C) Expression of hG-CSF in individual SH or USH plants in addition to the plants shown in Figure 3 by immunoblot analysis. Arrows
marked the location of the molecular weight at 20 and 15 kD. Numbers 4-10 in SH samples and 4-8 in USH samples denoted the individual
plants analyzed. Different amounts of Comercial hG-CSF, labled by +, were loaded as postive controls at 5, 10 and 20 ng/lane accordingly.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 3 of 14
Figure 3 Analysis on individual transgenic plants harboring single copy of transgene. (A) Expression analysis of hG-CSF on individual
transgenic plant leaves harboring single copy of transgene by real time PCR (upper panel) and immunoblot analysis (middle panel). Lower
panel, the expression levels in individual plants determined by immunoblot as shown in middle panel. The triangle symbol marked the location
of the molecular weight at 18.6 kD in accordance with comercial hG-CSF standard. All values in upper panel were normalized with 18S rRNA
level and relative to the lowest expression level in SH transgenic plants. Grey squares represented the average expression of the construct based
on 3 individual plants (1, 2, 3) and P values were obtained by two-tailed Student t-test on expression levels in the population of Constructs SH
and USH. (B) Immunoblot analysis of endogenous ubiquitin in non-transgenic (WT) and trangenic plants using antibody against ubiquitin. Upper
panel, dot immunoblot analysis of total soluble protein (2 μg/dot) in tobacco leaves, and lower panel, immunoblot analysis of total soluble
protein (10 μg/lane). Free ubiquitin, a 8.5 kD protein, was indicated by arrow, and ubiquitin-cojugated proteins, including the smear high
molecular weight component, were denoted by the bracket. Lanes SH and USH, see Figure 1.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 4 of 14
plants, suggesting that ubiquitination of transgenic plants
might be up-regulated. To confirm the results of dot
immunoblot analysis, SDS-PAGE of the total soluble pro-
tein (10 μg/lane) followed by immunoblot analysis were
performed. As shown in Figure 3B, after the same expo-
sure time, notable smear protein patterns (ubiquitin-con-
jugated proteins) were observed in the leaves of SH and
USH transgenic plants, but fewer bands in the WT plants.
These results indicated that ubiquitination was up-regu-
lated in transgenic plants.
hG-CSF expression in seeds
The expression of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco seeds
was analyzed by similar methods as in leaves. The expres-
sion of hG-CSF in tobacco seeds harboring Construct SH
or USH was detected by SDS-PAGE and immunoblot
analysis (Figure 4). For total soluble protein samples, no
distinct difference in protein banding patterns was
observed between WT and transgenic plants by SDS-
PAGE analysis (Figure 4A), and immunoblot analysis
showed that in both SH and USH transgenic seeds, hG-
CSF was synthesized with the same MW of 18.6 kD as
commercially available hG-CSF produced in E.coli (Fig-
ure 4B), suggesting that both ubiquitin and signal peptide
were absent in the final protein product.
As shown in Figure 4C and Table 1 the accumulation
level of hG-CSF protein, on average, was 0.5 mg/g total
soluble protein (TSP) in SH transgenic seeds while 0.97
mg/g TSP in USH, a 2 fold over the SH seeds, and the
highest accumulation of hG-CSF was 0.77 mg/g TSP in
SH and 1.38 mg/g TSP in USH transgenic seeds, respec-
tively, indicating that ubiquitin fusion could also be
applied to enhance the accumulation of hG-CSF in seeds.
When single copy of transgene was considered, the accu-
mulation levels on average were 0.45 mg/g TSP for SH
plants and 0.93 mg/g TSP for USH plants, suggesting
that among the transgenic plants carrying single copy of
transgene, ubiquitin fusion could still enhance the
accumulation of hG-CSF in transgenic seeds. A summary
on the expression of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco was
shown in Table 1.
Intracellular localization of hG-CSF
Based on the information of the two constructs as shown
in Figure 1, with no other targeting peptide, except the
phaseolin signal peptide introduced to the hG-CSF, it is
likely that the expressed hG-CSF in plant cells should be
secreted via the default pathway. The intracellular locali-
zations of hG-CSF in leaf and seed from the same trans-
genic plant carrying Construct USH were analyzed by
immuno-electron microscopy. The target hG-CSF was
found to appear in the apoplast and cell wall of leaf
(Figure 5A and 5B). However, for transgenic tobacco
seeds, hG-CSF was observed in protein storage vacuoles
(PSV) (Figure 5C and 5D) while no positive labeling in
apoplast or other cell compartments was detected (data
not shown).
Bioactivity assay
Bioactivity analyses of hG-CSF expressed in transgenic
leaves and seeds were performed by measuring their
capability to promote the proliferation of hG-CSF-
dependent NFS-60 cell line which grow only under the
presence of hG-CSF or other known growth factors
[26]. Total soluble protein samples (TSP) containing 1
ng of recombinant hG-CSF (determined by immunoblot,
data not shown) extracted from USH leaves and seeds
were used for bioactivity assay. For comparison, protein
samples from transgenic SH or WT leaves and seeds,
containing the same amount of TSP as in USH samples,
were also included. To exclude potential influence from
transgenic effect, total soluble protein samples from
leaves and seeds of transgenic tobacco carrying empty
pBI121 plasmid (denoted as EP) were used as negative
controls while commercial hG-CSF produced by E.coli
was used as positive control.
Table 1 Accumulation of hG-CSF in tobacco leaves and seeds
Tissue Copy number1
Construct Number of plants2
Average Yield3
* Maxium Yield4
*
Leaf single SH 3 0.21 ± 0.01 0.23
USH 3 0.42 ± 0.40 0.89
_ SH 10 0.30 ± 0.07 0.38
USH 8 0.89 ± 0.77 2.58
Seed single SH 3 0.45 ± 0.11 0.53
USH 3 0.93 ± 0.12 1.07
_ SH 10 0.50 ± 0.15 0.77
USH 8 0.97 ± 0.19 1.38
1
, Copy number of trangene determined by Southern blot: single, 1 copy of transgene; -, without consideration to transgene copy number.
2
, Number of individual transgenic plants anlyzed for each tissue, construct and different copy numbers of transgene.
3
, Values are the means ± stand deviation (SD).
4
, Maxium yield among transgenic plants anlyzed for each construct and tissue.
*, mg/g TSP for leaf and seed, estimated by quatitative analysis of immunoblot data with ImageJ software.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 5 of 14
As shown in Figure 6, after 72 hours incubation, the
cells treated with extraction buffer (sample EB) showed
similar baseline proliferation level with the untreated
sample (sample CT). When treated with commercial hG-
CSF (sample G), the proliferation of NFS-60 cells was
promoted by 220% over the untreated sample CT while
sample EB+G (extraction buffer supplemented with hG-
CSF) showed similar results, confirming that no influence
was from the extraction buffer and the validity of the
analysis system.
In the analysis of seed extracts, the cells treated with
samples WT and EP (transgenic plant carrying empty
PBI121 plasmid) showed similar proliferation levels as the
untreated (CT), suggesting that no distinct background
effect from tobacco seed proteins and transgene process.
Compared with the samples WT and EP, USH protein
Figure 4 Expression analysis of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco seeds. (A) SDS-PAGE analysis of total soluble protein (50 μg/lane) extracted
from tobacco seeds. Lanes SH, USH, see Figure 1; WT, wild type tobacco; and M, Precision Plus Protein standards (Bio-Rad). (B) Immunoblot
analysis of total soluble protein (20 μg/lane for sample proteins and 10-20 ng/lane for comercial hG-CSF as positive control) using anti-hG-CSF
antibody. (C) Expression of hG-CSF in individual SH or USH plants as detected by immunoblot analysis. Single, immunoblot analysis of hG-CSF of
individual transgenic plants harboring single copy of transgene. Arrows marked the location of the molecular weight at 20 and 15 kD. Numbers
4-10 in SH samples and 4-8 in USH samples denoted the individual plants analyzed. Different amounts of Comercial hG-CSF, labled by +, were
loaded as postive controls at 5, 10 and 20 ng/lane accordingly.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 6 of 14
Figure 5 Subcellular localization of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco leaves and seeds. The leaf (A, B) and seed (C, D) samples from the same
transgenic tobacoo plant harboring Construct USH was analyzed by immunoelectron microscopy using anti-hG-CSF antibody. Arrow indicated
immuno-labeling of hG-CSF. Panel D represented a higher magnification of the rectangle area in panel C. Apo, apoplast; CW, cell wall; PSV,
protein storage vacuole; and OB, oil body.
Figure 6 Bioactivity analysis of the expressed hG-CSF in transgenic leaves and seeds. Total soluble protein (TSP) extracted from leaves
(leaf extracts) and seeds (seed extracts) was analyzed. CT, untreated sample; G, samples treated with 1 ng comercial hG-CSF; EB, extraction
buffer; EB+G, extraction buffer supplemented with 1 ng comercial hG-CSF; WT, SH and USH, TSP from WT, SH and USH leaves and seeds; EP, TSP
from transgenic plant seeds harboring empty pBI121 vector; WT+G, WT sample supplemented with 1 ng comercial hG-CSF; EP+G, EP sample
supplemented with 1 ng comercial hG-CSF. Number in Y axis represented the raltive value to untreated sample (CT).
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 7 of 14
sample containing 1 ng expressed hG-CSF could promote
the proliferation of NFS-60 cells, indicating that the
expressed hG-CSF in USH seeds was bioactive. SH protein
sample containing relatively less (0.9 ng) hG-CSF also
showed biological activity but with corresponding decrease
in cell proliferation activity. However, the bioactivity of
USH sample was lower than those of samples G and
EB+G which contained the same amount of hG-CSF while
similar results were also observed with samples WT+G
and EP+G, suggesting that some compounds in tobacco
seeds may influence the efficacy of hG-CSF.
In the analysis of leaf extracts, proliferation effect of
NFS-60 cells by USH and SH leaf protein samples were
also observed, suggesting that the expressed hG-CSF in
leaves was also in bioactive form. A notable difference
was that the total soluble protein from tobacco leaves, in
comparison to that from seeds, appeared to show some
inhibitory effect on the growth of NFS-60 cells, as the
cells treated with leaf extracts, with or without hG-CSF,
yielded lower proliferation activity than the seed extracts
and the control group. Further, protein samples from old
leaves and leaves after freezing-thawing treatment
appeared to exert harmful effect on the growth of NFS-
60 cells even with the addition of commercial hG-CSF
(see Additional file 1), suggesting that some compounds
extracted from tobacco leaves were harmful to the
growth of NFS-60 cells or influenced the function of cul-
ture medium.
Discussion
Many recombinant therapeutic proteins have been
expressed in plant-based bioreactor, but only a few stu-
dies were on the expression of hG-CSF which is widely
used in clinical treatments. In this article, we reported
the expression of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco leaves
and seeds. To improve the expression of recombinant
proteins in E. coli and yeast, ubiquitin fusion strategy has
been used and shown to significantly enhance their
expression [19-22]. However, only a few reports were on
the use of ubiquitin fusion strategy in transgenic plant
leaves [23-25] but not in seeds. Through the strategy of
ubiquitin fusion, our study demonstrated that the accu-
mulation of hG-CSF could be increased up to 2 to 7 fold
in leaves and 2 fold in seeds relative to unfused hG-CSF
expression, suggesting that the expression enhancement
is applicable to plant seeds as well and providing the first
evidence on using the ubiquitin fusion strategy to
enhance the expression of a target protein in seeds which
are considered as bioreactor platform with distinct
advantages [15].
Expression of recombinant hG-CSF was studied in rice
and tobacco cell suspension cultures and tobacco leaves
through transient expression system but not in transgenic
plants (see Additional file 2). It’s known that transient
expression often lead to high accumulation of target
recombinant proteins favoring laboratory study. However,
for scale-up production of plant-based pharmaceuticals,
transgenic plant is a better choice. This study provides the
first proof on the expression of bioactive recombinant hG-
CSF in transgenic plants, and that the production can be
augmented by ubiquitin fusion strategy, with a maximum
accumulation level reaching 2.5 mg/g (0.25%) total soluble
protein (TSP) in leaves and 1.3 mg/g (0.13%) TSP in seeds.
However, these levels of expression, though notably
improved in comparison to other reports (see Additional
file 2), are still in low range. The expression of another
valuable human colony stimulating factor (CSF), human
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (hGM-
CSF), widely used as an adjuvant in clinical treatment of
neutropenia and aplastic anemia [27], has been reported
by several studies (see Additional file 2). Through a survey
on the transgenic expression of CSF in plants (see Addi-
tional file 2), except the high expression levels through
transient expression system and a case in rice seed, it
seems that human colony stimulating factor is difficult to
be expressed at levels higher than 0.1% TSP, possibly
resulting from its poor-efficient translation in plants due
to unfavorable codon usage and/or instability of the
expressed human CSF in plant cell environments. Thus,
further investigations are necessary for improvement.
The native hG-CSF is a glycoprotein with an O-glycosy-
lation site at residue Thr133 and the MW of hG-CSF is
about 18.6 kD without glycosylation as shown in Figures 2
and 4 (positive controls, produced by E. coli) but varied
from 17 to 24 kD when produced in plant-based systems
(see Additional file 2). The expressed hG-CSF in tobacco
leaves and seeds in this study showed a MW around 18.6
kD as the unglycosylated hG-CSF. Whether partial or
complete glycosylation occurred couldn’t be concluded as
the glycosylation patterns may vary among different
organisms, tissues and even different cells. In this connec-
tion, potential immunogenicity of recombinant proteins as
a result of non-human glycosylation should also be consid-
ered in the application of plant bioreactors. This aspect of
concern has been reviewed in several published review
papers [9,13,14,28]. To tackle the problem on N-glycosyla-
tion, many efforts were made to control the glycosylation
of recombinant proteins in plants, such as knock-in or
knock-out of related enzymes and retention of the target
protein in ER [13,28]. We also suggested some different
strategies on using membrane anchors for delivering
recombinant proteins via or bypass Golgi transport path-
way in control of glycosylation [14]. Only little attention
has been paid to the O-glycosylation status of therapeutic
proteins produced in transgenic plants thus far, although
marked differences in the O-glycosylation machinery exist
between humans and plants [28]. It was anticipated that
the presence of plant-modified O-glycans would lead to
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 8 of 14
accelerated clearance of the glycoprotein from the blood
[28]. However, no direct proof could be provided at pre-
sent time. In the case of hG-CSF, no N-glycosylation site
could be predicted and thus the glycosylation is likely to
come from O-linked modification.
However, immunogenicity of O-linked glycans is pre-
sently unknown. Further, the glycosylation of hG-CSF is
not essential for its bioactivity in terms of clinical effect
[29,30], and the bioactivity assay showed that the
expressed hG-CSF possessed in vitro biological activity
in inducing the proliferation of NFS-60 cells, indicating
that hG-CSF produced in both tobacco leaves and seeds
was in bioactive form and ubiquitin fusion expression
didn’t affect its bioactivity.
There are a total of five cysteine residues in hG-CSF
protein and two intra-chain disulfide bonds are formed
between Cys36 and Cys42 and between Cys64 and Cys74 for
proper folding of the protein [31]. The free cysteine resi-
due in mature hG-CSF protein may link with the free
cysteine residue of another hG-CSF protein through disul-
fide bonding to form a dimer. In this study, dimerization
of hG-CSF protein through disulfide bond formation was
indeed observed in transgenic seeds, but no dimerization
was detectable in leaves (see Additional file 3), suggesting
that the environment of seed organ favors recombinant
hG-CSF to form dimer. Although it has been reported
that hG-CSF functions as monovalent ligand and hG-CSF
dimers showed lower in vitro activity than the monomers
[32], the recombinant hG-CSF produced in seeds showed
similar biological activity as the commercial hG-CSF pre-
sented in WT protein extract in this study, which in turn
suggested the occurrence of proper folding of the
expressed hG-CSF.
On the enhancement of protein expression through
fusion with ubiquitin, several mechanisms were proposed:
(i) N-end protection [20,25] - Rapid folding of the nascent
ubiquitin moiety at the N-terminus of an emerging poly-
peptide chain may protect the still unfolded chain from
co-translational degradation; (ii) Folding facilitation
[33,34] - It was suggested that expression of ubiquitin
fusion would enhance the solubility of recombinant pro-
teins in E.coli, and ubiquitin moiety at the N-terminus
facilitated the folding of the emerging protein; and (iii)
Efficient translation [20,25] - Ubiquitin is an extremely
conserved protein, and the favorable codon bias of ubiqui-
tin enhances translation of the appended coding region.
However, there is no sufficient evidence to support these
proposed explanations and the enhancement mechanism
by ubiquitin fusion remains unclear. In our study, RT-PCR
results indicated that there was no significant difference in
the level of steady-state mRNA between fusion of hG-CSF
with ubiquitin or not. The difference observed in expres-
sion between fusion to ubiquitin (USH) and unfused (SH)
does not appear to be affected at the transcriptional level,
and therefore differences in expression levels are post-
transcriptionally affected, perhaps at translational or post-
translational level. This hypothesis is based on the oberva-
tion that when hG-CSF was expressed without targeting
through the secretory pathway (no signal peptide) in
tobacco, the recombinant protein was not detected (see
Additional file 4, Construct H). This may suggest that the
recombinant protein was readily degraded when expressed
in the cytosol and failed to accumulate; however when
fused to ubiquitin hG-CSF was detected (see Additional
file 4, Construct UH). Together, this supports the notion
that ubiquitin moiety at the N-terminus may protect the
protein from proteolytic attack in transgenic plants. How-
ever, it remains possible that ubiquitin facilitates folding
and efficient translation, which in turn contribute to the
enhancement.
Ubiquitin processing from the initial translation product
was shown to be so efficient that unprocessed product
couldn’t be detected and such processing has been
observed in several plants including tobacco, rice and
potato [25]. In this study, transgenic plants carrying Con-
struct USH could lead to the expression of hG-CSF with-
out ubiquitin in the final product, further supporting the
efficient processing of ubiquitin in tobacco leaves and
seeds. It has been indicated that ubiquitin is processed
from the translation product by Ubps co-translationally
and the efficient and rapid cleavage of ubiquitin guaran-
tees the docking of signal peptide with the ER and protein
import into the ER [25,35]. These molecular events are
supported by our study in that the expressed hG-CSF was
imported into the ER and further transported to apoplast
in leaves and protein storage vacuoles in seeds. Although
we did not determine the N-terminal sequence of the
expressed hG-CSF in tobacco, ubiquitin cleavage site has
been previously demonstrated by studies to occur precisely
after the final amino acid glycine, residue G-76, in the C-
terminus of ubiquitin [25,36,37]. Using similar cloning
procedure and chimeric gene constructs (see Methods),
we expect that the ubiquitin fusion strategy will direct the
production of recombinant hG-CSF without change in its
amino acid sequence at the N-terminus.
Transgenic plants have been developed for many years,
but the possible endogenous changes in transgenic plants
that may bring about by the effects of transgenes have not
been fully studied. Luo et al. reported that more proteins
were degraded by ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in the
transgenic endosperm when human granulocyte-macro-
phage colony stimulation factor (hGM-CSF) was expressed
in rice cells [38]. This consideration was based on the
observation of up-regulation of ubiqutinated proteins
which might lead to possible ubiquitination and degrada-
tion of hGM-CSF through the ubiquitin-proteasome path-
way. Our study also showed similar up-regulation of
protein ubiquitination in transgenic plants, suggesting the
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 9 of 14
possible occurrence of more ubiquitin-dependent protein
degradation events. However, in our case, no ubiquitinated
hG-CSF was detected in transgenic plants harboring the
Construct H (see Additional file 4) by immuno-precipita-
tion and immunoblot assay (data not shown), so the
degradation pathway of recombinant hG-CSF in trans-
genic plants can not be asserted. Interestingly, ubiquitin
fusion led to variable expression of the hG-CSF in indivi-
dual plants even those with single copy of transgene
(Figure 3A, Construct USH) while the plants without ubi-
quitin fusion showed relatively consistent expression
(Figure 3A, Construct SH). Because ubiquitin is an impor-
tant protein functioning in many different aspects of all
eukaryotic cells [39], the additional ubiquitin together with
the transgene effects may result in broader impact on the
endogenous environment of transgenic plants than non-
fusion transgenic plants, which in turn may lead to varia-
tions at the level of hG-CSF expression under ubiquitin
fusion.
Studies on the intracellular location of recombinant pro-
teins offer helpful hints in choosing a strategy on their
expression and downstream purification in the develop-
ment of plant bioreactor. In this study, using a constitu-
tively expression promoter, the protein of interest was
proposed to be secreted via the default pathway because no
particular sequence information was provided for specific
transport of the recombinant hG-CSF. However, while hG-
CSF was found to be secreted outside the cell in leaves, it
appeared only in the PSV of seeds. Based on the sequence
of hG-CSF, no targeting peptide could be predicted. It thus
appears that tissue-dependent localization of hG-CSF in
transgenic tobacco happened in our case. There were some
reports on tissue or cell-specific deposition of exogenous
proteins in plants, such as the secretion of phytohemagglu-
tinin, a PSV resident seed protein, into the apoplast of root
tissues of the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) [40] and
the accumulation of pathogenesis-related protein, normally
secreted by other cell types, in the vacuoles of specialized
cells called crystal idioblasts [41]. These examples indicate
that protein targeting may be regulated in a tissue- or cell-
specific manner [42], and recombinant proteins expressed
in seeds may be deposited in unexpected places [42-46]. To
compare intracellular trafficking in different tissues, Draka-
kaki et al. [42] used Aspergillus niger phytase as a model
glycoprotein to study the intracellular fate of recombinant
protein in the leaves, calli and seeds of rice and found that
the recombinant protein was efficiently secreted from leaf
cells and calli as expected, but in contrast, it was retained in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived prolamin bodies
and protein storage vacuoles in the endosperm cells. In the
study, however, the recombinant protein expression was
driven by different promoters, i.e. CaMV 35S promoter for
leaves and calli while Gt1 promoter for seeds. In our study,
driven by the CaMV 35S promoter only, hG-CSF produced
in transgenic tobacco was observed in apoplast in leaves
but in PSV in seeds, providing a more typical case of tissue-
specific deposition of an exogenous protein in transgenic
plant.
Although our and previous studies indicated that recom-
binant proteins could be accumulated into unexpected
compartments in transgenic seeds instead of via secretory
pathway [42-46], there were still some notable inverse
situations. Leite et al. [47] reported that a recombinant
human growth hormone, driven by a seed-specific promo-
ter from sorghum g -kafirin seed storage protein gene with
a signal peptide from a Coix prolamin, was secreted into
the apoplastic space in transgenic tobacco seeds. There-
fore, tissue-specific protein sorting appears to be a compli-
cated process, and further research is needed to elucidate
the underlying mechanisms, such as the effects of promo-
ters and individual proteins.
The bioactivity analyses on total soluble protein from
tobacco leaves and seeds were also performed in this
study. Results revealed that compared with seed extracts,
total soluble protein from leaves had lower promotional
activity on the proliferation of NFS-60 cells, suggesting
that the source of tissues might affect the bioactivity of the
product. Although total soluble protein extracted from
seeds didn’t exert adverse effect on the growth of NFS-60
cells, it did somewhat influence the efficacy of hG-CSF,
suggesting that some endogenous proteins or compounds
in the host plants may react with the target protein to
inhibit its bioactivity. Total protein samples from young
leaves had minor while old or degraded leaves (such as
after repeated freezing and thawing) exerted greater inhi-
bitory effect on the growth of NFS-60 cells, suggesting
that developmental and physiological status and condi-
tions of the plant tissues may also affect the bioactivity of
the products. In summary, the selection of host plants, the
endogenous chemical and biological environments of spe-
cific organs or tissues and their storage conditions should
be considered when transgenic plants are used to produce
therapeutic proteins. Thus proper stage of tissue collec-
tion, strict tissue storage conditions, efficient extraction
and purification steps to obtain material free of endogen-
ous host cell proteins/components are critical in achieving
desired efficacy and safety of the therapeutic.
Conclusions
In this study, the expression of bioactive hG-CSF, an
important human cytokine widely used in clinical treat-
ment, was enhanced through the strategy of ubiquitin
fusion in both transgenic tobacco leaves and seeds, pro-
viding the first evidence of the expression of hG-CSF in a
stably transformed plant and the applicability of the ubi-
quitin fusion strategy to improve recombinant protein
expression in transgenic plant seeds. Tissue-dependent
targeting of recombinant hG-CSF was also observed in
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 10 of 14
the study, suggesting that protein sorting may be affected
by a tissue-specific mechanism and subcellular localiza-
tion should be considered in designing recombinant pro-
tein production in different tissues of transgenic plants.
Methods
Construction of expression vectors
Ubiquitin coding sequence was cloned from genomic
DNA of tobacco leaves using primers u-f (5’-
GCTCTAGAATGCAGATCTTCGTCAAAACCCTC-3’)
and u-r (5’-GCGAGCTCACCACCGCGGAGACG-
GAG-3’) designed based on the tobacco ubiquitin gene
[GenBank: AJ309010], in which a SacII site (under-
lined) was introduced 10 bp upstream from the terim-
inal G codon [25] without any shift and change in the
open reading frame. The hG-CSF gene was donoted by
Dr. Wei Han (The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York). DNA encoding hG-CSF with pha-
seolin signal peptide was cloned into pBI121 binary
vector as shown in Figure 1, resulting in Construct SH.
Phaseolin signal peptide was used to direct the
expressed hG-CSF into ER. To guarantee no additional
amino acid introduced to N-terminus of signal peptide
and hG-CSF, DNA encoding hG-CSF with phaseolin
signal peptide was modified to include an appended
DNA sequence of the downstream 16 bp of ubiquitin
gene, CACCGCGGAGACGGAG, and cloned into
pBI121 binary vector with ubiquitin sequence through
the introduced SacII site (underlined), resulting in
Construct USH (Figure 1). All the expression cassettes
were driven by the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV)
35S promoter and terminated by the nopaline synthase
(NOS) terminator.
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation
All chimeric genes in pBI121 expression vectors were
transformed into Agrobacterium tumefaciens LBA4404 by
electroporation. Young leaves from wild type tobacco were
cut into small square discs (0.5 × 0.5 cm2
) and immersed
in 10× diluted agrobacterial culture for 10 minutes. The
leaf discs were first transferred to sterile filter paper for
excess agrobacterium removal and then transferred onto
solidified co-cultivation MS medium (Sigma). After co-cul-
tivation, the transformants were selected on MS medium
containing 500 mg/L carbenicillin (Sigma) and 100 mg/L
kanamycin (Sigma). Regenerated tobacco plants were
transferred to soil finally and grown in green house (The
Chinese University of Hong Kong) to maturity. Positive
transformants were identified by PCR screening and
Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA.
RNA extraction and Real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted using Tripure Isolation Reagent
(Roche) from the young fresh leaves of 21-day-old
transgenic plants and purified with RNeasy Plant Mini Kit
(Qiagen). Total RNA samples was diluted with RNase-free
water, and stored in -80°C ultra low temperature refrigera-
tor. RNA concentration was determined by OD260 mea-
surement using a spectrophotometer and the quality of
RNA was checked by 1% agarose/formaldehyde gel
electrophoresis.
The level of hG-CSF transcript was quantified by two-
step real-time PCR. Complementary cDNA synthesis was
conducted following the kit protocol for Powerscript
Reverse Transcriptase (Clontech) using Oligo-dT primer
(Promega). For hG-CSF amplification, cDNA product
from 100 ng total RNA was used as template in each RT-
PCR reaction with h-f (5’- CCACCCCCCTGGGCCCT-3’)
and h-r (5’-GGGCTGGGCAAGGTGGC-3’) primers, and
10 ng total RNA for 18 S rRNA [GenBank: AJ236016] as
internal control with 18 s-f (5’-AGGAATTGACG-
GAAGGGCA-3’) and 18 s-r (5’-GTGCGGCCCAGAA-
CATCT-3’) primers. RT-PCRs were performed using the
Bio-Rad iQ5 Real-Time PCR System with SYBR Green
Supermix Kit (Bio-Rad). All samples, including the exter-
nal standards and non-template control, were run in tripli-
cate. The reaction was initiated by activation of Taq
polymerase at 95°C for 5 min, followed by 40 three-step
amplification cycles consisting of 30 s denaturation at 95°
C, 30 s anealing at 60°C and 45 s extension at 72°C. The
fluorescence signal was measured at the end of each
extension step at 72°C. A final dissociation stage was run
to generate a melting curve for verification of amplification
product specificity. Following the final PCR cycle, the reac-
tions were heat-denatured at 0.5°C/10 s from 55 to 95°C.
Data analysis was performed by Gene Expression Function
on the Bio-Rad iQ5 software.
Protein extraction and Immunoblot
Leaf
Total soluble protein was extracted from fresh young leaves
of 21-day-old transgenic plants with 50 mM phosphate buf-
fered saline (PBS) extraction buffer in the presence of com-
plete protease inhibitor (cocktail tablets, Roche). Fresh
leaves (1 g) were ground into powder in a mortar with
liquid nitrogen and 1 ml extraction buffer was added in.
Whole homogenate was transferred into 2 ml Eppendorf
tube, incubated on ice for 15 min and centrifuged at 20000
× g for 10 minutes. Supernatant was collected and centri-
fuged for another 10 minutes. Final supernatant was col-
lected as total soluble protein (TSP) from leaves. Protein
concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) with
bovine serum albumin (Sigma) as standard.
Seed
Mature seeds were used to extract the recombinant pro-
tein. Seeds (10 mg) were ground into powder in a mor-
tar with 200 μl 50 mM phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
extraction buffer in the presence of complete protease
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 11 of 14
inhibitor (cocktail tablets, Roche) and sonicated for 30
minutes in ice water. The remained steps were as those
of the leaf procedure.
Immunoblot/SDS-PAGE
Total soluble protein extracted from leaf or seed was
diluted with 4× loading buffer (0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8;
0.8 g SDS; 40% Glycerol; 5%b-mercaptoethanol; 50 mM
EDTA; 8 mg Bromophenol Blue), boiled for 5 minutes and
separated on 15% SDS-PAGE with 10-50 μg protein/lane
followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue Staining for protein
visualization. For immunoblot, the total protein separated
by SDS-PAGE was directly transferred to PVDF membrane
without staining. To test on the formation of dimers by
recombinant hG-CSF, protein samples were treated with
4× loading buffer without b-mercaptoethanol as controls.
The immunoblotting was carried out using rabbit polyclo-
nal anti-hG-CSF antibody (PeproTech) as primary antibody
and anti-rabbit IgG-Peroxidase antibody (Sigma) as second-
ary antibody and developed using the ECL detection system
(Amersham Co., Bucks, UK). Recombinant hG-CSF from
E.coli was purchased from PeproTech and used as positive
control. In the immunoblot analysis of ubiquitin and ubi-
quitin-conjugated proteins, rabbit polyclonal anti-ubiquitin
antibody (specific to plant ubiquitin, Novus Biologicals) was
used as primary antibody. To estimate the expression level
of hG-CSF in transgenic plants, the same amount of total
soluble protein from leaves or seeds was loaded onto SDS-
PAGE during immunoblotting while leaving 3 lanes for
positive control standards of commercial hG-CSF at 5, 10
and 20 ng/lane, respectively. The detected immunoactive
bands of the experimental samples were compared with the
positive controls and quantified by densitometry using the
ImageJ software (National Institute of Health, USA; http://
rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). All the quantity of samples fell within
the amount of the three control standards.
Bioactivity Assay
The proliferation assay of NFS-60 cells in response to the
presence of hG-CSF measured by MTT [3-(4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide]
method was used to test the bioactivity of expressed hG-
CSF in plants. NFS-60 cells were cultured with RPMI-
1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fatal bovine
serum (FBS) and commercial recombinant hG-CSF (2 ng/
ml, PeproTech) and kept under 5% CO2 at 37 °C in a
humidified condition. For MTT test, total soluble protein
extracted from leaves and seeds (see Protein extraction
and immunoblot above) were used for analysis and NFS-
60 cells (1 × 104
per well) were cultured in a 96 well plate
and treated with the medium (RPMI-1640 medium sup-
plemented with 10% FBS) containing the following sam-
ples: commercial recombinant hG-CSF (1 ng); total
soluble protein extracted from leaf (TSP-L) and seed
(TSP-S) of transgenic plant harboring the Construct USH
containing 1 ng expressed hG-CSF; TSP-L and TSP-S
from SH plant, containing the same amount of total pro-
tein as the USH samples while 0.8 and 0.9 ng expressed
hG-CSF, respectively; TSP-L and TSP-S from transgenic
plant harboring empty pBI121 plasmid (denoted as EP),
containing the same amount of total protein as the USH
samples; TSP-L and TSP-S from EP plant (as above) sup-
plemented with 1 ng commercial hG-CSF; TSP-L and
TSP-S from wildtype (WT) plants, containing the same
amount of total protein as the USH samples; TSP-L and
TSP-S fromWT plant (as above) supplemented with 1 ng
commercial hG-CSF; extraction buffer (EB, PBS in supple-
ment with protein inhibitor); extraction buffer supplemen-
ted with 1 ng commercial hG-CSF. All treatments,
including the untreated control, were carried out in tripli-
cate. Cells were incubated at 37 °C for 72 hours. Finally,
20 μl of MTT (5 mg/ml) was added and the samples were
left to incubate at 37 °C for 4 h. The medium was dis-
carded and the formazan dye was dissolved in DMSO (100
μl) at 37 °C for 30 min. Absorbance was measured for all
samples at 550 nm using a VICTOR3 V™ Multilabel
Counter (PerkinElmer, USA).
Immunohistochemistry
Leaf
Immunogold electron microscopy (EM) on ultrathin sec-
tions prepared from fresh young leaves was performed as
previously described [48]. Small discs of tobacco leaves
were frozen in a high-pressure freezing apparatus (Leica
EM PACT2). Substitution was performed in an AFS freeze
substitution unit (Leica). Samples were stepwise infiltrated,
embedded, and UV polymerized with Lowicryl HM20
(Electron Microscopy Sciences). Immunolabeling on
HM20 ultrathin sections was done using standard proce-
dures with hG-CSF antibodies at 1:50 dilution, and gold-
coupled secondary antibodies at 1:50. Aqueous uranyl acet-
ate/lead citrate post-stained sections were examined in
Hitachi H-7650 transmission EM with a CCD camera
(Hitachi High-Tech, http://www.hitachi-hitec.com) operat-
ing at 80 kV.
Seed
Immature seeds were collected at 14-16 days after flow-
ering and fixed at 4°C for overnight in 4%(v/v) parafor-
maldehyde and 0.1% (v/v) glutaraldehyde buffered at pH
7.2 with 0.1 M PBS buffer. The fixed samples were
dehydrated and embedded in LR White resin. Immuno-
labelling on ultrathin sections were performed with the
same procedure as for leaf.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Impact of total soluble protein extracted from
tobacco leaves on the proliferation of NFS-60 cells. The bioactivities
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 12 of 14
of total soluble protein samples from young, old and freeze-thaw treated
leaves in promotion of the proliferation of NFS-60 cells were compared.
Additional file 2: Summary on expression of human colony-
stimulating factor (h-CSF) by plant-based platform. The published
reports on the expression of h-CSF in different plants, including
transformation method, vector construction, expression level, molecular
weight and bioactivity of the target protein, were summarized.
Additional file 3: Dimerization analysis of hG-CSF expressed in
transgenic tobacco leaves and seeds. Immunoblot analysis on non-
reduced samples of total soluble protein from leaves and seeds showed
that partial dimerization of hG-CSF through disulfide bonding occurred
in both SH and USH transgenic seeds while no dimer formed between
hG-CSF monomers in leaves.
Additional file 4: Impact of ubiquitin moiety at N-terminus on the
expression of hG- CSF in transgenic tobacco. In this experiment,
Construct H carrying the hG-CSF gene and Construct UH containing the
ubiquitin and hG-CSF genes, were used for tobacco transformation. As
both constructs were without a signal peptide, the synthesis of hG-CSF
was directed in the cytosol. Results showed that accumulation of hG-CSF
was only detected in UH transgenic plants but not in H plants.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Liwen Jiang (The Chinese University of Hong Kong) for
advice on EM, Mr. Freddie Waikwan Kwok (The Chinese University of Hong
Kong) for his excellent technical assistance and Dr. Jinfang Zhang (The
Chinese University of Hong Kong) for her help in NFS-60 cell culture. We
would like to acknowledge the support of our bioreactor work from the
Hong Kong RGC Earmarked Grant CUHK4580/05M, the Hong Kong UGC-AoE
Plant and Agricultural Biotechnology Project AoE-B-07/09 and the State
(China) Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, the Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
Author details
1
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 2
Life
Science Division, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University,
Shenzhen 518055, China. 3
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China.
Authors’ contributions
LT and SSMS conceived of the study and participated in its design. LT
carried out the experiments. LT and SSMS performed the statistical analysis
and prepared the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 22 July 2011 Accepted: 11 October 2011
Published: 11 October 2011
References
1. Palmblad J: The role of granulocytes in inflammation. Scand J Rheumatol
1984, 13:163-172.
2. Barreda DR, Hanington PC, Belosevic M: Regulation of myeloid
development and function by colony stimulating factors. Dev Comp
Immunol 2004, 28:509-554.
3. Souza LM, Boone TC, Gabrilove J, Lai PH, Zsebo KM, Murdock DC, Chazin VR,
Bruszewski J, Lu H, Chen KK, Barendt J, Platzer E, Moore MAS, Mertelsmann R,
Welte K: Recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor:
effects on normal and leukemic myeloid cells. Science 1986, 232:61-65.
4. Bishop B, Koay DC, Sartorelli AC, Regan L: Reengineering granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor for enhanced stability. J Biol Chem 2001,
276:33465-33470.
5. Duhrsen U, Villeval JL, Boyd J, Kannourakis G, Morstyn G, Metcalf D: Effects
of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on
hematopoietic progenitor cells in cancer patients. Blood 1988,
72:2074-2081.
6. Devlin JJ, Devlin PE, Myambo K, Lilly MB, Rado TA, Warren MK: Expression
of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor by human cell lines. J Leukoc
Biol 1987, 41:302-306.
7. Tsuchiya M, Nomura H, Asano S, Kaziro Y, Nagata S: Characterization of
recombinant human granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor produced in
mouse cells. EMBO J 1987, 6:611-616.
8. Perez-Perez J, Martinez-Caja C, Barbero JL, Gutierrez J: DnaK/DnaJ
supplementation improves the periplasmic production of human
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in Escherichia coli. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1995, 210:524-529.
9. Giddings G, Allison G, Brooks D, Carter A: Transgenic plants as factories for
biopharmaceuticals. Nat Biotechnol 2000, 18:1151-1155.
10. Ko K, Brodzik R, Steplewski Z: Production of antibodies in plants:
approaches and perspectives. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2009, 332:55-78.
11. Doran PM: Foreign protein degradation and instability in plants and
plant tissue cultures. Trends Biotechnol 2006, 24:426-432.
12. Facchini PJ, Dicosmo F: Plant cell bioreactor for the production of
protoberberine alkaloids from immobilized Thalictrum rugosum cultures.
Biotechnol Bioeng 1991, 37:397-403.
13. Twyman RM, Stoger E, Schillberg S, Christou P, Fischer R: Molecular
farming in plants: host systems and expression technology. Trends
Biotechnol 2003, 21:570-578.
14. Jiang L, Sun SSM: Membrane anchors for vacuolar targeting: application
in plant bioreactors. Trends Biotechnol 2002, 20:99-102.
15. Lau OS, Sun SSM: Plant seeds as bioreactors for recombinant protein
production. Biotechnol Adv 2009, 27:1015-1022.
16. Hong SY, Kwon TH, Jang YS, Kim SH, Yang MS: Production of bioactive
human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in transgenic rice cell
suspension cultures. Protein Expr Purif 2006, 47:68-73.
17. Zvereva AS, Petrovskaya LE, Rodina AV, Frolova OY, Ivanov PA,
Shingarova LN, Komarova TV, Dorokhov YL, Dolgikh DA, Kirpichnikov MP,
Atabekov JG: Production of biologically active human myelocytokines in
plants. Biochem (Mosc) 2009, 74:1187-1194.
18. Lee JK: Transgenic Expression of Human Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating
Factor (hG-CSF) in tobacco and Arabidopsis Seeds. Mphil thesis The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Department of Biology; 2002.
19. Yoo Y, Rote K, Rechsteiner M: Synthesis of peptides as cloned ubiquitin
extensions. J Biol Chem 1989, 264:17078-17083.
20. Butt TR, Jonnalagadda S, Monia BP, Sternberg EJ, Marsh JA, Stadel JM,
Ecker DJ, Crooke ST: Ubiquitin fusion augments the yield of cloned gene
products in Escherichia coli. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:2540-2544.
21. Ecker DJ, Stadel JM, Butt TR, Marsh JA, Monia BP, Powers DA, Gorman JA,
Clark PE, Warren F, Shatzman A, Crooke ST: Increasing gene expression in
yeast by fusion to ubiquitin. J Biol Chem 1989, 264:7715-7719.
22. Baker RT, Smith SA, Marano R, McKee J, Board PG: Protein expression using
cotranslational fusion and cleavage of ubiquitin. J Biol Chem 1994,
269:25381-25386.
23. Hondred D, Vierstra RD: Novel applications of the ubiquitin-dependent
proteolytic pathway in plant genetic engineering. Curr Opin Biotechnol
1992, 3:147-151.
24. Mishra S, Yadav DK, Tuli R: Ubiquitin fusion enhances cholera toxin B
subunit expression in transgenic plants and the plant-expressed protein
binds GM1 receptors more efficiently. J Biotechnol 2006, 127:95-108.
25. Hondred D, Walker JM, Mathews DE, Vierstra RD: Use of ubiquitin fusions
to augment protein expression in transgenic plants. Plant Physiol 1999,
119:713-724.
26. Weinstein Y, Ihle JN, Lavu S, Reddy EP: Truncation of the C-Myb Gene by
a Retroviral Integration in an Interleukin 3-Dependent Myeloid-Leukemia
Cell-Line. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1986, 83:5010-5014.
27. Mulder AB, Dewolf JTM, Smit JW, Vanoostveen JW, Vellenga E: Correction
of Neutropenia by Gm-Csf in Patients with a Large Granular
Lymphocyte-Proliferation. Ann Hematol 1992, 65:91-95.
28. Gomord V, Faye L: Posttranslational modification of therapeutic proteins
in plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2004, 7:171-181.
29. Bonig H, Silbermann S, Weller S, Kirschke R, Korholz D, Janssen G, Gobel U,
Nurnberger W: Glycosylated vs non-glycosylated granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor (G-CSF) - results of a prospective randomised
monocentre study. Bone Marrow Transpl 2001, 28:259-264.
30. Hoglund M: Glycosylated and non-glycosylated recombinant human
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rhG-CSF) - what is the difference?
Med Oncol 1998, 15(4):229-233.
31. Lu HS, Boone TC, Souza LM, Lai PH: Disulfide and Secondary Structures of
Recombinant Human Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor. Arch
Biochem and Biophys 1989, 268:81-92.
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 13 of 14
32. Fidler K, Jevsevar S, Milunovic T, Skrajnar S, Premzl A, Kunstelj M, Zore I,
Podobnik B, Kusterle M, Caserman S, Kenig M, Smilovic V, Porekar VG: The
Characterization and Potential use of G-CSF Dimers and their Pegylated
Conjugates. Acta Chim Slov 2011, 58:1-8.
33. Varshavsky A: Ubiquitin fusion technique and related methods. Methods
Enzymol 2005, 399:777-799.
34. Wang Z, Li H, Guan W, Ling H, Mu T, Shuler FD, Fang X: Human SUMO
fusion systems enhance protein expression and solubility. Protein Expr
Purif 2010, 73:203-208.
35. Wilkinson KD: Regulation of ubiquitin-dependent processes by
deubiquitinating enzymes. FASEB J 1997, 11:1245-1256.
36. Staub JM, Garcia B, Graves J, Hajdukiewicz PT, Hunter P, Nehra N,
Paradkar V, Schlittler M, Carroll JA, Spatola L, Ward D, Ye G, Russell DA:
High-yield production of a human therapeutic protein in tobacco
chloroplasts. Nat Biotechnol 2000, 18:333-338.
37. Baker RT: Protein expression using ubiquitin fusion and cleavage. Curr
Opin Biotechnol 1996, 7:541-546.
38. Luo J, Ning T, Sun Y, Zhu J, Zhu Y, Lin Q, Yang D: Proteomic analysis of
rice endosperm cells in response to expression of hGM-CSF. J Proteome
Res 2009, 8:829-837.
39. Schnell JD, Hicke L: Non-traditional functions of ubiquitin and ubiquitin-
binding proteins. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:35857-35860.
40. Kjemtrup S, Borkhsenious O, Raikhel NV, Chrispeels MJ: Targeting and
release of phytohemagglutinin from the roots of bean seedlings. Plant
Physiol 1995, 109:603-610.
41. Dixon DC, Cutt JR, Klessig DF: Differential targeting of the tobacco PR-1
pathogenesis-related proteins to the extracellular space and vacuoles of
crystal idioblasts. EMBO J 1991, 10:1317-1324.
42. Drakakaki G, Marcel S, Arcalis E, Altmann F, Gonzalez-Melendi P, Fischer R,
Christou P, Stoger E: The intracellular fate of a recombinant protein is
tissue dependent. Plant Physiol 2006, 141:578-586.
43. Arcalis E, Marcel S, Altmann F, Kolarich D, Drakakaki G, Fischer R, Christou P,
Stoger E: Unexpected deposition patterns of recombinant proteins in
post-endoplasmic reticulum compartments of wheat endosperm. Plant
Physiol 2004, 136:3457-3466.
44. Wright KE, Prior F, Sardana R, Altosaar I, Dudani AK, Ganz PR, Tackaberry ES:
Sorting of glycoprotein B from human cytomegalovirus to protein
storage vesicles in seeds of transgenic tobacco. Transgenic Res 2001,
10:177-181.
45. Tackaberry ES, Dudani AK, Prior F, Tocchi M, Sardana R, Altosaar I, Ganz PR:
Development of biopharmaceuticals in plant expression systems:
cloning, expression and immunological reactivity of human
cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B (UL55) in seeds of transgenic tobacco.
Vaccine 1999, 17:3020-3029.
46. Chikwamba RK, Scott MP, Mejia LB, Mason HS, Wang K: Localization of a
bacterial protein in starch granules of transgenic maize kernels. Proc Nat
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:11127-11132.
47. Leite A, Kemper EL, da Silva MJ, Luchessi AD, Siloto RMP, Bonaccorsi ED, El-
Dorry HF, Arruda P: Expression of correctly processed human growth
hormone in seeds of transgenic tobacco plants. Mol Breeding 2000,
6:47-53.
48. Wang J, Li Y, Lo SW, Hillmer S, Sun SS, Robinson DG, Jiang L: Protein
mobilization in germinating mung bean seeds involves vacuolar sorting
receptors and multivesicular bodies. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:1628-1639.
doi:10.1186/1472-6750-11-91
Cite this article as: Tian and Sun: Ubiquitin fusion expression and
tissue-dependent targeting of hG-CSF in transgenic tobacco. BMC
Biotechnology 2011 11:91.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Tian and Sun BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/91
Page 14 of 14
