ALLERGY, ASTHMA & CLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Open AccessREVIEW
BioMed Central
© 2010 Cole and Cant; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Review
Clinical experience in T cell deficient patients
Theresa S Cole and Andrew J Cant*
Abstract
T cell disorders have been poorly understood until recently. Lack of knowledge of underlying molecular mechanisms
together with incomplete data on long term outcome have made it difficult to assess prognosis and give the most
effective treatment. Rapid progress in defining molecular defects, improved supportive care and much improved
results from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) now mean that curative treatment is possible for many
patients. However, this depends on prompt recognition, accurate diagnosis and careful treatment planning.
This review will discuss recent progress in our clinical and molecular understanding of a variety of disorders including:
severe combined immunodeficiency, specific T cell immunodeficiencies, signaling defects, DNA repair defects,
immune-osseous dysplasias, thymic disorders and abnormalities of apoptosis.
There is still much to discover in this area and some conditions which are as yet very poorly understood. However, with
increased knowledge about how these disorders can present and the particular problems each group may face it is
hoped that these patients can be recognized early and managed appropriately, so providing them with the best
possible outcome.
Introduction
T cell disorders have been poorly understood until
recently. Lack of knowledge of underlying molecular
mechanisms together with incomplete data on long term
outcome made it difficult to assess prognosis and give the
most effective treatment. Rapid progress in defining
molecular defects, greatly improved supportive care and
much improved results from hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) now mean that curative treat-
ment is possible for many patients. However, this
depends on prompt recognition, accurate diagnosis and
careful treatment planning by experienced immunolo-
gists. Through discussion of many key T cell disorders
such as: severe combined immunodeficiency, other T cell
disorders, thymic disorders and disorders of lymphocyte
apoptosis we hope this review will aid this process.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) describes a
heterogeneous group of genetically determined condi-
tions which result in lymphopenia and hypogammaglob-
ulinemia, with inability to fight infection and early death.
Four main mechanism result in SCID: defective cytokine
dependent signaling in T cell pre-cursors, defective V(D)J
rearrangement, defective pre-TCR or TCR signaling and
premature cell death due to accumulation of purine
metabolites. The most common form of SCID is the X-
linked form due to mutations in genes coding for the
common cytokine receptor gamma chain which is shared
by the receptors for interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-
15, and IL-21. Please see Table 1: Molecular defects that
can present as SCID for details of common molecular
defects and their features. Some clinical features are com-
mon to all forms of SCID whilst others are pathognomic
for specific types. Recognition of the exact form of SCID
is important as this influences the optimal way HSCT is
performed.
SCID classically presents in the first few months of life
with respiratory or gastro-intestinal infections and asso-
ciated failure to thrive. Often these are due to common
pathogens such as Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) or
Parainfluenza virus causing a chronic bronchiolitic like
illness or rotavirus resulting in persistent diarrhea.
Opportunistic infections especially Pneumocystis jiroveci
(PJP) are common. In one study one in five patients with
SCID had PJP[1]. Often there is a history of cough and
dyspnea for weeks or even months. A high index of suspi-
cion is required as the organisms are rarely detected on
nasopharyngeal secretions, more commonly bronchoal-
veolar fluid is needed. Recurrent, but treatment respon-
* Correspondence: andrew.cant@nuth.nhs.uk
1 Paediatric Immunology Dept, Ward 23, Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate
Road, Newcastle, NE4 6BE, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 2 of 10
Table 1: Molecular defects that can present as SCID.
Disease T cells B cells Immunoglobulin Other features
Defect in cytokine
signaling
Common γchain
deficiency
N or Markedly decreased
NK cells
IL7Rα deficiency N or Normal NK cells
JAK3 deficiency N or Markedly decreased
NK cells
Defect in VDJ
recombination
Artemis deficiency
Cernunnos/XLF
deficiency
Microcephaly &
radiation sensitivity
DNA ligase IV Microcephaly &
radiation sensitivity
RAG1/2 deficiency
Defects in TCR
associated signaling
CD3δ/ε/ξ deficiency N Normal NK cells
CD45 deficiency N Normal γ/δ T cells
Disorders of purine
metabolism
ADA deficiency Absent from birth or
progressive
Absent from birth or
progressive
Progressive Neurological &
Radiological features
PNP deficiency Progressive N N or Neurological &
autoimmune features
Other defects
Reticular dysgenesis Normal or Arrested myeloid
maturation
= decreased, = markedly decreased, = increased, N = normal
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 3 of 10
sive superficial candidiasis is another important but
easily overlooked diagnostic clue. Disseminated cytomeg-
alovirus (CMV) infection is a less common but poten-
tially devastating infection presenting with pneumonitis,
hepatitis and encephalitis. Examination of a child with
SCID often reveals them to be wasted with tachypnea and
intercostal recession with or without crepitations or
rhonchi on auscultation. Lymphoid tissue is sparse or
absent, a sign best observed by looking for cervical or
inguinal nodes as demonstrating the absence of tonsillar
tissue is difficult in small infants. The full blood count
can greatly aid diagnosis, yet is often overlooked. An
absolute lymphocyte count <2.7 × 109/L is abnormal in an
infant and suggests SCID which can then be confirmed
on lymphocyte phenotyping. In SCID there is a severe
reduction in T cell numbers with variable B and NK cell
numbers. Immunoglobulin levels may be unhelpful due
to the presence of residual maternal IgG and the ability of
some infants with SCID to make non-functional IgM.
Isohemagluttinins may be useful in determining in vitro
IgM production. Lymphocytes usually fail to proliferate
after mitogen stimulation. Chest X-ray will show an
absent thymus. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
is the definitive treatment; trials of gene therapy are
ongoing, with mixed results. Supportive treatment
should be instigated as soon as the diagnosis is suspected,
including Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis, antifungal prophy-
laxis and immunoglobulin replacement.
A significant proportion of SCID patients present with
an eczematous rash, hepatosplenomegaly and lymphade-
nopathy, features quite different from "classical" SCID,
however the other features of SCID are usually also pres-
ent. In some families carrying the same molecular defect
one child can present with classical SCID while another
can present with this variant. In most cases one of the
well recognized molecular defects is present but
restricted clones of aberrant lymphocytes are present.
These either arise in the patient because the defect pre-
venting lymphocyte maturation is not complete
(Omenn's syndrome) or from maternal lymphocytes that
have crossed the placenta and engrafted in the child
(SCID with maternal fetal engraftment). There is consid-
erable similarity between the clinical features in these
conditions, though they are usually more severe in
Omenn's syndrome. The skin is red and scaly with a char-
acteristic leathery feel, the axillary and inguinal lymph
nodes are large and rubbery, often reaching three to four
centimeters in diameter. Hair and, in particular eyebrows
are absent. Patients with this condition are more at risk of
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonal infection fol-
lowing colonization of the abnormal skin. Useful immu-
nopathologic clues include the presence of very high
percentage of DR positive T cells without any naïve T
cells, oligoclonality on TCR V beta studies or T cell
receptor serotyping, eosinophilia and a raised IgE level
(due to a Th4 skewing of aberrant T cells). SCID with
maternal fetal engraftment is diagnosed by identifying
lymphocytes of maternal origin, by XX/XY karyotyping if
the patient is male or by tissue typing or the use of hyper-
variable DNA probes.
Abnormalities in purine metabolism, due to adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency or purine nucleoside phos-
phorylase (PNP) deficiency result in the accumulation of
toxic metabolites that damage T, B and NK cells. ADA
deficiency typically presents slightly earlier than other
forms of SCID, lymphocyte numbers may be normal at
birth but fall rapidly. Bony changes seen on chest X-ray
are often pathognomic, with flaring of the anterior rib
ends, blunting of the inferior angle of the scapula and pel-
vic dysplasia. Babies with ADA SCID are often irritable
and sometimes have pneumonitis or hepatitis without an
infectious cause, highlighting that this is a metabolic dis-
ease. PNP deficiency results in slower onset of immuno-
deficiency, initially affecting T cells but later damaging B
cells. Neurological features including a characteristic dys-
arthria and spastic diplegia are often present by diagnosis
which may not be until 4-5 years of age. Severe viral
infection such as adenovirus pneumonia or gastroenteri-
tis together with autoimmune features, including hemo-
lytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and thyroiditis are the
most common clinical features resulting from the
immune defect[2].
All organisms need to have mechanisms for repairing
naturally occurring DNA damage, such as occurs after
defective replication, ultraviolet light or naturally occur-
ring ionizing radiation. The immune system has adapted
this system to enable T and B cell DNA to be broken,
rearranged and rejoined so as to produce the huge num-
ber of receptors need to generate a comprehensive adap-
tive immune repertoire. It is not surprising therefore, that
when genetic defects occur in DNA repair mechanisms
there are neurodevelopmental and dysmorphic features
as well as a defective immune response. Genetic defects
that result in non-functioning proteins are embryologi-
cally lethal in DNA ligase IV mutations but not the other
DNA repair defects. Hypomorphic mutations give rise to
a range of protein function. This means that the clinical
picture can vary considerably. Patients with DNA ligase
IV and Cernunnos -XLF can present with a classical
SCID picture, but also have typical phenotypic features
including microcephaly, developmental delay and sun
sensitivity which can provide clues to the diagnosis.
Reticular dysgenesis (RD) is a rare form of SCID due to
a defect in lymphoid and myeloid differentiation.
Recently a mutation in the gene coding for the mitochon-
drial energy metabolism enzyme adenylate kinase 2
(AK2) has been identified in six individuals with reticular
dysgenesis from five independent families[3]. There is a
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 4 of 10
global impairment of lymphoid maturation along with an
arrest in myeloid maturation. T and B cell numbers are
both low. Patients with RD present in the first few weeks
of life, almost always with bacterial sepsis and neutrope-
nia, with or without thrombocytopenia. Severe congeni-
tal neutropenia or autoimmune neutropenia are the main
differential diagnoses. Bone marrow examination (which
shows arrest of myeloid differentiation at the promyelo-
cytic stage) along with low T and B cell numbers help dif-
ferentiate RD from these other conditions.
HSCT is the only curative treatment for SCID. Survival
has improved dramatically since it was first performed in
1968 and is now 80% for matched sibling or well matched
unrelated donor transplant[4]. Improved survival is the
result of many factors including: advances in understand-
ing the mechanisms of disease, more precise matching of
donor and recipient tissue types, less toxic pre-transplant
chemotherapy, improved management of complications
such as graft versus host disease (GvHD) and earlier diag-
nosis and better treatment of infections. The majority of
patients have good immune function and are off all medi-
cation post transplant. A minority of patients have long
term complications including: chronic graft versus host
disease, recurrent, non-opportunistic infections or long
term severe human papilloma virus infection[5].
Other T cell immunodeficiencies
Partial T cell immunodeficiencies occur as a result of
defects in signaling, T cell receptor gene rearrangements
or thymic dysfunction. Often the defects are caused by
hypomorphic gene defects allowing partial protein
expression and function, albeit aberrant function so these
disorders can also be associated with immune dysregula-
tion. The variety and variability of these defects explains
the wide spectrum of clinical features.
Signaling defects
Zap-70 kinase is critical for T cell activation, transmitting
signals from the CD3/TCR complex to the nucleus. Zap-
70 is also crucial for intrathymic T cell development, par-
ticularly for the development of CD8 cells from double
positive pre-cursors. Zap-70 kinase deficiency results in a
severe reduction or absence of CD8 cells and a reduction
in the proliferative response of CD4 cells, although CD4
numbers are often normal. Unlike classical SCID the thy-
mus and lymphoid tissue may be present. It is sometimes
associated with an elevated IgE level. Patients often pres-
ent with diarrhea and failure to thrive with persistent
viral enteritis due to enteroviruses, a diagnosis that can
often be missed unless detailed viral studies are under-
taken using PCR, culture and electron microscopy. A low
CD8 count (less than100 cells/mm3) and failure of T cells
to proliferate to antiCD3, reduced or absent proliferation
to PHA and normal proliferation to IL-2, PMA and iono-
phone suggest the diagnosis which is confirmed by show-
ing absence of Zap-70. Defects in genes coding for other
signaling molecules that associate with the TCR such as
the zeta chain cause a similar clinical picture or immuno-
phenotype.
Major histocompatability complex deficiencies also
cause immunodeficiency; MHC II is required to present
antigen to CD4 lymphocytes, its absence results in lack of
CD4 activation. It is also required in the thymus for posi-
tive CD4 lymphocyte selection. MHC II deficiency
results not from defects in MHC II genes themselves but
from defects in four genes that encode transcription fac-
tors required for MHC class II expression (RFXANK,
RFX5, RFXAP, and CIITA)[6]. Absence of MHC II results
in a variable phenotype with a later onset than SCID;
affected children often present in the second year of life
or later with bacterial, fungal or viral infections. Human
herpes virus infections are particularly common, includ-
ing human herpes virus 6 (HHV6), a pathogen often not
looked for. Enterovirus encephalitis is also common,
occurring in 40% of children in one review[7]. Cryp-
tosporidial infection can result in gastro-intestinal or
hepatic complications. Lymphocyte phenotyping shows
CD4 lymphopenia with increased CD8 numbers resulting
in a reversed CD4/CD8 ratio. Hypogammaglobulinemia
is often present. MHC class II expression is absent on B
cells and monocytes. HSCT is the only curative treatment
but results are significantly worse than those for SCID,
with European data showing 40% disease free survival for
HLA matched transplants and only 20% survival for mis-
matched transplants[7].
MHC I is required for CD8 lymphocyte development
and therefore presents with low numbers of CD8 cells.
The genetic defect is usually found in genes coding for
proteins that transport MHC I to the cell surface, for
example TAP1 & 2, however defects in tapasin will also
result in the same clinical picture. Children with MHC I
deficiency present in later childhood with respiratory
tract infections and bronchiectasis as well as characteris-
tic skin ulcers with exuberant granulation tissue and
rolled edges. Gastro-intestinal infection is rare. Lympho-
cyte subsets may be normal. Absence of MHC class I
expression can be demonstrated. Treatment is targeted at
respiratory disease, preventing progression of bron-
chiectasis. Unlike MHC class II it is not clear whether
HSCT or supportive therapy is best.
CD40 ligand deficiency is the best described form of
hyper IgM syndrome. Originally considered to be a B cell
defect, identification of the molecular defect in 1993
revealed a T cell defect[8], later identified as a mutation
in the gene encoding for CD40L glycoprotein (CD154).
CD40L is expressed on activated T cells and binds to
CD40 expressed on B cells and monocyte/macrophage
derived cells. Lack of binding prevents immunoglobulin
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 5 of 10
isotype switching by B cells as well as activation of
Kupffer cells and pulmonary macrophages. The ensuing
lack of IgA and IgG results in susceptibility to invasive
bacterial infection. CD40L is also important for cross talk
between T cells and monocyte derived cells during acti-
vation of the cell mediated immune response and there-
fore lack of CD40L can result in impairment of this
response. Failure of pulmonary macrophage activation
contributes to the risk of opportunistic infections such as
PJP developing and ineffective Kupffer cells result in
chronic gastro-intestinal and biliary cryptosporidial
infection which results in chronic liver disease, sclerosing
cholangitis, cirrhosis and hepatic malignancy from the
second or third decade onwards. Many patients present
in the latter months of infancy with an interstitial pneu-
monitis due to PJP or bacterial infections similar to those
seen in patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia.
Neutropenia is also common and contributes to the pro-
pensity to recurrent infections[9]. A European survey
suggested that although most patients on supportive
treatment were alive at 15 years of age about half had died
by their third decade[10]. Classically IgA and IgG are
absent and IgM is raised, however it can be normal. The
only curative treatment is HSCT although in older
patients this can be complicated by reactivation of cryp-
tosporidial disease and fulminant hepatic failure. Evalua-
tion of the European experience found 58% survival with
cure and expression of CD40L on activated lympho-
cytes[11]. A small number of combined liver and HSC
transplants have been performed. Post HSCT deaths are
related to infection, in particular cryptosporidium but
also adenovirus or cytomegalovirus reactivation[11]. This
poses a management dilemma as HSCT is much more
successful if performed in young patients before the onset
of liver disease.
Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome (WAS), has many clinical
features seen in T cell immunodeficiencies, however, the
X-linked gene defect affects WASP protein which is
important for actin polymerization ensuring cytoskeletal
integrity as well as signaling in all cells derived from the
hematopoietic stem cell. The complete WAS phenotype
is associated with gene defects that result in the absence
of WASP expression. It has a poor prognosis and most
patients do not survive adolescence[12]. WAS is charac-
terized by the triad of immunodeficiency, thrombocy-
topenia (with small platelets) and eczema, with potential
for autoimmunity and malignancy. It often presents in
infancy with petechia, bruising or bloody diarrhea and
although low the platelet count may be greater than 50/
mm3. Eczema tends to develop in infancy and is usually
generalized rather than flexural, however, it is often so
mild that WAS is not considered. Even when mild the
presence of petechia within the patches of eczema is quite
characteristic. The immune deficiency is progressive so
infections may not be severe in the first 1-2 years of life.
With time bacterial infections become pronounced, with
recurrent and often discharging ear infections, pneumo-
nias and skin sepsis. Bacterial meningitis can be seen
despite vaccination as vaccine responses are short lived.
Human herpes viral infections are a notable problem.
Cold sores are common and more extensive than usual.
Chicken pox can be devastating, with lesions progressing
well beyond the usual five day period of cropping. The
risk of secondary streptococcal and staphylococcal sepsis
is high. Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) can produce a pro-
longed febrile illness with marked lymphadenopathy and
hepatosplenomegaly. Cytomegalovirus and HHV6 infec-
tions are often insidious and prolonged and can be asso-
ciated with vasculitis. Susceptibility to pox viruses result
in severe and extensive molluscum contagiosum. Lym-
phocyte numbers may be normal in infancy but low T cell
numbers are common by six years of age[13]. B cell num-
bers usually fall over time. IgG levels are usually normal,
IgA can be normal or raised but IgM and isohemaggluti-
nin levels are low. Vaccine response to protein antigens
such as tetanus toxoid are usually present but there are
decreased or absent responses to polysaccharide antigens
such as pneumococcus. Autoimmunity can involve
hemolytic anemia, vasculitis, renal disease, inflammatory
bowel disease, neutropenia, dermatomyositis, recurrent
angio-oedema, uveitis and cerebral vasculitis. Malig-
nancy, usually EBV associated Non-Hodgkin's lym-
phoma, can develop in childhood but is more common in
adolescence. Aggressive topical treatment may help the
eczema. Antibacterial prophylaxis and immunoglobulin
replacement may reduce the risk of bacterial infection.
Aciclovir may help prevent HSV and VZV infections.
Immunosuppression may be needed for the autoimmune
phenomena but will increase the risk of fatal infection.
Platelet transfusion are necessary for severe bleeding and
splenectomy can lessen the frequency and severity of
bleeding episodes, although it appears to increase the risk
of fatal bacterial sepsis. Thus, for patients who do not
express WASP curative treatment should be attempted.
Currently HLA identical sibling or unrelated donor
HSCT offers an 80% chance of cure, although care must
be taken to ensure that myeloid as well as lymphoid cells
are predominantly donor post HSCT as patients with a
significant population of recipient myeloid cells remain at
risk of thrombocytopenia and autoimmunity. Gene ther-
apy also shows promising preliminary results but has not
yet been fully evaluated.
Hypomorphic mutations in the WASP gene, allowing
expression of WASP protein, result in a milder phenotype
previously known as X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT).
These patients usually suffer from a bleeding tendency
only in childhood and most survive in to adult life, albeit
with a high chance of having an intracranial hemorrhage
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 6 of 10
(ICH), 30 year ICH free survival is 36.8%[12]. Recent data
suggest that whilst XLT patients suffer from less infec-
tions and eczema the long term risk of autoimmunity and
malignancy may still be significant[14].
X-linked lymphoproliferative (XLP) syndrome, also
known as Duncan's Disease (after the original family
described) presents in a number of completely different
ways. There are three common presentations. Firstly ful-
minant EBV infection with a hemophagocytic lymphohis-
tiocytosis picture, resulting in fever, rash, splenomegaly,
jaundice, anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, low
fibrinogen, high triglycerides and hemophagocytosis on
tissue specimens from bone marrow, lymph node or
spleen. Secondly: dysgammaglobulinemia resembling
common variable immunodeficiency, with associated
sinopulmonary infections and lymphadenopathy.
Thirdly: as EBV driven lymphoma which is often extran-
odal and involves the gut. Less commonly it can present
with vasculitis, aplastic anemia or pulmonary lymphatoid
granulomatosis. XLP can be divided in to two groups on a
molecular basis. XLP 1 is associated with a mutation in
SH2D1A, which encodes for the signaling lymphocyte
activation molecule associated protein (SAP), which is
essential for T cell and NK cell signaling needed to con-
trol EBV infected B cells. Absent SAP expression and a
defect in the SH2D1A gene confirm the diagnosis. How-
ever, a significant proportion of XLP patients express or
partially express SAP or are not found to have a defect in
the SH2D1A gene despite showing the clinical pheno-
type. XLP 2 is associated with a gene mutation in the ×
linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP). XIAP is
expressed on lymphocytes, myeloid cells and NK cells
and its function is to suppress apoptosis through interac-
tion with caspases. Patients with XLP 2 have not been
described as developing lymphomas but unlike XLP 1
develop splenomegaly as a prominent feature prior to
EBV infection. Patients with XLP and fulminant EBV
infection have a high risk of dying and should be treated
aggressively if they demonstrate features of HLH with
either Etoposide and steroids or Anti-thymocyte globu-
lin, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and ciclosporin.
Patients with dysgammaglobulinemia will benefit from
IVIG. The only curative treatment is HSCT provided
there is an unaffected HLA identical sibling donor or a
well matched unrelated donor. If undertaken at a young
age in a stable patient HSCT is likely to be successful in
80% of cases. Patients with features of XLP but no identi-
fiable gene defect pose a management dilemma especially
if they have not yet had EBV infection. In these cases the
decision as to whether HSCT should be attempted is
finely balanced.
DNA repair defects
The DNA repair defects impact on many biological sys-
tems, not just the T and B cell V(D)J recombination pro-
cess. This results in a variety of different syndromes,
Cernunnos -XLF and DNA ligase IV present with a SCID
like picture but many others also have a degree of T cell
disorder. Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) is one of the best
known, resulting from mutations in the ATM gene which
encodes the ATM protein, a protein kinase involved in
meiotic recombination and cell cycle control. Patients
develop a progressive cerebellar ataxia which starts soon
after the onset of walking and results in most patients
being wheelchair bound by 10-12 years of age. Cognitive
function is usually preserved. Oculocutaneous telangi-
ectasia normally appear between three to six years of age.
Patients often have endocrinopathy with growth failure.
The degree of immunodeficiency is variable, from iso-
lated IgA deficiency to IgG deficiency and lymphopenia.
Respiratory tract infections are common and repeated
episodes of pneumonia can result in bronchiectasis. Pro-
phylactic antibiotics or immunoglobulin may be useful to
reduce the frequency and severity of infections. Most
patients with classical AT die in early adulthood from
respiratory failure or malignancy, including breast cancer,
brain tumors or hematological malignancy[15]. Some
patients with a milder variant of AT develop the neuro-
logical features later, appear to have less immunodefi-
ciency than classical AT and survive further in to
adulthood.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome is characterized by
microcephaly, mild to moderate learning difficulties and
facial features which are typically described as "bird like" -
with a receding forehead and mandible with a prominent
midface. Patients often also have large ears and sparse
hair[16]. Growth retardation is often not obvious at birth
but becomes visible by 2 years of age with shortening of
the trunk more prominent than shortening of the limbs.
Hypogammaglobulinemia is common with up to one
third of patients having agammaglobulinemia. As with
AT, sinopulmonary infection is common. CD4 lym-
phopenia is also frequent. The defective gene NBS1
encodes for nibrin, part of the protein complex down-
stream from ATM in the ATM signal transduction cas-
cade. As with AT prophylactic antibiotics and IVIG can
be useful in reducing the frequency and severity of infec-
tions. Patients are at risk of lymphoid malignancy which
occurs in adolescence or early adulthood. HSCT using a
modified Fanconi anemia conditioning protocol has been
successful in correcting the immune defect but not the
other features[17].
Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial
anomalies syndrome (ICF) is characterized by dysmor-
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 7 of 10
phic features: epicanthic folds, hypertelorism, flat nasal
bridge and low set ears, together with hypo or agamma-
globulinemia and branching of chromosomes 1,9 and 16
after PHA stimulation of lymphocytes which is diagnos-
tic. A mutation in the gene coding for DNA methylation
by the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B has been
described however, it has not been found in all patients
with the ICF phenotype. Abnormal T cell function occurs
despite normal T cell numbers with opportunistic infec-
tions such as PJP, severe viral warts and cutaneous fungal
infections. It can present early in life with severe infec-
tions and failure to thrive, as a result of gastrointestinal
infection or later in childhood with recurrent respiratory
tract or cutaneous infections. Many will also have some
degree of developmental delay in childhood. Prognosis is
poor, particularly for those that present in infancy with a
combination of infections, gastrointestinal problems and
failure to thrive[18]. Immunoglobulin replacement can be
useful in reducing the number of infective episodes for
those less severely affected but HSCT should be consid-
ered for those with the severe form of the disease.
Immune - osseous dysplasias
Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal reces-
sive metaphyseal chondrodysplasia associated with muta-
tions in the ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA processing
(RMRP) gene. CHH is one of four distinct skeletal disor-
ders associated with RMRP gene defects, the others being
metaphyseal dysplasia without hypotrichosis, kyphomelic
dysplasia and anauxetic dysplasia. The degree of
extraskeletal manifestations varies with each of these dis-
orders and more recently mutations that cause severe
immunodeficiency without skeletal changes have also
been identified[19]. Within the diagnosis of CHH there is
wide variety in phenotype even within the same family.
Typical features include short limb dwarfism with flaring
of the lower rib cage, a prominent sternum and bowing of
the legs with very short and hyperextensible fingers due
to ligamentous laxity. Hair is fine and sparse including
eyelashes and eyebrows. Hypoplastic nails and hypopig-
mented skin are also common. The degree of immunode-
ficiency is variable, some patients present with a SCID
like picture, whilst others have recurrent respiratory tract
infections. Human herpes virus infections are a particular
risk with fatal disseminated varicella or EBV driven lym-
phoma as notable features. The immune defect is pre-
dominantly T cell in nature with reduced numbers and
impaired proliferation to mitogens however humoral
abnormalities have also been described. CHH can also
present with immune dysregulation and features of auto-
immunity including anemia or neutropenia. HSCT has
been successfully used for cases presenting with severe
immunodeficiency
Schimke immune osseous dysplasia also has a variable
phenotype. The defective gene has been identified as
SMARCAL1 which codes for a chromatin remodelling
protein. It is characterized by short stature, hyperpig-
mented macules, lymphopenia, cerebral ischemia and
nephropathy leading to renal failure. Patients have dys-
morphic features with a broad nasal bridge and bulbous
nasal tip as well as small teeth and fine coarse hair. Ocular
abnormalities are common, including corneal opacities,
myopia and astigmatism. The hyperpigmented patches
are common on the trunk but can extend on to the limbs
and face. Infections are frequent and can be bacterial,
viral or fungal related to the lymphopenia and also neu-
tropenia. Other hematological abnormalities include ane-
mia and thrombocytopenia. Progressive proteinuria
causing nephrotic syndrome is steroid resistant and
results in renal failure requiring renal transplant [20].
Neurological development is normal until the onset of
cerebral ischemic episodes which are due to progressive
arteriosclerosis. Treatment options are limited, cerebral
and immunological complications are not affected by
renal transplant and there is difficulty balancing immu-
nosuppression post renal transplant to avoid death from
overwhelming infection. HSCT has been performed with
success[21].
Schwachman Diamond Syndrome (SDS) is a multisys-
tem disease that consists of pancreatic exocrine insuffi-
ciency, cytopenias and short stature. It is the second most
common cause of exocrine pancreatic failure after cystic
fibrosis[22]. Steatorrhea occurs in the majority of patients
before one year of age. Cytopenias vary, with neutropenia
the most common. However, neutrophils also have
impaired chemotaxis meaning that recurrent serious
infections occur even without significant neutropenia.
Anemia and thrombocytopenia are often mild. Hypog-
ammaglobulinemia can occur, resulting in recurrent
sinopulmonary infections. Skeletal abnormalities may not
be visible until after the first year of life although children
with SDS are often on the lower centiles at birth. Tho-
racic cage and digit abnormalities are also described.
Osteomalacia and osteoporosis can occur as a result of
impaired vitamin D absorption. Severe eczema is fre-
quently seen at presentation. The SBDS gene mutation
has been identified in more than 90% of patients with the
SDS phenotype. Although the function of the gene is still
not clear, it appears to have a role in ribosome biogenesis
and RNA processing[23]. Treatment is required for pan-
creatic insufficiency to maximize nutrition and growth.
Aggressive antibiotic treatment is required for infections.
With current treatment survival is in to mid-adulthood
however there is a high risk of hematological malignancy
which carries a poor prognosis.
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 8 of 10
Thymic disorders
The thymus is critical for the development of a fully func-
tional T cell repertoire. T lymphocytes are derived from
common lymphoid progenitors in the bone marrow
which move to the thymus and as thymocytes undergo T-
cell gene receptor rearrangement followed by positive
selection in the thymic cortex. Only cells that recognize
MHC expressed by thymic cortical epithelial cells are
selected. Following positive selection these cells mature
to single positive cells (CD4 or CD8) depending on the
MHC molecule recognized. Strongly self-reactive cells
undergo negative selection and apoptosis. Surviving thy-
mocytes then leave the thymus from the medulla. Defects
in thymocyte development due to an abnormal thymus
can result in T cell disorders with increased infections or
autoimmune features.
The chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is the
most common chromosomal deletion syndrome and cov-
ers an array of different phenotypes including DiGeorge
syndrome. The microdeletion at 22q11.2 results in abnor-
mal development of branchial arch derived structures
including the thymus, explaining the variety of clinical
features. These include: cardiac abnormalities such as
tetralogy of fallot and interrupted aortic arch; dysmor-
phic facies (hypertelorism, short philtrum, mandibular
hypoplasia and low set ears); neonatal hypocalcaemia
(which can present as neonatal seizures); feeding and
speech difficulties related to submucosal or overt clefts in
the palate and developmental delay[24]. The immunode-
ficiency is highly variable and only a minority present
with a SCID like picture (less than 0.5% have complete
DiGeorge syndrome with absent thymus and severe T cell
immunodeficiency[24]). T cell numbers are often low but
proliferation to mitogens is usually normal. Immunoglob-
ulins can be normal or low and response to vaccines can
be low or absent. In particular, responses to polysaccha-
ride antigens such as pneumococcus are abnormal in
early childhood resulting in recurrent respiratory tract
infections. There is also an increased incidence of auto-
immunity including cytopenias, arthritis and endo-
crinopathy in up to 30% of patients with 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome. For those with a SCID like phenotype adoptive
transfer of mature T cells through bone marrow or
peripheral blood mononuclear cell transplant has been
successful. Despite the lack of a functional thymus to
mature lymphoid progenitors there is peripheral expan-
sion of lymphocytes providing adequate protection
against infection. However, tolerance does not develop
and the risk of GvHD is high[25,26]. Thymic transplant
has been recently developed for patients with complete
DiGeorge anomaly. These cases had either very low cir-
culating T cell numbers (typical complete DiGeorge) or
oligoclonal T cell populations and lymphadenopathy
(atypical complete DiGeorge). Thymic transplant was
performed on 44 patients with a good outcome. Twenty
five subjects tested one year after transplant had devel-
oped polyclonal T cell repertoires with proliferative
responses to mitogens[27].
CHARGE syndrome consists of coloboma, heart
defects, for example Tetralogy of Fallot, atresia choanae,
retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia
and ear abnormalities/deafness. Cognitive function is
variable, from normal IQ to severe learning difficulties
and there also appear to be associated behavioral difficul-
ties[28]. Mutations in chromodomain helicase DNA
binding protein-7 (CHD7) have been identified in up to
75% of cases. There is a significant degree of overlap
between CHARGE and 22q11 deletions in terms of clini-
cal features. Unlike 22q11 deletions where immunodefi-
ciency is a recognized feature it is often overlooked in
CHARGE. There is however, a strong association
between CHARGE and immunodeficiency. This ranges
from T cell lymphopenia or hypogammaglobulinemia to
a SCID presentation including Omenn's syndrome[29].
Any child presenting with features of CHARGE should
have their immune system evaluated.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ecto-
dermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome is a rare auto-
somal recessive disorder also known as autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1(APS1). Originally
described as a triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidia-
sis, hypoparathyroidism and hypoadrenalism, a much
wider spectrum of associated autoimmune disease is now
recognized. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis can be
variable in its severity and age of onset. Autoimmune dis-
orders include hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism,
hypoadrenalism, diabetes mellitus, autoimmune hepati-
tis, vitiligo, alopecia and malabsorption due to GI tract
autoantibodies[30]. Candidiasis frequently starts in child-
hood with other non-specific symptoms but classical fea-
tures of APECED may not become apparent until early
adulthood. It is often associated with dystrophic nails and
dental enamel. Hyposplenia or asplenia can occur as a
result of autoimmune destruction rendering patients sus-
ceptible to pneumococcal infection. APECED results
from mutations in the Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE)
gene. AIRE has a role in regulating the expression and
presentation of peripheral tissue antigens by the thymic
medullary epitheial cells to thymocytes and is involved in
the clonal deletion of self-reactive thymocytes[31].
Decreased AIRE function allows autoreactive T cells to
escape the thymus in to the periphery. More recently it
has been recognized that AIRE also has a role in periph-
eral tolerance, eliminating autoreactive T cells that have
escaped negative selection in the thymus[32]. Treatment
is directed towards preventing oral candidiasis through
good oral hygiene and treatment of specific endocrine
disorders. Pneumococcal vaccine is also recommended
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 9 of 10
although death due to septicemia appears to be uncom-
mon[32].
IPEX syndrome (immune dysregulation, polyendo-
crinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome) presents in
infancy or early childhood. Severely affected infants pres-
ent with failure to thrive, persistent watery diarrhea due
to the autoimmune enteropathy and a widespread eczem-
atous rash which is difficult to treat. Hyperglycemia can
start from as early as the first week of life and may require
insulin to maintain glycemic control. Thyroiditis also
starts early in life and can result in hyper or hypothyroid-
ism. Hematological abnormalities are common, includ-
ing: autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia
and neutropenia. Other manifestations include: lymph-
adenopathy; hepatosplenomegaly; cholestatic hepatitis;
nephropathy; seizures; vasculitis and arthritis. Some
cases have multiple, severe infections including sepsis,
meningitis, pneumonia and osteomyelitis[33], these
appear to be related to impaired barrier functions of the
skin and gut rather than a specific immunodeficiency.
Investigations demonstrate eosinophilia with elevated IgE
but normal IgG, A and M. Autoantibodies can be found
directed against a variety of different organs and cell
types. Mutations have been identified in the FOXP3 gene,
located in the centromeric region of the × chromosome.
Absence of FOXP3 function results in the absence of reg-
ulatory T cells leading to autoaggressive lymphoprolifera-
tion. Despite being activated cells have defective IL-2,
IFN-γ and TNF-α production. Treatment with immuno-
suppression can improve symptoms but does not achieve
long term remission. The only curative treatment is
HSCT. A number of cases have been described with an
IPEX phenotype but no identifiable FOXP3 mutation.
These have been termed IPEX-like and require similar
treatment.
Disorders of apoptosis
The immune system functions by maintaining a small
population of lymphocytes specific for wide range of anti-
gens. Pathogen recognition results in rapid proliferation
of these lymphocytes. However, this mechanism must be
controlled to prevent unwanted effects and malignant
transformation in chronically activated cells.
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative syndromes (ALPS)
are a group of disorders characterized by abnormal apop-
tosis, resulting in lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity.
A number of gene mutations have been identified, includ-
ing fas, fas-ligand, caspase 8 and caspase 10. The spec-
trum of presentation is variable and like many other
conditions variation occurs within a family with the same
defect. The diagnosis of ALPS should be considered in
any patient presenting with persistent lymphadenopathy
and hepatosplenomegaly with or without evidence of
autoimmunity, for example, hemolytic anemia, thrombo-
cytopenia or neutropenia. The most common presenta-
tion is with lymphadenopathy and marked splenomegaly
at around two years of age. Hepatomegaly is present in
approximately 75%[34]. Occasionally patients present
with only lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly. Autoim-
mune features are variable in nature and timing of onset.
Autoantibodies are often present without evidence of
clinical disease. Investigations show lymphocytosis with
an increased number of TCR alfa/beta+ CD4-CD8- cells.
Abnormal apoptosis can be demonstrated. Lymphade-
nopathy will respond to steroids but recurs on weaning.
Autoimmune disease may require large amounts of
immune suppression. The combination of high dose ste-
roids, IVIG and Rituximab have been used with some
success although there are concerns about prolonged
hypogammaglobulinemia following the use of Rituximab.
The antimalarial drug pyrimethamine-sulphadoxine has
also been shown to be beneficial in reducing lymphade-
nopathy and cytopenias. Splenectomy has been used for
resistant thrombocytopenia and anemia however post-
splenectomy pneumococcal sepsis is a particular problem
in ALPS[34]. Death occurs as a result of hematological
malignancy, severe autoimmune disease or post-splenec-
tomy sepsis. HSCT has been used successfully for cases
that have been difficult to control using immunosuppres-
sion.
Conclusion
Our understanding of the wide variety of T cell disorders
has greatly improved in recent years. The spectrum of T
cell defects is broad, from severe combined immunodefi-
ciency to signaling defects to specific defects in lympho-
cyte apoptosis. This means there is massive variety in the
way patients present. It is important to be aware of these
conditions so the diagnosis can be considered. The
patient can then be referred to an expert immunologist
and investigated appropriately. It is helpful to identify the
molecular diagnosis as this can contribute to understand-
ing of prognosis and therefore the most appropriate man-
agement. It is important to recognize the infective
complications that are associated with these disorders
and look carefully for them. It is also necessary to under-
stand other systems/organs that can be affected and
assess the extent of damage to these, for example, lungs
and liver, as this can also have an impact on potential
treatment. HSCT has been successful in many of the T
cell disorders and should be considered early in the dis-
ease process now that survival has improved and compli-
cations reduced. Gene therapy may become more
widespread in the future as our understanding increases
and results improve. Further work is still needed however
in the large number of kindreds with T cell defects that
have yet to be identified in order to understand their
Cole and Cant Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9
Page 10 of 10
genetic defect, their risk of particular infections and
therefore the best treatment for them.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
TSC and AJC contributed equally to the preparation of this manuscript.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Author Details
Paediatric Immunology Dept, Ward 23, Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate
Road, Newcastle, NE4 6BE, UK
References
1. Berrington JE, et al.: Unsuspected Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia at
presentation of severe primary immunodeficiency. Arch Dis Child 2000,
82:144-7.
2. Markert ML: Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase Deficiency.
Immunodeficiency Reviews 1991, 3(45-81):.
3. Pannicke U, et al.: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2.
Nature Genetics 2009, 41:101-5.
4. Gennery AR, Cant AJ: Advances in hematopoeitic stem cell
transplantation for primary immunodeficiency. Immunol Allergy Clin
North Am 2008, 28(439-56):.
5. Neven B, et al.: Long-term outcome after hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation of a single-center cohort of 90 patients with severe
combined immunodeficiency. Blood 2009, 133:4114-24.
6. Masternak K, et al.: Molecular genetics of the bare lymphocyte
syndrome. Rev Immunogenet 2000, 2:267-82.
7. Saleem MA, et al.: Clinical course of patients with major
histocompatibility complex class II deficiency. Arch Dis Child 2000,
83:356-9.
8. Korthäuer U, et al.: Defective expression of T cell CD40 ligand causes ×
linked immunodeficiency with hyper IgM. Nature 1993, 361:494.
9. Notarangelo LD, et al.: Defects in class switch recombination. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2006, 117:855-64.
10. Toniati P, Savoldi G, Jones AM: Report of the ESID collaborative study on
clinical features and molecular analysis of X-linked Hyper IgM
syndrome (abstract). European Society for Immunodeficiencies Newsletter
2002:40.
11. Gennery AR, et al.: Treatment of CD40 ligand deficiency by
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a survey of the European
experience, 1993-2002. Blood 2004, 103:1152-7.
12. Imai K, et al.: Clinical course of patients with WASP gene mutations.
Blood 2004, 103:456-64.
13. Ochs HD, Thrasher AJ: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2006, 117:725-38.
14. Ochs HD: Mutations of the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein affect
protein expression and dictate the clinical phenotypes. Immunol Res
2009, 44(84-8):.
15. Verhagen MM, et al.: Clinical spectrum of ataxia-telangiectasia in
adulthood. Neurology 2009, 73:430-7.
16. Digweed M, Sperling K: Nijmegen breakage syndrome: clinical
manifestations of defective response to DNA double strand breaks.
DNA repair 2004, 3:1207-17.
17. Albert MH, et al.: Successful SCT for Nijmegen breakage syndrome.
Bone Marrow Transplant 2010, 45:622-6.
18. Hagleitner MM, et al.: Clinical spectrum of immunodeficiency,
centromeric instability and facial dysmorphism (ICF syndrome). J Med
Genet 2008, 45:93-9.
19. Notarangelo LD, Roifman CM, Giliani S: Cartilage-hair hypoplasia:
molecular basis and heterogenicity of the immunological phenotype.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2008, 8:534-9.
20. Boerkoel CF, et al.: Manifestations and treatment of Schimke immuno-
osseous dysplasia: 14 new cases and a review of the literature. Eur J
Pediatr 2000, 159:1-7.
21. Thomas SE, et al.: Successful renal transplantation following prior bone
marrow transplantation in pediatric patients. Pediatr Transplant 2004,
8:507-12.
22. Hall D, Dale P, Dodge JA: Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome: UK
perspective. Arch Dis Child 2006, 91:521-4.
23. Rujkijyanont P, et al.: Bone marrow cells from patients with Shwachman-
Diamond syndrome abnormally express genes involved in ribosome
biogenesis and RNA processing. Br J Haematol 2009, 145:806-15.
24. McLean-Tooke A, Spickett GP, Gennery AR: Immunodeficiency and
autoimmunity in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Scand J Immunol 2007,
66:1-7.
25. Daguinadau N, et al.: Immune constituition monitoring after PBMC
transplantation in complete DiGeorge Syndrome: an eight year follow
up. Clin immunol 2008, 128:164-71.
26. McGhee SA, Lloret MG, Stiehm ER: Immunologic reconstituition in 22q
deletion (DiGeorge) syndrome. Immunol Res 2009, 45:37-45.
27. Markert ML, et al.: Review of 54 patients with complete DiGeorge
anomaly enrolled in protocols for thymus transplantation: outcome of
44 consecutive transplants. Blood 2007, 109:4539-47.
28. Blake KD, Prasad C: CHARGE syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2006, 1:34.
29. Jyonouchi S, et al.: CHARGE (coloboma, heart defect, atresia choanae,
retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear anolmalies/
deafness) syndrome and chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. A
comparison of immunologic and nonimmunologic phenotypic
features. Pediatrics 2009, 123:e871-7.
30. Moraes-Vasconcelos D, et al.: Primary Immune deficiency disorders
presenting as autoimmune diseases: IPEX and APECED. J clin Immunol
2008, 28(suppl 1):S11-19.
31. Mathis D, Benoist C: Aire. Annu Rev immunol 2009, 27:287-312.
32. Husebye ES, et al.: Clinical manifestations and management of patients
with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1. J Int Med 2009,
265:514-29.
33. Torgerson TR, Ochs HD: Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-linked: Forkhead box protein 3 mutations and lack of
regulatory T cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007, 120:744-50.
34. Worth A, Thrasher AJ, Gaspar HB: Autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome: molecular basis of disease and clinical phenotype. Br J
Haematol 2006, 133:124-40.
doi: 10.1186/1710-1492-6-9
Cite this article as: Cole and Cant, Clinical experience in T cell deficient
patients Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
Received: 16 March 2010 Accepted: 13 May 2010
Published: 13 May 2010
This article is available from: http://www.aacijournal.com/content/6/1/9© 2010 Cole and Cant; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2010, 6:9
