THE OCCURRENCE DURING ACUTE INFECTIONS OF A
PROTEIN NOT NORMALLY PRESENT IN THE BLOOD
I. DISTRIBUTION OF THE REACTIVE PROTEIN IN PATIENTS' SERA AND THE
EFFECT OF CALCIUM ON THE FLOCCULATION REACTION WITH C
POLYSACCHARIDE OF PNEUMOCOCCUS
BY THEODORE J. ABERNETHY, M.D., AND OSWALD T. AVERY, M.D.
(From the Hospital of The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research)
(Received for publication, October 7, 1940)
In 1930 Tillett and Francis (1)found that in certain infectious diseases, notably lobar
pneumonia, the serum obtained from patients during the acute stage of the illness yields
a precipitate in the presence of dilute solutions of the C polysaccharide of Pneumococcus.
In pneumonia the precipitation test is positive during the height of the disease and
becomes negative shortly after the onset of recovery. Thus the precipitating action of
the serum closely parallels the clinical course of the infection. Although the particular
carbohydrate used as test reagent is derived from Pneumococcus, the presence of the
active substance in serum is not limited to pneumococcal diseases but occurs in a number
of other infections such as acute rheumatic fever, bacterial endocarditis, and staphylo-
coccal osteomyelitis. Ash (2) confirmed and extended these findings and showed that
the "C-reactive" substance is demonstrable in sera obtained from children during the
acute stage of infections due to Gram-negative bacilli of the colon-typhoid group. In
view of the observations cited above it is evident that the phenomenon is associated with
a variety of acute pathological conditions and is not specific with respect to the inciting
agent.
In 1934 Francis and Abernethy (3) published a preliminary report on the occurrence
in patients during the acute stage of pneumonia of a characteristic skin reaction following
the intracutaneous injection of 0.1 mg. of the C carbohydrate. They showed that the
skin reaction is correlated with the precipitating action of the serum in vitro. These
results were later confirmed by Finland and Dowling (4). Recently Abernethy and
Francis (5)using a more highly purified preparation of the C polysaccharide corroborated
the earlier work and emphasized the striking agreement between the results of the sero-
logical and cutaneous tests. In all patients in whom the disease terminated in unevent-
ful recovery they found that both the serum and skin tests were positive during the acute
febrile period and became negative shortly after crisis. With the development of
complications, the capacity of the skin and serum to react may persist or reappear. Only
in fatal cases have the results of the serological and cutaneous tests failed to agree. In
these instances it has been observed that the skin may fail to react although the active
substance can be demonstrated in the blood at the time of death.
In a subsequent paper (6) Abernethy reported the results of a study of the precipita-
tion reaction with sera obtained from experimentally infected animals. He found that the
serum of monkeys (Macacus cynomolgos) acutely ill with experimentalType II Pneumo-
173
ABNORMAL PROTEIN IN BLOOD DURING INFECTION. I
coccus pneumonia precipitated with the C carbohydrate in dilutions as high as 1: 500,000.
The reactive substance was present in serum obtained within the first 24 hours of the
experimental disease, but was not demonstrable in the blood of recovered monkeys. The
capacity of the serum to react is not dependent upon the site of the lesion, since the sera
of monkeys inoculated by the intraperitoneal or intradermal route were found to be
equally reactive. The occurrence of the phenomenon during the course of experimental
infection in monkeys is the same as that noted in the spontaneous disease in man.
Similar tests carried out with sera from infected mice and rabbits, however, were in-
variably negative throughout the infection irrespective of the site or severity of the
lesion. The seemingly discordant results of the precipitation test in different species
of animals infected with the same microorganisms appear at first glance to be somewhat
paradoxical. However, the presence during infection of a similarly reacting substance
in the blood of allied species such as man and monkeys, and the failure to demonstrate
the substance in more distant species such as rabbits and mice are probably to be ex-
plained on the chemical dissimilarities of the proteins of the unrelated hosts. Differences
in the degree of zoological relationship between the species tested would then account
for the observed differences in results. The assumption that during infection an
analogous but not identical substance exists in the blood of unrelated species would
require for its demonstration the use in each instance of a selective test reagent.
The present paper deals with (a) the effect of heat on the C-reactive
substance, (b) its distribution in the serum of infected man and monkeys,
and (c) the r61le of calcium in the flocculation reaction with the C poly-
saccharide.
EXPERIMENTAL
The Effect of Heat on the C-PrecipitableSubstance.-In order to determine
the effect of heating on the reactivity of the precipitable substance in human
serum the following experiment was carried out.
Serum obtained from a patient during the acute stage of Type VIII Pneumococcus
pneumonia was diluted with an equal part of /20 borate buffer at pH 7.8. 1.5 cc.
samples of the diluted serum were heated for 30 minutes in a water bath at temperatures
ranging from 550 to 700
C. After cooling, the specimens of serum heated at the different
temperatures were tested for the presence of the reactive substance by adding 0.25 cc.
of each to an equal volume of 1:20,000 solution of C polysaccharide. The mixtures were
incubated at 37C. for 2 hours and overnight in the refrigerator. The results of precipita-
tion tests are given in Table I.
The data presented in Table I indicate that under the experimental con-
ditions the C-precipitable substance in diluted serum is inactivated after
exposure to temperatures above 65°C. The samples of diluted serum
heated at the higher temperatures became opalescent, and it seems probable
that the loss of activity was associated with denaturation of the serum pro-
teins since in each instance loss of activity occurred following exposure to
temperatures at which most proteins are known to undergo denaturation.
174
THEODORP J.. ABERNETHY AND OSWALD T. AVERY
Distributionof the C-PrecipitableSubstance in Human Sera.-In order to
determine whether the reactive material in patients' serum is associated
with the albumin or the globulin fraction the following experiment was
carried out. Specimens of serum known to be reactive with the test carbo-
hydrate together with a control serum from a normal individual were
fractionated by salting out the respective proteins with ammonium sulfate.
This procedure was carried out with blood serum obtained from patients
suffering from acute lobar pneumonia, active rheumatic fever, and bac-
teremia due to colon bacillus. In the last instance the patient had aplastic
anemia complicated by fatal secondary infection and at autopsy abscesses
of the kidney and bronchopneumonia were found. The method of frac-
tionation of the serum proteins was as follows:-
5 cc. of serum were diluted with an equal volume of physiological salt solution, and
10.0 cc. of saturated ammonium sulfate were then added. The mixtures were allowed to
TABLE I
Effect of Heat on the C-PrecipitableSubstance in Human Serum
Precipitation reactions with C 1:20,000
Blood obtained during acute infection Serum heated for 30 min. at:
Unheated
serum 55'C. 600C. 65OC. 70'C.
Type VIII Pneumococcus pneumonia ... ++ ++ ++- - +++
stand for 15 minutes at room temperature and the globulin precipitated at half saturation
was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 R.P.M. The supernatant liquid was decanted
and the precipitate redissolved in 5.0 cc. of distilled water. The latter was reprecipitated
at half saturation with ammonium sulfate and collected as above. The supernatants
from the first and second precipitation were then combined and brought to full satura-
tion by the addition of solid ammonium sulfate. The precipitated albumin was collected
by filtration through paper on a BUchner funnel. The albumin and globulin precipitates
were separately dissolved in 3.0 cc. of M/100 phosphate buffer pH 7.4 and dialyzed in
cellophane sacs against the same buffer solution for 48 hours. The dialysates were then
removed and made isotonic by the addition of the requisite amount of solid NaCl. The
final protein solutions were clear. Most of the serum pigment was noted in the albumin
fraction.
For comparative purposes the whole untreated serum and the respective protein
fractions were adjusted to the same volume with physiological salt solution. Precipita-
tion tests with the globulin and albumin fractions together with the original serum were
carried out by adding to 0.25 cc. of each an equal volume of a 1:20,000 solution of the
C polysaccharide. The final readings were made after incubation at 370
C. for 2 hours
and overnight in the refrigerator. The results are given in Table II.
From the results shown in Table II it is evident that the active material
in patients' serum which combines to form a precipitate with the C poly-
175
ABNORMAL PROTEIN IN BLOOD DURING INFECTION. I
saccharide is associated with the serum albumin. In each instance the
precipitating titre of the albumin fraction was comparable to that of the
whole serum. The serum globulins on the other hand were wholly inactive.
It is interesting to note that in one of the cases of pneumonia (Type VII)
cited in Table II, pleural fluid as well as the blood serum was found to be
active in the precipitation tests with the polysaccharide. On fractionation
with ammonium sulfate the reactive material in both the blood and chest
fluid was present in the albumin and not in the globulin fraction precipitated
by half saturation with ammonium sulfate.
Distributionof the C-PrecipitableSubstance in the Serum of Monkeys with
Experimental Type III Pneumococcus Pneumonia.-Theclinical course and
TABLE II
Distributionof C-PrecipitableSubstancein the Albumin and GlobulinFractionsof
Human Serum
Precipitation reactions with C 1: 20,000
Serum of patients during acute infection
Whole serum Albumin Globulin
Type III Pneumococcus pneumonia ............... +++ + ++ -
Type VII Pneumococcus pneumonia .............. + ++ + + + + + -
Rheumatic fever............................... ++. + + + -
*Bacteremia (B. coli)............................ ++-
Control-normal individual......................
*Patient had aplastic anemia with terminal bacteremia, and at autopsy abscesses of
kidney and bronchopneumonia were found.
pathological findings of the experimental disease in these animals have been
described in a preceding paper (6).
Samples of the sera of monkeys (1-37 and 1-44) were obtained 24 and 48 hours after
intrabronchial inoculation of these animals with a virulent culture of Pneumococcus
Type III. The pooled specimens from each were found to be highly reactive with the
test carbohydrate. The serum of each animal was fractionated with ammonium sulfate
by the method described in the preceding experiment. The albumin and globulin frac-
tions were tested with the polysaccharide and the results compared with those of the
corresponding original serum as shown in Table III.
It is again evident that the reactive material present in the blood of
experimentally infected monkeys is intimately associated with the albumin
fraction as was previously shown to be the case with serum of patients
acutely ill with the spontaneous disease. The serum globulins separated
by half saturation with ammonium sulfate failed in each instance to react.
The striking parallelism between these findings and those with human serum
176
THEODORE J. ABERNETHY AND OSWALD T. AVERY
clearly demonstrates that during the spontaneous disease in man and the
experimental infection in monkeys the active component is found in the
albumin and not with the globulin fraction of the serum.
The Effect of Calcium on the PrecipitationReaction.-In comparative tests
on the blood plasma and serum ofpatients with pneumonia it was found that
whereas the serum from coagulated blood gave a marked precipitate with
C, the plasma derived from an oxalated sample of the same blood failed to
react when similarly tested. This difference in activity between serum
and plasma suggested that calcium might be involved in the reaction. In
order to determine whether the presence of calcium is essential in the pre-
cipitation reaction with C, the following experiments were carried out.
0.1 cc. of a 10 per cent solution of potassium oxalate was added to 5.0 cc. of reactive
serum. After standing at room temperature for 6 hours the mixture was centrifuged
TABLE m
Distributionof C-PrecipitableSubstance in Serumof Monkeys with Experimental Type III
PneumococcusPneumonia
Serum obtained within 48 hrs. after reactions with C 1:20,000
intrabronchial inoculation
Whole serum Albumin Globulin
Monkey 1-37 ................ . +++ ++
" 1-44 ................ +++. ++++
Normal monkey ..............
and the clear supernatant serum pipetted off from the deposit of insoluble calcium
oxalate. This procedure was repeated once more and the supernatant serum was then
transferred to a sterile cellophane sac and dialyzed to remove the excess of potassium
oxalate and residual traces of calcium. Dialysis was carried out against 0.85 per cent
NaCl solution adjusted to pH 7.4 by means of sodium bicarbonate and hydrochloric
acid according to Loeb (7). The sac was transferred daily to fresh buffer solution and
dialysis was continued for 7 days at 40
C. The serum was then tested for reactivity with
C both before and after the addition of calcium.
To a series of tubes each containing 0.4 cc. of the serum from which calcium had been
removed there was added 0.1 cc. of an appropriate dilution of CaC12 containing the
amounts shown in the protocol. An equal volume (0.5 cc.) of 1:10,000 solution of C
was then added to each tube. The reaction mixtures were incubated at 370
C. for 2
hours and left overnight in the refrigerator. The final readings are shown in Table IV.
From the data presented in Table IV it is evident that sera which are
highly reactive in the test with C lose their precipitating action after re-
moval of the calcium. The inactivation is reversible since on the addition
of minute traces of calcium chloride the serum regains its capacity to pre-
177
ABNORMAL PROTEIN IN BLOOD DURING INFECTION. I
cipitate with C. The amount of calcium required to reactivate the serum
is considerably less than that normally present in the blood. This observa-
tion together with the fact previously noted that the polysaccharide itself is
not precipitated by an excess of calcium alone, suggests that in the reaction
between C and the active component of serum, calcium combines to form
an insoluble complex which then precipitates from solution. The calcium
appears to be loosely bound since on washing with saline the precipitate
becomes increasingly more soluble with each successive extraction. If
instead of saline a dilute solution of calcium chloride is used the precipitate
remains insoluble.
Advantage was taken of this observation in a preliminary attempt to
determine quantitatively, according to the method of Heidelberger and
TABLE IV
Effect of Calcium on PrecipitationReaction between the C Polysaccharide and Reactive
Substance in Human Serum
Serum of patient during acute stage of lobar pneumonia Amount of CaCh added Precipitation reaction
with C 1:10,000
mg.
Original serum ................................. 0 + ++
Calcium removed ................................ 0
Calcium restored ................................ 0.02 + ++ +
.... ........................... ..... 0.0012 + ++
.I ... " ....... 0.0006 +++
"s. ........................... " 0.0003 + +
Kendall (8), the amount of precipitable nitrogen removed from reactive
serum by a known amount of polysaccharide. The result of an experiment
in which the conditions mentioned above were adequately controlled indi-
cates on the basis of the nitrogen content of the precipitate that the reactive
substance in serum is protein in nature. However, the chemical identity
of the active component is not as yet definitely known, nor is sufficient
evidence available at present to warrant any conclusions concerning its
origin or specific relationship to other proteins of the blood.
Potassium oxalate precipitates the blood calcium in an insoluble form,
whereas sodium citrate converts it into a compound which remains in solu-
tion in equilibrium with a lowered concentration of calcium ions. Because
of the difference in the effect of citrate on the solubility, ionization, and
diffusibility of calcium in protein-containing fluids (9) its use in the present
test involves a number of variables which influence the state and form of
calcium in the reacting system. However, despite these variables the
178
THEODORE J. ABERNETHY AND OSWALD T. AVERY
results of experiments in which citrate was used to immobilize the calcium
have all been in the same direction as those in the experiments with oxalate,
that is, active sera showed progressive and eventually complete loss of pre-
cipitating action as the concentration of calcium ions decreased.
In the preceding experiments dialysis was employed primarily to rid the
serum of the potassium oxalate and sodium citrate remaining in solution in
excess of the theoretical amount required to combine with the calcium.
Although the removal of the calcium by dialysis alone is slow and less com-
plete, an experiment was carried out in which an aliquot of the original
serum was dialyzed directly against saline buffered at pH 7.4; the same
technique as that employed in the case of the oxalated and citrated sera
was used. After dialysis had been continued for 7 days it was found that
the serum had lost almost completely its capacity to precipitate with the
polysaccharide. The faint trace of activity which remained was probably
attributable to minute amounts of residual calcium not removed by dialysis.
The precipitating action which was lost on dialysis was completely restored
when calcium chloride was added to the serum in final concentration of
0.001 mg. per cc.
In view of the action of oxalate and citrate on the precipitation reaction
it was of interest to compare the effect of another type of anticoagulant
such as heparin which does not remove or alter the state of the calcium in
body fluids. It was found that heparin in concentrations effective in pre-
venting blood coagulation does not inhibit the precipitation reaction of
active plasma, serum, or joint fluid with the C polysaccharide.
The results of the experiments on the influence of oxalate, citrate, dialysis,
and heparin demonstrate that the precipitating action of the serum is con-
ditioned by the presence of calcium in the reacting system. The effect of
salts of divalent metals, notably calcium, on the hemagglutinating and pre-
cipitating action of concanavalin A, a crystallizable globulin from jack
bean, has been reported by Sumner and Howell (10). They showed that
when salts of calcium, manganese, or magnesium are added to concanavalin
A which has been inactivated by treatment with acid followed by dialysis,
the protein completely regains its capacity to agglutinate erythrocytes and
starch granules and to precipitate glycogen.
DISCUSSION
The reaction under consideration depends upon the presence in the blood,
during certain acute pathological conditions, of a reactive substance pre-
sumably protein in nature which combines with the test carbohydrate to
form a precipitate in the presence of calcium ions. It will be recalled that
179
ABNORMAL PROTEIN IN BLOOD DURING INFECTION. I
the particular carbohydrate used as test reagent is the so called C poly-
saccharide which is present in the cell bodies of all types and variants of
pneumococci irrespective of their specific derivation (11). It differs from
the better known and chemically well defined capsular polysaccharides in
containing organically bound phosphorus, an acetylated amino sugar, but
no uronic acid as constituent parts of the molecule. Among a limited but
fairly representative group of other complex sugars including several of
bacterial origin none has been found thus far to substitute for the C poly-
saccharide in the reaction.
Although the test carbohydrate is derived from pneumococci it must be
emphasized that the reaction itself is not restricted to pneumococcal diseases
but occurs in a number of other infections of widely diverse origin. It is
apparent, therefore, that the phenomenon is not specific with respect to the
inciting agent. Since the reactive substance is found in the blood in a
number of unrelated infections it is evidently not derived from the bacteria
themselves, but seemingly arises in the host as a result of pathological
changes induced by or associated with acute infection.
The chemical relationships that determine the interaction between the
serum component and the test carbohydrate may be quite accidental though
perhaps not fundamentally different in principle from those which char-
acterize true antigen-antibody reactions. However, the reaction in ques-
tion presents certain distinctive features which serve to distinguish it from
immunity reactions in general. For example, in pneumonia the C-reactive
substance first appears in the blood early in the course of the inflammatory
process; it persists during the activity of the lesion and disappears from the
circulation shortly after crisis. This sequence of events with respect to
the time of appearance and disappearance of the active substance is the
reverse of that usually noted in the development and persistence of the
specific antibodies. Furthermore, as previously pointed out, although
widely different animal species may produce type specific antibodies to
pneumococcus, the C-reactive substance has been found in the blood during
acute pneumococcal infection only in the related species, man and monkey.
Moreover the C-reactive substance is not specifically related to the etiolog-
ical agent as is the case with most antibodies that arise in response to in-
fection. In addition the results of the present study show that unlike
most antibodies the reactive substance in patient's serum is present in the
albumin and not in the globulin fraction precipitated from serum by half
saturation with ammonium sulfate.
Another striking peculiarity of the precipitation reaction which seemingly
distinguishes it from known antigen-antibody reactions is the fact that the
180
THEODORE J. ABERNETHY AND OSWALD T. AVERY
presence of calcium ions in the reacting mixture is essential in the formation
of the precipitate, for as the present study shows no precipitation results
when the polysaccharide is added to a reactive serum from which the cal-
cium has been removed even though an optimal concentration of sodium
chloride is present. However, the precipitating action of the calcium-free
serum is completely restored on the addition of calcium in a concentration
much lower than that normally present in blood.
In the usual antibody reactions on the other hand, the primary union of
precipitins with a soluble antigen is followed by flocculation, provided an
appropriate concentration of a salt such as sodium chloride alone is present
in the reacting mixture. For example, in a parallel series of experiments in
which antipneumococcus serum was used, the removal of calcium from the
immune serum by oxalate and subsequent dialysis against physiological
saline did not prevent the calcium-free serum from reacting in precipitin
tests with the corresponding specific polysaccharide. Although salt is
required for the secondary manifestation of flocculation, the precipitating
action of immune sera is not selectively determined by the presence of
calcium ions as is the case in the reaction under discussion.
SUMMARY
The serum obtained from human beings and monkeys during the acute
phase of diverse infections contains a protein which is precipitable by the
C polysaccharide of pneumococcus. The distribution of this protein in
acute phase serum has been studied, and the effect of calcium on the pre-
cipitation reaction with the C polysaccharide is described. Other dis-
tinctive features of this reaction are discussed.
1. When heated above 65°C., serum obtained from patients during
certain acute infections loses the property of reacting in precipitation tests
with the C polysaccharide of pneumococcus. The loss of activity under
these conditions occurs at temperatures known to denature many proteins.
2. The reactive component in "acute phase" serum which precipitates
with the C polysaccharide is tentatively regarded as a protein.
3. The reactive substance is associated with the albumin fraction of
serum.
4. In the reaction between patients' serum and C polysaccharide, floccu-
lation is conditioned by the presence of calcium ions.
5. The following distinctive features of the C-reaction are discussed with
reference to known characteristics of antigen-antibody phenomena: (a)
the occurrence of the reactive component in blood only during the acute
stage of the infection; (b) the lack of specificity of the reaction with respect
181
182 ABNORMAL PROTEIN IN BLOOD DURING INFECTION. I
to the inciting cause of the disease; (c) the presence of the active substance
in the albumin fraction of the serum; (d) the action of calcium in producing
flocculation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Tillett, W. S., and Francis, T., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1930, 52, 561.
2. Ash, R., J. Infect. Dis., 1933, 53, 89.
3. Francis, T., Jr., and Abernethy, T. J., J. Clin. Inv., 1934, 13, 692.
4. Finland, M., and Dowling, H. F., J. Immunol., 1935, 29, 285.
5. Abernethy, T. J., and Francis, T., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1937, 65, 59.
6. Abernethy, T. J., J. Exp. Med., 1937, 65, 75.
7. Loeb, R. F., J. Gen. Physiol., 1924, 6, 453.
8. Heidelberger, M., and Kendall, F. E., J. Exp. Med., 1935, 61, 563.
9. McLean, F. C., and Hastings, A. B., J. Biol. Chem., 1935, 108, 285.
10. Sumner, J. B., and Howell, S. F., J. Biol. Chem., 1936, 115, 583.
11. Tillett, W. S., Goebel, W. F., and Avery, O. T., J. Exp. Med., 1930, 52, 895. Hei-
delberger, M., and Kendall, F. E., J. Exp. Med., 1931, 53, 625.
