CASE REPORT Open Access
Unusual presentation of eosinophilic fasciitis:
two case reports and a review of the literature
Ramazan Danis1
, Sami Akbulut2*
, Abdullah Altintas3
, Sehmus Ozmen1
, Cihan Akgul Ozmen4
Abstract
Introduction: Eosinophilic fasciitis is an uncommon disorder with unknown etiology and a poorly understood
pathogenesis. We present the cases of two patients with eosinophilic fasciitis with unusual presentation, and
describe the clinical characteristics and laboratory findings related to them.
Case presentation: The first case involves a 29-year-old Turkish man admitted with pain, edema and induration of
his right-upper and left-lower limbs. Unilateral edema and stiffness with prominent pretibial edema was noted
upon physical examination. A high eosinophil count was found on the peripheral smear. The second case involves
a 63-year-old Turkish man who had pain, edema, erythema, and itching on his upper and lower extremities, which
developed after strenuous physical activity. He had cervical lymphadenopathy and polyarthritis upon physical
examination, and rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody upon laboratory examination.
Conclusion: Eosinophilic fasciitis can present with various symptoms. When patients exhibit eosinophilia, arthralgia
and myalgia, eosinophilic fasciitis should be considered as a possible diagnosis.
Introduction
Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is an uncommon disorder with
unknown etiology and a poorly understood pathogen-
esis. It has symmetrical involvement and in its early
phase is characterized by limb or trunk erythema and
edema, and later by collagenous thickening of the der-
mis and subcutaneous fascia. EF is a scleroderma-like
syndrome that was first described in 1974 by Shulman
in patients with diffuse fasciitis and eosinophilia [1-3].
This syndrome was later named EF by Rodnan et al. [2].
Its onset is typically acute and findings include
erythema, swelling and induration of the extremities,
usually accompanied by eosinophilia.
Here, we present two cases of EF with unusual presen-
tation, and describe their corresponding clinical charac-
teristics and laboratory findings. The first patient
displayed unusual features that included high eosinophi-
lia count and asymmetry. The second patient had cervi-
cal lymphadenopathy and polyarthritis with rheumatoid
factor (RF) and antinuclear antibody (ANA).
Case presentation
Case report 1
A 29-year-old Turkish man was admitted to our clinic
with disability because of significant pain, edema and
stiffness of his right-upper and left-lower limbs. He
reported that the same clinical picture first appeared 3
years prior to this presentation and had since been
repeated many times. His condition sometimes
improved spontaneously and other times with the use of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Unilat-
eral edema and stiffness in his right-upper limb (left arm
circumference was 28.5 cm and right arm circumference
was 30.5 cm) and left-lower limb (left thigh circumfer-
ence was 53 cm and right thigh circumference was 46.4
cm), with prominent non-pitting pretibial edema were
detected upon physical examination. His white blood
cell count (WBC) was 22.8 × 109
/L with 26.4% neutro-
phils, 11.2% lymphocytes, and 60% eosinophils. His
hemoglobin was 14.6 gdL, and his erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate (ESR) was 3 mm/h.
Our patient’s stool specimens were examined for ova
and parasites. Meanwhile, his renal, thyroid and liver
function tests yielded negative results. His electrolytes
were also within normal limits. Results were also nega-
tive for RF, C-reactive protein and ANA. Results of his
* Correspondence: akbulutsami@gmail.com
2
Department of Surgery, Diyarbakir Education and Research Hospital, 21400,
Diyarbakir, Turkey
Danis et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2010, 4:46
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/4/1/46 JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS
© 2010 Danis et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
chest radiography, esophagography, abdominal ultraso-
nography and pulmonary-function studies were all
within normal limits. Bone marrow aspirate smears
showed 60% eosinophils. A full-thickness biopsy of his
left calf revealed active fasciitis (Figure 1A). Magnetic
resonance imaging of his lower limbs revealed that his
left-limb muscle group was thicker than his right (Fig-
ures 2A and 2B).
Finally, a diagnosis of EF was established from these
clinical and laboratory findings. His symptoms disap-
peared completely after a few days of treatment with 1
mg/kg/day oral methylprednisolone.
Case report 2
A 63-year-old Turkish man was admitted to our clinic
with edema, erythema, pain and itching of his upper
and lower extremities for 10 days, which started after
strenuous physical activity working with an axe in the
forest. Mobile, palpable lymph nodes were found in the
right anterior cervical (2 × 1 cm), left submandibular (3
× 1 cm) and left submental (2 × 2 cm) regions of his
body. His shoulder and elbow joints were warm, while
their range of movement, as well as the flexion and
extension of his wrist, were limited. Both knee joints
were warm and painful on flexion. His WBC count was
12.9 × 109
/L, while his neutrophils was 5.3 × 109
/L,
eosinophils was 4.9 × 109
/L (37.9%), and ESR was 98
mm/h. His ANA was positive, and his RF was 0.59 IU/
L. Peripheral blood smears showed 34% eosinophils. An
examination of his stool specimens returned negative
for ova and parasites. His electrolytes, renal, thyroid and
liver function values were all within normal limits.
Results of his chest radiography, abdominal ultrasono-
graphy, and pulmonary-function studies were also
within normal limits. Mild hepatomegaly (165 mm) was
detected upon abdominal ultrasonography. A full-
thickness biopsy revealed active fasciitis (Figure 1B). A
diagnosis of EF was established from these clinical and
laboratory findings. His symptoms improved completely
after a few days of treatment with 1 mg/kg/day oral
methylprednisolone.
Discussion
EF is an uncommon disease and only a few hundred
cases have been reported in the literature. It is charac-
terized by acute or subacute symmetric swelling of the
skin and the subcutaneous tissues. The forearms, flanks
and upper legs are usually affected, while the hands and
face are spared [4]. However, our first patient had asym-
metric edema and pain in his right limb, shoulder and
face, which differed from other cases reported in the
literature.
While the etiology of EF is still unknown, possible
causes include strenuous exercise, initiation of hemodia-
lysis, and infection with Borrelia burgdorferi [1,5,6]. In
addition, exposure to some drugs has been implicated.
Cutaneous side effects following simvastatin treatment,
including the development of EF, have been well-docu-
mented [7].
None of these causes were obvious in the first case we
presented, but strenuous exercise appeared to be the
triggering factor for the second patient. There was no
suspicion of relevant environmental or toxic exposure in
either of our patients. Paraneoplastic disease, progressive
systemic sclerosis, and infection with B. burgdorferi were
thus excluded.
The majority of patients with EF have peripheral
blood eosinophilia during the acute phase of the disease.
In one series, 33 out of 52 patients had eosinophilia.
Elevated ESR (29%) and polyclonal hypergammaglobuli-
nemia (35%) can also be found [8]. ANA positivity has
Figure 1 Mixed-type infiltration of eosinophils and other inflammatory cells in muscle and fat tissues of (A) patient 1 and (B) patient
2. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification ×200.
Danis et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2010, 4:46
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/4/1/46
Page 2 of 4
not been reported previously in EF with any consistency
[3], and RF is almost always negative. Both our patients
had hypereosinophilia, and our second patient had an
increased RF (0.59 IU/L) and a positive ANA test. Defi-
nitive diagnosis requires histopathological examination
from a full-thickness (epidermis to muscle) biopsy [9].
The biopsy results of both patients were consistent for
EF upon histopathological examination.
There is substantial agreement among published cases
or case series that corticosteroids are the first-line treat-
ment for EF and are usually effective in >70% of cases.
Other treatments include NSAIDs, D-penicillamine,
chloroquine, cimetidine, methotrexate, azathioprine,
cyclosporin A, infliximab, UVA-1, and bath PUVA
[10,11].
Spontaneous remission rate in patients with EF is 10%
to 20% at the time of presentation or relapse after dis-
continuing corticosteroid therapy [12]. Our first patient
had a history of spontaneous remission. In one series,
hematological disorders other than eosinophilia were
present in 5 out of 52 patients [8]. Hematological
abnormalities that have been described in association
with EF include aplastic anemia, acquired amegakaryo-
cytic thrombocytopenia, myeloproliferative disorders,
myelodysplastic syndromes, lymphoma, leukemia, and
multiple myeloma [8]. However, there was no hematolo-
gical abnormality in our patients we described.
The presence of lymphadenopathy is unusual. Ten
reported cases of EF with enlarged lymph nodes have
been identified previously. Six of these patients had lym-
phoma and four had reactive lymphadenopathy [13].
Our second patient had cervical, submandibular and
submental mobile lymphadenopathy, with an enlarged
liver and no haematological disease.
Two cases of EF with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have
been reported previously, but the diagnosis of RA had
been established in these patients before the diagnosis
of EF [14,15]. In the second case we described, our
patient’s symptoms at first were like those of RA. How-
ever, the symptoms began shortly after strenuous exer-
cise, which is not typical for RA, and eosinophilia and
histopathological evaluation revealed the correct diagno-
sis. Furthermore, the symptoms did not meet RA cri-
teria. Most EF patients with arthritis complain of
morning stiffness and exhibit changes on joint radio-
graphs similar to patients with RA [8]. This condition
may thus lead to misdiagnosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used for
the diagnosis of EF [9,15,16]. In two retrospective stu-
dies involving seven patients, MRI detected fascial thick-
ening and signal abnormalities in patients with EF at the
time of diagnosis [9,15]. MRI showed evidence of dis-
ease activity in both of our patients.
Conclusions
EF can present with various symptoms. When patients
exhibit eosinophilia, arthralgia and myalgia, EF should
be considered as a possible diagnosis. It is notable that
the first patient described in this case report also dis-
played unusual features including high eosinophil count
and asymmetrical presentation.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from our
patients for publication of this case report and any
accompanying image. Copies of the written consent are
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.
Abbreviations
EF: Eosinophilic fasciitis; RA: Rheumatoid arthritis; ANA: Antinuclear antibody;
ESR: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging.
Figure 2 Coronal and axial magnetic resonance imaging of patient 1. His left extremity was thicker than his right extremity, as shown on
coronal (A) and axial (B) images.
Danis et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2010, 4:46
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/4/1/46
Page 3 of 4
Author details
1
Department of Nephrology, Diyarbakir Education and Research Hospital,
21400, Diyarbakir, Turkey. 2
Department of Surgery, Diyarbakir Education and
Research Hospital, 21400, Diyarbakir, Turkey. 3
Department of Hematology,
Dicle University, Faculty of Medicine, 21380, Diyarbakir, Turkey. 4
Department
of Radiology, Dicle University, Faculty of Medicine, 21380, Diyarbakir, Turkey.
Authors’ contributions
RD, SA, AA and SO contributed in writing the manuscript and in reviewing
the literature. SA, RD and AA contributed in this case report’s design and in
preparing the manuscript for publication. CAO provided the necessary
radiological information. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 September 2009
Accepted: 8 February 2010 Published: 8 February 2010
References
1. Shulman LE: Diffuse fasciitis with eosinophilia: a new syndrome?. Trans
Assoc Am Physicians 1975, 88:70-86.
2. Rodnan GP, Di Bartolomeo A, Medsger TA Jr: Proceedings: Eosinophilic
fasciitis: report of six cases of a newly recognized scleroderma-like
syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 1975, 18(5):525.
3. Andreopoulos A, Antoniou TC, Yiakoumis X, Andreopoulos G, Vaiopoulos G,
Konstantopoulos K: Eosinophilic fasciitis accompanied by serositis. Isr Med
Assoc J 2009, 11(5):319-320.
4. Florell SR, Egan CA, Gregory MC, Zone JJ, Petersen MJ: Eosinophilic fasciitis
occurring four weeks after the onset of dialysis in a renal failure patient.
J Cutan Med Surg 2001, 5(1):33-36.
5. Granter SR, Barnhill RL, Duray PH: Borrelial fasciitis: diffuse fasciitis and
peripheral eosinophilia associated with Borrelia infection. Am J
Dermatopathol 1996, 18(5):465-473.
6. Choquet-Kastylevsky G, Kanitakis J, Dumas V, Descotes J, Faure M, Claudy A:
Eosinophilic fasciitis and simvastatin. Arch Intern Med 2001,
161(11):1456-1457.
7. Lakhanpal S, Ginsburg WW, Michet CJ, Doyle JA, Moore SB: Eosinophilic
fasciitis: clinical spectrum and therapeutic response in 52 cases. Semin
Arthritis Rheum 1998, 17(4):221-231.
8. Barnes L, Rodnan GP, Medsger TA, Short D: Eosinophilic fasciitis: a
pathological study of twenty cases. Am J Pathol 1979, 96(2):493-507.
9. Bischoff L, Derk CT: Eosinophilic fasciitis: demographics, disease pattern
and response to treatment: report of 12 cases and review of the
literature. Int J Dermatol 2008, 47(1):29-35.
10. Weber HO, Schaller M, Metzler G, Röcken M, Berneburg M: Eosinophilic
fasciitis and combined UVA1–retinoid–corticosteroid treatment: two
case reports. Acta Derm Venereol 2008, 88(3):304-306.
11. Haiduc VF, Erkan D, Kirou K, Birchansky S, Park J, Danon MJ: Anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA) positive recurrent eosinophilic fasciitis
responsive to cyclophosphamide: a clinical pathology conference held
by the Division of Rheumatology at Hospital for Special Surgery. HSS J
2008, 4(1):81-86.
12. Boin F, Hummers LK: Scleroderma-like fibrosing disorders. Rheum Dis Clin
North Am 2008, 34(1):199-220.
13. Brent LH, Abruzzo JL: Localized eosinophilic fasciitis in a patient with
rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 1985, 12(5):987-989.
14. Markusse HM, Breedveld FC: Rheumatoid arthritis with eosinophilic
fasciitis and pure red cell aplasia. J Rheumatol 1989, 16(10):1383-1384.
15. Baumann F, Brühlmann P, Andreisek G, Michel BA, Marincek B, Weishaupt D:
MRI for diagnosis and monitoring of patients with eosinophilic fasciitis.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2005, 184(1):169-174.
16. Agnew KL, Blunt D, Francis ND, Bunker CB: Magnetic resonance imaging
in eosinophilic fasciitis. Clin Exp Dermatol 2005, 30(4):435-436.
doi:10.1186/1752-1947-4-46
Cite this article as: Danis et al.: Unusual presentation of eosinophilic
fasciitis:
two case reports and a review of the literature. Journal of Medical Case
Reports 2010 4:46.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Danis et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2010, 4:46
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/4/1/46
Page 4 of 4
