CASE REPORT Open Access
Management of aplastic anemia in a woman
during pregnancy: a case report
Krista JM Stibbe1
, Hajo IJ Wildschut2*
, Pieternella J Lugtenburg3
Abstract
Introduction: Aplastic anemia is a rare disease caused by destruction of pluripotent stem cells in bone marrow.
During pregnancy it could be life-threatening for both mother and child. The only causal therapy for aplastic
anemia is bone marrow transplantation, which is contraindicated during pregnancy because of potential embryo
toxicity. Treatment options are erythrocytes and platelet transfusions and immunosuppressive therapy. There is,
however, no agreement about the optimal supportive care and treatment regime for this disorder during
pregnancy.
Case Presentation: A 26-year-old nulliparous Asian woman with an uneventful medical history was admitted to
the hospital at 14 weeks’ gestation because of excessive vomiting. Routine laboratory tests showed pancytopenia
(Hb 3.5 mmol/L, leukocytes 3.5 *109
/L, platelets 45 *109
L). A bone marrow biopsy confirmed aplastic anemia.
Methylprednisolon, cyclosporine A, packed cells and platelet transfusions were initiated. At 33 weeks she
developed neutropenia (0.1 *109
/L) for which oral colistin and tobramycin were given prophylactically. At 35 weeks
labor was induced, during which she developed a fever of 38.2°C. She gave birth spontaneously to a healthy son
weighing 2415 grams, who had no signs of pancytopenia. After delivery the blood count of the patient did not
recover and did not respond to medication. Eighteen weeks after delivery she died of sepsis complicated by
cerebral bleeding and infarction due to severe thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, despite optimal supportive
treatment.
Conclusion: This potential life-threatening disease has a relatively good prognosis for both mother and child after
optimal treatment. Transfusion during pregnancy is the first choice treatment with recommended hemoglobin
levels of >5.5 mmol/L and platelet counts of >20 *109
/L. Cyclosporine A seems a reasonable alternative therapy
with a reported success rate in non-pregnant patients of 70% when combined with antithymocyte globuline. Our
patient died 18 weeks postpartum from cerebral bleeding and infarction due to severe thrombocytopenia despite
intensive supportive treatment, methylprednisolon and cyclosporine A.
Introduction
Aplastic anemia is a rare disease caused by destruction
of pluripotent stem cells in bone marrow with an annual
incidence of 2 to 6/1.000.000 [1]. In contrast to the term
‘aplastic anemia’, suggesting suppression of erythropoetic
cell lines, all cell lines may be affected [2]. Depending
on affected cell lines, aplastic anemia is associated with
fatigue, bleeding due to thrombocytopenia and recurrent
infections due to neutropenia [3]. The diagnosis ‘aplastic
anemia’ is confirmed by hypocellularity of the bone
marrow. The remaining cells are morphologically unaf-
fected without malignant infiltration. Potential triggers
for the onset of aplastic anemia include T-cell mediated
auto-immune disease, iatrogenic agents, viral infection
and pregnancy [1]. There is, however, no causal relation
between pregnancy and the onset of aplastic anemia [4].
This notion is supported by the similar incidence of
aplastic anemia in men and women [1]. During preg-
nancy bone marrow transplantation is contraindicated
because of potential embryo toxicity [5]. There are no
clear guidelines for the management of aplastic anemia
during pregnancy. Is immunosuppressive treatment
more effective than supportive therapy consisting of ery-
throcytes and platelet transfusion and antibiotics?
* Correspondence: h.wildschut@erasmusmc.nl
2
Department of Obstetrics of Gynaecology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Stibbe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:66
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/66 JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS
© 2011 Stibbe et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Case presentation
A 26-year-old nulliparous Asian woman with an
uneventful medical history was admitted to a district
hospital at 14 weeks’ gestation because of excessive
vomiting. Laboratory tests showed pancytopenia (Hb
3.5 mmol/l, Ht 0.17, MCV 87, reticulocytes 28.6 *109
/l,
leukocytes 3.5 *109
/L with differentiation 41% neutro-
philes, 50% lymphocytes and 8% monocytes, platelets
45 *109
L). No iron, folic acid and vitamin B12 depletion
were encountered. She did not use medications and had
not been exposed to toxic materials. A bone marrow
biopsy was taken showing poor cellular bone marrow
without signs of malignancy. Aplastic anemia was the
most likely diagnosis. The patient was transferred to our
academic hospital for further diagnostic evaluation,
counseling and treatment. Repeated bone marrow tests,
including immunophenotyping and cytogenetic tests, did
not show abnormal cell populations. Bone marrow
biopsy showed hypocellular marrow with a percentage
less than 5% (Figure 1) without specific markers for
other causes of pancytopenia, such as acute leukemia,
myelodysplastic syndrome, hairy cell leukemia, lym-
phoma, myelofibrosis or anorexia nervosa. In concor-
dance with the diagnosis of aplastic anemia a small
population of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
(PNH) positive cells was detected in peripheral blood.
Aplastic anemia was assumed to originate during preg-
nancy because six months before admittance to the hospi-
tal our patient’s hemoglobin level was normal (8.1 mmol/l;
normal range: 7.5 to 10.0 mmol/l). During hospital admis-
sion the disease progressed resulting in erythrocyte
(270 mL dosage consisting of Ht 0.57 l/l) and platelet
transfusion (310 mL consisting of 340 *109
platelets) with
target platelet count 10 *109
/l twice a week. Methylpredni-
solon was started together with cyclosporine A (CsA) in a
dosage of 5 mg/kg twice a day (bd). The patient did not
respond (Figures 2, 3, 4). Moreover, she developed HLA-
antibodies against platelets, complicating the search for sui-
table platelet donors. At 35 weeks the patient became neu-
tropenic, for which oral colistin and tobramycin were given
prophylactically.
At 35 weeks labor was induced electively for logistic
reasons. Sufficient platelet donors with HLA identical
platelet transfusions were guaranteed. During delivery
the patient had a fever (38.2°C). The fetus responded
with tachycardia. Since intra uterine infection was sus-
pected, amoxicillin and clavulanic acid were started
intravenously. She gave birth spontaneously to a healthy
son weighing 2415 grams with a five-minute Apgar
score of 10. Estimated blood loss during delivery was
100 ml. After delivery severe pancytopenia with neutro-
phile number <0.05 *109
/l persisted. She remained ery-
throcyte and platelet transfusion-dependent despite CsA
treatment. After delivery laboratory tests still showed
severe pancytopenia despite transfusions (Hb 5.4 mmol/
l, platelets 53 *109
/l, leukocytes 1.5 *109
/l and neutro-
phils <0.05 *109
/l). Treatment with CsA was continued
without success. Therefore, ATG was planned to be
added three months after delivery. However, during hos-
pital admission the patient had a fever of 41.2°C and
gingival bleeding. No microbiological origin was found.
The patient was treated with imipenem and ATG treat-
ment was postponed. The next day the patient had diar-
rhea, headache and a maculopapular rash, probably due
to medication use. Therefore, all medications were
stopped for three days. She was discharged from the
hospital to recover from the rash and fever. However,
two days later she returned to the hospital because of
severe vomiting, diarrhea and headache. She became
hypotensive and hypoxic needing admission to the
intensive care unit. Because of Staphylococcus aureus
bacteremia, antibiotic treatment was started (merope-
nem and vancomycin). She needed artificial respiration
because of progressive dyspnea. She developed bilateral
pneumonia followed by a pneumothorax in the left lung
needing a thoracal drain. Antibiotic treatment was
switched to flucloxacillin. Two days later she had an
anisocoria, that is, unequal pupil sizes and Glasgow
coma score of E1M4(left)Vt. Platelets were 26 *109
/l
(target platelet count 20 *109
/l). The previous day plate-
lets had been 3 *109
/l although HLA matched platelet
transfusion five times a day. A computed tomography
scan of the cerebrum showed a total left arteria cerebri
media infarction with bleeding, compression of the left
lateral ventricle and midline shift to the right (Figure 5).
Because of the poor prognosis, based on the combina-
tion of very severe aplastic anemia and cerebral infarc-
tion, further treatment was stopped and the patient died
18 weeks after delivery. At present the child is healthy.
Figure 1 Hypocellular bone marrow showed only a little
hematopoesis and many fat cells.
Stibbe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:66
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/66
Page 2 of 5
Discussion
Little research has been published about therapy for
aplastic anemia during pregnancy. In fact, only case
reports and series with small sample sizes are available.
In young non-pregnant patients first choice therapy for
aplastic anemia is allogenic stem cell transplantation with
a five-year survival of 70 to 80% [1]. However, stem cell
transplantation is not feasible during pregnancy because
of the teratogenic effects of the immunotherapy and
radiotherapy for the unborn child [5]. Pregnancy termi-
nation to start bone marrow transplantation was not
recommended because of the relatively good prognosis
for both mother and child. During pregnancy supportive
therapy with erythrocyte and platelet transfusions is a
widely used, reasonable alternative. As described in this
case, the benefit of transfusions to prevent bleeding
should be weighed against the likelihood of developing
HLA antibodies and hemochromatosis in the mother [6].
Figure 3 Course of leukocyte numbers (*109
/l).
Figure 2 Hemoglobin (mmol/l) during pregnancy to the moment of death. Normal ranges are between the lines.
Stibbe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:66
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/66
Page 3 of 5
Therefore, we started with a low number and frequency
of platelets transfused and increased the frequency after
persistent thrombocytopenia [7]. In case the patient
responded insufficiently to supportive therapy, immu-
notherapy with ATG, CsA and/or methylprednisolon
could be started. These therapies are used regularly in
non-pregnant patients with a hematological response of
40 to 70% [1]. Lesser experience has been gained with
ATG treatment during pregnancy, only two cases out of
75. Moreover, both patients died [2,8]. Outside of
pregnancy CsA had comparable results with ATG in a
randomized controlled multicenter study [9]. According
to this study the hematological responses for CsA and
ATG after 12 months were 31.6% and 30% respectively.
The one year survival for CsA and ATG was 64 to 70%
[9].
Several case reports refer to Knispel et al. describing a
maternal mortality of 20 to 60%. However, the mortality
rate in that article published in 1976 differs from the
currently reported mortality of 2.7%, probably due to
better immunosuppressive treatment and supportive
care [2-6,8,10,11]. Unfortunately our pregnant patient
with very severe aplastic anemia died after intensive
supportive and immunosuppressive treatment with
methylprednisolon and CsA during and after pregnancy.
She was treated according to the best available treat-
ment based on the literature. She was not treated with
ATG during pregnancy because of the bad responses of
the two described patients in the literature. Because of
the reasonable clinical condition of the patient and good
condition of the fetus, there was no indication to termi-
nate the pregnancy early.
Conclusion
Aplastic anemia is a serious condition which may mani-
fest during pregnancy. The seriousness depends on the
degree of bone marrow suppression. Most pregnant
patients will have full-term pregnancies with a healthy
child. Fortunately, aplastic anemia has a low maternal
mortality due to treatment. During severe aplastic
Figure 4 Course of platelet numbers (*109
/l).
Figure 5 CT scan cerebrum performed on the last day of the
patient’s life.
Stibbe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:66
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/66
Page 4 of 5
anemia or complications caused by the supportive ther-
apy (erythrocyte and platelet transfusions and antibio-
tics) ATG, methylprednisolon and/or CsA could be
started. Nonetheless, our patient died 18 weeks postpar-
tum from sepsis, cerebral bleeding and infarction due to
severe thrombocytopenia despite intensive supportive
treatment, methylprednisolon and CsA. This case shows
that aplastic anemia during pregnancy is potentially a
life-threatening condition despite the favorable prog-
nosis for both mother and child.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
and her parents for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Abbreviations
ATG: antithymocyte globulin; CsA: Cyclosporin A; Hb: hemoglobin; HLA:
human leukocyte antigen; Ht: hematocrit; MCV: mean corpuscular volume;
PNH: paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Author details
1
Department of Obstetrics of Gynaecology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 2
Department of
Obstetrics of Gynaecology, Erasmus University Medical Center, PO Box 2040,
3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 3
Department of Hematology, Erasmus
University Medical Center, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
Authors’ contributions
HW provided antenatal care to the patient during the pregnancy and
delivery. He supervised the writing and edited earlier drafts of the
manuscript. PL treated the patient for aplastic anemia during and after
pregnancy He also edited earlier drafts of the manuscript. KS did a literature
study and was a major contributor to writing the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 June 2010 Accepted: 15 February 2011
Published: 15 February 2011
References
1. Young NS: Acquired aplastic anemia. Ann Intern Med 2002, 136:534-546.
2. Tichelli A, Socie G, Marsh J, Barge R, Frickhofen N, McCann S, Bacigalupo A,
Hows J, Marin P, Nachbaur D, et al: Outcome of pregnancy and disease
course among women with aplastic anemia treated with
immunosuppression. Ann Intern Med 2002, 137:164-172.
3. Snyder TE, Lee LP, Lynch S: Pregnancy-associated hypoplastic anemia: a
review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1991, 46:264-269.
4. Oosterkamp HM, Brand A, Kluin-Nelemans JC, Vandenbroucke JP:
Pregnancy and severe aplastic anaemia: causal relation or coincidence?
Br J Haematol 1998, 103:315-316.
5. Aitchison RG, Marsh JC, Hows JM, Russell NH, Gordon-Smith EC: Pregnancy
associated aplastic anaemia: a report of five cases and review of current
management. Br J Haematol 1989, 73:541-545.
6. Ascarelli MH, Emerson ES, Bigelow CL, Martin JN Jr: Aplastic anemia and
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia: concurrent complications
encountered in the third trimester of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1998,
91:803-806.
7. Slichter SJ, Kaufman RM, Assmann SF, McCullough J, Triulzi DJ, Strauss RG,
Gernsheimer TB, Ness PM, Brecher ME, Josephson CD, et al: Dose of
prophylactic platelet transfusions and prevention of hemorrhage. N Engl
J Med 2010, 362:600-613.
8. Deka D, Malhotra N, Sinha A, Banerjee N, Kashyap R, Roy KK: Pregnancy
associated aplastic anemia: maternal and fetal outcome. J Obstet
Gynaecol Res 2003, 29:67-72.
9. Gluckman E, Esperou-Bourdeau H, Baruchel A, Boogaerts M, Briere J,
Donadio D, Leverger G, Leporrier M, Reiffers J, Janvier M, et al: Multicenter
randomized study comparing cyclosporine-A alone and antithymocyte
globulin with prednisone for treatment of severe aplastic anemia. Blood
1992, 79:2540-2546.
10. Thakral B, Saluja K, Sharma RR, Marwaha N, Malhotra P, Varma N,
Malhotra S: Successful management of pregnancy-associated severe
aplastic anemia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2007, 131:244-245.
11. Kwon JY, Lee Y, Shin JC, Lee JW, Rha JG, Kim SP: Supportive management
of pregnancy-associated aplastic anemia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2006,
95:115-120.
doi:10.1186/1752-1947-5-66
Cite this article as: Stibbe et al.: Management of aplastic anemia in a
woman during pregnancy: a case report. Journal of Medical Case Reports
2011 5:66.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Stibbe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:66
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/66
Page 5 of 5
