CASE REPORT Open Access
Successful bone marrow transplantation in a
patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia with
co-existing Duchenne muscular dystrophy:
a case report
Velu Nair1*
, Satyaranjan Das1
, Ajay Sharma1
, Sanjeevan Sharma1
, Jasmeet Kaur2
and DK Mishra3
Abstract
Introduction: Diamond-Blackfan anemia and Duchenne muscular dystrophy are two rare congenital anomalies.
Both anomalies occurring in the same child is extremely rare. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is
a well-established therapy for Diamond-Blackfan anemia. However, in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
stem cell therapy still remains experimental.
Case presentation: We report the case of a nine-year-old boy of north Indian descent with Diamond-Blackfan
anemia and Duchenne muscular dystrophy who underwent successful allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. He is transfusion-independent, and his Duchenne muscular dystrophy has shown no clinical
deterioration over the past 45 months. His creatine phosphokinase levels have significantly decreased to 300 U/L
from 14,000 U/L pre-transplant. The patient is 100% donor chimera in the hematopoietic system, and his muscle
tissue has shown 8% to 10.4% cells of donor origin.
Conclusion: Our patient’s Diamond-Blackfan anemia was cured by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. The interesting clinical observation of a possible benefit in Duchenne muscular dystrophy cannot
be ruled out. However, further clinical follow-up with serial muscle biopsies and molecular studies are needed to
establish this finding.
Introduction
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare congenital
hypoplastic anemia that usually presents in infancy and
childhood. The incidence of DBA is five to 10 per one mil-
lion births, and more than 600 cases have been reported
worldwide. The exact cause is unclear, but the problem is
a defect in one of the early steps in erythropoiesis (red
blood cell (RBC)) production. In about 15% of affected
children, there is a defect within a gene called RPS19
(ribosomal protein S19) [1]. In most cases, occurrence is
sporadic, but in subsequent generations, inheritance is
usually autosomal dominant. Nearly 90% of these children
are transfusion-dependent by 18 months of age. About
60% of patients initially respond to drugs such as steroids,
androgens and cyclosporine, though one-half of these
initial responders become refractory to these medications
later [2]. The only curative treatment for DBA is allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (allo-HSCT), which has
an 85% success rate [3-5] and is offered to patients who
do not respond to or become refractory to drug therapy.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), which is caused
by mutation of the dystrophin gene, is the most common
and severe form of muscular dystrophy. This disorder is
marked by progressive loss of muscle function which
begins in the lower limbs and later occurs in the arms,
neck and other areas. DMD occurs in approximately one
of 3500 male live births and is inherited in an X-linked
recessive pattern [6]. Terminally, the respiratory muscles
are also involved. The calf muscles initially grow larger
(pseudo-hypertrophy) but are eventually replaced by fat
and connective tissue. The muscle fibers shorten because
of fibrosis. The diagnosis is suspected when the creatine
* Correspondence: nairvelu2000@yahoo.com
1
Department of Haematology & Bone Marrow Transplantation, Army Hospital
(Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt-110010, India
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Nair et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:216
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/216 JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS
© 2011 Nair et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
phosphokinase (CPK) levels are highly elevated and is
confirmed by muscle biopsy. There is no known cure for
DMD, and treatment is only supportive. However,
recently there have been anecdotal reports of benefit
following allo-HSCT treatment [7-10].
Case presentation
DBA and DMD are two rare congenital anomalies. Both
anomalies occurring in the same child is extremely rare.
We report such an unusual case of a nine-year-old boy of
north Indian descent, the third of four siblings born to
healthy, non-consanguineous parents with a family history
of DMD in a maternal first cousin. The boy was presented
to our hospital at the age of eight months with progressive
pallor and failure to thrive. He was diagnosed with DBA
on the basis of peripheral blood showing normocytic,
macrocytic anemia and reticulocytopenia with normocel-
lular bone marrow showing erythroblastopenia. Though
initially steroid-responsive, the boy later became unre-
sponsive to both steroids and cyclosporine. By the fourth
year of life, he was completely transfusion-dependent, and
iron chelation was started only in the sixth year of life
with intravenous desferrioxamine when his serum ferritin
level was found to be 5100 ng/mL.
The patient had normal milestones until the fourth
year of life. Thereafter he developed lower-limb weakness
and calf muscle pseudohypertrophy. The weakness was
progressive in nature, and by the age of five years the boy
required support to climb stairs. His CPK level was high
(5939 U/L), and his electromyogram was consistent with
myopathy. He was diagnosed with DMD. A muscle
biopsy was not done as the parents were unwilling to
allow their son to undergo the procedure at that time. At
this stage, the child was referred to our center for allo-
HSCT treatment in view of his transfusion-dependent
DBA with hyperferritinemia. The diagnosis was recon-
firmed at our center. He also had dysmorphic facial fea-
tures. However, RPS19 genetic studies could not be done.
The child had an unaffected elder brother who was a
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical match (6/6 anti-
gen match) and underwent myeloablative allo-HSCT
treatment. The conditioning regimen comprised busul-
phan (16 mg/kg over four days), cyclophosphamide (200
mg/kg over four days) and equine anti-thymocyte globulin
(Atgam; Pfizer(Pharmacia & Upjohn company, a subsidi-
ary of Pharmacia Corporation
Kalamazoo, Michigan 49001, USA) (90 mg/kg over three
days). There was a minor blood group mismatch, with the
recipient being in the B+ve group and the donor being in
the O+ve blood group. Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor primed bone marrow was harvested from the donor
while the donor was under general anesthesia. Plasma
depletion was done using a Cryofuge 6000i centrifuge(by
Heraeus Instruments made in Germany and supplied by
Kendro Labarotories (India)) at 3000 rpm, and plasma-
depleted marrow was infused with a cell dose of 6 × 108
mononuclear cells (MNCs)/kg body weight. Graft-versus-
host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis consisted of standard
dose methotrexate and cyclosporine. Neutrophil and plate-
let engraftment occurred on day+11 and day+16, respec-
tively. RBC engraftment was confirmed with a change of
blood group on day+90. The child has been transfusion-
free since 2 months post-transplant, and his serum ferritin
levels have been reduced to 600 ng/mL with regular phle-
botomies. The boy’s blood counts were normal 45 months
after allo-HSCT treatment: hemoglobin 13.5 g/dL, reticu-
locyte count 1%, white blood cell count 6.0 × 103
/μL with
70% neutrophils and platelet count 1900 × 103
/μL.
This patient was evaluated by a neurologist pre-
transplant and periodically post-transplant. The patient
was wheelchair-bound pre-transplant, and, 45 months
post-transplant, there has been no clinical deteriora-
tion whatsoever in the boy’s motor power. He con-
tinues to be wheelchair-bound and is able to sit on his
own for more than three hours at a stretch. The CPK
level pre-transplant had been in the range of 9000 to
14,000 U/L and showed a declining trend within four
weeks of transplantation, reaching a nadir of 300 U/L
by six months post-transplantation. The muscle biopsy,
which was done twice at 730 and 1250 days post-
HSCT, respectively, revealed mixed donor chimerism
with 8% to 10% cells of donor origin. Sequential chi-
merism studies using whole blood established triline-
age engraftment with 100% donor chimerism. There
were no post-transplant complications in the form of
sepsis, hepatic veno-occlusive disease or acute or
chronic GVHD.
Chimerism analysis performed on recipient peripheral
blood samples on day+30, day+90, day+365, day+730
and day+1250 revealed complete donor chimerism post-
transplant. A muscle biopsy was performed twice post-
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) at days 730 and
1250 to study histopathology, dystrophin expression and
chimerism status. Immunostaining for dystrophin I was
reduced, dystrophin II and III were absent and there
was up-regulation of utrophin.
Chimerism was performed to monitor donor cell
engraftment in the recipient peripheral blood and was
also used to detect donor cells in the muscle biopsy from
the recipient. Chimerism was carried out using recipient’s
hair follicle as the pre-transplant sample [11], peripheral
whole blood as the post-HSCT sample, and whole blood
sample from the donor. Blood was collected in ethylene-
diaminetetraacetic acid vacutainers. DNA extraction
from whole blood was carried out using the QIAamp
DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. Preparation of
hair follicles was done with 10 full-length hairs with
Nair et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:216
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/216
Page 2 of 5
roots plucked from different areas of the recipient’s scalp.
The presence of the hair bulb was visually confirmed.
Careful washing was done to minimize the risk of blood
contamination by rinsing in normal saline. The QIAamp
DNA Mini Kit was used for DNA extraction from hair
roots and muscle biopsy. The muscle biopsy specimen
was preserved in 10.4% formaldehyde for routine histo-
pathological processing and stained with hematoxylin
and eosin (Figure 1).
The fragment of muscle biopsy taken for chimerism
analysis was washed in saline seven times to remove all
traces of RBCs and peripheral blood MNCs (PBMCs).
The muscle tissue was homogenized and further rinsed
three times in saline, following which a frozen section of
the homogenized muscle was taken to check for any
contamination with PBMCs (Figure 2). Genomic DNA
was extracted from the muscle tissue cryosections seri-
ally cut from biopsies using the QIAamp DNA Blood
Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Chimerism of all samples was performed using 16
short tandem repeat markers (D8S1179, D21S11,
D7S820, CSF1PO, D3S1358, THO1, D13S317, D16S539,
D2S1338, D19S433, vWA, TPOX, D18S51, AMEL,
D5S818 and FGA) labeled with four types of fluorescent
dyes (6FAM, VIC, NED and PET). A multiplex polymer-
ase chain reaction assay was performed in a final reac-
tion volume of 25 μL containing 10.5 μL of reaction
mixture, 5.5 μL of primer mix, 0.5 μL of AmpFl STR
Identifier kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA,
USA) and 10 μL of DNA at a concentration of 0.2 ng/
μL. Cycling parameters were optimized as follows: 95°C
for 11 minutes (one hold), 94°C for 60 seconds, 59°C for
60 seconds, 72°C for 60 seconds and 28 cycles, 60°C for
60 minutes (two holds) in a GeneAmp PCR System
9700 (Applied Biosystems). Denaturation was performed
for five minutes at 95°C using Hi-Di Formamide and
GeneScan 500 LIZ Size Standard (both from Applied
Biosystems). The amplicon was resolved by performing
capillary electrophoresis using the ABI Prism 3100-
Avant Genetic Analyzer System (Applied Biosystems)
and analyzed using the Applied Biosystems Gene map-
per TM software v 3.5, Foster City CA 94404, USA. To
determine the fraction of donor cells in the recipient’s
peripheral blood and muscle biopsy samples post-trans-
plantation, the informative markers were identified and
the percentage of donor cells was estimated. While the
post-transplant recipient peripheral blood sample dis-
played complete donor chimerism, the muscle biopsy
sample showed mixed donor chimerism with 8% to
10.4% donor cells on days 730 and 1250, respectively
(Figure 3), suggesting the presence of donor-derived
cells in the recipient’s muscle.
Discussion
Allo-HSCT is the only available curative treatment for
DBA. The first “successful” allo-HSCT treatment of
DBA was reported in 1976 [12]. The patient died, but
hematopoietic engraftment from donor bone marrow
confirmed DBA as a transplantable disease. Since the
initial case, more than 70 transplants, the majority of
which involved from HLA-matched sibling donors, have
been reported in the literature [13,14]. The outcomes of
patients who undergo alternative donor stem cell trans-
plantation are significantly inferior to those of HLA-
matched sibling donors [14].
Figure 1 Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section showing post-
transplantation muscle biopsy. Image shows a cross-sectional
view of muscle fibers of varying sizes that have predominantly
peripheral nuclei with a few fibers displaying central nuclei and
regenerative changes. There is scanty intervening stroma.
Figure 2 Hematoxylin and eosin-stained cryosections of serially
cut biopsies of muscle tissue that was homogenized and
washed with saline prior to extraction of tissue DNA. No
evidence of mononuclear cell contamination of the muscle fibers
was noted.
Nair et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:216
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/216
Page 3 of 5
DMD has no known cure. Experiments with stem cells
on animals with DMD have been encouraging. In mdx
mouse models of DMD, allo-HSCT from normal mice
led to incorporation of donor-derived nuclei into muscle
and partial restoration of dystrophin expression in the
affected muscle. The canine model of DMD (canine X-
linked muscular dystrophy (CXMD)) has shown a clini-
cal course very similar to that of human DMD. In a
study of seven CXMD dogs that underwent allo-HSCT
from non-affected littermates, there was no increase in
the number of dystrophin-positive fibers or in the
amount of wild-type dystrophin RNA post-transplanta-
tion compared with pre-transplantation levels. However,
another canine study demonstrated that allo-HSCT pro-
vides an immune-tolerant platform for myoblast trans-
plantation from freshly isolated muscle-derived cells
from the same HSCT donor [15].
The first successful allo-HSCT in a patient with DMD
was reported in 2002. That patient with DMD was diag-
nosed at 12 years of age and underwent BMT at one
year of age for X-linked severe combined immunodefi-
ciency syndrome. Analysis of muscle biopsies revealed
the presence of donor nuclei within a small number of
muscle myofibers (0.5% to 0.9%). The discovery of the
donor’s mesenchymal cells in the patient’s muscle tissue
and bone marrow 13 years after the transplant raised
the hope that BMT may play a role in the treatment of
DMD [7]. Two case reports from China of unrelated
allogeneic umbilical cord HSCT in young boys with
advanced DMD have shown some improvement post-
transplantation. This improvement has been reported
both clinically by improved motor activity and in labora-
tory parameters seen by reduction in CPK levels,
increase in dystrophin-positive muscle fibers and
reduction of the defective gene transcripts measured by
PCR [9,10].
Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of
a boy with two rare genetic disorders, DBA and DMD,
who successfully underwent myeloablative allo-HSCT,
which cured his DBA and might have had a positive
effect on his DMD. Clinically, the course of his DMD
has seemed milder and nearly static over the past 45
months as compared to his first cousin, who also has
DMD and by the same age was unable to sit without
support. In addition, CPK levels showed drastic reduc-
tion, and chimerism studies revealed 8% and 10.4%
donor cells in the patient’s skeletal muscle at days 730
and 1250, respectively.
Though this percentage of donor cells was small, the
presence of these cells in the patient’s muscle tissue
indicates the possibility of transdifferentiation of hema-
topoietic donor stem cells to skeletal muscle myocytes
in the patient. However, no dystrophin expression was
noted in the muscle tissue, which could possibly be due
to the low level of transdifferentiation. Though this
transplant was done primarily for DBA, it raises the
interesting possibility of allo-HSCT’s being beneficial in
the treatment of DMD, which is an otherwise incurable
disease with 100% mortality. However, further clinical
follow-up with serial muscle biopsies and molecular stu-
dies is needed to document the extent and duration of
mixed chimerism in skeletal muscle in this patient. The
purpose of this case report is to describe this interesting
observation of a possible benefit in DMD and not to
suggest HSCT as a modality of treatment until further
studies show an unequivocal benefit, given the inherent
risks associated with HSCT.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient’s parent for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.
Author details
1
Department of Haematology & Bone Marrow Transplantation, Army Hospital
(Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt-110010, India. 2
Department of
Microbiology, Army Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt-110010, India.
3
Department of Pathology, Army Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt-
110010, India.
Authors’ contributions
BVN is the first author and is responsible for the conception and design of
the case report. Contributing authors SD, AS, SS, JK and DKM made
substantial contributions to the design of the manuscript and the
acquisition, analysis and interpretation of the data.
Figure 3 Microsatellite analysis of locus D21S11 in (a) donor
peripheral blood sample showing peaks at allele 28 and 33.2,
(b) recipient hair follicle representing patient pre-transplant
DNA with allele 30 and 33.2, (c) recipient muscle biopsy
sample on D+730 showing mixed chimerism with alleles 28, 30
and 33.2 and (d) recipient peripheral blood sample on D+730
showing complete donor chimerism.
Nair et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:216
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/216
Page 4 of 5
Authors’ information
VN is a consultant in Medicine & Clinical Haematology and was Head of the
Department of Medicine and Head of the Department of Haematology &
BMT, Army Research & Referral Hospital, New Delhi, India, which is the
premier institution of the Indian Armed Forces. He was also the Dean of the
Army College of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Presently, he is Head of
the Department of Medicine at the Armed Forces Medical College in Pune,
India. He is a well-known clinician, researcher and BMT physician with over
25 years of experience. He has written more than 150 publications in various
national and international journals, including Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Acta Haematologica, Blood, Journal of the Association of Physicians of India,
Indian Pediatrics. Medical Journal of Armed Forces of India and Indian
Journal of Haematology & Blood Transfusion among others. VN has done
two International Cancer Technology Transfer Fellowships under the
technology transfer program of the International Union Against Cancer,
Geneva, at King’s College & Hospital, London in 2004, and at Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2008. He is also the
former President of the Indian Society of Haematology & Transfusion
Medicine and a fellow of the American College of Physicians and the Indian
Academy of Medical Sciences.
All other contributing authors are either professors or associate professors in
the specialties mentioned on the title page and have significant experience
and have written numerous publications.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 30 June 2010 Accepted: 4 June 2011 Published: 4 June 2011
References
1. Orfali KA, Ohene-Abuakwa Y, Ball SE: Diamond Blackfan anemia in the UK:
clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Br J Haematol 2004, 125:243-252.
2. Alter BP: Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. In Nathan and Oski’s
Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. Volume 1.. 6 edition. Edited by:
Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, Look AT, Oski FA. Philadelphia: PA
Saunders; 2003:280-365, {AU: This is a two-volume set; please indicate
which volume this chapter is in.}.
3. Iriondo A, Garijo J, Baro J, Conde E, Pastor JM, Sabanés A, Hermosa V,
Sainz MC, Pérez de la Lastra L, Zubizarreta A: Complete recovery of
hemopoiesis following bone marrow transplant in a patient with
unresponsive congenital hypoplastic anemia (Blackfan-Diamond
syndrome). Blood 1984, 64:348-351.
4. Ohga S, Mugishima H, Ohara A, Kojima S, Fujisawa K, Yagi K,
Higashigawa M, Tsukimoto I, Aplastic Anemia Committee Japanese Society
of Pediatric Hematology: Diamond-Blackfan anemia in Japan: clinical
outcomes of prednisolone therapy and hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Int J Hematol 2004, 79:22-30.
5. Nair V, Das S, Sharma A: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
children with genetic defects. Indian Pediatr 2009, 46:241-243.
6. Den Dunnen JT, Grootscholten PM, Bakker E, Blonden LA, Ginjaar HB,
Wapenaar MC, van Paassen HM, van Broeckhoven C, Pearson PL, van
Ommen GJ: Topography of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)
gene: FIGE and cDNA analysis of 194 cases reveals 115 deletions and 13
duplications. Am J Hum Genet 1989, 45:835-847.
7. Gussoni E, Bennett RR, Muskiewicz KR, Meyerrose T, Nolta JA, Gilgoff I,
Stein J, Chan YM, Lidov HG, Bönnemann CG, Von Moers, Morris GE, Den
Dunnen JT, Chamberlain JS, Kunkel LM, Weinberg K: Long-term persistence
of donor nuclei in a Duchenne muscular dystrophy patient receiving
bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Invest 2002, 110:807-814.
8. Cooke R: Stem cells aimed at muscular dystrophy: evidence suggests a
future treatment. Newsday 2002.
9. Zhang C, Feng HY, Huang SL, Fang SW, Xu HG, Huang K, Zhou DH,
Chen W, Xie YM, Xi J Zhang M, Li Y, Liu Y: [Therapy of Duchenne
muscular dystrophy with umbilical cord blood stem cell transplantation]
[in Chinese]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi 2005, 22:399-405.
10. Zhang C, Chen W, Xiao LL, Tan EX, Luo SK, Zheng D, Ye X, Li Z, Lu XL,
Liu Y: [Allogeneic umbilical cord blood stem cell transplantation in
Duchenne muscular dystrophy] [in Chinese]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi
2005, 85:522-525.
11. Hong YC, Liu HM, Chen PS, Chen YJ, Lyou JY, Hu HY, Yi MF, Lin JS,
Tzeng CH: Hair follicle: a reliable source of recipient origin after
allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 2007,
40:871-874.
12. August CS, King E, Githens JH, McIntosh K, Humbert JR, Greensheer A,
Johnson RB: Establishment of erythropoiesis following bone marrow
transplantation in a patient with congenital hypoplastic anemia
(Diamond-Blackfan syndrome). Blood 1976, 48:491-498.
13. Vlachos A, Alter B, Buchanan G, et al: The Diamond Blackfan Anemia
Registry (DBAR): preliminary data [Abstract 339]. Blood 1993, 82(Suppl
1):88.
14. Vlachos A, Federman N, Reyes-Haley C, Abramson J, Lipton JM:
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for Diamond Blackfan anemia: a
report from the Diamond Blackfan Anemia Registry. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2001, 27:381-386.
15. Parker MH, Kuhr C, Tapscott SJ, Storb R: Hematopoietic cell transplantation
provides an immune-tolerant platform for myoblast transplantation in
dystrophic dogs. Mol Ther 2008, 16:1340-1346.
doi:10.1186/1752-1947-5-216
Cite this article as: Nair et al.: Successful bone marrow transplantation
in a patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia with co-existing Duchenne
muscular dystrophy: a case report. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011
5:216.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Nair et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:216
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/216
Page 5 of 5
