SHORT REPORT Open Access
Prevalence of invasive fungal disease in
hematological patients at a tertiary university
hospital in Singapore
Siok-Ying Lee1
, Chay-Leng Yeo2
, Winnie H Lee3
, Andrea L Kwa3
, Liang-Piu Koh4
, Li-Yang Hsu5*
Abstract
Background: The use of newer azoles as prophylaxis in hematological patients undergoing stem cell
transplantation or immunosuppressive chemotherapy has been shown to decrease the risk of developing invasive
fungal disease (IFD). However, the cost-effectiveness of such a strategy is dependent on the local epidemiology of
IFD. We conducted an audit of hematological patients with IFD in our institution in order to derive the prevalence
and types of IFD that occur locally.
Findings: We conducted a retrospective chart review of all hematological patients who developed possible,
probable or definite IFD according to EORTC/MSG criteria in the period from Oct 2007 to Apr 2010. The prevalence
of IFD was determined via correlation with institutional database records of all hematological patients treated at
our institution over the same time period.
There were 39 cases of IFD diagnosed during the study period, with 8 (20.5%) possible, 19 (48.7%) probable and 12
(30.8%) definite cases of IFD. Aspergillus spp. accounted for 83.9% of all probable and definite infections. There was
1 case each of Rhinocladelia spp., Coprinopsis cinerea, Exserohilum spp. sinusitis and Rhizopus spp. sinusitis. IFD
occurred in 12 of 124 (9.7%) AML and 4 of 103 (3.9%) ALL patients treated at our institution respectively. There
were 10 (16.1%) infections among 62 allogeneic HSCT recipients, six of whom were having concurrent graft-versus-
host disease (GVHD). Five other cases occurred after allogeneic HSCT failure, following salvage chemotherapy for
disease relapse. The prevalence of IFD during induction chemotherapy was 8.9% (11 of 124 cases) for AML and
1.0% (1 of 103 cases) for ALL. Fluconazole prophylaxis had been provided for 28 out of the 39 (71.8%) cases, while
4 (10.3%) were on itraconazole prophylaxis. The in-hospital mortality was 28.2% (11 of 39 cases), of which 5 (12.8%)
deaths were attributed to IFD.
Conclusions: The burden of IFD is high in our institution, especially in allogeneic HSCT recipients and patients on
induction chemotherapy for AML. A prophylactic strategy directed against invasive mould infections for local high-
risk patients may be considered as the comparative costs of treatment, prolonged hospitalisation and subsequent
delayed chemotherapy favours such an approach.
Background
Antifungal prophylaxis is recommended for patients
undergoing induction chemotherapy for acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and patients with allogeneic hemato-
poietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) undergoing
treatment for chronic extensive graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD) [1,2]. It may also benefit other patient
subpopulations at high risk of invasive fungal disease
(IFD) - those with prolonged neutropenia after stem cell
transplantation using bone marrow or cord blood
sources, or those with impaired cell-mediated immunity
secondary to therapeutic agents such as alemtuzumab
[1]. Several key factors should be considered before
deciding on whether to use prophylaxis and which agent
to use. These include: the effectiveness against the types
of fungi to be covered, institutional fungal epidemiology
in the select group of patients with hematological
* Correspondence: liyang_hsu@yahoo.com
5
Department of Infectious Disease, National University Hospital, Lower Kent
Ridge Road, Singapore
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Lee et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/42
© 2011 Hsu et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
malignancies, the number needed to treat, and the toxi-
city profile and drug interactions of the antifungal agent.
With the advent of new antifungals being used for
prophylaxis for patients with hematological malignan-
cies, fungal infection-related mortality has decreased [3].
However, this has also resulted in a shift in the epide-
miology of invasive mycoses, with an increase in the
prevalence of invasive mold infections among HSCT
recipients and patients with hematological malignancies
against a backdrop of a greater decline in prevalence of
invasive candidiasis [4,5].
Currently at our hospital, fluconazole is the antifungal
prophylactic agent used in patients with hematological
malignancies receiving chemotherapy and allogeneic or
autologous HSCT. Posaconazole, an extended-spectrum
triazole, is active against most pathogenic yeasts and
moulds [6], and has been approved for use as antifungal
prophylaxis in the subgroup of allogeneic HSCT recipients
with GVHD as well as profoundly neutropenic patients
with AML and/or myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) [6].
We performed an audit of hematology patients with
IFD at our hospital - a 995-bed university hospital in
Singapore with a large hematology and stem cell trans-
plantation center. Our rationale for embarking on this
study is to derive the epidemiology of IFD locally so as
to determine if there is a role for a switch to posacona-
zole prophylaxis in the immediate future.
Methods
A retrospective chart review was performed on all
hematology patients diagnosed with IFD that were hos-
pitalized between 1 October 2007 to 30 April 2010, out-
lining their outcomes and the prevalence of IFD
according to the underlying hematological disease. All
hematology patients with IFD in our institute are cap-
tured on a database at the point of diagnosis. In general,
diagnostic workup for IFD was directed by patient
symptoms, with the exception of persistent (>5 days)
febrile neutropenia, where a computed tomography
(CT) scan of the thorax was performed routinely. Serum
galactomannan was performed weekly for HSCT recipi-
ents, while bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) with galacto-
mannan testing of BAL fluid was performed routinely
for patients with CT thorax findings suggestive of fungal
infection [7] but negative serum galactomannan. Tissue
biopsies were performed where possible (platelet count
>50,000 cells/μL).
The number of patients diagnosed with AML and
acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) in the study period
was derived from the hematology cytogenetics labora-
tory registry, while the number of allogeneic HSCT
patients was obtained from the center’s HSCT registry.
IFD cases were classified as possible, probable or defi-
nite IFD according to the 2007 European Organization
for Research and Treatment of Cancer Invasive Fungal
Infections Cooperative Group and the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group
(EORTC/MSG) criteria, with physicians routinely
screening through all CT pulmonary images if these had
been performed looking for specific signs of fungal
infection [7]. We followed EORTC/MSG recommenda-
tions for serum galactomannan optical density (OD)
cutoffs, whereas the BAL galactomannan OD cutoff was
>1.0 [8].
Variables collected included demographic and clinical
data as well as outcomes - in-hospital mortality and
IFD-related mortality. The latter was determined follow-
ing chart review by an infectious diseases specialist, and
was based on the presence of ongoing progressive fungal
disease with no other apparent cause of death present.
This study is a subset of a larger febrile neutropenia
program evaluation that was approved by the institu-
tional ethics review committee (National Healthcare
Group Domain Specific Review Board E/09/340).
Results
During the study period, 103 and 124 patients were
diagnosed and provided induction +/- consolidation
therapy for ALL and AML respectively, while 135
patients received HSCT (62 allogeneic, including 6 cord
blood transplants, and 73 autologous transplants) for a
variety of haematological disorders. Locally, fluconazole
capsules or less frequently itraconazole solution are rou-
tinely provided as antifungal prophylaxis to patients
with leukemia receiving chemotherapy and HSCT
recipients.
There were 39 cases of IFD diagnosed during this per-
iod, of which 8 (20.5%) were possible, 19 (48.7%) were
probable and 12 (30.8%) were definite IFD according to
EORTC/MSG criteria [7], with all definite IFD cases
confirmed via histopathological detection of tissue-
invasive fungi in biopsy specimens. 28 (71.7%) patients
were on fluconazole, 4 (10.3%) were on itraconazole
prophylaxis while the remainder received no antifungal
prophylaxis. Demographic and clinical characteristics of
these patients are shown in Table 1. The majority were
male, and Aspergillus spp. accounted for 83.9% of all
probable and definite infections. There was 1 case each
of Rhinocladelia spp. and Coprinopsis cinerea pulmonary
infection, 1 case of Exserohilum spp. pulmonary infec-
tion and sinusitis, and 1 case of Rhizopus spp. sinusitis.
The majority of cases of aspergillosis (96.5%) were
identified by positive galactomannan testing from serum
and/or BAL fluid. Fungal cultures from infected tissue
or BAL samples were positive only in 17.9% of cases.
Rhinocladelia spp. and Coprinopsis cinerea were identi-
fied by internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing of
infected lung tissue [9].
Lee et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/42
Page 2 of 4
Eleven (28.2%) patients with IFD died during their
hospitalization, with 5 (12.8%) deaths attributed to IFD.
There was only non-aspergillosis mortality, who devel-
oped rapidly progressing mucormycosis involving eth-
moid, maxillary, frontal and sphenoid sinuses as well as
the left cavernous sinus. Extensive debridement and
high-dose (10 mg/kg body weight) liposomal amphoteri-
cin B failed to control the infection and she died within
one week of diagnosis. Intra-operative tissue specimens
grew Rhizopus spp., while histology showed extensive
disease - broad hyphal fungal fragments present in the
blood vessels of the left inferior turbinate, within the
lumina and invading the vessel walls and surrounding
connective tissue stroma.
The prevalence of IFD in AML and ALL patients dur-
ing induction chemotherapy was 8.9% (11 of 124 cases)
and 1.0% (1 of 103 cases) respectively. The prevalence of
IFD in allogeneic HSCT recipients was 16.1% (10 of 62
patients), occurring during initial neutropenia or GVHD.
Discussion
Our audit showed that the prevalence of and mortality
related to IFD is high in our institution, and comparable
to previously published figures [4,5,10-13]. All cases of
probable and definite IFD were caused by molds, and
the paucity of invasive candidiasis in our patients can be
attributed to the use of fluconazole or itraconazole as
antifungal prophylaxis in hematological patients on che-
motherapy or HSCT recipients. It is plausible that sev-
eral possible IFD cases as defined by the EORTC/MSG
criteria did not actually have fungal infection. However,
it is not possible to differentiate these cases further
given the current limitations of fungal diagnostics. The
proportion of possible IFD relative to probable/definite
IFD has decreased over time with more frequent use of
BAL galactomannan testing [8].
Switching to posaconazole prophylaxis for at-risk
patients may result in a significant reduction of IFD at
our institution. Recent landmark trials have shown a
relative risk reduction for IFD of 0.73 and 0.41 respec-
tively during neutropenia and GVHD compared to flu-
conazole [10,11], with a number need to treat (NNT) of
16 and 27 respectively to prevent 1 fungal infection in
each group [10]. To prevent 1 fungal infection-related
death, the NNT was 27 and 33 for hematology patients
with neutropenia and allogeneic HSCT recipients with
GVHD respectively [14]. It is reasonable to assume that
similar results can be expected locally, given comparable
fungal epidemiology. However, our results also suggest
that providing posaconazole for high-risk patients such
as allogeneic HSCT recipients and AML patients on
induction chemotherapy will cover just over 56% of
potential future patients with IFD (assuming distribution
of IFD among future local hematology patients remains
constant), resulting in a reduction of approximately 42%
of our current prevalence of IFD given expected success
rates of posaconazole prophylaxis of 75%. These figures,
while significant, suggest that more needs to be done to
identify individual patients who are at risk for IFD.
The overall additional estimated cost of treating an IFD
at our institution is approximately USD8,600.00 (data not
shown), notwithstanding other adverse events such as a
delay in chemotherapy and longer hospitalization. The
current cost of posaconazole prophylaxis for a month is
approximately USD2,300.00. Although several studies
have shown that posaconazole prophylaxis is potentially
cost-effective when compared to fluconazole [15-17],
these are aggregate population-based results. The burden
of payment for antifungal prophylaxis rests on the
patients in our local setting as the cost of these drugs is
borne directly by the patient or private insurance. Posa-
conazole prophylaxis on an individual level in Singapore
may be viewed as being more of a hedge or insurance,
and this may be a deterrent for those high-risk patients
who lack the necessary funds to pay for the drug.
This study had several limitations. Firstly, this was a ret-
rospective chart review and it is a plausible that even with
the existence of database, not all cases of IFD were diag-
nosed. Secondly, there were no autopsies performed on
Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of
hematology patients with invasive fungal disease
Median age, years (range) 43 (17 - 88)
Male gender (%) 25 (64.1)
Hematological diagnosis:
AML (% AML with IFD in study period) 12 (9.7)
ALL (% ALL with IFD in study period) 4 (3.8)
Autologous transplants (% autologous HSCT recipients
with IFD)
1 (1.4)
Allogenic transplants (% allogeneic HSCT recipients
with IFD)
10 (16.1)
- Neutropenia post-transplantation (% allogeneic
HSCT recipients with IFD occurring during
neutropenia)
4 (6.5)
- GVHD (% allogeneic HSCT recipients with IFD
occurring during GVHD)
6 (9.7)
Relapsed leukemia on salvage chemotherapy
post-transplantation
5
Others* 7
Location of IFD:
Sinus (%) 5 (12.8)
Pulmonary (%) 34 (87.2)
Median serum galactomannan (range) for:
- All IFD cases (n = 41) 0.3 (0.1–4.3)
- All probable/definite aspergillosis cases (n = 26) 0.6 (0.1–4.3)
*Others include 2 cases with MDS, 2 cases with aplastic anemia, and one case
each of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma, and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis secondary to T-cell
lymphoma.
Lee et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/42
Page 3 of 4
the patients who had died. This may have led to an under-
estimation of the mortality that could be attributed to IFD.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our audit revealed that the prevalence of
IFD is high locally. Although posaconazole prophylaxis
may potentially reduce these infections appreciably, a
significant minority (>35%) of IFD occur in hematology
patients where the data on the cost-effectiveness of
posaconazole prophylaxis is lacking. More needs to be
done to identify the patients and/or their risk factors in
order to deliver the appropriate antifungal prophylaxis.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the staff of the National University Cancer Institute,
Singapore for facilitating this study.
No funding was required to conduct this study.
Author details
1
Pharmacy Department, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Yishun Central, Singapore.
2
Pharmacy Department, National University Hospital, Lower Kent Ridge Road,
Singapore. 3
Pharmacy Department, Singapore General Hospital, Outram
Road, Singapore. 4
Department of Hematology, Oncology, National University
Hospital, Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore. 5
Department of Infectious
Disease, National University Hospital, Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore.
Authors’ contributions
SYL, CLY and LPK collected the data for the study. In addition, SYL wrote the
first draft of the manuscript while LPK coordinated the study with LYH. WL
and AK participated in the review of the manuscript. LYH conceived the
study design and coordinated the study. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
SYL is a pharmacist doing her residency in infectious disease at the
Singapore General Hospital. CLY is a pharmacist involved in antimicrobial
stewardship at National University Health System. WL and AK are principal
clinical pharmacists at Singapore General Hospital who oversee the
infectious disease residency program.
LPK is a consultant physician in the department of Hematology, Oncology at
the National University Cancer Institute. LYH is an infectious disease
physician at the National University Health System.
Competing interests
LYH and AK have received research funding from Pfizer Inc. and Merck,
Sharpe & Dohme. LPK is currently the site principal investigator for a
multicenter study funded by Pfizer Inc. Other authors report no conflict of
interest.
Received: 16 August 2010 Accepted: 28 February 2011
Published: 28 February 2011
References
1. Slavin MA, Heath CH, Thursky KA, Morrissey CO, Szer J, Ling LM, Milliken ST,
Grigg AP: Antifungal prophylaxis in adult stem cell transplantation and
haematological malignancy. Internal Medicine Journal 2008, 38:468-476.
2. Leventakos K, Lewis RE, Kontoyiannis DP: Fungal infections in leukemia
patients: how do we prevent and treat them? Clin Infect Dis 2010, 50:405-15.
3. Robenshtok E, Gafter-Gvili A, Goldberg E, Weinberger M, Yeshurun M,
Leibovici L, Paul M: Antifungal prophylaxis in cancer patients after
chemotherapy or hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation: systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 2007, 25:5471-89.
4. Kontoyiannis DP, Marr KA, Park BJ, Alexander BD, Anaissie EJ, Walsh TJ, Ito J,
Andes DR, Baddley JW, Brown JM, Brumble LM, Freifeld AG, Hadley S,
Herwaldt LA, Kauffman CA, Knapp K, Lyon GM, Morrison VA,
Papanicolaou G, Patterson TF, Perl TM, Schuster MG, Walker R,
Wannemuehler KA, Wingard JR, Chiller TM, Pappas PG: Prospective
surveillance for invasive fungal infections in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients, 2001-2006: overview of the Transplant-Associated
Infection Surveillance Network (TRANSNET) Database. Clin Infect Dis 2010,
50:1091-100.
5. Pagano L, Caira M, Candoni A, Offidani M, Fianchi L, Martino B, Pastore D,
Picardi M, Bonini A, Chierichini A, Fanci R, Caramatti C, Invernizzi R,
Mattei D, Mitra ME, Melillo L, Aversa F, Van Lint MT, Falcucci P, Valentini CG,
Girmenia C, Nosari A: The epidemiology of fungal infections in patients
with hematologic malignancies: the SEIFEM-2004 study. Haematologica
2006, 91:1068-75.
6. Noxafil (posaconazole) oral suspension [package insert]. Kenilworth, NJ:
Schering Corp; 2006.
7. De Pauw B, Walsh TH, Donnelly JP, Stevens DA, Edwards JE, Calandra T,
Pappas PG, Maertens J, Lortholary O, Kauffman CA, Denning DW,
Patterson TF, Maschmeyer G, Bille J, Dismukes WE, Herbrecht R, Hope WW,
Kibbler CC, Kullberg BJ, Marr KA, Muñoz P, Odds FC, Perfect JR, Restrepo A,
Ruhnke M, Segal BH, Sobel JD, Sorrell TC, Viscoli C, Wingard JR, Zaoutis T,
Bennett JE, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/
Invasive Fungal Infections Cooperative Group; National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) Consensus
Group: Revised definitions of invasive fungal disease from the European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Invasive Fungal
Infections Cooperative Group and the National Institute of Allergy and
Infections Diseases Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) Consensus
Group. Clin Infect Dis 2008, 46:1813-21.
8. Hsu LY, Ding Y, Phua J, Koh LP, Chan DS, Khoo KL, Tambyah PA:
Galactomannan testing of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is useful for
diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in hematology patients.
BMC Infect Dis 2010, 10:44.
9. Kumar M, Shukla PK: Use of PCR targeting internal transcribed spacer
regions and single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis of
sequence variation in different regions of rrna genes in fungi for rapid
diagnosis of mycotic keratitis. J Clin Microbiol 2005, 43:662-8.
10. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Winston DJ, Perfect J, Ullmann AJ, Walsh TJ,
Helfgott D, Holowiecki J, Stockelberg D, Goh YT, Petrini M, Hardalo C,
Suresh R, Angulo-Gonzalez D: Posaconazole vs. Fluconazole or Itraconazole
Prophylaxis in Patients with neutropenia. New Eng J Med 2007, 356:348-59.
11. Ullmann AJ, Lipton JH, Vesole DH, Chandrasekar P, Langston A,
Tarantolo SR, Greinex H, Morais de Azevedo W, Reddy V, Boparai N,
Pedicone L, Patino H, Durrant S: Posaconazole or fluconazole for
prophylaxis of severe graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med 2007,
356:335-47.
12. Jantunen E, Ruutu P, Niskanen L, Volin L, Parkkali T, Koukila-Kahkola P,
Ruutu T: Incidence and risk factors for invasive fungal infections in
allogeneic BMT recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997, 19:801-8.
13. Vehreschild JJ, Rüping MJ, Wisplinghoff H, Farowski F, Steinbach A, Sims R,
Stollorz A, Kreuzer KA, Hallek M, Bangard C, Cornely OA: Clinical
effectiveness of posaconazole prophylaxis in patients with acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML): a 6 year experience of the Cologne AML
cohort. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010, 65:1466-71.
14. Cornely OA, Ullmann AJ: Numbers need to treat with posaconazole
prophylaxis to prevent invasive fungal infection and death. Clin Infect Dis
2008, 46:1626-7.
15. De la Camara R, Jarque I, Sanz MA, Grau S, Casado MA, Sabater FJ,
Carreras E: Economic evaluation of posaconazole vs fluconazole in the
prevention of invasive fungal infections in patients with GVHD following
haematopoietic SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 2010, 45:925-32.
16. O’Sullivan AK, Pandya A, Papadopoulos G, Thompson D, Langston A,
Perfect J, Weinstein MC: Cost-Effectiveness of Posaconazole versus
Fluconazole or Itraconazole in the Prevention of Invasive Fungal
Infections among Neutropenic Patients in the United States. Value Health
2009, 12:666-73.
17. Stam WB, O’Sullivan AK, Rijnders B, Lugtenburg E, Span LF, Janssen JJ,
Jansen JP: Economic evaluation of posaconazole vs. standard azole
prophylaxis in high risk neutropenic patients in the Netherlands. Eur J
Haematol 2008, 81:467-74.
doi:10.1186/1756-0500-4-42
Cite this article as: Lee et al.: Prevalence of invasive fungal disease in
hematological patients at a tertiary university hospital in Singapore.
BMC Research Notes 2011 4:42.
Lee et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/42
Page 4 of 4
