CASE REPORT Open Access
Prolonged survival after splenectomy in Wiskott-
Aldrich syndrome: a case report
Kostas N Syrigos1*
, Nektaria Makrilia1
, Jeffrey Neidhart2
, Michael Moutsos1
, Sotirios Tsimpoukis1
, Maria Kiagia1
and
Muhammad W Saif3
Abstract
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is a rare X-linked immunodeficiency disorder that is characterized by a variable clinical
phenotype. Matched donor bone marrow transplantation is currently the only curative therapeutic option. We
present the case of a 24-year-old male who was diagnosed at the age of seven with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. He
did not respond to intravenous gammaglobulin and he experienced recurrent pulmonary infections despite
prophylactic antibiotics. The patient had no matched donor. At the age of nine, he was submitted to splenectomy
and his platelet count was normalized. Fifteen years later, the patient remains asymptomatic with a normal platelet
count. He is still receiving prophylactic antibiotics and no bleeding episodes or septic complications have been
reported. This case demonstrates that splenectomy can represent a safe therapeutic option in selected WAS
patients, provided that there is a tight follow-up program, patient education and adherence to guidelines
regarding post-splenectomy prophylaxis.
Keywords: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, thrombocytopenia, splenectomy, survival, treatment
Background
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare immunodefi-
ciency disorder, which is characterized by recurrent
infections, small-platelet thrombocytopenia and eczema.
It has been associated with increased risk of autoimmune
disorders and malignancy [1]. The syndrome was first
described in 1937 by Wiskott in three brothers with con-
genital thrombocytopenia, eczema, bloody diarrhea and
multiple ear infections [2], whereas, in 1954, Aldrich
reported that this disorder is associated with X-linked
inheritance [3]. WAS has a wide range of clinical pheno-
types that correlate with the type of mutation in the
WASP gene. The three main clinical phenotypes pro-
duced by WASP mutations are classic WAS, X-linked
thrombocytopenia and X-linked neutropenia [4]. Clinical
manifestations of WAS consist of petechiae, ecchymosis
and bloody diarrhea [1]. Recurrent infections are a fre-
quent problem and autoimmune diseases further compli-
cate clinical presentation [4]. Treatment is mainly
supportive and includes immunization, intravenous
gammaglobulin, corticosteroids, transfusions, prophylac-
tic antibiotics and splenectomy [5]. Matched bone
marrow transplant seems to be the only curative thera-
peutic option [6], whereas gene therapy holds much pro-
mise for future use in clinical practice [7]. When a
matched donor is not available, the number of treatment
options available is small and overall prognosis is poor
[6].
Splenectomy is used sparingly by WAS treatment cen-
ters, mainly because of the potential post-splenectomy
complications [8]. We present the case of a patient with
WAS with prolonged survival after splenectomy, who is
on a tight follow-up program and tightly adheres to the
prophylactic regimen. No sign of disease recurrence has
been reported nor has any serious complication.
Case presentation
Case report
Our patient first presented at our department at the age
of seven with facial eczema, recurrent pulmonary infec-
tions (lasting several weeks) and otitis media. Physical
examination revealed a severe eczema and laboratory
tests showed microcytic thrombocytopenia with a plate-
let count of 42000/mL at diagnosis. His white blood cell
* Correspondence: knsyrigos@usa.net
1
Oncology Unit, 3rd Department of Medicine, Sotiria General Hospital,
Athens School of Medicine, Greece
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Syrigos et al. Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2011, 37:42
http://www.ijponline.net/content/37/1/42 ITALIAN JOURNAL
OF PEDIATRICS
© 2011 Syrigos et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
count and hemoglobulin were within normal range.
Bone marrow biopsy ruled out aplastic anemia. He had
a low IgG (495 mg/dl, normal levels > 560 mg/dl for
age) and IgM (95 mg/dl, normal levels > 145 mg/dl for
age) count and elevated IgA (270 mg/dl, normal levels
< 250 mg/dl for age) and IgE levels (1680 IU/ml, normal
levels < 420 IU/ml for age). Coagulation tests were nor-
mal as were the total count and morphology of mega-
caryocytes. He had no known family history of the
disease but a maternal uncle was reported to have died
in childhood after experiencing similar symptoms. The
patient received multiple courses of intravenous gamma-
globulin, steroids, transfusions and prophylactic antibio-
tics. His thrombocytopenia was refractory (platelet
count ranging from 8000-78000/mL) and he experienced
multiple bleeding episodes. At the age of eight, he also
exhibited autoimmune Henoch-Schönlein-like purpura
and lymphopenia of variable severity. The patient had
neither a matched-donor sibling nor a matched unre-
lated donor. At the age of nine, the patient underwent
splenectomy. His platelet count was normalized has been
normal ever since with a mean value of 235000/mL.
There have been no signs of disease recurrence in the
last fifteen years or any autoimmune manifestations of
WAS. Levels of immunoglobulins are within normal
limits and the eczema has not reappeared. The patient
was educated from a very young age about the impor-
tance of taking specific post-splenectomy preventive
measures: Vaccination for pneumonococcus, haemophi-
lus influenza B and meningococcal C pathogens is con-
ducted according to guidelines and antibody levels are
measured to make sure that response is adequate. The
patient is currently on life-long phenoxymethylpenicillin
250 mg per os twice daily. All post-splenectomy febrile
illnesses of the patient are carefully evaluated and com-
plete blood work is performed to rule out sepsis. Antibio-
tic sensitivity testing on isolated pathogens is performed.
A mutation analysis was conducted six years ago and a
missence mutation in the exon 2 of the patient’s WASP
gene was detected. Furthermore, the patient lacked
WASP protein expression. He has experienced no epi-
sodes of post-splenectomy bleeding or sepsis. His compli-
ance with the recommended treatment has always been
exceptional.
Discussion
WAS is a multifaceted syndrome which is characterized by
sinopulmonary infections, microthrombocytopenia and
eczema [1]. The vast majority of patients have episodes of
bleeding, which are life-threatening in a percentage reach-
ing 30% [9]. According to the Zhu classification (1997)
[10], our patient is classified as score 4 WAS, due to
severe, treatment-resistant eczema, recurrent infections
and presence of autoimmune disease (Henoch-Schönlein-
like purpura). He also lacked WASP protein expression,
which can be rarely observed in missence patients [11].
However, it should be noted that missence mutations to
exons 1-3 have been associated with milder phenotypes
[10] and positive WASP expression [11].
The mutations responsible occur in the WAS gene, that
regulates actin polymerization in hematopoietic cells.
Thrombocytopenia in this syndrome seems to be attribu-
ted to increased phagocytosis and spleen destruction as
well as ineffective thrombocytopoiesis. Patients with WAS
have combined immunodeficiency, as functions of T and
B lymphocytes and NK cells are affected [4]. Main causes
of death are severe bleeding episodes, infections, autoim-
mune diseases and hematological malignancies [1].
Currently, the only curative therapy for WAS is hemato-
poietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [6], whereas gene
therapy is still under study [7]. Matched unrelated donors
can also be used for HSCT in WAS patients. A 2006
Japanese study showed that the overall 5-year survival rate
is 80% for WAS patients treated with HSCT from matched
unrelated donors or unrelated cord blood [12], while an
Italian single-center trial concluded that survival rates
were even better (81.2%) in case of unrelated donors [13].
Transplant is, however, associated with significant risk of
morbidity and mortality and this should be taken into
account, especially in patients with some other phenotype
variant and not classic WAS [6]. In patients with no avail-
able matched donor or ineligible because of age, treatment
is mainly supportive with intravenous gammaglobulin,
prophylactic antibiotics and immunization. Systemic ster-
oids generally fail to improve thrombocytopenia and
immunocompromise the patient even further. The out-
come is usually poor in these patients with only few of
them surviving into adulthood [8].
Splenectomy is one of the treatment options available
in patients who are not submitted to transplantation but
it is used sparingly by centers worldwide, since it carries
significant risk of severe infections and sepsis [8]. Conley
et al [8] in 2003 reported that less than 10% of treatment
centers use splenectomy systematically as a treatment
option whereas, 26.3% never select this modality. It has
been shown to be an effective measure to sustain an
increase in platelet counts [14]. The exact mechanism of
action is not known, however, it is believed that platelet
destruction is decreased and that blocking of this clear-
ance mechanism assists in offsetting impaired platelet
production [15]. The main concern regarding the wider
use of splenectomy is the post-splenectomy bleeding and
sepsis [14]. The Mullen et al study [14] showed that
recurrence of bleeding was mainly reported in patients
who developed idiopathic thrombopenic purpura (ITP)
and that half of these patients had already been diag-
nosed with ITP before splenectomy. A recent multicenter
study conducted in a large cohort of XLT patients
Syrigos et al. Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2011, 37:42
http://www.ijponline.net/content/37/1/42
Page 2 of 4
showed that the overall cumulative incidence of serious
bleeding events is not significantly reduced after sple-
nectomy [5]. Regarding post-splenectomy sepsis, more
than half of the patients were not receiving the recom-
mended prophylactic antibiotics or had discontinued the
regimen [14]. According to Albert et al [16], despite the
higher risk for systemic infections after splenectomy,
antibiotic prophylaxis and vaccination may render sple-
nectomy a reasonable treatment of choice for some XLT
patients, provided that the family situation and compli-
ance issued are taken into careful account.
Our case confirms that prolonged survival can be
achieved post-splenectomy in patients with WAS, given
that there is a systematic approach in their post-splenect-
omy medical care. Contrary to historical experience,
this patient experienced prolonged normalization of his
platelet count after splenectomy. Increased survival after
splenectomy has been previously reported but we propose
a cautious and systematic post-operative surveillance
which seems to improve the outcome. The patient had
been very carefully educated regarding the importance of
complying with the preventive regimen and of informing
all treating physicians about his being asplenic before
receiving any treatment. A careful and sensitive approach
helped avoid compliance issues in adolescence as well,
which has been recognized as a period of increased risk of
treatment refusal [16]. The guidelines for prevention and
treatment of infections in patients with absent or dysfunc-
tional spleen were followed, as have been published and
revised by the British Committee for Standards in Hema-
tology [17]. Furthermore, the patient received the recom-
mended immunization for splenectomized patients and
the adequate response to the vaccination was monitored
by regularly measuring antibody levels. It should be noted
that the patient produces anti-polysaccharide antibodies at
levels within normal range, even though a defective WAS
gene has been detected. Improvement in cellular immunity
has been described after splenectomy in WAS since 1981
[18] and this could be associated with the adequate
response to vaccination observed in our case. Post-
splenectomy, he did not experience increased infectious
complication while on prophylactic antibiotics and routine
vaccinations. Fifteen years after splenectomy, he continues
to function as an energetic youth without complications.
The appropriate timing of splenectomy and selection of
candidates are matters for discussion. With the emergence
of antibiotic resistant strains of pneumonococcus, it is
possible that regular infusions of IVIG are also needed as
prophylaxis in cases of patients who do not adequately
respond to vaccination.
Conclusions
In conclusion, prolonged survival with no thrombocyto-
penia recurrence can be achieved in WAS patients who
undergo splenectomy, without any grave complications,
with a focus on post-splenectomy patient care and
compliance.
Author details
1
Oncology Unit, 3rd Department of Medicine, Sotiria General Hospital,
Athens School of Medicine, Greece. 2
San Juan Oncology, New Mexico, USA.
3
Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University, NY, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KNS made a substantial contribution in conception and design and critically
revised the manuscript. NM acquired the data and drafted the manuscript.
JN analyzed and interpreted the data and co-drafted the manuscript. MM
analyzed the data and critically revised the manuscript. ST interpreted the
data and co-drafted the manuscript. MK analyzed the data and critically
revised the manuscript. MWS made a substantial contribution in conception
and design and critically revised the manuscript. All authors gave final
approval of the version to be published.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Sources of funding: None
Helsinki declaration: Conformed
Written informed consent was obtained from this patient for publication of
this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Received: 25 May 2011 Accepted: 10 September 2011
Published: 10 September 2011
References
1. Ochs HD, Filipovich AH, Veys P, Cowan MJ, Kapoor N: Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: diagnosis, clinical and laboratory manifestations, and
treatment. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2009, 15:84-90.
2. Wiskott A: Familiarer, angeborener morbus werlhofii? Monatsschr
Kinderbeilkd 1937, 68:212-216.
3. Aldrich RA, Steinberg AG, Campbell DC: Pedigree demonstrating a sex-
linked recessive condition characterized by draining ears, eczematoid
dermatitis and bloody diarrhea. Pediatrics 1954, 13:133-139.
4. Bouma G, Burns SO, Thrasher AJ: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome:
Immunodeficiency resulting from defective cell migration and impaired
immunostimulatory activation. Immunobiology 2009, 214:778-790.
5. Albert MH, Bittner TC, Nonoyama S, Notarangelo LD, Burns S, Imai K,
Espanol T, Fasth A, Pellier I, Strauss G, et al: X-linked thrombocytopenia
(XLT) due to WAS mutations: clinical characteristics, long-term outcome,
and treatment options. Blood 2010, 115:3231-3238.
6. Ozsahin H, Cavazzana-Calvo M, Notarangelo LD, Schulz A, Thrasher AJ,
Mazzolari E, Slatter MA, Le DF, Blanche S, Veys P, Fasth A, Bredius R,
Sedlacek P, Wulffraat N, Ortega J, Heilmann C, O’Meara A, Wachowiak J,
Kalwak K, Matthes-Martin S, Gungor T, Ikinciogullari A, Landais P,
Cant AJ, Friedrich W, Fischer A: Long-term outcome following
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
collaborative study of the European Society for Immunodeficiencies
and European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Blood
2008, 111:439-445.
7. Aiuti A, Roncarolo MG: Ten years of gene therapy for primary immune
deficiencies. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2009, 682-689.
8. Conley ME, Saragoussi D, Notarangelo L, Etzioni A, Casanova JL: An
international study examining therapeutic options used in treatment of
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Clin Immunol 2003, 109:272-277.
9. Sullivan KE, Mullen CA, Blaese RM, Winkelstein JA: A multiinstitutional
survey of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J Pediatr 1994, 125:876-885.
10. Zhu Q, Watanabe C, Liu T, Hollenbaugh D, Blaese RM, Kanner SB, Aruffo A,
Ochs HD: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome/X-linked thrombocytopenia: WASP
gene mutations, protein expression, and phenotype. Blood 1997,
90:2680-2689.
11. Lutskiy MI, Rosen FS, Remold-O’Donnell E: Genotype-proteotype linkage in
the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J Immunol 2005, 175:1329-1336.
Syrigos et al. Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2011, 37:42
http://www.ijponline.net/content/37/1/42
Page 3 of 4
12. Kobayashi R, Ariga T, Nonoyama S, Kanegane H, Tsuchiya S, Morio T,
Yabe H, Nagatoshi Y, Kawa K, Tabuchi K, Tsuchida M, Miyawaki T, Kato S:
Outcome in patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome following stem cell
transplantation: an analysis of 57 patients in Japan. Br J Haematol 2006,
135:362-366.
13. Pai SY, DeMartiis D, Forino C, Cavagnini S, Lanfranchi A, Giliani S, Moratto D,
Mazza C, Porta F, Imberti L, Notarangelo LD, Mazzolari E: Stem cell
transplantation for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a single-center
experience confirms efficacy of matched unrelated donor
transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 2006, 38:671-679.
14. Mullen CA, Anderson KD, Blaese RM: Splenectomy and/or bone marrow
transplantation in the management of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
long-term follow-up of 62 cases. Blood 1993, 82:2961-2966.
15. Cines DB, Bussel JB, McMillan RB, Zehnder JL: Congenital and acquired
thrombocytopenia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2004,
390-406.
16. Albert MH, Notarangelo LD, Ochs HD: Clinical spectrum, pathophysiology
and treatment of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Curr Opin Hematol 2010.
17. Davies JM, Barnes R, Milligan D: Update of guidelines for the prevention
and treatment of infection in patients with an absent or dysfunctional
spleen. Clin Med 2002, 2:440-443.
18. Knutsen AP, Rosse WF, Kinney TR, Buckley RH: Immunologic studies before
and after splenectomy in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J
Clin Immunol 1981, 1:13-19.
doi:10.1186/1824-7288-37-42
Cite this article as: Syrigos et al.: Prolonged survival after splenectomy
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a case report. Italian Journal of Pediatrics
2011 37:42.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Syrigos et al. Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2011, 37:42
http://www.ijponline.net/content/37/1/42
Page 4 of 4
