TheJournalofExperimentalMedicine
JEM © The Rockefeller University Press $8.00
Vol. 202, No. 5, September 5, 2005 597–606 www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20050749
ARTICLE
597
A novel glyco-conjugate vaccine against
fungal pathogens
AntonellaTorosantucci,1 Carla Bromuro,1 Paola Chiani,1 Flavia De Bernardis,1
Francesco Berti,2 Chiara Galli,2 Francesco Norelli,2 Cinzia Bellucci,2
Luciano Polonelli,3 Paolo Costantino,2 Rino Rappuoli,2 and Antonio Cassone1
1Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00186 Rome, Italy
2Chiron Vaccines, 53100 Siena, Italy
3Microbiology Section, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Parma, 43100 Parma, Italy
To generate a vaccine to protect against a variety of human pathogenic fungi, we
conjugated laminarin (Lam), a well-characterized but poorly immunogenic ␤-glucan
preparation from the brown alga Laminaria digitata, with the diphtheria toxoid CRM197,
a carrier protein used in some glyco-conjugate bacterial vaccines. This Lam-CRM conjugate
proved to be immunogenic and protective as immunoprophylactic vaccine against both
systemic and mucosal (vaginal) infections by Candida albicans. Protection probably was
mediated by anti-␤-glucan antibodies as demonstrated by passive transfer of protection to
naive mice by the whole immune serum, the immune vaginal fluid, and the affinity-purified
anti-␤-glucan IgG fractions, as well as by administration of a ␤-glucan–directed IgG2b
mAb. Passive protection was prevented by adsorption of antibodies on Candida cells or
␤-glucan particles before transfer. Anti-␤-glucan antibodies bound to C. albicans hyphae
and inhibited their growth in vitro in the absence of immune-effector cells. Remarkably,
Lam-CRM–vaccinated mice also were protected from a lethal challenge with conidia of
Aspergillus fumigatus, and their serum also bound to and markedly inhibited the growth
of A. fumigatus hyphae. Thus, this novel conjugate vaccine can efficiently immunize and
protect against two major fungal pathogens by mechanisms that may include direct
antifungal properties of anti-␤-glucan antibodies.
Fungal diseases are a major infectious threat
that demands increasing medical attention. A
few invasive mycoses (e.g., histoplasmosis and
coccidiomycosis) are geographically limited,
but of special concern are the worldwide infec-
tions caused by opportunistic fungal agents in
immunocompromised hosts. In particular, can-
didiasis and aspergillosis are common in hospital-
ized patients and carry a high mortality toll
even in the presence of effective therapy (1).
Early and accurate diagnosis of these systemic
infections is often difficult because of the non-
specificity of clinical symptoms and lack of
standardized diagnostic tools. Moreover, anti-
fungal therapy may be frustrated by toxicity
and emergence of resistance (2).
A prophylactic and/or therapeutic vaccine
would be the safest and most effective means
to meet this pressing medical need. Thus, dif-
ferent approaches to antifungal vaccination are
being developed that, in analogy with bacterial
and viral vaccines, are based on the use of one
or more antigens, including whole inactivated
cells, specific for each particular fungus (3, 4).
However, no such vaccine is currently available.
In none of the vaccine formulations under study
has ␤-glucan, a polysaccharide that is critical
for fungal viability and is present in all human
pathogenic fungi, been considered as vaccine
component.
Previous circumstantial evidence indicates
that intact cells of Candida albicans (5) and Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae (unpublished data) treated to
expose glucan rather than mannoprotein on
the cell surface confer a substantial degree of
anti-Candida protection. Therefore we have
considered that a vaccine composed of ␤-glucan
would best fit the medical need, possibly allow-
ing simultaneous immunization against more
than one fungal infection. To test the strength
of this novel approach and to avoid any likely
contamination with other fungal antigens, aThe online version of this article contains supplemental material.
CORRESPONDENCE
Antonio Cassone:
cassone@iss.it
Abbreviations used: CT, cholera
toxin; GG, glucan ghosts; Lam,
laminarin; NMR, nuclear mag-
netic resonance; ppm, parts per
million; Zym, zymoliase.
A VACCINE AGAINST FUNGI | Torosantucci et al.598
␤-glucan of nonfungal source, i.e., laminarin (Lam), a rather
well-characterized ␤(1, 3) glucan preparation from the
brown alga Laminaria digitata (6), was selected as the immu-
nizing antigen. Because laminarin, like most free polysaccha-
rides, is a poor immunogen, it was conjugated with the
diphtheria toxoid CRM197, a protein carrier safely used in
other human vaccines (7, 8). This novel glyco-conjugate has
been tested extensively as an immunoprophylactic vaccine
against experimental systemic and mucosal infections by C.
albicans, a fungal pathogen of particular medical relevance.
Initial investigations with Aspergillus fumigatus support the
concept that our conjugate vaccine may prove indeed effec-
tive against multiple agents of opportunistic fungal infections.
RESULTS
Generation and characterization of the Lam-CRM conjugate
Several batches of Lam-CRM and other CRM conjugates
with a soluble ␤-glucan extract of C. albicans (glucan ghosts
[GG]–zymoliase [Zym]) were prepared by the three-step re-
action described in the Methods section. The saccharide/
protein ratio of the Lam-CRM conjugate ranged between
0.57 and 0.75; for the GG-Zym conjugate it was ‫ف‬0.20, in-
dicating a low conjugation efficiency. All the experiments
with the Lam-CRM conjugate were performed using the
most glycosylated batch.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic tech-
niques were used to evaluate the integrity of the linked sac-
charide chains in the bulk conjugate vaccines. Proton NMR
spectra of the Lam-CRM conjugate showed a superimposi-
tion of relatively sharp signals originating from the saccharide
component and broader peaks arising from the protein carrier.
The assignment of the saccharide peaks, situated between 3.0
and 5.5 ppm (ppm), was accomplished with two-dimensional
correlation spectroscopy experiments and by comparison with
published data (9–11). Signals originating from the carrier
protein were observed at Ͻ2.8 ppm (aliphatic region) and at
Ͼ6.5 ppm (aromatic region) and were broader because the
protein has less mobility than the saccharide moieties. For a
direct comparison, the proton NMR spectra of unconjugated
laminarin and Lam-CRM conjugate are shown in Fig. 1, a
and b. A simple visual observation of the relevant part of the
spectra demonstrates the presence of intact, saccharide-attrib-
utable signals in the Lam-CRM conjugate.
The Lam-CRM conjugate is immunogenic and protective
against systemic candidiasis in mice
Initial experiments served to optimize dose, route, and
schedule of vaccine administration. In the typical experiment
(repeated three times), CD2F1 mice were immunized with
the Lam-CRM conjugate through a priming s.c. injection of
7 ␮g of conjugate (as polysaccharide equivalent) in complete
Freund adjuvant, followed 1 wk later by an i.p. booster of
the same amount of adjuvant-free conjugate. Mice injected
adjuvant and the carrier protein or Lam only, or adjuvant
and saline only (hereafter referred to as nonimmunized or
adjuvant-treated), served as controls. 2 wk after the booster,
some animals were bled to measure serum antibodies, and
others were challenged with 2 LD50 of C. albicans and moni-
tored for mortality and fungus burden in the kidney for a pe-
riod of 60 d.
After administration of the Lam-CRM conjugate, IgM
and IgG antibodies against ␤(1, 3), laminarin-like, or ␤(1, 6),
pustulan-like, glucans were generated (Fig. 2 a). No anti-
bodies against mannoproteins of C. albicans were detected
(Fig. 2 a). No anti-␤-glucan antibodies were present in any
control animals, with the exception of inconsistent, low-titer
antibodies (never Ͼ than 1:100 serum dilution) exclusively
of IgM class in mice given laminarin only (unpublished
data). Comparable, high levels of anti-CRM antibodies (ti-
ters always in excess of 5 log serum dilution) were detected
in both Lam-CRM– and in CRM-immunized mice (un-
published data).
Because in all three experiments performed with this im-
munization schedule the protection against the lethal fungal
challenge was extremely consistent, with a lack of statistical
heterogeneity, all the data are pooled in the Kaplan-Meyer
graph of Fig. 2 b. The figure shows that the Lam-CRM–
immunized mice, but not the CRM- or Lam-immunized
ones, were significantly protected from the lethal systemic
Figure 1. Partial 600 MHz NMR proton spectra of (a) laminarin
polysaccharide and (b) laminarin-CRM197 conjugate recorded at
25؇C. Molecular structure of laminarin and labels are shown for the NMR
peak assignment.
JEM VOL. 202, September 5, 2005 599
ARTICLE
challenge by C. albicans, as compared with the nonimmunized
(adjuvant-treated) mice. Protection in Lam-CRM–vacci-
nated mice was verified both in terms of median survival
time (P Ͻ 0.001) and overall mortality (P Ͻ 0.001; Fig. 2 b),
as well as in terms of dramatic reduction of the fungal cells in
the kidney (P Ͻ 0.001; Fig. 2 c).
We therefore asked whether the anti-␤-glucan antibod-
ies generated by the Lam-CRM vaccine were instrumental
in the observed protection. To this aim, a single dose of the
serum from Lam-CRM–immunized mice or, as control, the
serum from nonimmunized or CRM-immunized mice, was
given i.p. to naive animals 2 h before Candida challenge, and
the fungus burden in the kidney was assessed on day 2 after
challenge. As shown in Fig. 2 d, only the serum from Lam-
CRM–immune animals was capable of reducing the fungal
load (nearly 3 logs) in the mouse kidney compared with the
infectious burden in nonimmunized or CRM-immunized
mice. Moreover, this rather dramatic reduction in the fungus
burden was abolished totally by serum adsorption on Can-
dida cells (Fig. 2 e).
Because immune sera contain other nonimmunoglobulin
constituents that may affect Candida in vivo, the immunoglob-
ulin fraction was separated and purified by affinity chroma-
tography on Protein A, which resulted into three pooled se-
rum fractions (pools A, B and C) with differential content of
anti-␤-glucan IgM and IgG classes. In particular, pools A and
B were composed almost exclusively of IgM and IgG1 anti-
bodies, respectively, whereas pool C contained IgG1 as well
as IgG2a, IgG2b, and IgG3 (Fig. S1, available at http://
www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20050749/DC1). When
these fractions were used for passive protection experiments,
all were able to cause some reduction of the fungus burden in
the kidney (Fig. 2 f). However, pool C, which was the only
one containing appreciable IgG2 and IgG3 isotypes and a
much lower IgG1 titer than pool B, was the most protective,
causing an approximate 2-log reduction in fungal burden
(Fig. 2 f). As a further control, an IgG2- and IgG3-enriched
pool C fraction prepared from the serum of animals immu-
nized with CRM only did not provide any reduction of the
fungal load in the kidney (Fig. 2 f). Overall, these data sup-
port the concept that the protection conferred upon mice by
the Lam-CRM vaccine was mediated to a great extent, if not
entirely, by anti-␤-glucan antibodies, particularly, although
not exclusively, those belonging to the IgG class (see also the
following sections of Results).
The Lam-CRM conjugate is immunogenic and protective
against estrogen-dependent vaginal candidiasis in rats
Systemic infections by Candida usually occur in settings quite
different from those typical of mucosal infections by the same
fungus, which, besides the AIDS patients, may also affect to a
large extent nonpatently immunodepressed subjects, as, for in-
stance, women with chronic vaginal candidiasis (12). The fun-
gus virulence and the immune mechanisms of the fungus are
different in the two settings, so protection against mucosal
infection cannot be anticipated by the results of a protective
systemic vaccination (13). Therefore, we asked whether the
Lam-CRM vaccine was endowed with immunogenic and
protective potential in a model of rat vaginal candidiasis, which
has some similarities to the human vaginal disease and in which
the rate of fungal clearance from the vaginal cavity can be mea-
sured. As shown in Fig. 3 a, rats intravaginally immunized with
the Lam-CRM vaccine and a mucosal adjuvant exhibited a
significantly accelerated rate of Candida clearance from the va-
gina as compared with the controls (P Ͻ 0.01) at any time
point except day 0, with full clearance 3 wk after challenge,
several days before the clearance observed in controls. In the
Figure 2. Vaccination with the Lam-CRM conjugate induces anti-
body-mediated anti-Candida protection in a murine experimental
model of disseminated infection. (a) Anti-␤-glucan IgG and IgM titers
in Lam-CRM–vaccinated mice. The graph shows the ranges of ELISA titers
against the indicated antigens measured in five groups of 6–12 mice (for
a total of 46 animals) independently immunized with Lam-CRM. MP,
mannoproteins; Pust, pustulan. (b) Survival rates of mice immunized with
Lam or CRM or with the Lam-CRM conjugate, as compared with nonimmu-
nized mice (Adj), after a lethal systemic challenge with C.albicans (cumulative
data from three independent experiments and 28 mice per group). (c) Fungal
burden in the kidneys from four Lam-CRM–vaccinated or four control CRM-
vaccinated mice on day 2 after i.v. infection with C.albicans. (d) Number of
fungal CFU in kidneys from naive mice given a single administration of
anti-Lam-CRM, anti-CRM, or nonimmune (Adj) serum 2 h before an i.v.
challenge with C. albicans. Data are from three independent experiments
with a total of nine mice per group. (e) Reversal of the passive protection
after serum adsorption with Candida cells. The experiment was performed
with three mice per group. (f) Effect of the passive vaccination with Protein A
affinity–separated fractions of the Lam-CRM serum on Candida kidney
load. Data are from three mice per group. Some details on isotype and
subclass of anti-␤-glucan immunoglobulin in pool A, B and C are given
in Fig. S2.
A VACCINE AGAINST FUNGI | Torosantucci et al.600
vaginal fluid of Lam-CRM–vaccinated rats, IgG against lami-
narin, against the Candida glucan digest GG-Zym, and, at
lower titer, against pustulan, were present (Fig. 3 b). Intranasal
instead of intravaginal immunization with the vaccine induced
a similar pattern of anti-␤-glucan antibodies in vaginal fluids
and a comparable degree of protection against the experimen-
tal vaginal infection (not depicted). Immune vaginal fluids
were able to transfer protection to nonimmunized rats, as
shown by the significant acceleration of the fungus clearance as
compared with the animals given normal vaginal fluid (Fig. 3
c). The accelerated clearance of the fungus conferred by the
administration of Lam-CRM–immune vaginal fluids was re-
markably similar to that achieved in this model by treatment
with fluconazole, an active anticandidal drug (Fig. 3 c), and
was almost completely abolished by fluid adsorption on insolu-
ble ␤-glucan particles from C. albicans. Thus, the Lam-CRM
vaccine confers protection against the experimental vaginal
candidiasis, and this protection seems to be mediated by vagi-
nal anti-␤-glucan antibodies of the IgG class.
Passive protection with an anti-␤-glucan mAb
These data pointed out that anti-␤-glucan antibodies, in par-
ticular those of the IgG class, were instrumental in the protec-
tion conferred by the Lam-CRM vaccine in both systemic
and mucosal candidiasis. In an attempt to support this notion
further, mAbs directed against ␤-glucan and, as control,
against the carrier CRM197 protein were generated. One
(mAb 2G8; IgG2b isotype) recognized both laminarin and,
with lower reactivity, pustulan, as well as ␤-glucans from ei-
ther C. albicans and S. cerevisiae, but not ␣(1,6) glucan (dextran)
configurations or mannan (Fig. 4 a). This mAb was tested for
its capacity to confer passive protection against Candida infec-
tion. In the systemic model, a single i.p. administration of the
mAb 2G8 2 h before an i.v. challenge with the same fungal
dose as the one used for testing passive protection by Lam-
CRM serum conferred significant protection, averaging a
Ͼ1-log decrease in the fungus kidney burden, as compared
with that measured in control mice given the irrelevant, iso-
type-matched anti-CRM mAb (P Ͻ 0.01, Fig. 4 b). Similarly,
in the rat model of experimental vaginal candidiasis, a single
intravaginal administration of mAb 2G8 caused a significant
acceleration of the fungus clearance, with resolution of the in-
fection on day 21, in comparison with control animals treated
with the irrelevant anti-CRM mAb (Fig. 4 c).
Overall, the reduction in fungus burden in the systemic
infection conferred by treatment with mAb 2G8 was lower
than that conferred by an equal volume of the whole im-
mune serum or its pool C IgG-rich fraction (compare the
relevant parts of Figs. 3 and 4), even though mAb 2G8 had
higher anti-laminarin titer (Ͼ1:20,000) than either serum
(1:800) or pool C fraction (1:3000). Conversely, the passive
protection conferred by the same mAb in the model of mu-
cosal infection was substantially comparable to the protec-
tion conferred by transfer of the immune vaginal fluid.
Antibody binding and growth inhibition of C. albicans
and A. fumigatus hyphae
A variety of mechanisms have been shown to be involved in
the protective effects of antifungal antibodies, substantially
Figure 3. Antibodies raised by the vaccination with the Lam-CRM
conjugate significantly accelerate the resolution of a rat vaginal
infection with C. albicans. (a) Vaginal fungal clearance in rats vaccinated
intravaginally with the Lam-CRM conjugate, with unconjugated CRM or
Lam, or left immunized (CT) were intravaginally infected with C. albicans.
Figure shows mean values plus SD of CFU counts from individual animals,
measured in two independent experiments with a total of 10 animal
per group (b) Anti-␤-glucan antibodies in vaginal fluids from Lam-CRM–
vaccinated rats. Results are expressed as mean OD 405 nm plus SEM readings
of ELISA assays against the indicated solid-phase ␤-glucan antigens by
two pooled vaginal fluids, obtained in two independent experiments from
a total of 10 rats. OD values measured from CRM-vaccinated control rats
(usually Ͻ0.15) have been subtracted. Pust, pustulan. (c) Course of the
experimental vaginal infection in rats administered whole or ␤-glucan
particle–adsorbed vaginal fluids from Lam-CRM–vaccinated animals, as
compared with rats given fluconazole therapy. Results are expressed as
mean CFU plus SD measured from five animals per group.
JEM VOL. 202, September 5, 2005 601
ARTICLE
matching similar mechanisms of antibacterial protection (14,
15). Because ␤-glucan is a viability-critical cell wall compo-
nent of pathogenic fungi (16), and there is evidence that
some ␤-glucan–binding toxins are fungicidal (17, 18), we
asked whether the anti-␤-glucan antibodies generated by
Lam-CRM vaccination could exert a direct anti-Candida ef-
fect. Thus, we first examined the pattern of antibody binding
to fungal cells and then tested for any growth inhibition ex-
erted by the antibodies during in vitro assays.
Microscopic observations after immunofluorescence
staining with both the anti-Lam-CRM serum and mAb 2G8
showed that the serum, which expectedly was strongly reac-
tive with isolated ␤-glucan fungal particles (Fig. 5 a), bound
preferentially to the germ tubes and hyphae of C. albicans
and particularly to hyphal tips and septa (Fig. 5, b and c and
b1 inset). Essentially the same pattern of C. albicans fluores-
cence was observed with mAb 2G8 (Fig. 5, d–f). Conidial
wall of short and long hyphal threads of A. fumigatus also flu-
oresced equally when reacting with either the Lam-CRM
serum (Fig. 5, g and h) or mAb 2G8 (Fig. 5 i). In both fungi,
the fluorescence was not distributed uniformly along the hy-
phae (Fig. 5, f, h, and i), and, particularly in C. albicans, some
septal regions were strongly fluorescent with both antibodies
(Fig. 5, b and e). Weak and cell-to-cell variable fluorescence
was observed on C. albicans yeast cells, with some exceptions
in discrete cell wall areas, probably corresponding to cell wall
scars, where abundant, ␤-glucan-rich new cell wall accumu-
lates (Fig. 5 b, inset b1). No reaction at all was observed in
either fungus upon treatment with CRM-immune serum or
anti-CRM mAb (Fig. S2, available at http://www.jem.org/
cgi/content/full/jem.20050749/DC1).
Therefore, both the Lam-CRM serum and mAb 2G8
were tested in growth-inhibition experiments in vitro. Be-
cause of the difficulties in measuring CFU of growing As-
pergillus hyphae, a growth-inhibition assay based on radioac-
tive glucose incorporation was used for this fungus, as
Figure 4. Specificity and anti-Candida protective activity by mAb
2G8, a murine anti-␤-glucan, mAb. (a) ELISA reactivity of mAb 2G8
with various ␤-glucan or non–␤-glucan polysaccharides. (b) Candida load
in the kidney of mice given as a single i.p. administration of the mAb 2G8
or of the irrelevant anti-CRM mAb (Control) and subjected to a systemic
challenge with C. albicans. Results are from three independent experiments
with a total of 10 mice/group. (c) Vaginal clearance of C. albicans in rats
(five per group) administered the anti-␤-glucan mAb 2G8, the irrelevant
anti-CRM mAb, or none and intravaginally infected with the fungus. Data
are mean values of CFU counts from individual vaginal fluids. SD was
always Ͻ15%.
Figure 5. Expression of anti-Lam-CRM serum– and mAb 2G8–
reactive epitopes on the cell surface of C. albicans and A. fumigatus.
(a and d) Indirect immunofluorescence staining of isolated ␤-glucan cell
wall ghosts of C. albicans with the anti-Lam-CRM serum (a) or the mAb
2G8 (d). (b and e) Pattern of immunofluorescence reactivity in C. albicans
germ tubes stained with the anti-Lam-CRM serum (b) or the mAb 2G8 (e).
The b1 inset shows the preferential staining of the hyphal cell. (c and f) Hyphal
filaments of C. albicans reacted with anti-Lam-CRM serum (c) or mAb 2G8
(f). (g) Immunofluorescence staining by the anti-Lam-CRM serum on a
germinated conidium of A. fumigatus. (h and i): Reactivity of the anti-Lam-
CRM serum (h) and of the mAb 2G8 (i) with A. fumigatus hyphae. Negative
control staining of fungal cells is shown in Fig. S2.
A VACCINE AGAINST FUNGI | Torosantucci et al.602
previously reported for Fusarium spp (19). As shown in Fig. 6
a, the Lam-CRM immune serum (but none of the irrelevant
antibody-containing sera) was able to inhibit hyphal growth
of C. albicans significantly, and the growth inhibition seemed
to be greater when the immune serum was slightly diluted.
Hyphal growth inhibition was also observed with the use of
mAb 2G8, apparently in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. 6 b).
The Lam-CRM immune serum also strongly inhibited the
growth of A. fumigatus, (averaging ‫%57ف‬ inhibition in four
independent experiments; Fig. 6 c). The inhibitory effect on
hyphal growth of A. fumigatus was evident both on addition
of immune serum to conidia and on its addition to pre-
formed hyphae (Table S1, available at http://www.jem.org/
cgi/content/full/jem.20050749/DC1). Direct microscopic
observations (Fig. S3, available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/
content/full/jem.20050749/DC1) confirmed the functional
inhibitory data presented here.
On the basis of the growth inhibition described here, we
performed an initial investigation asking whether immuniza-
tion with the Lam-CRM vaccine could protect mice from a
lethal systemic challenge by A. fumigatus. An immunization
schedule similar to that used to immunize against systemic
candidiasis was employed, and the mice were challenged i.v.
with a lethal inoculum of conidia. As shown in Fig. 6 d,
mortality was lower and was significantly delayed in Lam-
CRM–vaccinated mice when compared with controls im-
munized with CRM alone.
DISCUSSION
A novel glyco-conjugate vaccine, composed of a simple
␤-glucan polysaccharide such as laminarin conjugated with the
diphtheria toxoid CRM197, has been shown here to confer
protection, when used as preventive vaccine, against both a
lethal systemic infection in mice and against a self-healing
vaginal C. albicans infection in rats. Conjugation of lami-
narin, which by itself is a poor immunogen, with the protein
carrier made this polysaccharide immunogenic, as demon-
strated by the induction in both rats and mice of anti-␤-glu-
can antibodies, most of which are of the IgG class. No anti-
bodies directed against non–glucan-containing fungal materials,
including cell surface mannoproteins, were generated, match-
ing the nonfungal source and purity of both laminarin and
carrier protein. High levels of anti-CRM antibodies were
induced equally by vaccination with Lam-CRM or with
CRM alone, making the use of this latter protein a particu-
larly good control.
Antibody production was essential for anti-Candida pro-
tection, as was demonstrated by experiments involving pas-
sive transfer of the whole immune serum or its IgG-enriched
fraction, which conferred protection to nonimmune ani-
mals. Such protection was not conferred by any control se-
rum or when the antibodies present in the Lam-CRM se-
rum were adsorbed on fungal cells or ␤-glucan particles. Loss
of protective capacity on absorption on ␤-glucan particles
and the passive protection conferred by mAb 2G8, an anti-
␤-glucan mAb, constitute additional although indirect evi-
dence that anti-␤-glucan antibodies are largely responsible
for the vaccine-induced protection. The degree of passive
protection apparently ranked in the order: whole immune
serum → IgG-rich serum fraction pool C → mAb, suggest-
ing that a number of saccharide epitopes and antibody iso-
types participate in the protection. Supporting this possibil-
ity, some degree of passive protection in the systemic model
was also detected with the transfer of Lam-CRM antiserum
pool A and B, which contained mostly IgM and IgG1 iso-
types. No anti-␤-glucan IgM were detected in the vaginal
fluid of Lam-CRM–immunized rats after mucosal vaccina-
tion; here, the protection was fully associated with anti-
␤-glucan IgG. Anti-␤-glucan antibodies were shown to bind
preferentially to the hyphae of C. albicans and to cause inhi-
bition of their growth in vitro in the absence of any host cel-
lular factor. Remarkably, the same vaccine also protected the
mice from a lethal infection of A. fumigatus, a fungal organ-
ism quite distinct from C. albicans but also expressing ␤-glu-
can polysaccharides on its cell wall. Although these latter
Figure 6. In vitro growth of C. albicans and A. fumigatus is signifi-
cantly restricted by the anti-␤-glucan antibodies, and Lam-CRM
vaccination significantly prolongs the survival of mice subjected to a
systemic challenge with A. fumigatus. (a) CFU number in C. albicans
cultures grown overnight in the presence of whole or 1:10 diluted anti-
Lam-CRM or control sera. Data are from one representative experiment
out of three performed with similar results and represent mean values
from triplicate independent determinations. (b) Dose–response C. albicans
CFU reduction by the anti-␤-glucan, 2G8 and the irrelevant anti-CRM,
mAbs. The figure shows a representative experiment as for Fig. 6 a. (c) Effect
of anti-Lam-CRM and control anti-CRM serum on the in vitro growth of
A. fumigatus, as evaluated by 3H-glucose incorporation assays. Mean count
per minute values from four independent experiments, each performed in
triplicate, are shown. For additional experimental details, see Fig. S3 and
Table S1. (d) Survival of mice vaccinated with the Lam-CRM conjugate or
with CRM only and infected i.v. with A. fumigatus. Data are from a single
experiment with eight mice per group.
JEM VOL. 202, September 5, 2005 603
ARTICLE
data must be taken cautiously because of their preliminary
nature, they nonetheless contribute to the proof of principle
that a single immunizing tool can indeed be developed
against multiple fungal infections. Moreover, they match the
consistent observations made here demonstrating the effi-
ciency of the binding and growth inhibition of A. fumigatus
hyphae by the Lam-CRM immune serum.
Fungal ␤-glucan has various molecular and supramolecu-
lar configurations (11, 16). Although laminarin is commonly
considered a prototypal ␤(1, 3) glucan, we were not surprised
to find both anti-laminarin and anti-pustulan (which is a clas-
sic ␤[1, 6] glucan) antibodies in the serum of Lam-CRM–
vaccinated mice. Laminarin has very short ␤(1, 6)–bound side
residues (6). In addition, a degree of cross-reactivity between
these two linear glucose polymers is a distinct possibility that
is indirectly supported by the fact that the anti-␤-glucan mAb
2G8 recognizes both configurations (although it recognizes
the ␤[1, 3] glucan more intensely). Overall, given the hetero-
geneous distribution and cell surface expression of the differ-
ent ␤-glucan configurations in the different fungi, cross-reac-
tivity would increase the possibility that Lam-CRM might be
a useful anti-fungal vaccine (16).
Other glyco-conjugate vaccines against C neoformans and
against Candida itself have been generated (reviewed in [3, 4]).
For both fungi, the conjugated polysaccharide is the external
capsular or cell wall material (glucuronoxylomannan for C
neoformans or mannan for Candida). Besides the antigenic vari-
ability of mannan (13, 20, 21), one concern with these vac-
cines is the demonstrated capacity of surface polysaccharides to
induce the production of both protective and inhibitory anti-
bodies (5, 21). ␤-glucan is a much less variable molecule, and,
to our knowledge, no inhibitory or competing anti-␤-glucan
antibodies have been described. Moreover, ␤-glucan has some
advantages for vaccine formulation. It is an abundant and sta-
ble molecule and, given its strong resistance to hot alkali and
acid solutions, it can be deprived rather easily of protein and
other saccharide contaminants. Also, laminarin is a widely
marketed, available compound, devoid of chitin, which co-
valently associates with glucan in some fungi (11).
Our data do not establish the immunologic mechanism(s)
whereby anti-␤-glucan antibodies may confer protection.
However, our findings show that ␤-glucan constituents are
present on fungal cell surfaces and are accessible to antibod-
ies, which therefore could opsonize the cells and facilitate
complement deposition. The importance of this process
(e.g., the rapid opsonization of Blastomyces dermatitidis cells,
which notoriously expose ␤-glucans on their surface) for an-
tifungal protection has been highlighted in several studies
(22). Antibodies to cell surface components of C. albicans
have been shown to favor both intracellular and extracellular
killing of the fungus (21), and, quite recently (23) anti-
␤-glucan antibodies have been shown to increase the candi-
dacidal activity of macrophages in vitro. In a more subtle
fashion, these antibodies may alter the host inflammatory re-
sponses, of which ␤-glucans may be a strongly inductive
component (24), and shift the cytokine profile toward the
protective Th1 pattern, as demonstrated in experimental
cryptococcosis (25). Importantly, anti-␤-glucan IgG have
been shown here to bind efficiently Candida and Aspergillus
hyphae (i.e., those forms of growth that are considered par-
ticularly invasive in host tissues). Antibodies binding the hy-
phal form of growth could easily perturb adherence and tis-
sue invasion, as has been demonstrated recently with a mAb
directed against a stress-mannoprotein of C. albicans (26). All
factors seem to be relevant for host response to Candida, pos-
sibly collaborating with cell-mediated immunity (27).
In addition to the mechanisms already discussed, our data
suggest that an additional mechanism for protection by anti-
␤-glucan antibodies could operate in vivo. In fact, the im-
mune serum from vaccinated mice exerted a marked inhibi-
tion of Candida (and Aspergillus) hyphal growth in vitro, an
effect that was also exerted by the affinity-purified IgG-rich
fraction and that is in keeping with the preferential antibody
binding to the hyphae. Together with previous data ob-
tained with other yeast killer toxin–mimicking, anti-idio-
typic antibodies (17, 18), our present findings suggest that
certain anti-␤-glucan antibodies may be endowed with di-
rect inhibitory activity on fungi through some sort of inter-
action with such viability-critical molecules.
The presence of ␤-glucan on cell surfaces of C. albicans
has been a matter of controversy (28). Recently, Gantner et
al. (29) have shown that soluble Dectin-1, a ␤-glucan recep-
tor important for host response to Candida (24), did not ap-
preciably bind the hyphae of C. albicans. We show here quite
clearly that ␤-glucan–specific antibodies bind to the hyphal
cell surface and inhibit their growth, indicating that functional
␤-glucan is accessible to antibodies on hyphal cell surfaces.
Possibly, epitope number, affinity, fine molecular configura-
tion, and steric hindrance features differ for Dectin-1 and an-
tibody binding. Nonetheless, it is of interest that the patched
pattern of Dectin-1 binding to the yeast cell surface of C. albi-
cans has some resemblance to that of anti-␤-glucan antibodies.
As recently discussed by Deepe (3) and by Mochon and
Cutler (4), the development of antifungal vaccines requires
overcoming several major obstacles, one of which could be
the need to identify and vaccinate persons at risk before they
become so immunocompromised as to be unresponsive to
immunization. Several categories of patients at risk of invasive
candidiasis could benefit from a safe and effective immuno-
prophylactic vaccine (30, 31). There are also mucosal patholo-
gies (e.g., Candida vaginitis) that affect millions of apparently
nonimmunocompromised women for whom a vaccine in-
ducing protective antibodies would be of utmost usefulness.
Our Lam-CRM vaccine elicits highly protective, specific IgG
vaginal antibodies both by intravaginal and intranasal immuni-
zation. Previously, other antibodies against some defined viru-
lence traits proved to confer protection in this model (32, 33).
The anti-␤-glucan antibodies described here could also
be exploited for immunotherapy, particularly given the re-
cent biotechnological developments making more feasible
A VACCINE AGAINST FUNGI | Torosantucci et al.604
the in vitro production of human antibodies with prese-
lected specificity (34). A particular preparation of anti-
HSP90 antibody complexed with amphotericin B has
recently completed phase III trials of efficacy for systemic
candidiasis (3, 35). In particular, fungal hyphae are a potent
means to evade protective host response (36–38); thus the
possibility of inhibiting the hyphal growth of major fungal
pathogens with anti-␤-glucan antibodies deserves consider-
ation in future preclinical and clinical studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Glucan antigens and other reagents
Laminarin, a linear ␤(1, 3)-linked glucan backbone with occasional ␤(1, 6)-
linked branching of a single glucosyl residue (6) (average mol wt, 4.5 kD), was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Pustulan, a ␤(1, 6)–linked glucan (mol wt, 20
kD) was obtained from Calbiochem. A ␤-glucan preparation from Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae (G5011; Sigma-Aldrich) and dextran, an ␣(1, 6)-linked
polysaccharide (Dextran Standard 1000; Sigma-Aldrich) were also used
throughout this study. Soluble C. albicans ␤-glucan (GG-Zym), a mixture of
␤(1, 3) and ␤(1, 6) glucan, was obtained by limited ␤(1, 3) glucanase (Zymo-
liase 100T, Seikagaku Corporation) digestion of particulate glucan ghosts of
C. albicans (5). Mannoproteins were extracted and purified as previously de-
scribed (39). The nontoxic mutant protein of diphtheria toxin CRM197 (7),
herein referred to as CRM, was manufactured by Chiron Corp.
Glyco-conjugate preparation and analytical determinations
Laminarin and C. albicans GG-Zym were used to prepare glyco-conjugates with
the CRM protein. To this aim, terminal reducing groups of polysaccharides (2
mg/ml) were subjected to reductive amination by incubation for 5 d at 50ЊC in
300 mg/ml ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 M sodium cyanoboro-
hydride (pH 7.5; Sigma-Aldrich). Aminated laminarin was purified from the re-
action mixture by diafiltration on regenerated cellulose membrane (cut-off 3.0
kD; Millipore), whereas aminated GG-Zym was purified by gel filtration on
Sephadex G-10 column (Amersham Biosciences). The amount of primary
amino groups introduced by the reaction was determined by the method of
Habbeb (40). The aminated polysaccharides were vacuum dried, resolubilized
in DMSO/H2O mixture, and then reacted with N-hydroxysuccinimide diester
of adipic acid (Ferro Pfanstiehl; 12-fold molar excess as compared with primary
amino groups) in the presence of triethylamine (fivefold molar excess) to intro-
duce an active spacer molecule in the conjugate (41). After selective precipita-
tion with dioxane and drying under vacuum, the content of N-hydroxysucci-
nimide ester groups introduced in the activated polysaccharide was estimated
according to Miron and Wilchek (42). For conjugation to CRM, a 20-fold
molar excess of activated polysaccharide was reacted overnight with the protein,
at room temperature, in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2. The unbound
polysaccharide was separated from the glyco-conjugate by ultrafiltration, using
Amicon 10-kD filter devices (Millipore). High-performance anionic exchange
chromatography coupled with pulsed amperometric detection was used to
quantify total and free (unconjugated) polysaccharide content in the conjugate
preparations (8). Molecular size of conjugate preparations and absence of un-
conjugated CRM protein was assessed by HPLC analysis onto a Toso Haas
TSK 4000SWXL guard and analytical columns (HPLC system, Waters Corpo-
ration), with 0.1 M Na2PO4/0.1 M NaCl pH 7.2 as the mobile phase, as well
as by standard SDS-PAGE analysis followed by Comassie staining.
Polysaccharide content was controlled repeatedly throughout the entire
procedure by the phenol-sulfuric acid method, with glucose as reference
compound (43). To estimate the conjugation and polysaccharide/protein ra-
tio in final conjugate products, this analysis was coupled to MicroBCA Pro-
tein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories), following the manufacturer’s specifications
NMR spectroscopy
The glyco-conjugate samples were freeze-dried and redissolved in 700 ␮l of
deuterated water (2H2O, 99.9% deuterium; Sigma-Aldrich). Proton spectra
were recorded with a 14.1-T Brucker Avance 600 MHz spectrometer,
equipped with a 5-mm PFG triple resonance probe and operating under
controlled temperature (25 Ϯ 0.1ЊC). XWINNMR 2.6 software (Brucker)
was used for acquisition and processing data. Standard pulse sequences were
used throughout. For the one-dimensional spectra, the spectral width was
6,000 Hz and 32k data points were acquired. The spectra were referenced
relative to the signal of monodeuterated water, 4.79 ppm.
Microorganisms
C. albicans strains BP and SA-40 (type collection of the Istituto Superiore di
Sanità) were used in the models of disseminated and vaginal Candida infec-
tions, respectively. For experimental infections, cells from stock cultures in
Sabouraud-dextrose agar (Difco Laboratories) were grown in Winge medium
(strain BP[5]) or in YEPD medium (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% glu-
cose, all w/v) (strain SA-40 [32]) at 28ЊC for 24 h, then harvested by centri-
fugation, washed, counted in an hemocytometer, and resuspended to the de-
sired concentration in PBS. Germ tube and hyphal forms were obtained by
culturing yeast cells for 1.5 h or 5 h, respectively, in Lee’s medium or in
RPMI 1640 (Euroclone Ltd.), supplemented with FCS (1 mM glutamine and
2% FCS; HyClone) at 37ЊC, as previously described (5). A. fumigatus 495,
from the type collection above, was routinely maintained on Sabouraud-dex-
trose agar slants. Suspensions of conidia were prepared by gently flushing the
surface of fungal colonies with sterile PBS. After filtration of hyphal debris
through a BD Falcon 100-␮m cell straining device (BD Biosciences), the
conidia were thoroughly washed with PBS by centrifugation, counted in a
hemocytometer, and resuspended at suitable concentrations in PBS. Hyphal
growth was obtained by incubation in RPMI-FCS for 18 h at 37ЊC.
mAbs
Two stable hybridoma secreting anti-␤-glucan (2G8) or anti-CRM IgG mAb
were generated after fusion of spleen cells of GG-Zym-CRM–immunized
Balb/c mice (Harlan Nossan) and myeloma cells of the murine line X63-Ag8
653, using standard in-house protocols (44). Indirect ELISA assays using dif-
ferent glucan molecules, mannoprotein preparations, and the unconjugated
CRM protein as solid-phase antigens were used for selecting and assessing
mAb specificity. Hybridoma were routinely cultured in RPMI 1640 (Euro-
clone Ltd.) supplemented with 10% FCS (Hyclone), 100 U penicillin/ml,
100 ␮g streptomycin/ml, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 2 mM L-glutamine
(Hyclone). 2G8 and anti-CRM mAbs were precipitated from culture super-
natants by ammonium sulfate (44) and affinity purified on Protein A Sepha-
rose resin (Amersham Biosciences), following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Immunogenicity and protection assays
Disseminated candidiasis and aspergillosis in mice. Female 4-wk-
old CD2F1 mice (Harlan) were immunized with two doses of the Lam-
CRM vaccine, each consisting of 7 ␮g polysaccharide/0.1 ml PBS/mouse.
The priming was given s.c. in complete Freund’s adjuvant (Sigma-
Aldrich); the booster was given i.p. 15 d later, without adjuvant. Control
animals were injected with unconjugated laminarin or CRM, with
Freund’s adjuvant only, or with PBS, as specified in single experiments.
Vaccinated and control animals were bled by retroorbital puncture 2 wk
after the last injection, and their sera were pooled and stored at Ϫ20ЊC. In
some experiments, sera from Lam-CRM–or CRM-only–immunized mice,
as well as control animals, were separated by affinity chromatography on
Protein A Sepharose (Amersham Biosciences), with 0.1 M glycine buffer
pH 3.0 as the eluant. Unbound (pool A), weakly bound (pool B, eluted
from the column by buffer washing), and strongly bound (pool C, eluted
with glycine buffer, pH 3) immunoglobulin fractions were extensively dia-
lyzed against PBS by ultrafiltration in 10-kD cut-off centrifuge filter de-
vices (Millipore) and concentrated to 1 ml. Pools were characterized for
their immunoglobulin concentration (by protein assay) and composition by
ELISA with laminarin as the coating antigen. Some lots of immune sera
were also subjected to adsorption with intact C. albicans cells or insoluble
GG particles (5). The fungal challenge was made by i.v. administration of 2
LD50 (106 cells/0.2 ml/mouse) of yeast cells of C. albicans strain BP or of
JEM VOL. 202, September 5, 2005 605
ARTICLE
conidial cells (5 ϫ 106/0.2 ml/mouse) of A. fumigatus. Protection end-
points were mortality (median survival time and ratio of dead/total chal-
lenged mice) and, for C. albicans, enumeration of fungal CFU in the left
kidney 2 d after the challenge (5).
For passive immunization experiments, mice were administered a single
i.p. injection of 0.5 ml of serum (or Protein A–separated serum fractions) or
equivalent doses (200–250 ␮g protein/0.5 ml/mouse) of the anti ␤-glucan, or
anti-CRM mAb. 2 h later, the animals received a sublethal challenge with
5 ϫ 105 C. albicans cells i.v. Protection was evaluated on day 2 after challenge
by measuring the extent of kidney invasion by the fungus (5).
Rat vaginal candidiasis. Oophorectomized Wistar rats (Charles River
Laboratories) were immunized three times at weekly intervals with 50 ␮g
Lam-CRM conjugate (polysaccharide)/rat by either the intravaginal or the
intranasal route, using 3 ␮g/rat of cholera toxin (CT, provided by Swiss Se-
rum and Vaccine Institute) as the adjuvant, as described previously (32).
Control rats were given unconjugated laminarin plus CT, unconjugated
CRM plus CT, or CT only. All rats were maintained under pseudoestrus
by the s.c. administration of estradiol benzoate (Benzatrone; Samil). For ex-
perimental infection, rats were inoculated intravaginally with C. albicans
(107 cells/0.1 ml of saline/rat) as described elsewhere (32). Before infection,
samples of vaginal fluids (PBS vaginal washes) were taken from immunized
and control animals and were pooled and assayed for vaginal anti-␤-glucan
antibodies. Other aliquots were stored at Ϫ20ЊC.
Groups of naive animals were also passively transferred vaginal fluids
from Lam-CRM–vaccinated or control rats (0.5 ml intravaginally/rat, at
equivalent protein concentrations), anti-␤-glucan 2G8, or the irrelevant
anti-CRM mAb (each 200 ␮g protein/rat) and, after 30 min, were infected.
In some experiments, vaginal fluids were preadsorbed with insoluble GG
particles to remove anti-␤-glucan antibodies (5). As a positive control, rats
were infected with C. albicans and subjected to effective fluconazole (Pfizer
Inc.) therapy, 10 ␮g of fluconazole/rat at 1, 24, and 48 h after challenge.
Active and passive protection were evaluated through the estimation of fun-
gal CFU in vagina until day 21–28 after infection, as described in previous
reports (32). All animal studies were approved by the Istituto Superiore di
Sanità intramural Institutional Review Committee.
Serological assays
Immune sera, vaginal fluids, and mAbs were assayed for their reactivity
with various ␤-glucan or control antigens by indirect ELISA, according to
previously described protocols (5). Immunoglobulin classes and isotypes of
murine anti-␤-glucan antibodies were evaluated using alkaline phos-
phatase–conjugated goat anti–mouse IgM or IgG antibodies (Sigma-
Aldrich) or with biotin-conjugated anti–mouse IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, or
IgG3 antibodies (BD Biosciences) and alkaline phosphatase–conjugated
ExtrAvidin reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). Rat vaginal fluids were reacted with
alkaline phosphatase-conjugated sheep anti–rat IgG, IgM, or IgA (Serotec
Ltd.). Vaginal fluids were considered positive for a determined antibody
when their ELISA readings (OD, 405 nm) were at least twofold those from
control wells reacted with fluids from mock-vaccinated rats. Serum titers
were defined as the highest dilution of sera producing an OD of 405 nm, at
least twofold that obtained from sera of mock-vaccinated animals assayed at
the same dilution.
For immunofluorescence assay, fungal cells (2 ϫ 105 C. albicans germ
tubes in Lee’s medium or 104 A. fumigatus conidia in RPMI 1640-FCS)
were cultured on microscope chamber slides (Nalge Nunc International).
After incubation for 1 or 5 h (Candida) or 18 h (Aspergillus) at 37ЊC, the cul-
ture medium was removed, the slides were blocked with BSA (3% w/v in
PBS containing 0.05% v/v Tween 20), then reacted with various dilutions
of murine sera, serum fractions, or mAbs in PBS-Tween20 (1 h at 37ЊC).
After extensive washings with PBS, slides were treated with fluorescein
isothiocyanate–conjugated anti–mouse IgG or IgM antibody (Sigma-
Aldrich), washed again, and observed with a Leitz Diaplan fluorescence mi-
croscope. Negative controls with sera from CRM-immunized mice or with
the anti-CRM mAb were always included in the experiments.
Growth inhibition assays
150 C. albicans germ tubes or Aspergillus conidia were incubated in 200 ␮l of
RPMI-FCS, in the presence of sera from Lam-CRM–vaccinated mice,
with their pool C fractions (at 1:2–1:10 final dilutions), or with 250–20 ␮g/
ml 2G8 mAb. Control cultures were prepared with un-fractionated sera or
pool C fractions from CRM-vaccinated mice or with the irrelevant anti-
CRM mAb at the same protein concentration. Cultures were incubated
overnight at 37ЊC. Candida growth was evaluated by classic CFU counts
(5), whereas growth of A. fumigatus was quantitated by measuring 3H-glu-
cose incorporation over a 3-h period, as described elsewhere (19). The in-
hibitory activity of anti-␤-glucan sera or mAb was always confirmed by mi-
croscopic examination of the fungal cultures. In two experiments, A.
fumigatus conidia were allowed to produce elongated hyphae by incubation
in medium for 18 h at 37ЊC, then were treated with 1:5 diluted anti-Lam-
CRM or anti-CRM serum or with medium only for additional 18 h, and
finally were labeled for 3 h with 3H-glucose.
Statistical analysis
Differences in survival rates and overall 30- or 60-d survival in C. albicans–
challenged mice were analyzed by Fisher’s exact test and by nonparametric
two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test, respectively. Data from CFU counts, in
both in vitro and in vivo experiments, were analyzed by two-tailed Stu-
dent’s t test. Multiple comparisons were made by analysis of variance (one-
way ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s multiple t test.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows isotype and IgG subclass composition of anti-Lam antibodies
in serum fractions (pool A, B, and C) of animals immunized with the Lam-
CRM vaccine. Fig. S2 shows parallel bright field and immunofluorescence
staining of A. fumigatus or C. albicans hyphae reacted with the control anti-
CRM serum or anti-CRM mAb. Fig. S3 depicts the microscopic aspect of
A. fumigatus cultures generated from an equal number of conidial cells
which were incubated overnight with the anti–Lam-CRM or the control
anti-CRM serum, showing inhibition of hyphal growth by the former serum.
Table S1 displays the results of 3H-glucose incorporation experiments, show-
ing inhibition of hyphal growth of A. fumigatus. Online supplemental mate-
rial is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20050749/DC1.
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Alessandro Spurio for help in
preparation of the figures.
This work was supported in part by institutional grants and by special grants
from the AIDS National Project (Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Ministero della Salute,
Italy) under contracts 50B/F and 50F.27.
The authors have no conflicting financial interests.
Submitted: 13 April 2005
Accepted: 23 June 2005
REFERENCES
1. Edmond, M.B., S.E. Wallace, D.K. McClish, M.A. Pfaller, R.N. Jones,
and R.P. Wenzel. 1999. Nosocomial bloodstream infections in United
States hospitals: a three years analysis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 29:239–244.
2. Sanglard, D. 2002. Resistance of human fungal pathogens to antifungal
drugs. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 5:379–385.
3. Deepe, G.S. Jr. 2004. Preventative and therapeutic vaccines for fungal in-
fections: from concept to implementation. Expert Rev. Vaccines. 3:1–9.
4. Mochon, A.B., and J.E. Cutler. 2005. Is a vaccine needed against Can-
dida albicans? Med. Mycol. 43:97–115.
5. Bromuro, C., A. Torosantucci, P. Chiani, S. Conti, L. Polonelli, and
A. Cassone. 2002. Interplay between protective and inhibitory anti-
bodies dictates the outcome of experimentally disseminated candidiasis
in recipients of a Candida albicans vaccine. Infect. Immun. 70:5462–5470.
6. Read, S.M., G. Currie, and A. Bacic. 1996. Analysis of the structural
heterogeneity of laminarin by electrospray-ionisation-mass spectrome-
try. Carbohydr. Res. 281:187–201.
7. Giannini, G., R. Rappuoli, and G. Ratti. 1984. The amino-acid se-
A VACCINE AGAINST FUNGI | Torosantucci et al.606
quence of two non-toxic mutants of diphtheria toxin: CRM45 and
CRM197. Nucleic Acids Res. 12:4063–4069.
8. Ho, M.M., B. Bolgiano, and M.J. Corbel. 2001. Assessment of the sta-
bility and immunogenicity of meningococcal oligosaccharide C-CRM197
conjugate vaccines. Vaccine. 19:716–725.
9. Nishimura, T., C. Bignon, J. Allouch, M. Czjzek, H. Darbon, T. Wa-
tanabe, and B. Henrissat. 2001. Streptomyces matensis laminaripentaose hy-
drolase is an ‘inverting’ beta-1,3-glucanase. FEBS Lett. 499:187–190.
10. Petersen, B.O., M. Krah, J.Ø. Duus, and K.K. Thomsen. 2000. A
transglycosylating 1,3 (4)-beta-glucanase from Rhodothermus marinus:
NMR analysis of enzyme reactions. Eur. J. Biochem. 267:361–369.
11. Kollár, R., B.B. Reinhold, E. Petrakova, H.J. Yeh, G. Ashwell, J.
Drgonova, J.C. Kapteyn, F.M. Klis, and E. Cabib. 1997. Architecture
of the yeast cell wall. Beta(1→6)-glucan interconnects mannoprotein,
beta(1→)3-glucan, and chitin. J. Biol. Chem. 272:17762–17775.
12. Fidel, P.L., Jr., and J.D. Sobel. 1998. Protective immunity in experi-
mental Candida vaginitis. Res. Immunol. 149:361–373.
13. Calderone, R.A., and W.A. Fonzi. 2002. Virulence factors in Candida
albicans. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 9:327–335.
14. Casadevall, A., A. Cassone, F. Bistoni, J.E. Cutler, W. Magliani, J.W.
Murphy, L. Polonelli, and L. Romani. 1998. Antibody and/or cell-
mediated immune protective mechanisms in fungal diseases: an ongo-
ing dilemma or an unnecessary dispute? Med. Mycol. 36:95–105.
15. Keller, R.G., G.S. Pfrommer, and T.R. Kozel. 1994. Occurrence,
specificities and functions of ubiquitous antibodies in human serum
that are reactive with Cryptococcus neoformans cell wall. Infect. Immun. 62:
215–220.
16. Masuoka, J. 2004. Surface glycans of Candida albicans and other patho-
genic fungi: physiological roles, clinical uses, and experimental chal-
lenges. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 17:281–310.
17. Polonelli, L., F. De Bernardis, S. Conti, M. Boccanera, M. Gerloni, G.
Morace, W. Magliani, C. Chezzi, and A. Cassone. 1994. Idiotypic intra-
vaginal vaccination to protect against candidal vaginitis by secretory yeast
killer toxin-like anti-idiotypic antibodies. J. Immunol. 152:3175–3182.
18. Guyard, C., E. Dehecq, J.P. Tissier, L. Polonelli, E. Dei-Cas, J.C.
Cailliez, and F.D. Menozzi. 2002. Involvement of beta-glucans in the
wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity of Williopsis saturnus var. mrakii
MUCL 41968 killer toxin. Mol. Med. 8:686–694.
19. Girmenia, C., A.P. Iori, F. Boecklin, A. Torosantucci, P. Chiani, P.
De Fabritiis, F. Taglietti, A. Cassone, and P. Martino. 1999. Fusarium
infections in patients with severe aplastic anemia: review and implica-
tions for management. Haematologica. 84:114–118.
20. De Bernardis, F., A. Molinari, M. Boccanera, A. Stringaro, R. Robert,
J.M. Senet, G. Arancia, and A. Cassone. 1994. Modulation of cell sur-
face-associated mannoprotein antigen expression in experimental can-
didal vaginitis. Infect. Immun. 62:509–519.
21. Casadevall, A., E. Dadachova, and L.A. Pirofski. 2004. Passive anti-
body therapy for infectious diseases. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2:695–703.
22. Zhang, M.X., T.T. Brandhorst, T.R. Kozel, and B.S. Klein. 2001.
Role of glucan and surface protein BAD 1 in complement activation
by Blastomyces dermatitidis yeast. Infect. Immun. 69:7559–7564.
23. Ishibashi, K., M. Yoshida, I. Nakabayashi, H. Shinohara, N.N. Miura,
Y. Adachi, and N. Ohno. 2005. Role of anti-␤-glucan antibody in
host defense against fungi. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 44:99–109.
24. Brown, G.D., and S. Gordon. 2005. Immune recognition of fungal
beta-glucans. Cell. Microbiol. 7:471–479.
25. Yuan, R.R., A. Casadevall, J. Oh, and M.D. Scharff. 1997. T cells co-
operate with passive antibody to modify Cryptococcus neoformans infec-
tion in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:2483–2488.
26. Moragues, M.D., M.J. Omaetxebarria, N. Elguezabal, M.J. Sevilla, S.
Conti, L. Polonelli, and J. Ponton. 2003. A monoclonal antibody di-
rected against a Candida albicans cell wall mannoprotein exerts three
anti-C. albicans activities. Infect. Immun. 71:5273–5279.
27. Romani, L. 2004. Immunity to fungal infections. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
4:1–23.
28. Torosantucci, A., P. Chiani, and A. Cassone. 2000. Differential
chemokine response of human monocytes to yeast and hyphal forms of
Candida albicans and its relation to the beta-1,6 glucan of the fungal cell
wall. J. Leukoc. Biol. 68:923–932.
29. Gantner, B.N., R.M. Simmons, and D.M. Underhill. 2005. Dectin-1
mediates macrophage recognition of Candida albicans yeast but not fila-
ments. EMBO J. 24:1277–1286.
30. Spellberg, B.J., and J.E. Edwards Jr. 2003. The pathophysiology and
treatment of Candida sepsis. Curr. Infect. Dis. Rep. 4:387–399.
31. Stevens, D.A. 2004. Vaccinate against aspergillosis! A call to arm of the
immune system. Clin. Infect. Dis. 38:1131–1136.
32. De Bernardis, F., M. Boccanera, D. Adriani, A. Girolamo, and A. Cas-
sone. 2002. Intravaginal and intranasal immunizations are equally effec-
tive in inducing vaginal antibodies and conferring protection against
vaginal candidiasis. Infect. Immun. 70:2725–2729.
33. De Bernardis, F., M. Boccanera, D. Adriani, E. Spreghini, G. Santoni,
and A. Cassone. 1997. Protective role of antimannan and anti-aspartyl
proteinase antibodies in an experimental model of Candida albicans
vaginitis in rats. Infect. Immun. 65:3399–3409.
34. Traggiai, E., S. Becker, K. Subbarao, L. Kolesnikova, Y. Uematsu,
M.R. Gismondo, B.R. Murphy, R. Rappuoli, and A. Lanzavecchia.
2004. An efficient method to make human monoclonal antibodies
from memory B cells: potent neutralization of SARS coronavirus. Nat.
Med. 10:871–875.
35. Burnie, J., and R. Mathews. 2003. The role of antibodies against
HSP90 in the treatment of fungal infections. Drugs News Perspect. 16:
205–210.
36. Rooney, P.J., and B.S. Klein. 2002. Linking fungal morphogenesis
with virulence. Cell. Microbiol. 4:127–137.
37. d’Ostiani, C.F. G. Del Sero, A. Bacci, C. Montagnoli, A. Spreca, A.
Mencacci, P. Ricciardi-Castagnoli, and L Romani. 2000. Dendritic
cells discriminate between yeasts and hyphae of the fungus Candida al-
bicans. Implication for initiation of T helper cell immunity in vitro and
in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 191:1661–1674.
38. Torosantucci, A., G. Romagnoli, P. Chiani, A. Stringaro, P. Crateri, S.
Mariotti, R. Teloni, G. Arancia, A. Cassone, and R. Nisini. 2004.
Candida albicans yeast and germ tube forms interfere differently with
human monocyte differentiation into dendritic cells: a novel dimor-
phism-dependent mechanism to escape the host’s immune response.
Infect. Immun. 72:833–843.
39. Bromuro, C., A. Torosantucci, M.J. Gomez, F. Urbani, and A. Cas-
sone. 1994. Differential release of an immunodominant 65 kDa man-
noprotein antigen from yeast and mycelial forms of Candida albicans. J.
Med. Vet. Mycol. 32:447–459.
40. Habeeb, A.F. 1966. Determination of free amino groups in proteins by
trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid. Anal. Biochem. 14:328–336.
41. Hill, M., J.J. Bechet, and A. d’Albis. 1979. Disuccinimidyl esters as bi-
functional crosslinking reagents for proteins: assays with myosin. FEBS
Lett. 102:282–286.
42. Miron, T., and M. Wilchek. 1982. A spectrophotometric assay for sol-
uble and immobilized N-hydroxysuccinimide esters. Anal. Biochem.
126:433–435.
43. Dubois, M., K.A. Gilles, J.K. Hamilton, P.A. Rebers, and F. Smith.
1956. Colorimetric method for determination of sugar and related sub-
stances. Anal. Chem. 28:350–356.
44. Cassone, A., A. Torosantucci, M. Boccanera, G. Pellegrini, C. Palma,
and F. Malavasi. 1988. Production and characterisation of a monoclo-
nal antibody to a cell-surface, glucomannoprotein constituent of Can-
dida albicans and other pathogenic Candida species. J. Med. Microbiol. 27:
233–238.
