REVIEW Open Access
Intensive care of the cancer patient: recent
achievements and remaining challenges
Elie Azoulay1,2*
, Marcio Soares3,4
, Michael Darmon5
, Dominique Benoit6
, Stephen Pastores7
and Bekele Afessa8
Abstract
A few decades have passed since intensive care unit (ICU) beds have been available for critically ill patients with
cancer. Although the initial reports showed dismal prognosis, recent data suggest that an increased number of
patients with solid and hematological malignancies benefit from intensive care support, with dramatically
decreased mortality rates. Advances in the management of the underlying malignancies and support of organ
dysfunctions have led to survival gains in patients with life-threatening complications from the malignancy itself, as
well as infectious and toxic adverse effects related to the oncological treatments. In this review, we will appraise
the prognostic factors and discuss the overall perspective related to the management of critically ill patients with
cancer. The prognostic significance of certain factors has changed over time. For example, neutropenia or
autologous bone marrow transplantation (BMT) have less adverse prognostic implications than two decades ago.
Similarly, because hematologists and oncologists select patients for ICU admission based on the characteristics of
the malignancy, the underlying malignancy rarely influences short-term survival after ICU admission. Since the
recent data do not clearly support the benefit of ICU support to unselected critically ill allogeneic BMT recipients,
more outcome research is needed in this subgroup. Because of the overall increased survival that has been
reported in critically ill patients with cancer, we outline an easy-to-use and evidence-based ICU admission triage
criteria that may help avoid depriving life support to patients with cancer who can benefit. Lastly, we propose a
research agenda to address unanswered questions.
Introduction
The number of patients living with cancer has been
increasing steadily [1-3]. The ageing population,
improved diagnostic tools for cancer, and decrease in
cancer-related mortality have contributed to this
increase. The age-adjusted invasive cancer incidence
rate (95% confidence interval) in the United States is
533.8 (532.6-535.1) per 100,000 population [4]. More
than 1.4 million people were projected to be diagnosed
with cancer in the United States in 2009 [3]. In Europe,
there were an estimated 3,191,600 cancer cases diag-
nosed and 1,703,000 deaths from cancer in 2006 [5]. In
2005, more than 100,000 cases of hematological malig-
nancies were diagnosed in the United States and
approximately 230,000 in Europe [4,6]. Intensive che-
motherapy regimens [7] and the use of new and more
targeted therapeutic drugs have resulted in high cancer
cure rates. However, the treatment often leads to drug-
related organ toxicities and increased susceptibility to
infection [8,9]. As a consequence, intensivists are
increasingly managing patients with cancer who are
admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for organ dys-
function–chiefly respiratory failure, originating from
infectious, malignant, or toxic complications [10,11].
Timely recognition and early ICU admission offer
opportunities to prevent and manage life-threatening
complications that are cancer-related, including tumor
lysis syndrome [12], leukostasis [13], and macrophage
activation syndrome [14]. Managing organ dysfunction
in critically ill cancer patients requires specialized skills
by the intensivist and close collaboration between the
intensivist and oncologist.
Critically ill cancer patients have lower survival rates
compared with patients without comorbidities. However,
their in-hospital mortality rates are not higher compared
with critically ill patients with other comorbidities, such
as heart failure, liver cirrhosis, or other serious chronic
diseases [15]. Recent studies have shown that a substan-
tial survival rate can be achieved even in severely ill
* Correspondence: elie.azoulay@sls.aphp.fr
1
AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Medical ICU, Paris, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
© 2011 Azoulay et al; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
patients with cancer [16-18]. Healthcare providers and
patients often discuss the merits of providing mechani-
cal ventilation, vasoactive agents, renal replacement
therapy, or other life-sustaining treatments in patients
with cancer [19]. There also are unresolved questions
about whether part or all of these supportive therapies
can be simultaneously administered with cancer-specific
treatments, including chemotherapy [20-22]. More
recently, the lack of survival benefit in cancer patients
admitted to the ICU with multiple organ failure [10,17]
has raised concerns about the timing of ICU admission
[11].
This is not a systematic review but a consensus opi-
nion from experts who care for critically ill patients
with cancer. We plea for the development and imple-
mentation of broader ICU admission policies. Future
observational research will be required to assess the
validity of our conclusions.
Cancer patients requiring ICU support: the ten truths
(Tables 1 and 2)
Short-term survival after critical care illness improved
Several studies comparing two time periods in sub-
groups of cancer patients have reported improvement in
hospital survival during the past decade [10,11,23-28]
(Figure 1). Recent prospective and retrospective cohort
studies have documented lower mortality rates com-
pared with the mortality rates previously reported
[16,23,29-33]. Improved survival rates have been
reported in cancer patients who require mechanical ven-
tilation [23,30,34-36], renal replacement therapy [37-39],
and vasopressors [26,27], as well as those with neurolo-
gical complications [28]. The impact of the Surviving
Sepsis Campaign may have played a part in the reduc-
tion in mortality seen during the past few years in
patients with septic shock [26,27]. Although these
studies include large cohorts of patients, most of them
are retrospective and single-centered and do not provide
adequate reasons for the improved survival. Only two
prospective, multicenter, ICU outcome studies that
involve cancer patients have been published to date
[40]. Another limitation of these studies is the huge het-
erogeneity in patient case mix: medical and surgical
patients; solid and hematologic cancer patients; allo-
geneic and autologous blood; and bone marrow trans-
plant (BMT) recipients. Moreover, it is difficult to
compare the results between the published studies
because of the variations in ICU admission and dis-
charge criteria as well as the settings and timing for the
implementation of end-of-life decisions [41].
Although there may have been a general improvement
in ICU mortality of cancer patients over time, five
hypotheses have been proposed to account for the
decreased mortality rate in these patients [19]: 1) an
overall improved survival in cancer patients [42,43]
related to the use of more intensive chemotherapeutic
regimens [7], the development of more potent and tar-
geted therapies [8,9,44,45], as well as advances in the
supportive care and prevention of organ dysfunction
[46]; 2) improved ICU management with the develop-
ment of noninvasive diagnostic [40,47] and therapeutic
strategies [23,48,49]; 3) ability to obtain the etiological
diagnosis in patients with acute respiratory failure
[40,49-51], e.g., bacterial infection [21,22,52]. In this
regard, it is worth noting that patients admitted to ICUs
with a large volume of hematological patients with acute
respiratory failure experience a lower mortality [53]; 4)
new strategies avoiding early chemotherapy during the
course of chronic malignancies (such as watch-and-wait
policies or immunotherapy) assist in managing patients
with improved performance status with less organ-
related toxicity and epithelial and endothelial dysfunc-
tion with its increased propensity for cardiovascular,
renal, and pulmonary dysfunctions [54]; and 5) changes
in triage patterns may have occurred that facilitate the
Table 1 Prognosis in cancer patients needing intensive
care support: the ten truths
1. Short-term survival after critical care illness has improved
2. Classic predictors of mortality are no longer relevant
3. Clinicians’ understanding of organ dysfunction has improved
4. Some subgroups of patients continue to have high and unchanged
mortality
5. The typically used triage criteria for ICU admission are unreliable
6. Three days of ICU management is warranted before making a final
decision (ICU trial)
7. Attempt should be made to find a balance between noninvasive
treatments and avoiding delays in optimal therapies
8. Close relationship and collaboration need to be developed between
intensivists and hematologist/oncologists to increase skills of all sides in
the global management of cancer patients
9. Early admission to the ICU for cancer patients is recommended
10. Doing everything possible, even cancer chemotherapy, may improve
outcome
Table 2 Recent ICU advances in the management of
critically ill cancer patients
1. Less restrictive admission policies [17]
2. Use of noninvasive mechanical ventilation [23,48,49]
3. Diagnostic strategy in acute respiratory failure [40,47,50,60]
4. Prevention of tumor lysis syndrome [12,58,59]
5. Management of acute kidney injury [37-39]
6. Advances in antifungal agents [102]
7. Transfusion policies [103]
8. Recognizing drug-related organ toxicities [104-106]
9. Understanding organ dysfunction in macrophage activation
syndrome [14]
10. Diagnostic strategy in neurological involvement [107]
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 2 of 13
ICU admission of cancer patients with the best chances
for survival.
Overall, the medical literature has documented
improvement in survival of critically ill patients with
cancer. However, most of the studies have evaluated
short-term outcomes, such as ICU, hospital, 28-day,
and, rarely, 3- or 6-month survival. To our knowledge,
no study has used long-term or meaningful outcomes,
such as disease-free survival and quality of life after ICU
admission.
Classic predictors of mortality are no longer relevant
Current studies still report that the need for mechanical
ventilation, presence of invasive fungal infection, devel-
opment of multiorgan failure, and high severity of illness
scores are additional prognostic factors for mortality
among cancer patients. Although these prognostic fac-
tors are important, they often are unreliable and mostly
derived from inconsistent results. For example, a British
multicenter study of patients with hematologic malig-
nancy admitted to the ICU showed that BMT was a risk
factor for increased hospital death [55]. However,
among patients with cancer admitted to the ICU, those
who underwent autologous BMT had the same prog-
nosis as those who did not [19,23]. Benoit and collea-
gues reported neutropenia to be an independent risk
factor for increased mortality in patients with hematolo-
gic malignancy admitted to the ICU [16]. However, a
subsequent study at the same institution proved this to
be no longer valid [56], and based on another large mul-
ticenter study in Brazil, Soares et al. recently reported
the lack of association between mortality and the pre-
sence of neutropenia in patients with cancer [57]. These
differences are likely to reflect differences of selection
biases by oncologists in providing treatment. The
reported prognostic importance of other classic mortal-
ity predictors, such as age or characteristics of the
malignancy, vary among studies and may mainly depend
on ICU admission criteria [18,41]. We recommend not
denying ICU admission to elderly patients based on age
alone, or to those with advanced malignancies at the
earliest phase of the disease, a time when response to
therapy is not known.
Improved understanding of organ dysfunction
There has been an improved understanding of organ
dysfunction, mainly as a result of a close collaboration
between hematologists/oncologists and intensivists [24]
(Table 2). Clinical experience in managing patients with
cancer has led to better understanding of the pathophy-
siology of acute tumor lysis syndrome [12,46,58,59] and
macrophage activation syndrome [14] and to a compre-
hensive diagnostic strategy of acute respiratory failure
[60]. Although the cause-effect relationship cannot be
proven, we strongly believe that the improved under-
standing of organ dysfunction in patients with cancer
has translated into better survival.
Some groups of patients remain with high and unchanged
mortality
In addition to bedridden patients and those with no life-
span expanding therapy (see point 5 following), there
are three groups of patients in whom survival rates
Figure 1 Trends of mortality in critically ill cancer patients during the past two decades. Unadjusted hospital mortality rates in critically ill
cancer patients by year of study publication (clear gray). Unadjusted ICU mortality rates in bone marrow transplant recipients by year of study
publication (dark gray).
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 3 of 13
remain marginally low. These include allogeneic BMT
recipients with severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
who are unresponsive to immunosuppressive therapy
[27,61], patients with multiple organ failure related to
delayed ICU admission [10], and specific clinical vign-
ettes in patients with solid tumors, such as pulmonary
carcinomatous lymphangitis with acute respiratory fail-
ure [62], carcinomatous meningitis with coma [63], or
bone involvement by extra-hematopoietic cancerous
cells and medullar insufficiency [64].
Several studies have assessed the outcomes of allo-
geneic BMT recipients admitted to the ICU during the
past three decades [61]. Despite careful selection for
ICU admission and advances in critical care, the prog-
nosis remains grim, with an overall 1-yr survival rate of
less than 10% in patients who receive mechanical venti-
lation [27,34,65-67]. Outcomes are not related to the
source of stem cells (bone marrow vs. peripheral blood
vs. cord blood donors), the underlying malignancy for
which BMT was performed, and patient-related charac-
teristics, such as age or comorbidities [27,61,67]. Ten
factors have been identified to be associated with mor-
tality after a critical care illness–most are surrogate mar-
kers of GVHD: 1) BMT from unrelated donor, because
of increased risks for GVHD and associated complica-
tions; 2) GVHD itself, with epithelial injury and subse-
quent organ dysfunction (liver, gastrointestinal tract and
skin,), and with toxic and infectious complications from
immunosuppression (aspergillosis and other severe
opportunistic infections); 3) the need for mechanical
ventilation (associated with approximately 20% survival);
4) acute respiratory failure and the need for mechanical
ventilation 4-6 weeks after BMT (GVHD period, 10%
survival); 5) the association of severe sepsis and resistant
GVHD; 6) thrombotic microangiopathy due to endothe-
lial activation triggered by GVHD, total body irradiation,
toxicity of immunosuppressive regimen, and infectious
diseases; 7) multiple organ failure in the setting of
severe hepatic veno-occlusive disease; 8) acute respira-
tory failure from pulmonary aspergillosis; 9) late nonin-
fectious pulmonary complications, including diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage [68,69], bronchiolitis obliterans
[70], and other new onset obstructive ventilatory disor-
ders; and 10) relapse of the underlying malignancy after
BMT. We recommend unrestricted intensive care sup-
port of allogeneic BMT recipients in three situations:
patients at the earliest phase of transplantation (before
GVHD develops) and BMT recipients proposed for ICU
admission after 1 year of transplant and without GVHD
or with controlled GVHD, and patients who require
mechanical ventilation for status epilepticus related to
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
In all other situations, ICU admission and goals of ther-
apy should be decided on an individual basis. Because
survival remains exceptional, it seems reasonable to dis-
courage ICU admission and mechanical ventilation in
patients with severe sepsis or acute respiratory failure
and uncontrolled GVHD.
Patients who develop multiple organ failure are at
higher risk for death if their ICU admission is delayed.
Khassawneh et al. reported only one survivor in patients
admitted with three organ dysfunctions [10]. In patients
with multiple myeloma, delayed ICU admission was
associated with increased mortality [11]. The nature and
the extent of organ dysfunctions, at ICU admission or
more significantly after day 3, are good predictors of
mortality [17,26,71].
Triage criteria that are usually used are unreliable
Marginal survival has been reported in severely impaired
or bedridden patients [18,24,30], as well as in patients
with no lifespan prolonging anticancer therapy [19]. In
these patients, care must be maintained but with transi-
tion from cure to comfort. Restricted admission policies
based on these two criteria translates into improved sur-
vival [23,24]. However, triage criteria for ICU admission
remain unreliable. In a prospective study that evaluated
the outcomes of patients proposed for ICU admission,
20% of patients who were not admitted because they
were considered “too well” died before hospital dis-
charge (mainly after a delayed ICU admission), and 25%
of the patients who were not admitted because they
were too sick survived [72]. Importantly, this study high-
lighted the inadequacy of the triage criteria and the need
for the development and implementation of new ICU
admission policies.
At least 3 days of ICU management before making end-of-
life decisions (ICU trial)
The use of life-sustaining therapies in most patients
with cancer is no longer futile. However, recent data
suggest that duration of mechanical ventilation, use of
vasopressors, and dialysis are strong predictors of death.
For example, marginal survival have been reported in
patients who require invasive mechanical ventilation for
3 days or more [17,50]. Studies of patients with neutro-
penia or septic shock have reported that outcomes were
not easily predictable at the time of ICU admission [26].
Identifying patients who remain severely ill, with no
improvement (or with worsening condition) after 3 days
of full ICU support, may be easier and more effective to
appraise outcomes [17,19].
There may be “golden hours or days” of resuscitation
associated with improved outcome, for the ICU manage-
ment of critically ill cancer patients. During this time,
everything should be done. Subsequently, the continua-
tion or introduction of life-sustaining therapies in
patients whose conditions are worsening may not be
beneficial. Further observational studies are needed to
confirm the optimal time for the “ICU Trial.”
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 4 of 13
Finding a balance between noninvasive treatments and
avoiding delays in optimal therapies
Early ICU admission offers the opportunity to use non-
invasive diagnostic tests (i.e., sputum analyses instead of
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in acute respiratory fail-
ure) and noninvasive ventilation (NIV) [48,49]. This
noninvasive approach is supported by the lower diag-
nostic yield of BAL in cancer patients with acute
respiratory failure and the easy availability of noninva-
sive diagnostic tests [40,60]. Although bronchoscopy
and BAL can be avoided in a large proportion of
patients, those who may benefit should be identified
early after admission to the ICU.
Close relationship and collaboration need to be developed
with hematologists and oncologists to increase the skills of
both sides in the overall management of patients with
cancer
Undoubtedly, some of the improvement in the outcome
of critically ill cancer patients can be attributed to for-
mal and informal free exchange of ideas between inten-
sivists and hemato-oncologists. The hemato-oncologists
are able to appraise outcomes and to update the intensi-
vists about therapeutic options and potentials for cure
of the underlying malignancies. Hemato-oncologists may
teach the key pathophysiological aspects of malignant
diseases as well as specific complications. Also, ICU
admission decisions should be undertaken by both par-
ties based on the acute medical disease, as well as the
underlying disease prognosis and patients’ preferences
and values. ICU clinicians may be more knowledgeable
and experienced in setting goals of life-sustaining thera-
pies based on the reversibility of single organ dysfunc-
tion and on the presence of multiple organ failure.
Decisions to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining thera-
pies are best undertaken by both parties. Information
given to patients’ relatives and shared decision-making
should be presented by both parties together.
Early admission to the ICU for patients with cancer
We are not aware of any study designed to assess the
impact of early ICU admission. The following four
observations suggest that early admission may improve
outcome: a) during the past decade, decreased mortality
was observed in association with earlier ICU admission
[11]; b) receiving oxygen at a flow higher than 1 liter/
min is significantly associated with subsequent need for
mechanical ventilation and death [73]; c) performing
high-risk procedures in severely ill patients (i.e.,
bronchoscopy and BAL in hypoxemic patients) may be
less harmful if performed in the ICU (sometimes under
NIV) [40,51,74,75]; and d) there is a linear relationship
between the number of organ dysfunctions and patients’
survival, suggesting that patients should best be
admitted as early as possible rather than at a time of
multiple organ failure where survival remains marginal.
Doing everything that can be done, including cancer
chemotherapy
When ICU admission is warranted, patients should be
treated with a full code status, or according to an ICU
trial. In both situations, patients receive everything they
need during the first few ICU days and then have their
situation reappraised after 3 to 5 days of full ICU sup-
port. This full-code status includes the administration of
cancer chemotherapy along with ventilatory support,
vasoactive agents, renal replacement therapy, and other
life-sustaining therapies. Indeed, patients with tumor
lysis syndrome, pulmonary or renal infiltration by the
malignancy, sepsis related to obstructive pneumonia, or
ureteral compression may require life-sustaining thera-
pies until the cancer chemotherapy becomes effective.
Studies have shown the feasibility of administering che-
motherapy in the ICU, with acceptable short- and long-
term outcomes [20,21]. They also have demonstrated
that when patients present with severe sepsis or septic
shock after recent chemotherapy, outcomes may be bet-
ter than in those who did not receive recent cancer che-
motherapy [21,22].
Broadening ICU admission policies and clarifying patient’s
code status at the time of admission
▶ Full code status
Most critically ill cancer patients are admitted to the
ICU during the early management period of aggressive
malignancies, i.e., during the first course of chemother-
apy (induction or consolidation; Figure 2). Some patients
with low-grade hematological malignancies (chronic
lymphocytic or myeloid leukemia or low-grade lym-
phoma) may be admitted at any time of their disease
course, mainly for infectious or toxic life-threatening
complications. Patients with partial remission (myeloma)
or high-risk solid tumors (metastatic breast or ovarian
cancer) can be admitted at a later course of their dis-
ease, even after several courses of chemotherapy, which
provides significant and sustained response with
improved long-term survival [2]. All of these patients
are admitted to the ICU with a full-code status. The
decision-making process is similar to that of other ICU
patients without malignancy (Figure 2; Table 3). Also,
the need to document patient preferences for resuscita-
tion and end-of-life issues at the time of ICU admission
is crucial.
▶ ICU trial
In some patients with cancer, the usual ICU admission
triage criteria may be unreliable. Nevertheless, establish-
ing the goals of therapy at the time of ICU admission is
crucial to optimize their management. The ICU trial is
an alternative to ICU refusal in cancer patients [17]. It
consists of an unlimited ICU support for a limited time
period. Everything is done for at least 3 to 5 days [19].
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 5 of 13
In a study performed at the Saint-Louis hospital in
Paris, France, patients who were non-bedridden and
who had a survival prolonging therapy were included
[17]. Allogeneic BMT recipients were excluded. Clini-
cians made clear to patients and families that the ICU
trial was an alternative to ICU refusal and that as soon
as the situation was considered irreversible with no
hope for survival, the level of care was transitioned from
cure to comfort. The major result from this ICU trial
was that none of the variables available at ICU admis-
sion was significantly different between ICU survivors
and nonsurvivors. Only after day 3, nonsurvivors had
significantly more organ dysfunction than ICU survivors.
More recently, we have advocated the use of the ICU
trial in patients with newly diagnosed malignancies, but
with life expectancy less than 1 year [76]. This study
was an attempt to broaden ICU admission policies and
to suggest other types of ICU admission to avoid depriv-
ing ICU management to patients who may potentially
benefit. Indeed, in the evaluation of the ICU trial [17],
survival was 20% overall but 40% in patients who were
alive and in the ICU after day 3.
▶ Exceptional ICU admission
The first status of admission is the “exceptional ICU”
(Figure 2; Table 3). We propose this admission status
for patients in whom severe limitation of the perfor-
mance status are attributable to the malignancy itself
and may improve in response to chemotherapy. Another
scenario for this status is when evidence emerges from
new trials that a new effective therapy is available for a
FULL CODE ICU MANAGEMENT
ICU TRIAL
HEROIC
ICU ADMISSION
?
Prophylactic ICU
Admission?
Early ICU
Admission?
Palliative ICU
Admission?
Terminal ICU
Admission?
Non-ICU care
In ICU?
EXCEPTIONAL
ICU ADMISSION
Figure 2 Alternative to ICU refusal in cancer patients proposed for ICU admission.
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 6 of 13
patient without lifespan-prolonging therapy. This does
not include results from in vitro studies or from phase
I/II trials. For example, admission to the ICU for
patients with intractable malignancy is not recom-
mended. If the results from a new trial report that using
a newly developed drug/protocol allows substantial sur-
vival, the question that can be raised is about the bene-
fits from this drug when patients become critically ill. In
this case, intensivists and hematologists or oncologists
should decide to perform a careful evaluation in five to
ten patients. In this circumstance, exceptional ICU
admission includes formal discussions between hemato-
oncologists and intensivists and must address the nature
of ICU management and the time with which a response
to therapy can be expected. As for the ICU trial,
patients and relatives must agree with ICU admission
and fully grasp its objectives.
▶ Heroic ICU admission
A second new status of ICU admission that we some-
times adopt is the “heroic ICU.” This ICU management
is used to resolve conflicts between ICU clinicians and
hemato-oncologists, or between clinicians and patients/
relatives about the actual prognosis and the appropriate
level of care. The philosophy of this type of ICU admis-
sion is that 1 or 2 days of ICU management will make
the prognosis more evident to appraise and create mutual
trust. Although intensivists are aware that death is the
most likely outcome, discussions among the stakeholders
may help to resolve the conflicts and mistrust. The use of
heroic ICU to resolve conflicts and to develop time for
mutual trust between clinicians, intensivists, patients, and
relatives may create false hope, raise unrealistic expecta-
tions, and can be perceived as highly controversial. We
must emphasize that if this status of ICU admission is
used more than 2 to 3 times per year, conflict resolution
strategies or an attempt to increase the understanding
and knowledge about the underlying condition (of the
actual prognoses of malignancies or of the outcomes of
organ dysfunction in cancer patients) are in order.
▶Other admission policies
The common characteristic of all the previous statuses
of ICU admission is that patients receive full-code
management for an unlimited or a limited time period.
Other admission policies need to be evaluated before
specific recommendations are made. Such policies
include early ICU admission, prophylactic ICU admis-
sion, palliative ICU admission, ICU admission for
non-ICU care, and terminal ICU admission (Figure 2;
Table 3). The terminal admission policy is based on a
controversial assumption that the ICU is the best place
to die in the hospital and ICU clinicians are skilled to
perform adequate palliative care to dying patients.
Details on code status and clinical vignettes are
reported in Table 3. Figure 3 summarizes our sugges-
tions for ICU admission according to the factors that
have been presented above.
Table 3 Different ICU admission policies
Type of ICU admission Code status Clinical situation
1. Full code ICU
management
Full code Newly diagnosed malignancies
Malignancies in complete remission
2. ICU trial Unlimited for a limited time
period—at least 3 to 5 days
Clinical response to therapy not available or
undetermined
3. Exceptional ICU
admission
Same as ICU trial Newly available effective therapy that should be
tested in a patient who becomes critically ill
4. Heroic ICU admission ICU management until conflict
resolution
Both hematologists/oncologists and intensivists agree
that ICU admission is not appropriate, but patients or
relatives disagree with the appropriate level of care
5. Other admission modalities that are performed but not yet formally evaluated
a) Prophylactic ICU admission Full code; intensive clinical and
biological monitoring; invasive
procedures under safer conditions
Earliest phase of high-risk malignancies. Admission
to the ICU is warranted to avoid development of
organ dysfunction (acute respiratory failure, tumor
lysis syndrome, etc.)
b) Early ICU admission Full code; intensive clinical and
biological monitoring; invasive
procedures under safe conditions;
no life-sustaining therapies
Admission to the ICU in patients with no organ
dysfunction but physiological disturbances. ICU is
warranted to avoid late ICU admission (condition
associated with higher mortality)
c) Palliative ICU admission Noninvasive strategies only Admission to the ICU for the purpose of undergoing
noninvasive mechanical ventilation as the ceiling of
therapy
d) In-ICU non-ICU care No life-sustaining therapies Short ICU admission to help for optimal and prompt
management (catheter withdrawal, early antibiotics
etc.)
e) Terminal ICU admission No life-sustaining therapies ICU admission is required to best provide palliative
care and symptom control. Controversial issue
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 7 of 13
Unanswered questions and research agenda
Many unanswered questions deserve future observa-
tional and interventional studies (Table 4). As experts in
the management of critically ill cancer patients, we sug-
gest a research agenda to address the following ten
burning issues:
1) The first and most intriguing issue is the lack of
studies on long-term outcomes in cancer patients who
survive their ICU stay. We do not know whether the
increase in the number of survival days is only a prolon-
gation of the dying process or if it is an actual increase
in survival with good quality of life. Beside ICU and
hospital survival, very few studies have addressed survi-
vors’ quality of life. For example, in a study of noncan-
cer patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome,
survivors lost 18% of their baseline body weight during
the ICU stay, experienced severe muscle weakness and
fatigue, and had persistent functional disability 1 year
after ICU discharge [77-79]. These findings are extre-
mely relevant, because treatment decisions are substan-
tially influenced by the clinical condition of the patient.
In critically ill cancer patients, poor performance status
has been associated with mortality [18,30]. Moreover,
poor performance status may prevent the use of opti-
mally aggressive chemo- and radiation therapy regimens
and/or decrease the ability to achieve radical surgical
resection, thereby shortening long-term survival. We
need studies evaluating outcomes up to 2 years after cri-
tical illness. These studies need to investigate survival,
treatments that have been implemented, and remission
from the malignancy.
2) In addition to physical outcomes, mental health and
quality of life outcomes must be assessed in ICU survi-
vors. At this time, no study has specifically evaluated
health-related quality of life and post-ICU burden in cri-
tically ill cancer patients who survived the ICU. Nelson
et al. investigated self-reported symptom experience of
cancer patients at the time that they were receiving
intensive care support [80]. Most patients reported
experiencing pain, discomfort, anxiety, sleep disturbance,
or unsatisfied hunger or thirst. Approximately one third
reported depression and dyspnea. Significant pain and
discomfort were associated with common ICU proce-
dures. Inability to communicate, sleep disruption, and
limitations on visiting were particularly stressful among
ICU conditions studied. However, no study has assessed
the prevalence of these symptoms 6 months or 1 year
after ICU discharge. Yet, such assessment is a key issue
when addressing the question of ICU admission policies
for cancer patients.
3) Studies in relatives of critically ill cancer patients
should be developed to seek specific needs and
Recipients of No
BMT?
Yes
Autologous BMT Evaluate
Allogeneic BMT or Response to Therapy and
Allogeneic without GVHD Type of Malignancy
active GVHD
Refractory Uncontrolled Controlled
Discourage MV Discourage MV ICU trial Full Code
Inaugural First line Therapy Second line Therapy Relapsingre/fractory
Good Life Expectancy Poor life expectacy Good Life Expectancy Poor life expectacy Good Life Expectancy Poor life expectacy
Full Code ICU trial Discourage MV Exceptional ICU Discourage MV
Figure 3 Code status in cancer patients receiving mechanical ventilation. Good life expectancy refers to a malignancy where complete
remission and long term survival are possible outcomes. Poor life expectancy refers to a malignancy where median life expectancy is below one
year.
Table 4 Unanswered questions and research agenda
1) Establishing long-term outcomes in oncology and hematology
patients who survive their ICU stay. Do we prolong the dying process
or do we actually increase survival?
2) Addressing qualitative outcomes
3) Searching for specific family needs and communication strategies
4) Evaluating new admission policies
5) Improving transition from curative to palliative care
6) Evaluating the impact of the ICU on overall long-term and disease-
free survival
7) Defining the appropriate timing for ICU admission (avoiding delays)
8) Appraising prognostic factors of mortality
9) Evaluating outcomes in patients who receive intensive care (e.g., NIV,
vasopressor) in the wards
10) Performing qualitative studies before any recommendation on the
use of NIV as the ceiling of therapy
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 8 of 13
communication strategies. Also, determinants of ICU
and post-ICU burden on relatives of ICU survivors
should be evaluated, because relatives of critically ill
patients may become actual caregivers.
4) In this review, we describe provisional models of
ICU admission with various code statuses that have not
yet been evaluated. First, criteria for ICU admission
need to be described and appraised. Second, new modal-
ities of ICU admission should be evaluated and the bal-
ance between their strengths and weaknesses described.
Controversial issues, such as palliative or terminal ICU
admission, must be discussed at a global level. Indeed, it
is possible, yet debatable, that death that occurs in the
ICU is perceived as “good” by patients and relatives.
However, broadening ICU admission criteria will be
obviously associated with increased mortality and asso-
ciated conflicts [81], clinician’s burnout [82], demorali-
zation [83], and further exhausting the limited available
resources and ICU beds.
5) One of the most difficult issues in the ICU trial is
determining the appropriate time for making end-of-life
decisions [84]. Transition from curative to palliative care
is complex in cancer patients because of their young
age, complex medical conditions, doubts on the actual
therapeutic plans, and pressures from consultants and
relatives. Implementing new ICU admission policies for
cancer patients requires a critical evaluation of end-of-
life care that occurs in up to 80% of these patients, i.e.,
when the irreversibility of the medical condition is
deemed certain. Also, quality of dying and death must
be specifically assessed in this context. Most impor-
tantly, the need to document patient preferences for
resuscitation and end-of-life issues at the time of ICU
admission is crucial.
6) The ICU benefits for overall long-term and disease-
free survival are still unknown. We can hypothesize that
patients with cancer who survive the initial complica-
tions without residual organ dysfunction will be able to
receive full regimen chemotherapy and subsequently
more available lifespan-prolonging therapies. However,
no ICU study has evaluated the impact of the ICU sup-
port on long-term and disease-free survival.
7) Recent studies suggest survival benefits from early
admission to the ICU [11]. However, this has never
been evaluated properly. Indeed, a randomized, clinical
trial designed to admit selected patients with cancer at
the earliest phase of the malignancy (before or within
first few days of cancer chemotherapy) with only one
organ dysfunction may be in order. Besides overall sur-
vival, if prevention of organ dysfunction translates into
improved outcomes, practical guidelines will be easy to
recommend.
8) An appraisal of classic prognostic factors is timely.
There are data that suggest that neutropenia and
autologous BMT may no longer have prognostic rele-
vance [57]. New determinants of outcome have emerged
from recent studies. These new determinants include
our ability to make the actual etiological diagnosis
rather than treating empirically [40,48,50,51,85], delayed
ICU admission [11], cytogenetic data in patients with
aggressive malignancies [86], and, clearly, the number
and the extent of organ dysfunctions [17,26]. However,
additional multicentre cohort studies are needed to
identify predictors of death in cancer patients admitted
to the ICU, controlling for the ASSESS criteria that we
have recently proposed (Table 5) [18]. These include
triage criteria for ICU admission, code status implemen-
ted at ICU admission, the nature of life-sustaining thera-
pies that are required, and the extent of organ
dysfunction at admission, as well as long-term overall
and disease-free survival and quality of life.
9) There is an emerging interest for adding NIV to
routine supportive care provided in hematology/oncol-
ogy wards [87-90]. This is partly due to shortage of ICU
beds [91] and ICU physicians’ reluctance to admit can-
cer patients with acute respiratory failure [92,93], as well
as the unconfirmed assumption that ICU admission may
hamper patients’ chances of receiving optimal hematol-
ogy/oncology care and appropriate infection prevention.
We advise caution when implementing NIV in hypoxe-
mic patients with cancer [94]. Unless NIV is the ceiling
of therapy [95], we believe that NIV should be initiated
only in an ICU or high-dependency unit setting, where
Table 5 ASSESS approach
Domain Description and rationale
Triage for ICU
Admission
Triage criteria for ICU admission used by
oncologists/hematologists and intensivists.
Detailed evaluation of the ICU admission
process, including data on non-ICU cancer
patients with various levels of organ
dysfunction on the wards and data on the
effects of early ICU admission
Code Status Code status to be implemented at ICU
admission: full code, ICU trial for a short period
(3-5 days with full-code status and then
reevaluation) or early implementation of
palliative care
ICU support and
patient’s evolution
ICU management, with a reappraisal of the
intensity, duration and nature of life-supporting
treatments provided in the ICU. Evaluation of
incidence, nature and outcome of organ
failures and residual organ dysfunction
Survival Beyond short- and medium-term survival by
evaluating long-term outcomes (up to 1 year)
Picture of survivors Description of ICU survivors, including
qualitative evaluation of the ability to undergo
chemotherapy, disease-free survival, functional
status, health-related quality of life and post-
ICU burden (stress-related disorders, anxiety,
and depression)
Adapted from (18).
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 9 of 13
endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventila-
tion can be safely and timely performed if NIV fails [96].
10) Mortality in patients who receive palliative NIV
has been reported in various subgroups of patients
[97-101]. Patients with cancer remain poor candidates
for palliative NIV, even if some of them may receive
some benefit [62]. Additionally, the concept that the
ICU is an appropriate setting to deliver palliative or
terminal care is highly controversial. However, these stu-
dies report no qualitative outcomes, including quality of
life, ICU-burden, and quality of dying for the majority
of patients who die after NIV. We believe that qualita-
tive studies are mandatory before establishing any
recommendation on the use of NIV as the ceiling of
therapy in patients with cancer.
Conclusions
In patients with cancer who require ICU admission, the
survival rate has improved. Besides refinements in the
selection criteria of patients for ICU admission,
advances in hematology and oncology as well as
enhancements in ICU management have contributed to
this improved survival. In this changing context, clini-
cians’ beliefs regarding the results of ICU management
of patients with cancer must be appraised. Also, admis-
sion policies must be broadened and closely evaluated
to avoid depriving patients who may benefit from life-
sustaining therapies.
Acknowledgements
Supported by a grant from the Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AOM
04139) and the French Society for Intensive Care Medicine. Dr. Soares is
supported in part by individual research grant from CNPq.
Author details
1
AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Medical ICU, Paris, France 2
University Paris-7
Paris-Diderot, UFR de Médecine, 75010 Paris, France 3
D’Or Institute for
Research and Education, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 4
Postgraduate Program,
Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 5
Intensive Care
Department, Hôpital de Bellevue and Saint-Etienne University, Saint-Etienne,
France 6
Intensive Care Department, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium 7
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue C1179,
New York, NY 10065, USA 8
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to the preparation of this manuscript and critical
review of the material.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 February 2011 Accepted: 23 March 2011
Published: 23 March 2011
References
1. Coleman MP, Quaresma M, Berrino F, Lutz JM, De Angelis R, Capocaccia R,
Baili P, Rachet B, Gatta G, Hakulinen T, Micheli A, Sant M, Weir HK,
Elwood JM, Tsukuma H, Koifman S, Ga ES, Francisci S, Santaquilani M,
Verdecchia A, Storm HH, Young JL: Cancer survival in five continents: a
worldwide population-based study (CONCORD). Lancet Oncol 2008,
9:730-756, Epub 2008 Jul 17.
2. Kinsey T, Jemal A, Liff J, Ward E, Thun M: Secular trends in mortality from
common cancers in the United States by educational attainment, 1993-
2001. J Natl Cancer Inst 2008, 100:1003-1012, Epub 2008 Jul 8.
3. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Hao Y, Xu J, Murray T, Thun MJ: Cancer statistics,
2008. CA Cancer J Clin 2008, 58:71-96, Epub 2008 Feb 20.
4. Atlanta U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Cfdcapanci: U.S.
Cancer Statistics Working Group. United States Cancer Statistics: 1999-
2005 Incidence and Mortality Web-based Report.[http://www.cdc.gov/
uscs 2009].
5. Ferlay J, Autier P, Boniol M, Heanue M, Colombet M, Boyle P: Estimates of
the cancer incidence and mortality in Europe in 2006. Ann Oncol 2007,
18:581-592.
6. Rodriguez-Abreu D, Bordoni A, Zucca E: Epidemiology of hematological
malignancies. Ann Oncol 2007, 18(Suppl 1):i3-i8.
7. Linker C, Damon L, Ries C, Navarro W: Intensified and shortened cyclical
chemotherapy for adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 2002,
20:2464-2471.
8. Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, Irwin D, Stadtmauer EA, Facon T,
Harousseau JL, Ben-Yehuda D, Lonial S, Goldschmidt H, Reece D, San-
Miguel JF, Blade J, Boccadoro M, Cavenagh J, Dalton WS, Boral AL,
Esseltine DL, Porter JB, Schenkein D, Anderson KC: Bortezomib or high-
dose dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 2005,
352:2487-2498.
9. Pfreundschuh M, Trumper L, Osterborg A, Pettengell R, Trneny M, Imrie K,
Ma D, Gill D, Walewski J, Zinzani PL, Stahel R, Kvaloy S, Shpilberg O,
Jaeger U, Hansen M, Lehtinen T, Lopez-Guillermo A, Corrado C, Scheliga A,
Milpied N, Mendila M, Rashford M, Kuhnt E, Loeffler M: CHOP-like
chemotherapy plus rituximab versus CHOP-like chemotherapy alone in
young patients with good-prognosis diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma: a
randomised controlled trial by the MabThera International Trial (MInT)
Group. Lancet Oncol 2006, 7:379-391.
10. Khassawneh BY, White P Jr, Anaissie EJ, Barlogie B, Hiller FC: Outcome from
mechanical ventilation after autologous peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation. Chest 2002, 121:185-188.
11. Peigne V, Rusinova K, Karlin L, Darmon M, Fermand JP, Schlemmer B,
Azoulay E: Continued survival gains in recent years among critically ill
myeloma patients. Intensive Care Med 2009, 35:512-518.
12. Darmon M, Guichard I, Vincent F, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: Prognostic
significance of acute renal injury in acute tumor lysis syndrome. Leuk
Lymphoma 2010, 51:221-227.
13. Azoulay E, Fieux F, Moreau D, Thiery G, Rousselot P, Parrot A, Le Gall Jr,
Dombret H, Schlemmer B: Acute monocytic leukemia presenting as acute
respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003, 167:1329-1333.
14. Creput C, Galicier L, Buyse S, Azoulay E: Understanding organ dysfunction
in hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Intensive Care Med 2008,
34:1177-1187.
15. Tanvetyanon T, Leighton JC: Life-sustaining treatments in patients who
died of chronic congestive heart failure compared with metastatic
cancer. Crit Care Med 2003, 31:60-64.
16. Benoit DD, Vandewoude KH, Decruyenaere JM, Hoste EA, Colardyn FA:
Outcome and early prognostic indicators in patients with a hematologic
malignancy admitted to the intensive care unit for a life-threatening
complication. Crit Care Med 2003, 31:104-112.
17. Lecuyer L, Chevret S, Thiery G, Darmon M, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: The
ICU trial: a new admission policy for cancer patients requiring
mechanical ventilation. Crit Care Med 2007, 35:808-814.
18. Soares M, Azoulay E: Critical care management of lung cancer patients to
prolong life without prolonging dying. Intensive Care Med 2009,
35:2012-2014.
19. Azoulay E, Afessa B: The intensive care support of patients with
malignancy: do everything that can be done. Intensive Care Med 2006,
32:3-5, Epub 2005 Nov 25.
20. Darmon M, Thiery G, Ciroldi M, De Miranda S, Galicier L, Raffoux E, Le Gall
Jr, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: Intensive care in patients with newly
diagnosed malignancies and a need for cancer chemotherapy. Crit Care
Med 2005, 33:2488-2493.
21. Benoit DD, Depuydt PO, Vandewoude KH, Offner FC, Boterberg T, De
Cock CA, Noens LA, Janssens AM, Decruyenaere JM: Outcome in severely
ill patients with hematological malignancies who received intravenous
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 10 of 13
chemotherapy in the intensive care unit. Intensive Care Med 2006,
32:93-99.
22. Vandijck DM, Benoit DD, Depuydt PO, Offner FC, Blot SI, Van Tilborgh AK,
Nollet J, Steel E, Noens LS, Decruyenaere JM: Impact of recent
intravenous chemotherapy on outcome in severe sepsis and septic
shock patients with hematological malignancies. Intensive Care Med 2008,
34:847-855.
23. Azoulay E, Alberti C, Bornstain C, Leleu G, Moreau D, Recher C, Chevret S,
Le Gall Jr, Brochard L, Schlemmer B: Improved survival in cancer patients
requiring mechanical ventilatory support: impact of noninvasive
mechanical ventilatory support. Crit Care Med 2001, 29:519-525.
24. Azoulay E, Recher C, Alberti C, Soufir L, Leleu G, Le Gall Jr, Fermand JP,
Schlemmer B: Changing use of intensive care for hematological patients:
the example of multiple myeloma. Intensive Care Med 1999, 25:1395-1401.
25. Kress JP, Christenson J, Pohlman AS, Linkin DR, Hall JB: Outcomes of
critically ill cancer patients in a university hospital setting. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1999, 160:1957-1961.
26. Larche J, Azoulay E, Fieux F, Mesnard L, Moreau D, Thiery G, Darmon M,
Le Gall Jr, Schlemmer B: Improved survival of critically ill cancer patients
with septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2003, 29:1688-1695, Epub 2003 Sep
12.
27. Pene F, Aubron C, Azoulay E, Blot F, Thiery G, Raynard B, Schlemmer B,
Nitenberg G, Buzyn A, Arnaud P, Socie G, Mira JP: Outcome of critically ill
allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation recipients: a
reappraisal of indications for organ failure supports. J Clin Oncol 2006,
24:643-649, Epub 2005 Dec 27.
28. Legriel S, Marijon H, Darmon M, Lemiale V, Bedos JP, Schlemmer B,
Azoulay E: Central neurological complications in critically ill patients with
malignancies. Intensive Care Med 36:232-240.
29. Soares M, Salluh JI, Ferreira CG, Luiz RR, Spector N, Rocco Jr: Impact of two
different comorbidity measures on the 6-month mortality of critically ill
cancer patients. Intensive Care Med 2005, 31:408-415, Epub 2005 Jan 28.
30. Soares M, Salluh JI, Spector N, Rocco Jr: Characteristics and outcomes of
cancer patients requiring mechanical ventilatory support for >24 hrs. Crit
Care Med 2005, 33:520-526.
31. Staudinger T, Stoiser B, Mullner M, Locker GJ, Laczika K, Knapp S,
Burgmann H, Wilfing A, Kofler J, Thalhammer F, Frass M: Outcome and
prognostic factors in critically ill cancer patients admitted to the
intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2000, 28:1322-1328.
32. Schellongowski P, Benesch M, Lang T, Traunmuller F, Zauner C, Laczika K,
Locker GJ, Frass M, Staudinger T: Comparison of three severity scores for
critically ill cancer patients. Intensive Care Med 2004, 30:430-436, Epub
2003 Nov 4.
33. Darmon M, Azoulay E, Alberti C, Fieux F, Moreau D, Gall Jr, Schlemmer B:
Impact of neutropenia duration on short-term mortality in neutropenic
critically ill cancer patients. Intensive Care Med 2002, 28:1775-1780.
34. Groeger JS, White P Jr, Nierman Dm, Glassman J, Shi W, Horak D, Price K:
Outcome for cancer patients requiring mechanical ventilation. J Clin
Oncol 1999, 17:991-997.
35. Depuydt PO, Benoit DD, Vandewoude KH, Decruyenaere JM, Colardyn FA:
Outcome in noninvasively and invasively ventilated hematologic
patients with acute respiratory failure. Chest 2004, 126:1299-1306.
36. Soares M, Depuydt PO, Salluh JI: Mechanical ventilation in cancer
patients: clinical characteristics and outcomes. Crit Care Clin 26:41-58.
37. Benoit DD, Hoste EA, Depuydt PO, Offner FC, Lameire NH, Vandewoude KH,
Dhondt AW, Noens LA, Decruyenaere JM: Outcome in critically ill medical
patients treated with renal replacement therapy for acute renal failure:
comparison between patients with and those without haematological
malignancies. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005, 20:552-558, Epub 2005 Jan 25.
38. Darmon M, Thiery G, Ciroldi M, Porcher R, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: Should
dialysis be offered to cancer patients with acute kidney injury? Intensive
Care Med 2007, 33:765-772.
39. Soares M, Salluh JI, Carvalho MS, Darmon M, Rocco Jr, Spector N: Prognosis
of critically ill patients with cancer and acute renal dysfunction. J Clin
Oncol 2006, 24:4003-4010.
40. Azoulay E, Mokart D, Rabbat A, Pene F, Kouatchet A, Bruneel F, Vincent F,
Hamidfar R, Moreau D, Mohammedi I, Epinette G, Beduneau G, Castelain V,
De Lassence A, Gruson D, Lemiale V, Renard B, Chevret S, Schlemmer B:
Diagnostic bronchoscopy in hematology and oncology patients with
acute respiratory failure: prospective multicenter data. Crit Care Med
2008, 36:100-107.
41. Massion PB, Dive AM, Doyen C, Bulpa P, Jamart J, Bosly A, Installe E:
Prognosis of hematologic malignancies does not predict intensive care
unit mortality. Crit Care Med 2002, 30:2260-2270.
42. Brenner H: Long-term survival rates of cancer patients achieved by the
end of the 20th century: a period analysis. Lancet 2002, 360:1131-1135.
43. Brenner H, Gondos A, Arndt V: Recent major progress in long-term cancer
patient survival disclosed by modeled period analysis. J Clin Oncol 2007,
25:3274-3280.
44. O’brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, Gathmann I, Baccarani M, Cervantes F,
Cornelissen JJ, Fischer T, Hochhaus A, Hughes T, Lechner K, Nielsen JL,
Rousselot P, Reiffers J, Saglio G, Shepherd J, Simonsson B, Gratwohl A,
Goldman JM, Kantarjian H, Taylor K, Verhoef G, Bolton AE, Capdeville R,
Druker BJ: Imatinib compared with interferon and low-dose cytarabine
for newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J
Med 2003, 348:994-1004.
45. Talpaz M, Shah NP, Kantarjian H, Donato N, Nicoll J, Paquette R, Cortes J,
O’Brien S, Nicaise C, Bleickardt E, Blackwood-Chirchir MA, Iyer V, Chen TT,
Huang F, Decillis AP, Sawyers CL: Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant
Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias. N Engl J Med 2006,
354:2531-2541.
46. Wossmann W, Schrappe M, Meyer U, Zimmermann M, Reiter A: Incidence
of tumor lysis syndrome in children with advanced stage Burkitt’s
lymphoma/leukemia before and after introduction of prophylactic use
of urate oxidase. Ann Hematol 2003, 82:160-165.
47. Rano A, Agusti C, Jimenez P, Angrill J, Benito N, Danes C, Gonzalez J,
Rovira M, Pumarola T, Moreno A, Torres A: Pulmonary infiltrates in non-
HIV immunocompromised patients: a diagnostic approach using non-
invasive and bronchoscopic procedures. Thorax 2001, 56:379-387.
48. Hilbert G, Gruson D, Vargas F, Valentino R, Chene G, Boiron JM, Pigneux A,
Reiffers J, Gbikpi-Benissan G, Cardinaud JP: Noninvasive continuous
positive airway pressure in neutropenic patients with acute respiratory
failure requiring intensive care unit admission. Crit Care Med 2000,
28:3185-3190.
49. Hilbert G, Gruson D, Vargas F, Valentino R, Gbikpi-Benissan G, Dupon M,
Reiffers J, Cardinaud JP: Noninvasive ventilation in immunosuppressed
patients with pulmonary infiltrates, fever, and acute respiratory failure. N
Engl J Med 2001, 344:481-487.
50. Azoulay E, Thiery G, Chevret S, Moreau D, Darmon M, Bergeron A, Yang K,
Meignin V, Ciroldi M, Le Gall Jr, Tazi A, Schlemmer B: The prognosis of
acute respiratory failure in critically ill cancer patients. Medicine
(Baltimore) 2004, 83:360-370.
51. Hilbert G, Gruson D, Vargas F, Valentino R, Favier JC, Portel L, Gbikpi-
Benissan G, Cardinaud JP: Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage via
the laryngeal mask airway in high-risk hypoxemic immunosuppressed
patients. Crit Care Med 2001, 29:249-255.
52. Benoit DD, Depuydt PO, Peleman RA, Offner FC, Vandewoude KH,
Vogelaers DP, Blot SI, Noens LA, Colardyn FA, Decruyenaere JM:
Documented and clinically suspected bacterial infection precipitating
intensive care unit admission in patients with hematological
malignancies: impact on outcome. Intensive Care Med 2005, 31:934-942.
53. Lecuyer L, Chevret S, Guidet B, Aegerter P, Martel P, Schlemmer B,
Azoulay E: Case volume and mortality in haematological patients with
acute respiratory failure. Eur Respir J 2008, 32:748-754, Epub 2008 Apr 30.
54. Ardeshna KM, Smith P, Norton A, Hancock BW, Hoskin PJ, Maclennan KA,
Marcus RE, Jelliffe A, Vaughan G, Hudson , Linch DC: Long-term effect of a
watch and wait policy versus immediate systemic treatment for
asymptomatic advanced-stage non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2003, 362:516-522.
55. Hampshire PA, Welch CA, Mccrossan LA, Francis K, Harrison DA: Admission
factors associated with hospital mortality in patients with
haematological malignancy admitted to UK adult, general critical care
units: a secondary analysis of the ICNARC Case Mix Programme
Database. Crit Care 2009, 13:R137.
56. Meyer S, Gortner L, Gottschling S: Comment on “impact of recent
intravenous chemotherapy on outcome in severe sepsis and septic
shock patients with haematological malignancies” by Vandijck et al.
Intensive Care Med 2008, 34:1929, author reply 1930-1931.
57. Soares M, Caruso P, Silva E, Teles JM, Lobo SM, Friedman G, Dal Pizzol F,
Mello PV, Bozza FA, Silva UV, Torelly AP, Knibel MF, Rezende E, Netto JJ,
Piras C, Castro A, Ferreira BS, Rea-Neto A, Olmedo PB, Salluh JI:
Characteristics and outcomes of patients with cancer requiring
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 11 of 13
admission to intensive care units: a prospective multicenter study. Crit
Care Med 2010, 38:9-15.
58. Coiffier B, Altman A, Pui CH, Younes A, Cairo MS: Guidelines for the
management of pediatric and adult tumor lysis syndrome: an evidence-
based review. J Clin Oncol 2008, 26:2767-2778.
59. Tosi P, Barosi G, Lazzaro C, Liso V, Marchetti M, Morra E, Pession A, Rosti G,
Santoro A, Zinzani PL, Tura S: Consensus conference on the management
of tumor lysis syndrome. Haematologica 2008, 93:1877-1885.
60. Azoulay E, Schlemmer B: Diagnostic strategy in cancer patients with
acute respiratory failure. Intensive Care Med 2006, 32:808-822, Epub 2006
Apr 29.
61. Afessa B, Azoulay E: Critical care of the hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipient. Crit Care Clin 2010, 26:133-150.
62. Meert AP, Berghmans T, Hardy M, Markiewicz E, Sculier JP: Non-invasive
ventilation for cancer patients with life-support techniques limitation.
Support Care Cancer 2006, 14:167-171, Epub 2005 Jun 10.
63. Oh SY, Lee SJ, Lee J, Lee S, Kim SH, Kwon HC, Lee GW, Kang JH, Hwang IG,
Jang JS, Lim HY, Park YS, Kang WK, Kim HJ: Gastric leptomeningeal
carcinomatosis: multi-center retrospective analysis of 54 cases. World J
Gastroenterol 2009, 15:5086-5090.
64. Ruffato A, Mattioli S, Pileri S, Daddi N, D’ovidio F, Pilotti V, Tazzari P:
Do bone marrow isolated tumor cells influence long-term survival
of non-small cell lung cancer? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2009,
35:463-468.
65. Price KJ, Thall PF, Kish SK, Shannon VR, Andersson BS: Prognostic indicators
for blood and marrow transplant patients admitted to an intensive care
unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998, 158:876-884.
66. Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW: Withdrawing life support from mechanically
ventilated recipients of bone marrow transplants: a case for evidence-
based guidelines. Ann Intern Med 1996, 125:625-633.
67. Afessa B, Tefferi A, Dunn WF, Litzow MR, Peters SG: Intensive care unit
support and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation III
performance in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Crit Care
Med 2003, 31:1715-1721.
68. Afessa B, Tefferi A, Litzow MR, Krowka MJ, Wylam ME, Peters SG: Diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002, 166:641-645.
69. Afessa B, Tefferi A, Litzow MR, Peters SG: Outcome of diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2002, 166:1364-1368.
70. Afessa B, Litzow MR, Tefferi A: Bronchiolitis obliterans and other late
onset non-infectious pulmonary complications in hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 2001, 28:425-434.
71. Guiguet M, Blot F, Escudier B, Antoun S, Leclercq B, Nitenberg G: Severity-
of-illness scores for neutropenic cancer patients in an intensive care
unit: Which is the best predictor? Do multiple assessment times
improve the predictive value? Crit Care Med 1998, 26:488-493.
72. Thiery G, Azoulay E, Darmon M, Ciroldi M, De Miranda S, Levy V, Fieux F,
Moreau D, Le Gall Jr, Schlemmer B: Outcome of cancer patients
considered for intensive care unit admission: a hospital-wide
prospective study. J Clin Oncol 2005, 23:4406-4413.
73. Gruson D, Vargas F, Hilbert G, Bui N, Maillot T, Mayet T, Pillet O, Chene G,
Gbikpi-Benissan G: Predictive factors of intensive care unit admission in
patients with haematological malignancies and pneumonia. Intensive
Care Med 2004, 30:965-971.
74. Antonelli M, Conti G, Riccioni L, Meduri GU: Noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation via face mask during bronchoscopy with BAL in high-risk
hypoxemic patients. Chest 1996, 110:724-728.
75. Maitre B, Jaber S, Maggiore SM, Bergot E, Richard JC, Bakthiari H, Housset B,
Boussignac G, Brochard L: Continuous positive airway pressure during
fiberoptic bronchoscopy in hypoxemic patients. A randomized double-
blind study using a new device. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000,
162:1063-1067.
76. Darmon M, Azoulay E: Critical care management of cancer patients:
cause for optimism and need for objectivity. Curr Opin Oncol 2009,
21:318-326.
77. Cheung AM, Tansey CM, Tomlinson G, Diaz-Granados N, Matte A, Barr A,
Mehta S, Mazer CD, Guest CB, Stewart TE, Al-Saidi F, Cooper AB, Cook D,
Slutsky AS, Herridge MS: Two-year outcomes, health care use, and costs
of survivors of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2006, 174:538-544.
78. Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM, Matte-Martyn A, Diaz-Granados N, Al-
Saidi F, Cooper AB, Guest CB, Mazer CD, Mehta S, Stewart TE, Barr A,
Cook D, Slutsky AS: One-year outcomes in survivors of the acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2003, 348:683-693.
79. Tansey CM, Louie M, Loeb M, Gold WL, Muller MP, De Jager J, Cameron JI,
Tomlinson G, Mazzulli T, Walmsley SL, Rachlis AR, Mederski BD, Silverman M,
Shainhouse Z, Ephtimios IE, Avendano M, Downey J, Styra R, Yamamura D,
Gerson M, Stanbrook MB, Marras TK, Phillips EJ, Zamel N, Richardson SE,
Slutsky AS, Herridge MS: One-year outcomes and health care utilization in
survivors of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Arch Intern Med 2007,
167:1312-1320.
80. Nelson JE, Meier DE, Oei EJ, Nierman DM, Senzel RS, Manfredi PL, Davis SM,
Morrison RS: Self-reported symptom experience of critically ill cancer
patients receiving intensive care. Crit Care Med 2001, 29:277-282.
81. Azoulay E, Timsit JF, Sprung CL, Soares M, Rusinova K, Lafabrie A,
Abizanda R, Svantesson M, Rubulotta F, Ricou B, Benoit D, Heyland D,
Joynt G, Francais A, Azeivedo-Maia P, Owczuk R, Benbenishty J, De Vita M,
Valentin A, Ksomos A, Cohen S, Kompan L, Ho K, Abroug F, Kaarlola A,
Gerlach H, Kyprianou T, Michalsen A, Chevret S, Schlemmer B: Prevalence
and factors of intensive care unit conflicts: the conflicus study. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2009, 180:853-860.
82. Poncet MC, Toullic P, Papazian L, Kentish-Barnes N, Timsit JF, Pochard F,
Chevret S, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: Burnout syndrome in critical care
nursing staff. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007, 175:698-704.
83. Hamric AB, Blackhall LJ: Nurse-physician perspectives on the care of
dying patients in intensive care units: collaboration, moral distress, and
ethical climate. Crit Care Med 2007, 35:422-429.
84. Gaeta S, Price KJ: End-of-life issues in critically ill cancer patients. Crit Care
Clin 26:219-227.
85. Stover DE, Zaman MB, Hajdu SI, Lange M, Gold J, Armstrong D:
Bronchoalveolar lavage in the diagnosis of diffuse pulmonary infiltrates
in the immunosuppressed host. Ann Intern Med 1984, 101:1-7.
86. Prebet T, Boissel N, Reutenauer S, Thomas X, Delaunay J, Cahn JY,
Pigneux A, Quesnel B, Witz F, Thepot S, Ugo V, Terre C, Recher C,
Tavernier E, Hunault M, Esterni B, Castaigne S, Guilhot F, Dombret H, Vey N:
Acute myeloid leukemia with translocation (8;21) or inversion (16) in
elderly patients treated with conventional chemotherapy: a collaborative
study of the French CBF-AML intergroup. J Clin Oncol 2009, 27:4747-4753.
87. Walsh TJ: Advances and challenges in infectious diseases supportive care
of patients with hematologic malignancies, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, and severe aplastic anemia. Semin Hematol 2009,
46:191-197.
88. L’her E: Noninvasive ventilation outside the intensive care unit: a new
standard of care? Crit Care Med 2005, 33:1642-1643.
89. Elliott MW, Confalonieri M, Nava S: Where to perform noninvasive
ventilation? Eur Respir J 2002, 19:1159-1166.
90. Hill NS: Where should noninvasive ventilation be delivered? Respir Care
2009, 54:62-70.
91. Sinuff T, Kahnamoui K, Cook DJ, Luce JM, Levy MM: Rationing critical care
beds: a systematic review. Crit Care Med 2004, 32:1588-1597.
92. Azoulay E, Pochard F, Chevret S, Vinsonneau C, Garrouste M, Cohen Y,
Thuong M, Paugam C, Apperre C, De Cagny B, Brun F, Bornstain C, Parrot A,
Thamion F, Lacherade JC, Bouffard Y, Le Gall Jr, Herve C, Grassin M,
Zittoun R, Schlemmer B, Dhainaut JF: Compliance with triage to intensive
care recommendations. Crit Care Med 2001, 29:2132-2136.
93. Pastores SM, Voigt LP: Acute respiratory failure in the patient with cancer:
diagnostic and management strategies. Crit Care Clin 26:21-40.
94. Truwit JD, Bernard GR: Noninvasive ventilation–don’t push too hard. N
Engl J Med 2004, 350:2512-2515.
95. Tanvetyanon T: Which patient with a do-not-intubate order is a
candidate for noninvasive ventilation? Crit Care Med 2004, 32:2148-2150.
96. Adda M, Coquet I, Darmon M, Thiery G, Schlemmer B, Azoulay E: Predictors
of noninvasive ventilation failure in patients with hematologic
malignancy and acute respiratory failure. Crit Care Med 2008,
36:2766-2772.
97. Chu CM, Chan VL, Wong IW, Leung WS, Lin AW, Cheung KF: Noninvasive
ventilation in patients with acute hypercapnic exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease who refused endotracheal intubation. Crit
Care Med 2004, 32:372-377.
98. Cuomo A, Delmastro M, Ceriana P, Nava S, Conti G, Antonelli M,
Iacobone E: Noninvasive mechanical ventilation as a palliative treatment
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 12 of 13
of acute respiratory failure in patients with end-stage solid cancer. Palliat
Med 2004, 18:602-610.
99. Curtis Jr, Cook DJ, Sinuff T, White DB, Hill N, Keenan SP, Benditt JO,
Kacmarek R, Kirchhoff KT, Levy MM: Noninvasive positive pressure
ventilation in critical and palliative care settings: understanding the
goals of therapy. Crit Care Med 2007, 35:932-939.
100. Levy M, Tanios MA, Nelson D, Short K, Senechia A, Vespia J, Hill NS:
Outcomes of patients with do-not-intubate orders treated with
noninvasive ventilation. Crit Care Med 2004, 32:2002-2007.
101. Nava S, Sturani C, Hartl S, Magni G, Ciontu M, Corrado A, Simonds A: End-
of-life decision-making in respiratory intermediate care units: a
European survey. Eur Respir J 2007, 30:156-164.
102. Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, Bennett JE, Greene RE,
Oestmann JW, Kern WV, Marr KA, Ribaud P, Lortholary O, Sylvester R,
Rubin RH, Wingard Jr, Stark P, Durand C, Caillot D, Thiel E, Chandrasekar PH,
Hodges MR, Schlamm HT, Troke PF, De Pauw B: Voriconazole versus
amphotericin B for primary therapy of invasive aspergillosis. N Engl J
Med 2002, 347:408-415.
103. Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, Marshall J, Martin C, Pagliarello G,
Tweeddale M, Schweitzer I, Yetisir E: A multicenter, randomized,
controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care.
Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators, Canadian Critical
Care Trials Group. N Engl J Med 1999, 340:409-417.
104. Chagnon K, Boissel N, Raffoux E, Dombret H, Tazi A, Bergeron A: A new
pattern of cytosine-arabinoside-induced lung toxicity. Br J Haematol
2009, 147:771-774.
105. Bergeron A, Rea D, Levy V, Picard C, Meignin V, Tamburini J, Bruzzoni-
Giovanelli H, Calvo F, Tazi A, Rousselot P: Lung abnormalities after
dasatinib treatment for chronic myeloid leukemia: a case series. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2007, 176:814-818.
106. Chagnon K, Boissel N, Raffoux E, Dombret H, Tazi A, Bergeron A: A new
pattern of cytosine-arabinoside-induced lung toxicity. Br J Haematol
2009, 147:771-774.
107. Legriel S, Marijon H, Darmon M, Lemiale V, Bedos JP, Schlemmer B,
Azoulay E: Central neurological complications in critically ill patients with
malignancies. Intensive Care Med 36:232-240.
doi:10.1186/2110-5820-1-5
Cite this article as: Azoulay et al.: Intensive care of the cancer patient:
recent achievements and remaining challenges. Annals of Intensive Care
2011 1:5.
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁt from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
Azoulay et al. Annals of Intensive Care 2011, 1:5
http://www.annalsofintensivecare.com/content/1/1/5
Page 13 of 13
