REVIEW ARTICLE
Radionuclide imaging of bone marrow disorders
Ali Agool & Andor W. J. M. Glaudemans &
Hendrikus H. Boersma & Rudi A. J. O. Dierckx &
Edo Vellenga & Riemer H. J. A. Slart
Received: 14 May 2010 /Accepted: 15 June 2010 /Published online: 13 July 2010
# The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Noninvasive imaging techniques have been used
in the past for visualization the functional activity of the
bone marrow compartment. Imaging with radiolabelled
compounds may allow different bone marrow disorders to
be distinguished. These imaging techniques, almost all of
which use radionuclide-labelled tracers, such as 99m
Tc-
nanocolloid, 99m
Tc-sulphur colloid, 111
In-chloride, and
radiolabelled white blood cells, have been used in nuclear
medicine for several decades. With these techniques three
separate compartments can be recognized including the
reticuloendothelial system, the erythroid compartment and
the myeloid compartment. Recent developments in research
and the clinical use of PET tracers have made possible the
analysis of additional properties such as cellular metabolism
and proliferative activity, using 18
F-FDG and 18
F-FLT.
These tracers may lead to better quantification and targeting
of different cell systems in the bone marrow. In this review
the imaging of different bone marrow targets with radio-
nuclides including PET tracers in various bone marrow
diseases are discussed.
Keywords Bone marrow imaging . Bone marrow disorders
Introduction
Bone marrow is a dynamic tissue compartment in the cavity
of bones. In adults, haematopoietic cells are produced by
the bone marrow cells in the large bones that account for 2–
5% of an adult’s weight [1]. In the past, a distinction was
made between red marrow which consists of haemato-
poietic cells and yellow marrow which consists of
adipocytes. It is now general accepted that a small fraction
of cells, the so-called haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
reside in specific areas of the bone marrow including the
osteoblastic and vascular niche [1]. These HSC have the
potential for self-renewal but also for proliferation and
differentiation into different cell lineages including the
myeloid, erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages [2]. This
process is strongly dependent on the surrounding cells of
the microenvironment including mesenchymal stem cells
that have the capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts,
chondrocytes, adipocytes, myocytes and endothelial cells
[1]. During life distinct changes occur in the composition of
the bone marrow cavity. At birth, the whole bone marrow
cavity contains haematopoietic cells which are gradually
replaced by adipose tissue during life. In particular, the
distal parts of the skeleton become depleted of haemato-
poietic cells with ageing.
The architecture of the haematopoietic system can be
distorted strongly by a number of disorders, including
malignancy. Transformation of a haematopoietic stem cell
can result in expansion of the malignant clone and
A. Agool
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center Twente,
Hengelo, the Netherlands
A. Agool :A. W. J. M. Glaudemans :H. H. Boersma :
R. A. J. O. Dierckx :R. H. J. A. Slart (*)
Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
P.O. Box 30,001, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: r.h.j.a.slart@ngmb.umcg.nl
R. A. J. O. Dierckx
Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium
E. Vellenga
Department of Hematology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
DOI 10.1007/s00259-010-1531-0
disruption of the normal haematopoietic system [3]. In
acute leukaemia the bone marrow contains a population of
immature cells that has lost the potential to differentiate. In
myeloproliferative diseases (MPD), however, there is an
expansion of a certain haematopoietic lineage that has the
persisting potential for differentiation [4]. Exposure of
haematological malignancies and solid tumours to radiation
or chemotherapy will eliminate many of the rapidly
dividing cells of the bone marrow. The degree and extent
of this process will determine the severity of the bone
marrow aplasia and duration of peripheral pancytopenia.
Limited diagnostic procedures are available to determine
the extent of bone marrow involvement. It is assumed that
the material obtained with a bone marrow aspiration and
biopsy from the sternum or the crista iliaca reflects the total
bone marrow compartment. Using these methods, its
composition and cellular components can be analysed. In
addition, in vitro assays can be used to measure the
potential of more primitive progenitors or stem cells [5].
However, bone marrow biopsy has distinct limitations: it is
an invasive procedure and only a small proportion of the
total bone marrow content is investigated. The latter may
cause sampling errors. A noninvasive technique for the
evaluation of the total bone marrow activity in haemato-
logical diseases, as well as for the evaluation of haemato-
logical effects of solid tumours, would therefore be
invaluable.
In this review we describe the clinical indications of
bone marrow imaging as well as the most common bone
marrow disorders, including bone marrow transplantation.
This is combined with a review of the literature on nuclear
medicine techniques that are used in diagnostic protocols
for determination of bone marrow disorders. We pay special
attention to recent developments in positron emission
tomography (PET) techniques for the imaging of the bone
marrow.
Clinical indications
Current indications for radionuclide bone marrow imaging
are as follows:
1. Evaluation of patients with a discrepancy between bone
marrow histology and clinical status
2. Evaluation of the degree of radiotherapy effect on bone
marrow
3. Detection of extramedullary haematopoiesis (EMH)
4. Location of the optimal site for bone marrow biopsy
5. Diagnosing and staging of haematological bone mar-
row disorders
6. Detection of bone marrow metastases
7. Diagnosis of bone marrow infarctions
8. Evaluation of bone marrow transplantation
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are usually the standard
techniques for evaluation of bone marrow function.
However, sometimes a discrepancy can be found between
histology of the bone marrow and the patient’s laboratory
and clinical findings. This may be due to a bone marrow
sampling error. Noninvasive imaging using a specific bone
marrow tracer can be helpful to confirm a suspected
sampling error and will visualize a specific part of bone
marrow functionality.
Many patients suffering from malignancies are treated
with chemotherapy and/ or radiotherapy. These therapy
modalities commonly cause adverse events on bone
marrow activity. Bone marrow imaging may determine the
amount of remaining functional bone marrow tissue and
shows its biodistribution.
EMH refers to haematopoiesis taking place outside the
bone marrow. This is a symptom of several haematological
disorders, including chronic haemolytic anaemia (HA) and
MPD. EMH occurs mainly in the liver and spleen, where it
contributes to organ enlargement. It may, however, also
occur in other organs or structures [6]. Clinical arguments
supporting evaluation of EMH are (1) to determine the
extent of EMH in the liver or spleen, (2) to determine the
presence and evaluate the contribution of splenic erythro-
poiesis in patients under consideration for splenectomy, and
(3) to evaluate mass lesions outside the liver and spleen to
differentiate EMH from other processes. Bone marrow
imaging is a diagnostic tool for determination and staging
of several haematological bone marrow disorders. The latter
is further addressed in the next paragraph Bone marrow
disorders.
Detection of bone marrow activity as well as bone
metastases is another indication for bone marrow imaging.
Solid tumours have the propensity to metastasize to bone
and may therefore influence the bone marrow compartment.
Appropriate radiopharmaceuticals and clinical results are
discussed in section Imaging the bone marrow using
radionuclides.
Bone marrow infarctions are common in patients with
sickle cell anaemia and its variants SC and S thalassaemia.
Thalassaemia is an inherited autosomal recessive blood
disease. Patients with haemoglobin SC disease inherit a
gene for haemoglobin S from one parent, and a gene for
haemoglobin C from the other. In fact, more than half of all
patients suffering from these pathologies will experience
bone marrow infarctions at some point during the course of
their disease [7]. Plain X-ray images are usually normal in
acute bone marrow infarction; therefore radionuclide
imaging can play an additional role in the detection of
acute bone marrow infarctions [8]. Finally, bone marrow
imaging techniques may be useful for studying the
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 167
proliferative activity of the haematopoietic compartment
following intensive chemotherapy with and without stem
cell support. Especially in the setting of autologous stem
cell transplantation, determination of the remaining haema-
topoietic activity and its susceptibility to chemotherapeutic
intervention in the case of relapse may be valuable. Bone
marrow imaging may also be indicated to differentiate
sepsis from bone marrow, after unclear skeletal and
leucocyte scintigraphy findings; however, this is beyond
the scope of this review.
Bone marrow disorders
Myeloproliferative diseases
MPDs are clonal haematopoietic stem cell disorders
characterized by proliferation in the bone marrow of one
or more cell lines resulting in an excessive production of
cells belonging to the granulocytic, erythroid and megakar-
yocytic lineage (Table 1). Nowadays, a WHO classification
is used for distinguishing the separate disorders [9].
Different molecular markers have been defined such as
JAK2 and TET2 mutations that might further be helpful in
categorizing the disorders [10]. Most frequently diagnosed
are chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML), polycythaemia vera
(PV), chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis (MF), and essential
thrombocythaemia [11]. These disorders are characterized
by the fact that enhanced proliferation of different cell lines
is accompanied by a relatively normal maturation, resulting
in increased number of granulocytes, red blood cells and/or
platelets in the peripheral blood. MPDs mainly occur in
adults with a higher prevalence in the fifth to seventh
decades of life. The MPDs can have a stepwise progression
that leads to bone marrow failure due to MF or ineffective
haematopoiesis. Furthermore, transformation to acute leu-
kaemia may occur.
Frequently, there is a coincidence of symptoms for the
specific MPD entities. Leucocytosis, thrombocytosis, ex-
cessive megakaryocytic proliferation, MF and organome-
galy are features that can occur in almost any of the MPDs.
For example, both PV (malignant red blood cell prolifer-
ation) and MF (proliferation of mainly megakaryocytic
elements, associated with deposition of bone marrow
connective tissue) can also be associated with increased
white blood cells (WBC). PV is usually associated with a
mild increase in WBC counts. PV is associated with regular
WBC differentiation, whereas MF is frequently associated
with a mild increase in immature WBC. Leucocytosis in PV
is associated with an increased risk of thrombosis.
However, the primary treatment is directed towards the
control of increased red blood cells [12]. Today there
remains a distinct subgroup of elderly patients with PV for
whom 32
P is the optimal treatment option, as described in
the guidelines of the EANM [13]. MF is associated with
variable abnormalities in WBC, either increased with
circulating immature precursors, or decreased in the
presence of massive splenomegaly. The number of WBC
in MF is therefore important for treatment decisions.
Recently, a prognostic score index has been defined that
may be helpful for establishing the proper treatment [14].
For example in PV, a survival time longer than 10 years is
not uncommon [11]. The recent development of therapy
targeting specific molecular defects in MPDs is an exiting
field of interest in which nuclear medicine may play a key
role.
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal haemato-
poietic stem cell diseases characterized by dysplasia and
ineffective haematopoiesis in one or more of the major cell
lines (Table 1). The clinical behaviour of MDS can be
highly variable and separation into subgroups is based on
the bone marrow cytology and cytogenetic findings
according to the WHO classification [9, 15]. Subgroups
that can be distinguished are refractory anaemia (with or
without ringed sideroblasts), refractory cytopenia with
multilineage dysplasia, refractory anaemia with excess
blasts, and MDS (unclassified or with a chromosome
Table 1 Features of myeloid disorders at diagnosis
Disease BM cellularity Blasts Maturation Morphology Haematopoiesis Blood counts Organomegaly
Myelodysplastic
syndromes
Usually increased,
occasionally
decreased
Normal or
increased
(<20%)
Present Dysplasia Ineffective Cytopenia Uncommon
Myeloproliferative
disorders
Usually increased Normal or
slightly
increased
(<10%)
Present Relatively
normal
Effective One or more
myeloid cell lines
increased
Common
Acute myeloid
leukaemia
Usually increased,
occasionally
decreased
Increased
(>20%)
Varies,
frequently
minimal
Sometimes
dysplasia
Ineffective or
effective
Variable Uncommon
168 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
abnormality). MDS occurs predominantly in older adults
with a median age of 70 years. Secondary MDS, a result of
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy for other malignant
disorders, is an increasing problem and may represent as
many as 15% of all patients diagnosed with MDS [16].
Secondary MDS tends to be much more severe than
primary MDS. Clinical symptoms are related to cytopenia
(s), most frequently anaemia, and less commonly neutro-
penia and/or thrombocytopenia. Organomegaly is infre-
quently observed. MDS prognosis depends on its
morphological subtype and cytogenetic characteristics by
which patients can be subdivided in low- and high-risk
group. Patients in the low-risk group are treated with
transfusion, haematopoietic growth factors, immunosup-
pressive therapy or lenolidamide. Those in the high-risk
group are treated in general with therapy regimens
commonly used for patients with acute leukaemia including
allogeneic stem cell transplantation [15].
Aplastic anaemia
Aplastic anaemia (AA) is a rare haematological disorder
caused by immune-mediated destruction of HSC in the
bone marrow [17]. Haematopoiesis fails: blood cell counts
are extremely low (pancytopenia) and the bone marrow
appears empty. Massive AA is a life-threatening bone
marrow disorder, which is associated – if untreated – with a
high mortality rate [18]. In almost half of patients the AA
occurs during the first three decades of life. Often, the
aetiology remains unclear. AA is associated with exposure
to toxins such as benzene, or with the use of certain drugs,
such as chloramphenicol, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and
quinine. AA is present in up to 2% of patients with acute
viral hepatitis. Clinical symptoms are related to the
cytopenia(s). Anaemia leads to malaise, pallor and related
symptoms such as palpitations, thrombocytopenia which is
associated with an increased risk of haemorrhage, bruising
and petechia, and granulocytopenia which is associated
with an increased risk of infection. AA can be effectively
treated by immunosuppressive therapy or allogeneic stem
cell transplantation. When initial treatment is started
promptly, the 5-year survival rate is up to 75%. After a
well-matched bone marrow transplantation, patients have a
long-term survival rate of up to 90% [19].
Haemolytic anaemia
Haemolytic anaemia (HA) is anaemia due to the abnormal
breakdown of red blood cells either in the blood vessels
(intravascular haemolysis) or extravascularly by an overac-
tive enlarged spleen that traps circulating red blood cells
and destroys them. HA can be either acquired or inherited.
Acquired HA can be either immune or non-immune
mediated. HA represents approximately 5% of all anaemias.
Signs of anaemia (fatigue, palpitations and later heart
failure) are generally present. Jaundice (as a result of bilirubin
accumulation which is caused by haemoglobin degradation)
can be the first sign. The overall incidence of death is low
among patients with HA. However, older patients and patients
with cardiovascular impairment are at higher risk compared to
the rest of the population. Symptomatic treatment can be
given by blood transfusion. In immune-mediated HA steroid
therapy is highly effective. Splenectomy can be helpful in
extravascular haemolysis, because in this case most red blood
cells are removed by the spleen.
Imaging the bone marrow using radionuclides
Based on the target cell system, bone marrow imaging
using radionuclides may be divided into three categories:
(1) imaging the reticuloendothelial system (RES), (2)
imaging erythroid precursor cells, and (3) imaging the
myeloid compartment in the bone marrow. These imaging
techniques, almost all using radionuclides for gamma
cameras, have been used in nuclear medicine for many
years. Recent developments in research and application of
PET tracers has led to targeting two other pathways for
imaging the bone marrow: (4) the metabolic activity, and
(5) the proliferative activity. In general, PET tracers will
provide absolute quantification options and a better
resolution than gamma camera tracers. So the use of PET
tracers may be an advantage compared to the use of gamma
camera techniques for the evaluation of bone marrow
disorders. The five target cell systems and the tracers for
imaging the bone marrow are discussed below.
Imaging the reticuloendothelial system
The RES is part of the immune system and consists of
phagocytic cells located in reticular connective tissue,
primarily monocytes and macrophages. Major components
of this system are the hepatic Kupffer cells, the phagocytic
cells in the spleen and the phagocytic reticulum cells in
the bone marrow. The RES can be easily imaged using
radiolabelled colloids. Colloids are small particles that
remain suspended in an appropriate medium. After
intravenous injection, they are phagocytosed by macro-
phages and distributed throughout the body in the RES.
This property is used for RES-targeted bone marrow
scintigraphy.
The two most widely used tracers for scintigraphy of the
RES are 99m
Tc-sulphur colloid and 99m
Tc-nanocolloid
(Table 2). 99m
Tc-sulphur colloid is widely used in the US.
The sizes of the particles range from 100 to 1,000 nm. After
intravenous administration, 5% of the injected activity
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 169
accumulates in the RES of the bone marrow, about 90% in
the liver and 5% in the spleen [20]. Because of the high
liver uptake it is difficult to evaluate the bone marrow in the
lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine. 99m
Tc-nanocolloid
is produced from microaggregated human serum albumin.
More than 95% of the particles are less than 80 nm in size.
After intravenous injection, 99m
Tc-nanocolloid is rapidly
cleared from plasma and taken up by the RES. About 15–
20% is accumulated in the bone marrow by macrophages,
the rest being distributed to the liver (70%) and spleen
(10%) [21]. Because of their small size, the uptake of
nanocolloids by the marrow is greater than that of larger
colloids. There is a small-sized fraction of the nanocolloid
which is not taken up by the RES and is probably slowly
excreted by the kidneys, thereby giving rise to a consider-
able blood background and urinary tract activity.
Normal bone marrow scintigraphy shows homogeneous
activity in the bone marrow of the axial skeleton with
uptake in the humeri and femora limited to the proximal
one-third. The skull, sternum and ribs may show variable
degrees of uptake. The scans are evaluated for homogeneity
and intensity of uptake in normally haematopoietic marrow-
containing structures, the presence and extent of peripheral
marrow expansion, central marrow depletion and focal
marrow defects. Bone marrow infarctions due to sickle cell
anaemia can be imaged with 99m
Tc-sulphur colloid, since
RES activity is lacking in infarcted bone marrow, leading to
the appearance of demarcated defects in bone marrow [22].
In the past, bone marrow images were often obtained using
nanocolloids. This method is not now used because of its
unfavourable target to background ratio [23].
Imaging the erythroid bone marrow (‘the red cells’)
The erythropoietic part of the bone marrow can be imaged
with the PET tracer 52
Fe. Iron is incorporated into the
haemoglobin of erythrocytes.
52
Fe is a cyclotron-produced positron-emitting isotope
with a half-life of 8.2 h and decays by positron emission
(57%) and by electron capture (43%) to the radioactive
daughter 52m
Mn (Table 2). Another iron radioisotope, 59
Fe,
emits β-rays with the high energy of 1.59 MeV and gamma
rays of 1.1 and 1.3 MeV. It has a half-life of 45 days, and
therefore imaging is of low quality with a high radiation
dose. Bone marrow expansion has been demonstrated in
patients with chronic HA (not acute HA), MF and, on rare
occasions, PV [24]. However, the disadvantages mentioned
above and the limited availability of the isotope and PET
facilities have precluded its widespread use.
The tracer 111
In-chloride (111
In-Cl3) distributes in the
skeletal system in a manner partly similar to the distribution
of iron isotopes and partly similar to that of nanocolloids
[25]. 111
In-Cl3 binds to transferrin in exactly the same
manner as iron. The biological behaviours of indium and
iron are different, because In3+
is not reduced, as is iron, to
the In2+
state, but in many respects they are similar, and
marrow 111
In-Cl3 uptake probably reflects the distribution
of erythropoietic marrow. 111
In-Cl3 has been used clinically
for bone marrow studies [26, 27]. It is a cyclotron-produced
isotope with a half-life of 2.8 days emitting gamma rays
with energies of 171 keV (89%) and 245 keV (94%). It
decays by electron capture to stable 111
Cd. After intrave-
nous injection, 111
In-Cl3 is rapidly coupled to serum
transferrin and eliminated from the plasma with a half-life
of 5 h. About 30% of the administered tracer is found in the
bone marrow, 20% in the liver, 7% in the kidneys, and 1%
in the spleen. The remaining activity is distributed
throughout the body fluids without any specific tissue
accumulation. 111
In-Cl3 is incorporated into erythrocytes
only to a minor degree (4% of injected dose) [21]. In
patients with normal bone marrow function and iron
storage, the distribution of 111
In-Cl3 is similar to that of
the 99m
Tc-labelled colloids (Fig. 1) [25].
Patients with MF show an extension of 111
In-Cl3 uptake
beyond the central skeleton towards the knees and
sometimes ankles and elbows, together with uptake in the
spleen. The clinical severity of the disease may be predicted
by uptake of indium, particularly the disappearance of a
physiologically active bone marrow (Fig. 1) [28]. 111
In-Cl3
scintigraphy of the bone marrow has been reported in
patients with AA before therapeutic intervention. In almost
all patients a marked reduction in the uptake was seen.
Failure of 111
In-Cl3 uptake correlated with a poor prognosis
in patients with AA [29]. Another study was performed in
patients with AA in remission for more than 2 years. Bone
marrow scintigrams using 111
In-Cl3 showed patchy haema-
topoiesis which appeared to characterize the residual
marrow damage in AA remission [30].
Overall, the results are not very encouraging. Moreover,
bone marrow irradiated with 5 Gy failed as expected to
accumulate iron but had unimpaired 111
In-Cl3 uptake.
Together with its nearly negligible incorporation into
erythrocytes and the relatively high radiation exposure of
the erythroid compartment, this almost completely pre-
cludes the use of 111
In-Cl3 as a reliable agent for the
assessment of erythropoietic bone marrow activity.
Imaging the myeloid bone marrow compartment
(‘the white cells’)
99m
Tc-HMPAO or 111
In-oxinate-labelled WBC are useful
bone marrow imaging tracers (Table 2). Granulocytes may
become damaged during the labelling process and will be
trapped in the marrow, so the images obtained presumably
represent the distribution of marrow reticuloendothelial
cells. Although there is considerable liver activity with this
170 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
technique, it is significantly less than seen with the colloid
agents, so the spine is usually minimally obscured.
However, the labour-intensive cell labelling procedure and
risk of contamination makes this technique only suitable for
well-equipped laboratories with qualified personnel. Label-
ling of WBC may be improved using new developed kits
that are safe and easy to use, with a high labelling
efficiency without affecting cell vitality and function and
with less risk of contamination. An alternative technique to
label WBC in vivo is based on the use of murine
Fig. 1 Different patterns of haematopoietic bone marrow imaging. a
Normal pattern of haematopoietic bone marrow activity in the central
skeleton and skull. b Expansion of haematopoietic bone marrow
activity more distally in the extremities. c Reduced haematopoietic
bone marrow activity in the central compartment of the skeleton and
skull, as seen in AA. d MF with extramedullary erythropoiesis in the
spleen and liver and reduced haematopoietic bone marrow activity in
the central compartment of the skeleton and skull
Table 2 Overview of different radiopharmaceuticals for imaging the bone marrow
Radiopharmaceutical Physical half
life
Effective dose to bone marrow per MBq
(mSv)
Cyclotron Quantification
(absolute)
Target
Gamma camera
99m
Tc-sulphur colloid 6 h 0.0019 − − RES
99m
Tc-nanocolloid 6 h 0.0094 − − RES
111
In-chloride 2.3 days 0.21 − − Erythropoietic
99m
Tc-WBC 6 h 0.023 − − RES
111
In-WBC 2.3 days 0.36 − − RES
99m
Tc-AGAb 6 h 0.0055 − − Granulopoietic
PET
52
Fe 8.2 days 6.1 +/− + Erythropoietic
18
F-FDG 2 h 0.011 +/− + Metabolic activity (glucose)
18
F-FLT 2 h 0.029 +/− + Proliferative activity (DNA)
11
C-methionine 20 min 0.00045 + + Metabolic activity (amino acid)
11
C-acetate 20 min 0.0057 + + Metabolic activity (fatty acid)
11
C-choline 20 min 0.0019 + + Cell proliferation
18
F-choline 2 h 0.012 +/− +
AGAb antigranulocyte antibodies, WBC white blood cells, +/− 18
F cyclotron-produced, but transportable for local labelling procedures.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 171
monoclonal antigranulocyte antibodies (AGAb), or Fab′
fragments, labelled with 99m
Tc. 99m
Tc-labelled murine
monoclonal antibodies have been developed to target
granulocytes in vivo. Immunoscintigraphy using 99m
Tc-
labelled AGAb (99m
Tc-AGAb) directed against the nonspe-
cific cross-reacting antigen 95 (NCA-95) has been found to
be a suitable modality for bone marrow imaging because of
the simplicity of its use and a high target-to-background
ratio [31]. NCA-95 is expressed at the cell membrane of
circulating granulocytes in blood as well as in mature
myeloid cells in the bone marrow [32]. The binding of
AGAb to cells in the bone marrow is very rapid and
extensive because of the high concentration of granulo-
cytes, promyelocytes and myelocytes that all express the
NCA-95 antigen [33]. Myeloid cells in the bone marrow are
in a 50–100:1 excess compared with granulocytes in the
peripheral blood. 99m
Tc-AGAb has been found to distribute
primarily to the bone marrow after intravenous injection
[34], and a progressive increase in activity in the spleen and
the bone marrow is visible [33]. The uptake in the spleen
can potentially be used for assessment of EMH [21].
The bone marrow status can be evaluated in three
different ways: (1) estimation of the bone marrow distribu-
tion pattern, (2) identification of focal lesions (cold and
hot), and (3) calculation of the uptake ratio between the
sacroiliac region (corrected for background activity) and the
background [35].
The bone marrow appearance in each haematological
disease on 99m
Tc-AGAb scans seems to be characteristic. In
PV, a moderately increased uptake in the spleen is seen,
probably related to EMH [36]. In MDS, generalized, small
focal defects in uptake in the bone marrow are seen without
indications of EMH or peripheral expansion [21]. In
patients with MF, diffusely decreased bone marrow activity
and prominent splenic uptake are seen. In AA, highly
reduced and patchy marrow uptake is seen, but also a
diffusely decreased uptake.
Imaging the metabolic activity
The well known PET tracer 18
F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
is widely used in the evaluation of oncological and
infectious diseases. FDG uptake is a measure of cell
glucose utilization (glycolysis). FDG is metabolically
trapped in the cell after phosphorylation as FDG-6-
phosphate. Unlike glucose, FDG does not further partici-
pate in the glycolytic pathway and remains in the cell. FDG
uptake reflects the metabolic activity of the cell and it is
useful to examine the function of the red marrow and to
detect bone marrow involvement in both benign and
malignant disorders. PET/CT additionally provides the
synergistic advantages of precise anatomical localization
of radiotracer uptake, high contrast and spatial resolution,
and accurate quantification of metabolic activity at sites of
radiotracer uptake.
Under normal conditions the liver, spleen, and bone
marrow show homogeneous low uptake of FDG, with the
bone marrow and spleen appearing less intense than the
liver. Uptake of FDG in haematopoietic marrow, and its
pattern and amount, can vary with age and with the level of
marrow function at the time of PET examination [23].
Higher FDG uptake in the bone marrow than in the liver
may indicate bone marrow activation [37]. The diffuse
increase in FDG uptake in the bone marrow may be caused
by the presence of malignancy or haematopoietic disease,
but also may be due to an inflammatory reaction, stimulation
by some types of malignancy, as a result of recent chemo-
theraphy, or to the administration of haematopoietic growth
factors. To determine the effect of granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) on bone marrow
glucose metabolism, the specific uptake of FDG in bone
marrow has been evaluated. It was shown that a substantial
increase in bone marrow FDG uptake is rapidly induced by
CSF treatments and should not be misinterpreted as diffuse
bone metastases or bone marrow disease [38]. Therefore,
FDG uptake is a sensitive marker of stimulated haemato-
poiesis, and both the extension and the intensification of
uptake should be taken into account during haematopoietic
growth factor therapy [39]. FDG uptake in the bone marrow
compartment can be quantified using the standardized
uptake value.
Patients with PV show a diffuse elevated FDG uptake in
the bone marrow, as a result of bone marrow stimulation
related to the clonal expansion of multipotent haemato-
poietic progenitor cells in this disease. When diffuse high
marrow uptake of FDG is seen, PV should be considered in
the differential diagnosis in the absence of an another
aetiology [40, 41]. In a case report, a patient with MF was
reported to show a markedly increased FDG uptake
throughout the spleen and liver. Both were massively
enlarged, and combined with a lower FDG uptake in the
bone marrow of the central skeleton, being a reflection of
the patient’s MF [42]. Patients with MDS also show diffuse
bone marrow FDG uptake. This has also been found in
patients who had undergone FDG PET for other reasons. So,
these reports demonstrate that diffuse FDG uptake by the
bone marrow probably suggests neoplastic disease of the
haematopoietic tissue [43]. FDG PET has been shown to be
effective for the detection of bone marrow metastases from
several malignancies including lung carcinoma, breast carci-
noma, and lymphoma [44–48]. It is unclear to what extent
lesions are involved in bone marrow and bone metastases.
A recent study in 21 patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and bone marrow involvement showed that the
bone marrow uptake of FDG depends on the histological
172 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
type of cell infiltrate. In this study, FDG PET showed
abnormal foci of uptake in most patients with concordant
bone marrow involvement (prominent diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma), whereas FDG uptake was normal in most
patients with discordant bone marrow involvement (prom-
inent indolent lymphoma) [49]. Another study demonstrat-
ed at initial staging of Hodgkin lymphoma that diffuse bone
marrow uptake without splenic involvement may be due to
Hodgkin lymphoma-related bone marrow involvement.
However, these observations are more likely to be due to
bone marrow inflammatory changes. In contrast, diffuse
spleen uptake in combination with bone marrow uptake is
probably more associated with disease involvement than
with inflammatory changes [50]. Moreover, in a study of
the role of FDG as a tracer to visualize bone marrow
metastases in 257 patients with newly diagnosed lung
cancer, the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of FDG-
PET and bone scintigraphy were found to be 94% vs 85%,
91% vs 75%, and 96% vs 95%, respectively [44].
A previous study investigating the bone marrow status in
112 breast cancer patients with N0 or N1 disease (who had
undergone bone marrow aspiration twice) demonstrated
that tumour cells were present in the bone marrow in 83%
of the patients at the time of primary surgery. This was
reduced to 24% 12 months after initiation of adjuvant
systemic chemotherapy [51]. This supports the concept that
systemic treatment is effective in reducing the number of
tumour cells within the bone marrow. Further studies are
warranted to investigate this differential response to
systemic therapy. When metastases are mainly confined to
the bone marrow compared to those that involve the bone
matrix, this would further enhance the role of metabolic
imaging of bone marrow metastases by FDG PET in
various malignant disorders.
FDG PET can also be used for the evaluation of CML or
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) [52, 53]. Follow-up
FDG PET scans were performed in patients with CML after
termination of treatment [53]. FDG PET findings showed
reduced FDG uptake in the bone marrow. Also localized
relapse of ALL in bone marrow can be visualized with
FDG PET [52]. FDG PET has already been shown to be
useful in the initial staging of multiple myeloma patients
(Fig. 2). It has also been demonstrated to be valuable in
patients with solitary plasmacytoma in bone as well as in
patients suffering from extramedullary plasmacytoma [54].
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy using 111
In-pentetreotide
may also be a good alternative to find the malignant plasma
cells in multiple myeloma and plasmacytoma patients,
especially at relapse [55]. 99m
Tc-sestamibi has also been
proposed as a potential tracer in patients with multiple
myeloma [56]. The patterns of 99m
Tc-sestamibi uptake in
patients with multiple myeloma are related to both the
clinical status and the stage of disease. The presence of
focal uptake or of intense diffuse bone marrow uptake
suggests that the patient has active and advanced stage
disease, while a negative scan in a patient with multiple
myeloma clearly indicates remission [56]. Compared with
99m
Tc-sestamibi FDG PET/CT performs better in the
detection of focal lesions, whereas 99m
Tc-sestamibi is
superior in the visualization of diffuse disease in the spine
and pelvis [57]. Finally, it is considered that FDG PET may
become useful in the initial staging, follow-up, and
restaging of patients with bone marrow malignancy.
Imaging the proliferative activity
The thymidine analogue 3-deoxy-3-18
F-fluorothymidine
(18
F-FLT) was developed as a PET tracer to image cell
proliferation [58]. The pyrimidine analogue thymidine is
incorporated into DNA and undergoes the same first
metabolic step as thymidine. 18
F-FLT is taken up by the
cell by both passive diffusion and facilitated transport by
Na+
-dependent carriers. Subsequently, 18
F-FLT is phos-
phorylated by thymidine kinase 1 (TK1) into 18
F-FLT
monophosphate, after which it is trapped in the cell. The
phosphorylation by TK1 forms the basis of 18
F-FLT as a
proliferation tracer. As a result of this behaviour, reduced
18
F-FLT uptake is seen in the affected area after radiother-
Fig. 2 FDG PET image in a
patient with multiple myeloma.
Lesions are visible in the ribs,
right scapula and sternum
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 173
apy (Fig. 3). Accordingly, increased 18
F-FLT uptake in
bone marrow and spleen is seen in patients with acute
myeloid leukaemia. This uptake is significantly higher in
patients with relapsed, refractory, or untreated leukaemia
[59]. Therefore, 18
F-FLT could be an imaging biomarker of
disease activity. EMH lesions can also be seen with 18
F-
FLT PET (Fig. 4e).
In a recent pilot study, we demonstrated 18
F-FLT
distribution in haematological disorders [60]. There is
increased 18
F-FLT uptake in the bone marrow areas
compared with that in healthy control subjects and a
significant expansion of the bone marrow compartment in
patients with MDS (Fig. 4b). Patients with MPD showed
remarkable expansion of the bone marrow with high uptake
(see Fig. 4c). Despite the large size of the liver and spleen
in two patients with MPD, 18
F-FLT uptake in these organs
was not elevated. Significantly higher uptake in the spleen
and liver with distinct hepatosplenomegaly was character-
istic of MF, with bone marrow uptake significantly reduced
and expansion may be seen (Fig. 4d). 18
F-FLT may also be
a valuable tool for visualizing the bone marrow compart-
ment and is able to identify solitary areas of increased
proliferative activity that can frequently be recognized in
patients with AA (Fig. 4a). Increased 18
F-FLT uptake was
demonstrated after stem cell transplantation in a group of
patients with lymphoma. At the same time there was an
extension of bone marrow activity in the peripheral
skeleton. These findings correlated with in vitro data
showing a higher proliferative activity of haematopoietic
progenitor cells [61]. 18
F-FLT PET may be a promising
method for noninvasive evaluation of bone marrow activity
after bone marrow transplantation.
Fig. 3 a Normal distribution of 18
F-FLT PET. b The effect of radio-
therapy on bone marrow activity in (a) the fourth lumbar vertebra
and (b) the midthoracic vertebrae
Fig. 4 Different bone marrow patterns in 18
F-FLT PET. a A patient
with AA. Several patchy hot lesions with increased proliferative
activity are visible in the spine and femora, and mainly higher liver
uptake compared to controls. b A patient with MDS shows a relatively
homogeneous 18
F-FLT PET pattern in the bone marrow of the spine
and relative heterogeneous expansion in the extremities, but the
extremities can also be homogeneous. There is normal uptake in the
liver and spleen. c A patient with MPD shows homogeneously
increased uptake and extensive peripheral bone marrow expansion
into extremity bones and no elevated uptake in the liver or (enlarged)
spleen. d A patient with MF shows low uptake in the bone marrow
compartment. Elevated uptake in the enlarged spleen and moderate
elevated uptake in the liver as a result of extramedullary haematopoiesis.
e A patient with thoracic paravertebral EMH with β-thalassaemia
174 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
11
C-Methionine is another PET compound that can be
used for imaging the amino acid activity in highly
proliferative tissues, such as bone marrow [62]. The
mechanism of increased uptake of 11
C-methionine in bone
marrow has been described as an expression of increased
cellular proliferation and protein synthesis [63]. Multiple
myeloma is a process characterized by neoplastic prolifer-
ation of plasma cells, and these cells nearly always produce
complete monoclonal immunoglobulins or monoclonal
immunoglobulin light chains. The unrestricted expansion
of a plasma cell clone and the excessive synthesis of
monoclonal immunoglobulins result in extensive skeletal
destruction and anaemia. 11
C-Methionine incorporation into
immunoglobulins of the malignant plasma cell clone in
vivo can be assumed. On the basis of increased methionine
uptake in plasma cells, active multiple myeloma can be
imaged with 11
C-methionine PET [63]. Nunez et al.
compared 11
C-methionine with FDG PET in 12 patients
with metastatic prostate cancer. 11
C-Methionine PET was
more effective than FDG PET for detecting bone metasta-
ses, including bone marrow involvement in this patient
population [62].
The potential advantages of PET using radiolabelled
phospholipids, such as 11
C- and 18
F-labelled choline, in the
assessment of patients with prostate cancer have been
emphasized in previous studies [64, 65]. Choline uptake
seems to be a marker of cell proliferation in prostate cancer,
as malignancies are commonly characterized by increased
proliferative activity. The second explanation proposed is
upregulation of choline kinase in cancer cells: overexpres-
sion of choline kinase has been found in cancer cell lines,
including human-derived prostate cancer [66]. Cimitan et
al. examined 100 postoperative prostate cancer patients
with persistently increased serum PSA levels, suggestive of
local recurrences or distant metastases. 18
F-Choline PET/
CT correctly detected bone involvement in 21% of patients;
also 76% of them were undergoing hormone therapy [64].
Bone marrow metastases were not scored separately in this
study, but 18
F-choline may be an interesting PET tracer for
this purpose.
11
C-Acetate has also recently been used for the imaging
of prostate cancer and the genitourinary system and is
suitable for visualizing the pelvis due to its lack of urinary
excretion and its acceptable tumour to background contrast
[67, 68]. Previously published data on the value of 11
C-
acetate PET show that it might have significant potential for
the detection of recurrences and bone metastases when
using more advanced PET/CT equipment [69]. Probably
11
C-acetate may also be an interesting PET tracer for
evaluation of bone marrow metastases. Recently, 18
F-
fluoroacetate has been introduced as a possible alternative
to 11
C-acetate for PET imaging, especially with respect to
its longer half-life [70].
Future perspectives and conclusion
Several patterns of bone marrow uptake can be identified
depending on the haematopoietic activity, the underlying
disorder and the radiopharmaceutical used. Bone marrow
activity can be more or less identically recognized with
gamma and PET cameras. However, differences have been
noted in the resolution and quality, and PET offers the
ability to quantify standardized uptake values of the bone
marrow activity. Different targets can be used for imaging
the total normal and diseased bone marrow compartment.
This is an advantage compared to a bone marrow biopsy by
which 1–2 cm of the bone marrow compartment is
evaluated. Imaging may help to differentiate various bone
marrow diseases and may play a part in monitoring
treatment and bone marrow transplantation. There are new
developments in PET tracers for the field of nuclear
medicine. Imaging of hypoxia and programmed cell death
in the bone marrow compartment are two features that may
be used in the future for monitoring disease activity or for
studying the effects of therapy including chemotherapy,
kinase inhibitors or radiotherapy [71].
A number of agents exploit the low oxygen tension in
hypoxic tissues to permit intercellular trapping by reductive
mechanisms. [18
F]Fluoromisonidazole-3-fluoro-1-(2′-nitro-
1′-imidazolyl)-2-propanol (18
F-MISO) and 64
Cu-diacetyl-
bis(N4
-methylthiosemicarbazone (64
Cu-ATSM), and the
recently introduced [18
F]fluoroazomycinarabinoside (18
F-
FAZA) are the lead contenders for human application. Their
promise is based on their noninvasive nature, ease of use
and robustness, ability to measure hypoxia status, validity,
ability to demonstrate heterogeneity, and general availabil-
ity [71, 72]. 18
F-FAZA uptake by normal bone marrow cells
is relative low, but may potentially increase under hypoxic
conditions [71]. Visualization of apoptosis or programmed
cell death with 18
F-annexin A5 may be of use to study the
effectiveness of treatment in leukaemia, myeloma or MPDs
[73].
In future, 18
F-immuno-PET or labelling with the PET
label 89
Zr with a longer life is of interest for the
determination of CD66 distribution in the bone marrow,
especially for the evaluation of leukaemia [74]. The CD66
antigen is expressed at the cell surface of mature myeloid
cells including promyelocytes and granulocytes. It is
therefore an attractive target for the detection of the extent
of the monotonous population of leukaemic cells in the
bone marrow and probably also of value for the monitoring
of minimal residual disease following treatment. Anti-
CD66 monoclonal antibodies labelled with beta-emitting
nuclides (188
Re and 90
Y) have already been introduced and
can be used as part of the treatment for high-risk leukaemia
[75]. Neovascularization is also a prominent feature of
malignant transformation. Recently different agents have
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 175
been introduced into clinical practice, including monoclonal
antibodies against VEGF or kinase inhibitors of the VEGF
receptor. New imaging tools with 89
Zr-bevacizumab have
become available in solid tumours for visualization of
neovascularization [76]. This might also be an attractive
approach for haematological disorders since enhanced
neovascularization is also a prominent feature in acute
myeloid leukaemia [77].
In conclusion, a variety of bone marrow targets can
be imaged with radionuclide imaging, where PET offers
the possibility of absolute quantification of bone marrow
activity. Imaging may help differentiate various bone
marrow diseases and may play a role in monitoring treat-
ment effects.
Acknowledgment We thank Jan Pruim, Douwe Buiter and Albertus
Piers for technical assistance.
Conflicts of interest None.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Rubin R, Strayer DS. Rubin's pathology: clinicopathologic
foundations of medicine. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2007.
2. Rizo A, Vellenga E, de Haan G, Schuringa JJ. Signaling pathways
in self-renewing hematopoietic and leukemic stem cells: do all
stem cells need a niche? Hum Mol Genet 2006;15(Spec no 2):
R210–9
3. Johnsen HE, Kjeldsen MK, Urup T, Fogd K, Pilgaard L, Boegsted
M, et al. Cancer stem cells and the cellular hierarchy in
haematological malignancies. Eur J Cancer 2009;45 Suppl
1:194–201.
4. Vardimann JW. Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases. In:
Finn WG, Peterson LC, editors. Hematopathology in oncology.
New York: Springer US; 2004. p. 13–43.
5. Schepers H, van Gosliga D, Wierenga AT, Eggen BJ, Schuringa
JJ, Vellenga E. STAT5 is required for long-term maintenance of
normal and leukemic human stem/progenitor cells. Blood
2007;110:2880–8.
6. Koch CA, Li CY, Mesa RA, Tefferi A. Nonhepatosplenic
extramedullary hematopoiesis: associated diseases, pathology,
clinical course, and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc 2003;78:1223–33.
7. Charache S, Page DL. Infarction of bone marrow in the sickle cell
disorders. Ann Intern Med 1967;67:1195–200.
8. Lutzker LG, Alavi A. Bone and marrow imaging in sickle cell
disease: diagnosis of infarction. Semin Nucl Med 1976;6:83–93.
9. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Pileri SA, Stein H,
et al. World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors
of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. 4th ed. Lyon: IARC Press;
2009.
10. Delhommeau F, Dupont S, Della Valle V, James C, Trannoy S,
Masse A, et al. Mutation in TET2 in myeloid cancers. N Engl J
Med 2009;360:2289–301.
11. Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, Vardiman JW. Tumours of
haematopoietic and lymphoid tissue, pathology and genetics.
World Health Organization classification of tumours. Lyon: IARC
Press, 2001.
12. Tefferi A, Spivak JL. Polycythemia vera: scientific advances and
current practice. Semin Hematol 2005;42:206–20.
13. Tennvall J, Brans B. EANM procedure guideline for 32P
phosphate treatment of myeloproliferative diseases. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 2007;34:1324–7.
14. Tam CS, Kantarjian H, Cortes J, Lynn A, Pierce S, Zhou L, et al.
Dynamic model for predicting death within 12 months in patients
with primary or post-polycythemia vera/essential thrombocythe-
mia myelofibrosis. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:5587–93.
15. Greenberg P, Anderson J, de Witte T, Estey E, Fenaux P, Gupta P,
et al. Problematic WHO reclassification of myelodysplastic
syndromes Members of the International MDS Study Group. J
Clin Oncol 2000;18:3447–52.
16. Williamson PJ, Kruger AR, Reynolds PJ, Hamblin TJ, Oscier DG.
Establishing the incidence of myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J
Haematol 1994;87:743–5.
17. Young NS. Acquired aplastic anemia. Ann Intern Med
2002;136:534–46.
18. Young NS, Scheinberg P, Calado RT. Aplastic anemia. Curr Opin
Hematol 2008;15:162–8.
19. Pitcher LA, Hann IM, Evans JP, Veys P, Chessells JM, Webb DK.
Improved prognosis for acquired aplastic anaemia. Arch Dis Child
1999;80:158–62.
20. Desai AG, Thakur ML. Radiopharmaceuticals for spleen and bone
marrow studies. Semin Nucl Med 1985;15:229–38.
21. Reske SN. Recent advances in bone marrow scanning. Eur J Nucl
Med 1991;18:203–21.
22. Milner PF, Brown M. Bone marrow infarction in sickle cell anemia:
correlation with hematologic profiles. Blood 1982;60:1411–9.
23. Blebea JS, Houseni M, Torigian DA, Fan C, Mavi A, Zhuge Y, et
al. Structural and functional imaging of normal bone marrow and
evaluation of its age-related changes. Semin Nucl Med
2007;37:185–94.
24. Ferrant A, Rodhain J, Leners N, Cogneau M, Verwilghen RL,
Michaux JL, et al. Quantitative assessment of erythropoiesis in
bone marrow expansion areas using 52Fe. Br J Haematol
1986;62:247–55.
25. Datz FL, Taylor A Jr. The clinical use of radionuclide bone
marrow imaging. Semin Nucl Med 1985;15:239–59.
26. Itoh H, Kanamori M, Takahashi N. Dissociation between In-111
chloride and Tc-99m colloid bone marrow scintigraphy in
refractory anemia with excess blasts. Clin Nucl Med
1990;15:124–5.
27. Sayle BA, Helmer III RE, Birdsong BA, Balachandran S, Gardner
FH. Bone-marrow imaging with indium-111 chloride in aplastic
anemia and myelofibrosis: concise communication. J Nucl Med
1982;23:121–5.
28. Rain JD, Najean Y. Bone marrow scintigraphy in myelofibrosis.
Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1993;35:101–2.
29. McNeil BJ, Rappeport JM, Nathan DG. Indium chloride scintig-
raphy: an index of severity in patients with aplastic anaemia. Br J
Haematol 1976;34:599–604.
30. Hotta T, Murate T, Inoue C, Kagami T, Tsushita K, Wang JY, et al.
Patchy haemopoiesis in long-term remission of idiopathic aplastic
anaemia. Eur J Haematol 1990;45:73–7.
31. Huic D, Ivancevic V, Richter WS, Munz DL. Immunoscintigraphy
of the bone marrow: normal uptake values of technetium-99m-
labeled monoclonal antigranulocyte antibodies. J Nucl Med
1997;38:1755–8.
32. Wahren B, Gahrton G, Hammarstrom S. Nonspecific cross-
reacting antigen in normal and leukemic myeloid cells and serum
of leukemic patients. Cancer Res 1980;40:2039–44.
176 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
33. Becker W, Borst U, Fischbach W, Pasurka B, Schafer R, Borner
W. Kinetic data of in-vivo labeled granulocytes in humans with a
murine Tc-99m-labelled monoclonal antibody. Eur J Nucl Med
1989;15:361–6.
34. Reske SN, Karstens JH, Gloeckner W, Steinstrasser A, Schwarz
A, Ammon J, et al. Radioimmunoimaging for diagnosis of bone
marrow involvement in breast cancer and malignant lymphoma.
Lancet 1989;1:299–301.
35. Munz DL, Voth E, Emrich D. Different approaches to determine
the uptake ratio of bone-marrow-seeking radiopharmaceuticals for
classifying the scintigraphic bone marrow status. Nuc Compact
1987;18:192–4.
36. Bonner H. Pathology. Philadelphia: Lippincott; 2009.
37. Inoue K, Goto R, Okada K, Kinomura S, Fukuda H. A bone
marrow F-18 FDG uptake exceeding the liver uptake may indicate
bone marrow hyperactivity. Ann Nucl Med 2009;23:643–9.
38. Sugawara Y, Fisher SJ, Zasadny KR, Kison PV, Baker LH, Wahl
RL. Preclinical and clinical studies of bone marrow uptake of
fluorine-1-fluorodeoxyglucose with or without granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor during chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:173–80.
39. Knopp MV, Bischoff H, Rimac A, Oberdorfer F, van Kaick G.
Bone marrow uptake of fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose following
treatment with hematopoietic growth factors: initial evaluation.
Nucl Med Biol 1996;23:845–9.
40. Basu S, Asopa R, Peshwe H, Mohandas KM. Diffuse intense
FDG uptake in the bone marrow in gastrointestinal stromal tumor
with coexistent polycythemia rubra vera. Clin Nucl Med
2008;33:782–3.
41. Quarles van Ufford HM, de Jong JA, Baarslag HJ, de Haas MJ,
Oud K, de Klerk JM. FDG PET in a patient with polycythemia
vera. Clin Nucl Med 2008;33:780–781
42. Burrell SC, Fischman AJ. Myelofibrosis on F-18 FDG PET
Imaging. Clin Nucl Med 2005;30:674.
43. Inoue K, Okada K, Harigae H, Taki Y, Goto R, Kinomura S, et al.
Diffuse bone marrow uptake on F-18 FDG PET in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes. Clin Nucl Med 2006;31:721–3.
44. Cheran SK, Herndon JE, Patz EF Jr. Comparison of whole-body
FDG-PET to bone scan for detection of bone metastases in patients
with a new diagnosis of lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2004;44:317–25.
45. Kumar R, Alavi A. Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET in the management
of breast cancer. Radiol Clin N Am 2004;42:1113–22.
46. Kumar R, Maillard I, Schuster SJ, Alavi A. Utility of
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET imaging in the management of patients
with Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Radiol Clin N
Am 2004;42:1083–100.
47. Mavi A, Lakhani P, Zhuang H, Gupta NC, Alavi A.
Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET in characterizing solitary pulmonary
nodules, assessing pleural diseases, and the initial staging,
restaging, therapy planning, and monitoring response of lung
cancer. Radiol Clin N Am 2005;43:1–21.
48. Moog F, Bangerter M, Kotzerke J, Guhlmann A, Frickhofen N,
Reske SN. 18-F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomogra-
phy as a new approach to detect lymphomatous bone marrow. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:603–9.
49. Paone G, Itti E, Haioun C, Gaulard P, Dupuis J, Lin C, et al. Bone
marrow involvement in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: correlation
between FDG-PET uptake and type of cellular infiltrate. Eur J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2009;36:745–50.
50. Salaun PY, Gastinne T, Bodet-Milin C, Campion L, Cambefort P,
Moreau A, et al. Analysis of 18F-FDG PET diffuse bone marrow
uptake and splenic uptake in staging of Hodgkin's lymphoma: a
reflection of disease infiltration or just inflammation? Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 2009;36:1813–21.
51. Becker S, Becker-Pergola G, Wallwiener D, Solomayer EF, Fehm
T. Detection of cytokeratin-positive cells in the bone marrow of
breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant therapy. Breast Cancer
Res Treat 2006;97:91–6.
52. Endo T, Sato N, Koizumi K, Nishio M, Fujimoto K, Sakai T, et al.
Localized relapse in bone marrow of extremities after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Am J
Hematol 2004;76:279–82.
53. Nakajo M, Jinnouchi S, Inoue H, Otsuka M, Matsumoto T, Kukita
T, et al. FDG PET findings of chronic myeloid leukemia in the
chronic phase before and after treatment. Clin Nucl Med
2007;32:775–8.
54. Jadvar H, Conti PS. Diagnostic utility of FDG PET in multiple
myeloma. Skeletal Radiol 2002;31:690–4.
55. Agool A, Slart RH, Dierckx RA, Kluin PM, Visser L, Jager PL, et al.
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy might be useful for detecting
skeleton abnormalities in patients with multiple myeloma and
plasmacytoma. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2010;37:124–30.
56. Pace L, Catalano L, Pinto A, De Renzo A, Di Gennaro F, Califano
C, et al. Different patterns of technetium-99m sestamibi uptake in
multiple myeloma. Eur J Nucl Med 1998;25:714–20.
57. Fonti R, Salvatore B, Quarantelli M, Sirignano C, Segreto S,
Petruzziello F, et al. 18F-FDG PET/CT, 99mTc-MIBI, and MRI in
evaluation of patients with multiple myeloma. J Nucl Med
2008;49:195–200.
58. Shields AF, Grierson JR, Dohmen BM, Machulla HJ, Stayanoff
JC, Lawhorn-Crews JM, et al. Imaging proliferation in vivo with
[F-18]FLT and positron emission tomography. Nat Med
1998;4:1334–6.
59. Buck AK, Bommer M, Juweid ME, Glatting G, Stilgenbauer S,
Mottaghy FM, et al. First demonstration of leukemia imaging with
the proliferation marker 18F-fluorodeoxythymidine. J Nucl Med
2008;49:1756–62.
60. Agool A, Schot BW, Jager PL, Vellenga E. 18F-FLT PET in
hematologic disorders: a novel technique to analyze the bone
marrow compartment. J Nucl Med 2006;47:1592–8.
61. Woolthuis C, Agool A, Olthof S, Slart RH, Huls G, Smid WM, et
al. Auto-SCT induces a phenotypic shift from CMP to GMP
progenitors, reduces clonogenic potential and enhances in vitro
and in vivo cycling activity defined by (18)F-FLT PET scanning.
Bone Marrow Transplant 2010. DOI: 10.1038/bmt.2010.75
62. Nunez R, Macapinlac HA, Yeung HW, Akhurst T, Cai S, Osman
I, et al. Combined 18F-FDG and 11C-methionine PET scans in
patients with newly progressive metastatic prostate cancer. J Nucl
Med 2002;43:46–55.
63. Dankerl A, Liebisch P, Glatting G, Friesen C, Blumstein NM,
Kocot D, et al. Multiple myeloma: molecular imaging with
11C-methionine PET/CT – initial experience. Radiology 2007;242:
498–508.
64. Cimitan M, Bortolus R, Morassut S, Canzonieri V, Garbeglio A,
Baresic T, et al. [18F]Fluorocholine PET/CT imaging for the
detection of recurrent prostate cancer at PSA relapse: experience
in 100 consecutive patients. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging
2006;33:1387–98.
65. Kwee SA, Thibault GP, Stack RS, Coel MN, Furusato B,
Sesterhenn IA. Use of step-section histopathology to evaluate
18F-fluorocholine PET sextant localization of prostate cancer. Mol
Imaging 2008;7:12–20.
66. Zheng QH, Gardner TA, Raikwar S, Kao C, Stone KL,
Martinez TD, et al. [11C]Choline as a PET biomarker for
assessment of prostate cancer tumor models. Bioorg Med Chem
2004;12:2887–93.
67. de Jong IJ, Pruim J, Elsinga PH, Vaalburg W, Mensink HJ.
Visualization of prostate cancer with 11C-choline positron
emission tomography. Eur Urol 2002;42:18–23.
68. Shreve P, Chiao PC, Humes HD, Schwaiger M, Gross MD.
Carbon-11-acetate PET imaging in renal disease. J Nucl Med
1995;36:1595–601.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178 177
69. Albrecht S, Buchegger F, Soloviev D, Zaidi H, Vees H, Khan HG,
et al. (11)C-Acetate PET in the early evaluation of prostate cancer
recurrence. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2007;34:185–96.
70. Ponde DE, Dence CS, Oyama N, Kim J, Tai YC, Laforest R, et al.
18F-Fluoroacetate: a potential acetate analog for prostate tumor
imaging – in vivo evaluation of 18F-fluoroacetate versus 11C-
acetate. J Nucl Med 2007;48:420–8.
71. Souvatzoglou M, Grosu AL, Roper B, Krause BJ, Beck R,
Reischl G, et al. Tumour hypoxia imaging with [18F]FAZA PET
in head and neck cancer patients: a pilot study. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging 2007;34:1566–75.
72. Padhani A. PET imaging of tumour hypoxia. Cancer Imaging
2006;6:S117–21.
73. Baumann P, Mandl-Weber S, Volkl A, Adam C, Bumeder I,
Oduncu F, et al. Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitor A771726
(leflunomide) induces apoptosis and diminishes proliferation of
multiple myeloma cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2009;8:366–75.
74. Neumaier B, Mottaghy FM, Buck AK, Glatting G, Blumstein
NM, Mahren B, et al. (18)F-Immuno-PET: Determination of anti-
CD66 biodistribution in a patient with high-risk leukemia. Cancer
Biother Radiopharm 2008;23:819–24
75. Ringhoffer M, Blumstein N, Neumaier B, Glatting G, von
Harsdorf S, Buchmann I, et al. 188Re or 90Y-labelled anti-CD66
antibody as part of a dose-reduced conditioning regimen for patients
with acute leukaemia or myelodysplastic syndrome over the age of
55: results of a phase I-II study. Br J Haematol 2005;130:604–13.
76. Nagengast WB, de Vries EG, Hospers GA, Mulder NH, de Jong
JR, Hollema H, et al. In vivo VEGF imaging with radiolabeled
bevacizumab in a human ovarian tumor xenograft. J Nucl Med
2007;48:1313–9.
77. de Bont ES, Rosati S, Jacobs S, Kamps WA, Vellenga E.
Increased bone marrow vascularization in patients with acute
myeloid leukaemia: a possible role for vascular endothelial growth
factor. Br J Haematol 2001;113:296–304.
178 Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2011) 38:166–178
