LETTER TO THE EDITOR
Palliative care for patients with hematological
malignancies—a case series
Bernd Alt-Epping & Gerald Wulf & Friedemann Nauck
Received: 5 August 2010 /Accepted: 16 August 2010 /Published online: 1 September 2010
# The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Dear Editor,
Despite significant therapeutic advances in the last decades,
more than half of all adult patients with hematological
malignancies (ICD 10: C81–C95) will eventually die from
their disease (53.6% in Germany; [3]). Specialized pallia-
tive care (PC) institutions, that are characterized by a
multidisciplinary team approach in order to improve the
quality of life of patients with advanced and progressive
disease, have gained broad acceptance in the care for
patients with solid tumors. However, patients with hemato-
logical malignancies are considered to be underrepresented
in specialized PC services [4, 5].
Patients with hematological malignancies had signifi-
cantly later access to PC services, defined as the interval
from first PC consultation until death (13 versus 46 days)
[2], and a need of explicit PC concepts for patients with
hematological malignancies undergoing stem cell trans-
plantation has been claimed [1].
We therefore reviewed all patients with hematological
malignancies at our specialized PC institution in order to
define underlying clinical and disease specific character-
istics, the subjective needs of these patients, the environ-
ment of care, and different modes of PC support, and tried
to outline a specific PC approach that could serve as a first
fundament and framework for closer PC/hematology
cooperations.
Within 31 months (October 1, 2006–April 21, 2009), 79
patients with underlying hematological malignancies were
treated at the Department of Palliative Medicine in
Goettingen/Germany (5.1% of 1,555 PC patients total).
Most patients (34 patients; 43.0%) were treated on an
outpatient basis/PC home care service, while 33 patients
(41.1%) also required inpatient palliative care. Ten patient
contacts (12.7%) were limited to PC consultation service,
and two patients (and relatives) were solely supported by
PC volunteer services, at home and on a hematology ward,
respectively (Table 1). In further 15 documented cases, PC
services were contacted by the hematology department, but
PC support was not initialized as care concepts were
modified before transfer (6/15=40.0%) or due to shortage
of a free PC unit bed (9/15=60.0%). Six of the waiting
patients died while being on the waiting list for a PC unit
transfer (6/15=40%), one of them on the same day PC
services were contacted .
Aggressive lymphoma and acute leukemia, as well as
myeloma, were the most frequent entities.
Pain was prevalent in 29.1% of cases (23 patients),
43.4% of those suffered from myeloma. Instead, the request
for PC was predominantly (56.9%) motivated by psycho-
social or nursing-related demands or general support needs
for the patient and his/her family.
For the referred patients, the PC approach encompassed
– counseling and pharmacotherapy for pain, dyspnea,
fatigue, loss of appetite, and other measures of
symptom control
– tailored therapeutic interventions like symptom-guided
blood product substitution, anti-infective therapy or
antineoplastic therapy, as well as wound care or
B. Alt-Epping (*) :F. Nauck
Department of Palliative Medicine,
University Medical Center Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40,
37099 Göttingen, Germany
e-mail: bernd.alt-epping@med.uni-goettingen.de
G. Wulf
Department of Hematology/Oncology,
University Medical Center Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40,
37099 Göttingen, Germany
Ann Hematol (2011) 90:613–615
DOI 10.1007/s00277-010-1057-3
individual modifications of nutrition and infusional
therapy. Aspects of blood product substitution, the
eventual changes in transfusion requirements, the
indications to modify or even restrict previous transfu-
sion concepts with regard to end-of-life care aspects
were addressed in 31 patients/39.2% of cases.
– supporting individual disease-coping strategies by
psychological interventions. This proved especially
helpful in situations where disease trajectories and
prognostication were uncertain.
– advance care planning of precautionary and preparative
measures for possible emergencies: bleeding, dyspnea,
pain, and other end-of-life crises were anticipated by
open communication. Instructions and medications
(like on-demand medication for dyspnea, restlessness,
or pain) were given in order to facilitate home care and
to avoid involvement of emergency medical services at
the end of life.
– inpatient consultative PC services: numerous patients have
been cared for by hematology services for years, and
antineoplastic and supportive measures may prove useful
throughout the disease; therefore, an “as-needed” consul-
tative approach will permit continuous hematological care.
– strengthening medical home care and outpatient nurs-
ing: facilitating home care included day and night
contact options, early involvement of social services,
and a flexible readmission policy that offers inpatient
service if home care failed.
– involvement of relatives, friends, and other non-
professionals like community healthcare providers into
home care. As general support needs were high (e.g.,
due to general weakness) but focal symptoms requiring
specialized care not always present, non-professional
support proved helpful for continuing care at home.
In our case series, the major therapeutic challenges were
related to social problems (discharge planning, organizational
tasks, home care, and family support) or psychical problems.
Psychological consultations often aimed to provide relief for
the patients’ (or the families’) ambivalence towards realistically
understanding the narrow prognostic limitations but still hoping
for disease stabilization or even clinical improvement. Reas-
sessment of transfusion requirements with regard to altered
treatment goals proved to be a major medical and ethical
controversy in almost half of our patients.
We found a cohort of patients that did not necessarily
suffer from focal symptoms, as described in epidemiolog-
ical surveys of general PC patient populations, where, for
instance, pain is reported to be a major clinical problem in
81.7% and dyspnea in 20.2% [6].
Eleven patients (13.9%) came from an allogenic stem cell
transplantation background. For this particular group of
patients, the transition from curative intervention to a PC
approach is considered to be especially difficult, regarding the
maximum efforts for cure from an otherwise fatal disease,
accepting a high treatment-related morbidity and mortality.
Transplanters who are about to decide to seek PC support might
ask whether they had given up too soon, or if they should have
better given up their curative efforts a long time ago. Several
observational studies with stem cell transplantation patients
showed that the introduction of a hospice team earlier in the
disease process did not shorten survival or dismiss hope, but
appeared to improve symptoms and allowed better planning [1].
Our case series illustrates the need for a specific PC
concept for patients with hematological malignancies. From
a PC perspective, traditional thinking in PC that suggests a
“common pathway” for all disease entities at the end of life
[7] have to be abandoned beforehand. The hematological
perspective ought to consider that PC is more than pain
therapy: it provides numerous multiprofessional competen-
cies in the medical, nursing, social, psychological, spiritual,
Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics (n=79)
Demographic characteristics
Mean age (years) 65.6 (min 23,
max 85)
Male 42/79=53.2%
Female 37/79=46.8%
Mode of hematology/PC interaction
Inpatient PC unit 33 patients
Outpatient liaison service 34 patients
Consultation service 10 patients
PC/hospice volunteer service
(PC contacted but no further interaction)
2 patients
(15 patients)
Underlying disease entity: 34 patients
Aggressive lymphoma with allo PBSCT 2 patients
Aggressive lymphoma w/o allo PBSCT 25 patients
- subgroup T-cell origin 5 patients
Acute leukemia with allo PBSCT 4 patients
Acute leukemia w/o allo PBSCT 18 patients
Multiple myeloma/plasmocytoma with allo PBSCT 5 patients
Multiple myeloma/plasmocytoma w/o allo PBSCT 12 patients
Indolent lymphoma 8 patients
Chronic leukemia 2 patients
Aplastic anemia 2 patients
Osteomyelofibrosis 1 patient
Leading problem for PC involvement:
General support needs/nursing/family/final phase 45 patients
- subgroup encompassing wound care 3 patients
Pain 23 patients
- subgroup multiple myeloma 10 patients
Dyspnea 8 patients
Neuropsychiatric symptoms 2 patients
Refractory diarrhea 1 patient
614 Ann Hematol (2011) 90:613–615
and ethical field that can (and should) be utilized within
continuous hematological care.
Both approaches to patient care, PC and hematology, can
be expected to benefit mutually from intensified communi-
cation that meets the specific needs of our patients.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Chung HM, Lyckholm LJ, Smith TJ (2009) Palliative care in BMT.
Bone Marrow Transplant 43:265–273
2. Fadul NA, El Osta B, Dalal S, Poulter VA, Bruera E (2008)
Comparison of symptom burden among patients referred to
palliative care with hematologic malignancies versus those with
solid tumors. J Palliat Med 11(3):422–427
3. Krebs in Deutschland 2005/2006. Häufigkeiten und Trends, 7th
ed. Robert Koch Institute, Gesellschaft der epidemiologischen
Krebsregister in Deutschland (eds). Berlin 2010
4. Maddocks I, Bentley L, Sheedy J (1994) Quality of life issues in
patients dying from haematological diseases. Ann Arc Med
Singapore 23(2):244–248
5. McGrath P (2002) Are we making progress? Not in haematology!
Omega (Westport) 45(4):331–348
6. Radbruch L, Nauck F et al (2003) What are the problems in
palliative care? Results from a representative survey. Support Care
Cancer 11:442–451
7. Solano JP, Gomes B, Higginson IJ (2006) A comparison of
symptom prevalence in patients with far advanced cancer, AIDS,
heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and renal
disease. J Pain Sympt Manage 31:58–69
Ann Hematol (2011) 90:613–615 615
