PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY OF THE LYMPHATIC TISSUES OF
RATS AS STUDIED WITH TRITIUM-LABELED THYMIDINE*
BYCHARLESG. CRADDOCK,M.D., GEORGE S. NAKAI,~M.D., HAJIME
FUKUTA,§ M.D.,ANDLOUISE M. VANSLAGER,HM.D.
(From the Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California,
and the Hematology Research Laboratory, Veterans
Administration Center, Los Angeles)
P~TES 39 TO 41
(Received forpublication,April3, 1964)
Isotopic labelingof the DNA of blood cellshas provided an important tech-
nique for obtaining information about the cytokinetics of white cells.It has
been assumed that the DNA label is stable within a given lineage of cells.
However, severalpapers have indicated reincorporation of tritiatedthymidine
(H3Tdr)-labeled deoxyribonucleic acid (H3DNA) of cellsduring catabolism by
other proliferating cells.The tritiated thymidine is originally incorporated
during DNA synthesis (I-6). Most interpretations of this finding have as-
sumed that itisnot the resultofradiobiologicalartifactdue to the isotope.Aside
from the significanceof thisfindingin terms of interpretationof data pertaining
to cellrenewal, lifespan, and possibletransformation of blood cellsintodifferent
morphological entities (7), the possibility of the DNA within cells being un-
stable has many other implications.
The biochemistry of the transfer of DNA label remains to be elucidated.
Hamilton (8), whose work in leukemic subjects led him to propose that DNA
reutilization might occur within lymphatic tissue, believed that his data favored
the reincorporation of fragments of DNA polymer rather than mononucleotides
or nucleosides resulting from DNA breakdown. He pointed out that the earlier
works of Ottesen (9) and Osgood et al. (10) were also consistent with this view.
On the other hand, Robinson and Brecher have recently reported strong evi-
dence suggesting that reincorporation of the DNA label in blood cells by rapidly
growing liver cells occurs after breakdown of DNA to a nucleoside level (11).
After flash labeling of the DNA of a portion of a normally replicating cell
population which is in DNA synthesis at the time the H3Tdr is available, dilu-
* Supportedby Grant CA07169,United States Public Health Service.
Clinical Investigator, Veterans AdministrationCenter, Los Angeles.
§Research Fellowfrom the University of Kyushu, Fukuoka, Japan, supported by funds
from the California Institute Cancer Research.
]] Assistant Resident in Hematology, Department of Medicine, UCLA Center for Health
Sciences, Los Angeles.
389
390 PROLIFERATIVE ACTMTY OF LYMPHATIC TISSUES
tion of the DNA label in the divisible cells, as new DNA is synthesized during
repeated cell divisions, should follow a single first-order decline. This is not the
case in some tissues (12-14). The reasons for this are not clear but could reflect
some damaging effect of the isotope on a portion of the DNA which has in-
corporated the HSTdr, prolonged interphase of some cells in a given population,
prolonged retention of label in an early, "stem" cell population feeding cells
into the particular proliferating pool under study, or inherent asynchrony of
DNA replication in some cells. Another more likely possibility, in view of the
evidence that the DNA label can be transferred from blood cells to such tissues
as replicating liver (1, 5), skin (2), and tumor cells (4) is that the persistence of
some DNA label reflects reutilization of the I)NA label by growing cells. This
interpretation has been given by others to events in lymphatic tissue (14) and
more recently for the intestinal mucosa (3). It has been assumed that the source
of DNA label to be reincorporated in such tissues as the intestinal mucosa is
from desquamating mucosal cells containing the DNA label. Another possible
source of reincorporated label is that contained in lymphatic tissue and in white
blood cells moving through the area.
The purpose of this paper is to present findings on the course of H3Tdr label-
ing of DNA in various parts of the lymphatic tissue of young adult male rats.
It has been assumed by the authors that if the label in DNA after HSTdr
administration can be transferred from blood cells to other proliferating tissues,
the same process can occur between lymphocytes in lymphatic tissue. The per-
sistence of DNA label in a precursor population of cells is accepted as evidence
for this occurrence. It should be emphasized that the term DNA label, as
employed here, refers to material in the nucleus of replicating cells which be-
comes labeled with IPTdr, is extractable from tissues by procedures commonly
employed to remove DNA, contains thymidylic acid, and lacks uridylic acid.
There is some evidence that DNA is heterogeneous (15) and there is no way of
knowing, in the present work, whether H3Tdr labels only that DNA in the
chromosomes which is genetically determinative.
Materials and Methods
These studies have employedsimultaneousradiochemicaland autoradiographic determina-
tionsofDNAlabelingofvarioustissuesofrats after administration ofI-ISTdr.Autoradiography
has definitelimitations of interpretation, particularly in fixedtissue sections,as pointed out
by Cottier (16).Sincemuch of the present data dealswith low levelsof DNA labelingper cell,
radiochemiealassessmentof tissue DNA label has been of value in establishingthe degreeof
labelingin certain tissues.The deficienciesofradiochemiealtechniquesin the analysis of DNA
labeling in tissues of mixed cell speciesare well known, but coupled with autoradiographic
localizationof the labeled cellpopulation, they have been of assistance.
Radiochemical Techniques.--The tissues wereweighedand aliquots dried in plastic bags,
rewelghed,and combusted.The total dry tissue Hacontent was determinedas tritiated water
of combustion (17). This provided a measure of any 1-13label in DNA and in non-DNA or
acid-solublenucleosideor nucleotidepools.This technique was preferred to analysisofRNA
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI~ ]~UKUTA~ AND VANSLAGER 391
and acid-soluble nudeotides because of its simplicity, the high percentage recovery of tissue Ha
and the avoidance of variation in nucleic acid and nucleotide extraction of different tissues.
The DNA of a portion of tissue was extracted and quantitated as described previously (18).
Samples containing any non-DNA phosphorus were discarded. Aliquots of DNA extracted
from each tissue were hydrolyzed and the bases chromatographed. Any DNA containing de-
tectable uracil contamination after hydrolysis and chromatographic separation of the bases
was discarded.
All radioactivity determinations were performed in the same instrument (tri-carb, Packard
Instrument Co., La Grange, Illinois) under identical conditions. Determinations of quench were
made for DNA from each tissue and for DNA of varying concentrations. The tritiated
water samples, obtained from combustion of dehydrated tissue, were counted in a suspen-
sion-scintillator system consisting of PPO, POPOP, 1 toluene, and ethyl alcohol. The DNA
extracted from tissues was dissolved in water and counted in a gel-scintillator consisting of
PPO, POPOP, thixcin, and hyamine chloride in toluene. The volumes of water counted were
either 0.1 or 0.2 ml in 20 ml of solvent or gel-scintillator.
Samples of tissue to be combusted were divided into three aliquots and combnsted sep-
arately. Tissues analyzed include bone marrow, small and large intestine, adrenal, liver,
kidney, and lymphatic organs. Results wiU be given for lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen.
Lymph nodes included were all those visible in the mediastinal, axillary, periaortic, and
mesenteric regions and tissue from each area was combusted separately. These nodes were
assumed to be representative of the peripheral organized lymph nodes. No attempt was made
to quantitate the entire body lymphoid tissue. Samples containing any color, a difficulty en-
countered only with bone marrow and whole blood, were discarded. Samples which were in-
completely combusted with any remaining ash were discarded. Each of three samples from the
same tissue, except in the case of lymph nodes, was counted for three 10 minute periods and
checked within 10 per cent. Repeat counts of the same sample varied within 1 per cent. For
the lymph nodes, individual nodes from each area selected were weighed and combusted
separately. The largest methodological variation with this technique concerns the hydroscopic
action of the plastic bags cont~inlng the dehydrated samples. All weighing was performed on a
Mettler electrical balance (model NI-5) accurate to -4- 0.002 rag. Variation in bag weight after
drying was controlled in each instance by weighing an empty dried bag and subtracting the
final hag weight from that of the sample.
Quadruplicate I-I~DNA samples were counted from each tissue, including the pooled lymph
nodes. Variation was within 5 per cent and repeat counts of the same sample varied within 1
per cent. Although the variation from animal to animai within a group sacrificed at the same
time after the same dose of H~dr was considerable, sufficient points in time were obtained to
establish clear-cut trends for initial uptake into DNA and loss of H from DNA with time for
each organ studied. The differences between tissues with a rapid DNA turnover such as
erythroid and myeloid bone marrow and intestinal mucosa and slowly replenished structures
such as liver, kidney, lymph nodes, etc., are very marked. Data concerning tissues other than
the lymphatic system will be presented in a subsequent paper.
Autoradiographic Technique.--Touch preparations of freshly cut cross-sections of spleen,
lymph nodes, and thymus were made on gelatin-coated slides. Marrow smears and imprints for
autoradiography were fixed in Carnoy's fixative which removes any Ha in acid-soluble pools
from the slide. Duplicate portions of tissues to be sectioned at 4 micra were fixed in Caruoy's,
solution and formalin for 4 hours. Autoradiography was performed with the stripping film
technique as described previously (18). Staining was with acid-Giemsa as described by Feinen-
1 PPO, 2,5-diphenyloxazole; POPOP, 1,4-bis-2-(4-methyl-S-phenyloxazolyl)-benzene. Pur-
chased from Packard ~_nstrument Co., La Grange, Illinois.
392 PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY O]~ LYMPHATIC TISSUES
degen and Bond (19). Duplicate sets of slides were developed after 2 and 4 weeks. Sections of
each tissue were also stained with hematoxylin and eosin and with methyl green pyronlne.
Tissue and cell morphology and localization of the DNA label were studied in the following
tissues: marrow, blood leukocytes, small intestine, large intestine, liver, kidney, adrenal,
axlllary, mediastinal, mesenteric and periaortic lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen. Quantitation
of grains will be described only for the lymphatic organs and only for lymphoid cells in these
organs. Quantitation of grains is more reliable on imprint material with the technique em-
ployed and the data presented for sequential dilution of DNA label in large lymphocytes is
from imprints of thymus and lymph nodes. Imprints of spleen have the disadvantage of in-
duding variable numbers of immature myeioid and erythroid cells which are at times difficult
to distinguish from immature lymphoid cells in spleen red pulp and bone marrow preparations.
For this reason the data on mean grain counts of large lympbocytes and thymocytes are
derived from imprints of lymph nodes and thymus.
The lymphoid cells of the lymph nodes and thymus have been divided into small, medium,
and large, following the criteria of others (20). However, there are several gradations of me-
dium-sized cells and, for the purposes of the data pertaining to the rate of grain dilution as an
indication of the rate of DNA renewal, only the largest lymphocytes were scored. The large
cells of the thymus cortex and in the medullary cords and cortices of lymphoid follicles stand
out because of their size and their staining characteristics. The nucleus is considerably paler
and the cytoplasm much darker than in the surrounding small cells. The cytoplasm of these
immature cellsis uniformly more pyrinophilic than is that of smaller~ presumably more mature
lymphocytes.
Background scatter on imprint material was determined by counting the grains per i000
micra2over portions of the slide adjacent to ceils, taking the mean d I0 such areas. This value
was subtracted from the mean grain count so that the values given are relative to background.
The range of background grains was from 0 to 3 per i000 micra.2 One hundred large thymo-
cytes or lymphocytes were counted on each of four imprints of the thymus and lymph nodes.
One thousand cells were counted to determine the per cent labeled cells.
In the case of the spleen, where only section material could be employed because of the
mixed cell population, the radioactivity in different regions of the tissue could be readily
estimated over groups d cells, but accurate grain counts of lightly labeled cells were not pos-
sible. The spleen material was employed, therefore~ to provide localization of highly labeled (i0
grains or more above background), lowly labeled, or unlabeled lymphoid ceils. The compara-
tive degree of DNA labeling of lymphoid cells in the germinal centers, cortex of lymphoid
follicles, and those in the splenic red pulp was estimated using these rough criteria. Germinal
centers are defined, for the purposes of this paper, as the collections of lymphoid cells near the
center of the spherical follicle and adjacent to the small blood vessel with characteristically
high endothelial lining cells (21). These cells have a higher mitotic index than cells elsewhere
in the follicle (22-25). These cells are mostly large- and medium-sized cells.
Animals.--Sprague-Dawley male rats bred in the rat colony of the Department of Bio-
logical Chemistry, UCLA Center for Health Sciences, Los Angeles, were employed. These rats
increase their weight at a rate d 2 per cent per day between I00 and 350 gin. The increase
thereafter is more gradual and consists mainly of additional body fat. Heavier animals, receiv-
ing the same dose per gram of I-ISTdras smaller animals, show an increased uptake of the iso-
tope into the DNA of proliferating tissue because of the dose is influenced by the amount of
slowly replicating adipose tissue. It is important, therefore, to select animals less than 350 gm
body weight for this type of study. All animals were between 150 and 250 gm unless otherwise
specified.
Animals were sacrificed serially by exsangulnation. Partial hepatectomy (40 to 50 per cent)
was performed by the technique of Higgins and Anderson (26).
CRADDOCK, NAKAI, ~D-KUTA~ AND VANSLAGER 393
Isotopes.--HaTdr, 6.4 c/mmole was obtained from New England Nuclear Corp., Boston.
Injections were given in volumes of 0.25 to 1.0 ml subcutaneously to unanesthetized animals
at the same time of day, usually between 7 and 8 a.m. Intravenous administration of the
isotope to 10 rats and 24 mice provided an initial uptake of ttSTdr into the DNA of various
organs which was not significantly different from animals receiving subcutaneous injections.
The amount ofisotopeadministeredto the variousgroups of animalsis indicatedin the results.
The C14formate employed had a specific activity of 9.5 mc/mmole.
RESULTS
The initial uptake of HSTdr into thymus DNA is approximately one-fifth that
of the peripheral lymph nodes and one-elghth that of the spleen. These findings,
similar to those of Nygaard and Potter with C14Tdr (13), are shown in Table I
TABLE I
Comparison of Ha in DNA, As Determined by DNA Extraaion, and H8 {n Whole Tissues
of 36 Normal Rats
Averageweight 200 gin, 1 to 5 hours after Hvrdr, 0.5/zc/gm.
Organ
Liver.
Kidney......
Spleen .....
Lymph nodes
Thymus
1-dose..
3-dose§.. ......
HI content of
dry tissue
38.2 4- 6.6
~.44-8.6
830.2 4- 182.6
426.1 4- 262.2
208.2 4- 58.2
1070.0 4- 55.0
Concentration of
DNA-P in fresh
tissue*
mg DNA-P per
mg X 106
21-25
33-34
76-85
76-85
181-242
181-242
HaDNA, from DNA
extraction of tissue
cP~/mg DNA-P X
101 4- 1
36.2 4- 3.2
58.1 4- 5.3
170.0 4- 22.1
91.4 4- 24.1
20.1 4- 6.2
115.3 4- 18.5
HZDNAcalculated
from H8content
and DNA-P
concentration~
c~K/mg DNA-P
X 10--8
38.4-45.7
45.8-47.2
195.3-218.4
100.3-121.3
17.2-23.0
85.1-118.8
* From Davidson, The Biochemistry of Nucleic Acids (53).
Dry weight 25 per cent of wet weight for liver and kidney. 20 per cent of wet weight for
spleen, lymph nodes and thymus.
§ Four rats sacrificed 1 to 24 hours after last of 3 doses of 0.5/~clgra at 24-hour intervals.
and Text-figs. 1 and 2. In spite of variation from animal to animal, there is
good agreement between the H3DNA specific activity and the total H 3 in the
dehydrated tissue. Calculating H~DNA from H 3 content, known DNA-P con-
centration, and wet weight to dry weight ratio, provides values comparable to
the measured H3DNA label. This was true in animals receiving a single dose of
0.5, 1.0, and 0.5/~c/gm at 24 hour intervals for 3 doses.
Text-fig. 1 shows a plateau of thymus radioactivity for 3 days after adminis-
tration of a single dose of H3Tdr. Fifty-six to 72 per cent of the large thymic
lymphoid cells were labeled in these normal rats sacrificed 1 to 5 hours after a
single dose of I-~Tdr. There is rapid dilution of the H3DNA per large thymocyte,
as shown by the fall in mean grain count during the first 24 hours. Thereafter,
394 PROLIFERATIVE ACTMTY OF LYMPHATIC TISSUES
the drop in mean grain count per large cell is more gradual, although after 0.5
/~c/gm, the grains per cell after 48 hours are too low to permit accurate quantita-
tion. Serial grain counting of large thymic cells in rats receiving 1 ~tc/gm, in
which the initial mean grain count was twice as high as in these rats receiving
0.5/~c/gm, confirms the more gradual fall in grains beyond 24 hours.
The peripheral lymph node and spleen HaDNA and Ha content data are
shown in Text-fig. 2. The lines shown are intended to give the best fit to these
1°° 3jl (12_3(5) (-/} (5) (4) (4) (2)*--NUMBER of ANIMALS -'~ (2) (2.)
.t. .t.~ j . ~ o= H3DNA Sp.Act(CPM/~LgDNA-P X]hymusWt (rag)X I0
5 -1"4.,_~...~ o= H3 Conc.{cPMA'~gDry Wt.) X 11"qmusWt(mg) X l(~4
t .
[ I I f t I 1 I I ] I I t I I I I I I I I I I f I [ I '
I 5 I0 15 20 24 28
Days After H3TDR
TBxT-FIO. 1. The loss of I-P from normal rat thymus after administration of HaTdr, 0.5
c/gm. As shown in Table I, similar values are obtained for I-PDNA specific activity by direct
measurement and by estimates based on Ha concentration. In this and subsequent figures the
curves of loss of 1-13from DNA (HaDNA specific activity) and from the whole tissue (Ha con-
centration in cp~s/mg dry weight) are the same. There is no detectable Haexcept that in DNA.
The mean grain counts refer to the largest thymic progenitor cells which are clearly lymphoid
cells, counting 200 ceils for each point.
points and the slopes are approximations only. In most instances the label
concentration is higher in spleen than in lymph nodes. The decline in radio-
activity appears to follow two first-order curves, the first with a half-life of
about 3 days. The second slope is very gradual indeed with a half-life of some 50
days. Nygaard and Potter (13), in similar studies of the loss of C14DNA from rat
spleen after C14 thymidine administration, did not carry their observations
beyond 7 days following isotope administration and, therefore, did not observe
the very prolonged retention of some DNA label. They noted two separate
C~1)I)OCK, NAEAI, ~UKUTA~ AND V~SLAGEE 395
decay curves for the spleen during the 1st week, one with a half-life of 1.2 days
and a second wkh a half-life of 4 days. The present studies show so much spread
oI values from aniraal to animal that it is not possible to define more closely the
pattern during the 1st week after isotope administration. H~wever, i[ Nyga~rd
and Potter's findings can be combined with these data it is evident that the
decay is very complex, consisting of at least three components. The most strik-
NORMAL RATS, LYMPH NODES
H~DNA(..'~ & H3 Content(,=)
SPLEEN H~DNA(*) 8E H~ Content(o} •
After I"I~TDR 0,5.,uc/gm
2oo.1¢ | ~
° °
..~ E = ~ | ~ o " '~ . . . . . . . . .
• " k .
~ ]:, . ; -:
•~ ~z ~'-~ ~ E A N &RmN COUNT,LARGE LYMPHOCYTES
""-~-~----t-~- • tN LYMPH NODES
-- .... ~ ........ ~ .......................... ,
4L
' I I | , I I , , , I , | , I
bAYS AFTER H'~'I'DR
T~x~-FI~.2. The lossofH~fromnormalrat lymphnode~and spleenafterH~Tdr,0.5I~c/
gin.Alsoshownis the serialmeangra/ncountsoflargelymphoblastsia a mesenteri¢lymph
node.
1o
ing feature of the decay is the very prolonged retention of some DNA label by
both lymph nodes and spleen.
The rate of dilution of HaDNA in large lymphocytes in lymph nodes, ex-
pressed as mean grain count, is also shown. Forty-eight to 72 per cent of the
large lymphocytes in imprints of normal lymph nodes were labeled in these
normal rats sacrificed 1 to 5 hours a~ter a single dose of H~Tdr. Amongst the
labeled large lymphocytes there appeared to be at least two groupings of label
intensity with an increased number of ceils contain/ng 3 to I0 grains and the
remainder showing the expected distribution about a mean of 35 grains (Text-
~oo
z
G~
0
.--t
396 PROLI~EP.ATIVE ACTIVITY 0]~ LYMPHATIC TISSUES
fig. 3). As the large lymphocytes lose label with repetitive divisions the range of
grain count becomes progressively narrower as cells with a low label intensity
become predominant. There is an initial rapid fall in grain count during the
first 24 hours, followed by a more gradual decline, which approximates the loss
of H3DNA from the whole tissue. This curve of loss of HSDNA from large
lymphocytes is similar to previous data of this type obtained by Alpen et al.
(14)• These authors resolved this curve into two components, one of half-time
of 20 to 30 hours and another of half-time 40 to 50 days.
Rats sacrificed serially after the last of 3 doses of 0.5/~c/gm given at 24 hour
intervals (hereafter called 3-dose animals) show a biphasic loss of radioactivity
r"-" I000 CELLS COUNTED,
"-" NORMAL RAT
MEAN OF 6 NORMAL RATS
". 30] [] 200 CELLS COUNTED/RAT
o~
F--
z l r ......
[.iJ ......
(D .... -,,..... ......
I.u
I~L .... -I
0 :5 5 I0 15 20 25 30 :55 40 45 50 55 60 65--90
GRAINS PER CELL
TExT-FIG.3. The distribution of grains in large lymphoblasts in imprints of mesenteric
lymph nodes of normal rats sacrificed1 to 5 hoursafter H3Tdr,0.5/~c/gm. All cellsin this
category are counted.
from spleen and lymph nodes (Text-fig. 4). Sufficient points have not been ob-
• .~ . • •
tamed to determine wzth accuracy the slope of the more gradual portzon of thzs
curve, but the half-time would appear to be of the order of 50 days. Again, the
dilution of grains in large lymphocytes is rapid during the first 24 hours after
the last dose of H3Tdr. Thereafter, the fall in grain count appears to parallel the
loss of H3from the entire tissue.
Text-fig. 4 contrasts the loss of radioactivity expressed as H~content from the
lymph nodes and thymuses of rats receiving 3 doses at 24 hour intervals. There
is more rapid loss of radioactivity from the thymus than from lymph nodes.
Twenty-four hours after a single dose of H3Tdr, highly labeled small cells,
resulting from division of highly labeled large- and medium-sized cells, are found
in the follicles of lymph nodes and spleen. The small cells of the thymus are
labeled much less intensely. In animals sacrificed serially, highly labeled small
lymphocytes such as those in lymph nodes were found in gradually diminishing
numbers in all tissues examined except the thymus.
CRADDOCKp NAKAI~ ]~UKUTA~ AND VANSLAGEE 397
In animals sacrificed 1 hour after the last of 3 doses of HSTdr, 0.5 #c/gm at
24 hour intervals, the mean grain count of large progenitor cells in the thymus is
about twice as high as it is after a single dose of 0.5 #c/gin. The DNA label
was reduced in these progenitor cells during the 24 hours following each in-
jection and the most significant change is the extent to which the radioactivity
(,- MEDIASTINAL"~
__= ~ CONTFNTt/o-AXILLARY (~
......... I A'PERIAORTIC (" LYMPH NODES
I o-MESENTERICJ
~,~.-THYMUS5000-
1".. 2(300 ~ • ,, ---= MEAN GRAIN COUNT, LARGE LYMPHOID CELLS
E o
I00.. I0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
,~ 4.. ~ ~ --- . . . . . . . . . . ; 5
"%~.
~...
, ,o ' ' '24
DAYS AFTER H3"I'DR
TEXT-FIG. 4. Loss of H s from normal rat lymph nodes and thymuses after H~Tdr, 0.5 #e/
gm given on each of 3 successive mornings prior to time 0. The first a~im~]s were sacrificed 1
hour after the third injection of isotope. The dashed lines describe the mean grain counts of
large lymphoid progenitor cells on autoradiographs of thymus and mesenteric lymph node.
has been dispersed to small cells by division of the labeled precursors. In the
thymus this appears as low labeling of a majority of the cells in the thymus
cortex. The I-PDNA specific activity of the thymus is about 5 times higher in
these 3-dose rats than in rats receiving a single dose of 0.5 #c/gm (Table I).
It was found that the mean grain count over large thymocytes in 3-dose
animals (sacrificed 1 hour after the last dose) was the same as that for animals
sacrificed i hour after 1.0 #g/gm. The rate of grain dilution in these two groups
could be followed starting with the same intensity of DNA label in the large
Er~l~>
z
100
6")
g
50 Z
8C
Z
--I
398 PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY OF LYMPHATIC TISSUES
cells. The results, shown in Text-fig. 5, suggest a more rapid initial fall in mean
grain count in animals receiving a single dose, although the number of animals
is too small to allow statistical verification. The subsequent rate of dilution of
the DNA label is similar in the two groups, though the mean grain count is
higher at each point in the 3-dose animals.
2olz
z
n,"
(.9
z
w
LARGE THYMIC
LYMPHOID CELLS
• = I.O~uc/gm X I
o = O.5,ec/grn X 3 Prior to ~me 0
~"'{I.
I I 1 I I I
0 24. 48 72 96 120 144 168
HOURS After Last H3TDR
T~x~-FIa. 5. Serial mean grain counts of large lymphoid progenitor cells in the thymuses of
normal rats after a single dose of HSTdr, 1.0 #c/gin (solid circles) and after 3 doses of 0.5 #c/
gm given at 24 hour intervals. The first sacrifices were performed 1 hour after the single dose
or after the last of 3 doses.
The autoradiographs of section material from these tissues were evaluated
for the location of highly labeled, lowly labeled, and unlabeled cells. They con-
sistently showed the presence of highly labeled cells in the medullary cords and
peripheral areas of lymphoid follicles of the spleen and lymph nodes. However,
the germinal centers of lymphoid follicles of the spleen and lymph nodes,
where mitotic activity is highest (22-25), showed cells with a lower label in-
tensity in animals sacrificed 1 to 5 hours after a single dose of I-PTdr, an ex-
ample of which is shown in Fig. 1. Similar large lymphocytes in germinal centers
of splenic lymphoid follicles with a lower grain count than in more peripherally
located large lymphocytes have been described by Fliedner et al. (27) and by
Cottier et al. (28). It is presumed that these cells account for the increased
number of cells containing 3 to 10 grains as seen on imprint material (Text-
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI~ I~UKUTA~ AND VANSLAGER 399
fig. 3). An unexpected finding in the animals sacrificed at periods of 1 week or
more after labeling was the persistence of labded large and medium lympho-
cytes in these areas of active cellular proliferation.
Large lymphocytic progenitor cells in the thymus invariably showed a lower
mean grain count than large cells in the follides of lymph nodes and spleen.
Figs. 2 a and 2 b show such cells in imprints from a lymph node and thymus
of a normal rat sacrificed 1 hour after a single dose of 0.5 #c/gin. The low uptake
TABLE II
In Vitro Labeling of Thymus and Lymph Node Cell Suspensionsfrom
Normal Sprague-DawleyRats
Rats killed by guillotine. Cell suspensions dispersed in chilled Hanks' solution, particles
removed and free cells adjusted to cell concentration of 100,000/rams. H~rDR (6.9 e/mmole)
added to each suspension, 20 gc]2 ml, and incubated at 37"C for 2 hours with gentle agita-
tion. Viability determined by eosin uptake.
Tissue Rat No.
thymus 205
206
207
Lymph 205
nodes 206
207
Viable
cells
pet ~t
99
98
99
98
98
99
Cell suspension
Small
~r c~
92.2
89.0
93.9
96.7
94.3
96.4
IaZge
~r cent
7.9
11.0
6.1
3.3
5.7
3.6
AutoradJographs(1000large
celIscounted)
Labeled cells
(over 5 grains)
Small Large
per ce~ pet cent
0.2 53.0
0.34 62.0
0.32 58.2
0.1 86.7
0.21 82.8
0.83 94.4
Grains
per cell,
mean
28
36
53
>100
>100
>100
HsDNA
specific
activity
261.4
565.03
of HSTdr into precursor cells in the thymus cortex, as compared to the majority
of precursor cells in lymph follicles (with the exception of those in germinal
centers) could be due to differences in blood flow and isotope availability (16).
Attempt was made to study this factor employing in vitro incubations. Fresh
suspensions of dispersed cells were made as quickly as possible after sacrifice
and comparable concentrations of cells and isotope incubated under identical
conditions. The amount of isotope was purposefully made much higher than
would be present in vivo.The results, shown in Table II, indicate the lower up-
take of H3Tdr by thymus cells, as compared to lymph node cells.
Rats subjected to partial hepatectomy 3 days before the administration of
HaTdr, 0.5 gc/gm, and sacrificed 5 hours later, show a marked increase in the
uptake of the label into the DNA of lymphoiff tissue (Text-fig. 6). The thymus
weights in these stressed animals were markedly reduced and the percentage
400 PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY O]~ LYMPHATIC TISSUES
of small cells in the thymus had fallen from a mean value of 84 to 36 per cent.
An example of the intensity of DNA label in the large lymphocytic cells of the
thymus is shown in Fig. 3. Similar though less marked changes were noted in
the spleen and lymph nodes.
Another group of 10 animals was subjected to lesser and variable degrees of
partial hepatectomy. Five days later these rats were given 0.5 gc/gm of H3Tdr
and sacrificed at 2 hours, 1 to 3, 5, 7, and 10 days. It will be noted (Text-fig. 7)
r-~ NORMAL
50% HEPATECTOMY
4500
4000.
3500'
3000.
2500'
u
2000'
d.
09 1500'
I000'
"I"
500'
I
T
SPLEEN THYMUS LYMPH NODES
TEXT-FIG. 6. The uptake of HSTdr into the DNA of lymphatic tissues of 36 normal rats
and 6 rats subjected to 50 per cent hepatectomy 3 days before isotope administration. Animals
in both groups received 0.5/~c/gm and were sacrificed 1 to 5 hours later. 3", 4- 1 sD from
meaD..
that there was a good correlation between mean grain count of large progenitor
ceils and total HSDNA, as estimated by I-PDNA specific activity multiplied by
thymus weight. The animals with more severe stress and smaller thymus weight
showed a greater uptake of I-PTdr. In those animals sacrificed within 1 to 5
hours after HSTdr there was found to be a good correlation between HSDNA
specific activity, plotted on a logarithmic scale, and the reciprocal of thymus
weight (Text-fig. 8 a).
As previously described, the mean grain count of thymus progenitor cells
fails rapidly during the first 24 hours after a single dose of H3Tdr. The dilution
with subsequent divisions is more gradual (Text-figs. 1 and 5). This same pat-
tern seems to prevail in stressed animals. If the mean grain count of the large
thymus progenitor cells in animals sacrificed between 24 hours and 10 days is
plotted against total thymus I-PDNA (Text-fig. 8 b), a good correlation is found.
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI, :FUKUTA~ AND VANSLAGER 401
These points include animals subjected to variable degress of stress, as noted,
and normal animals receiving different amounts of tPTdr. It would appear,
therefore, that once the DNA label has entered the small cell population of the
thymus by division of labeled progenitor cells, the subsequent loss of DNA label
from the large cells capable of mitosis occurs at the same rate as the loss of
HSDNA from the whole thymus. Furthermore the late decline in grain count of
g
x 5c I
i lO '~
X ~
N
a_
<%
r~
O3
Z
"1-
ii
LONE SD
==MEAN GRAIN COUNT,
LARGE THYMOCYTES
I I0
DAYS AFTER H3TDR
5O
Z
~o ~
Z
5 co
Z
c
_~00~"
TExT-FIo.7. Rats subjectedto partial(20 to 30percent) hepatectomy5 daysbeforeHSTdr
administration(0.5 ~c/gm) and then sacrificedserially.Although the initial uptake of HaTdr
is increased,the subsequentloss of H3and the dilution of grainsin largethymic progenitor
lymphocytesis not markedlydifferentfromnormal.
large thymocytes and the late decline in total thymus HSDNA follow the same
approximate slope regardless of the extent of initial labeling of the progenitor
cells.
Similar data were obtained on the lymph nodes and spleens of these stressed
animals. Over the course of the 9 day period there did not appear to be any
significant difference from normal animals for rate of decline of H~DNA specific
activity or mean grain count of large lymphoblasts.
A group of 8 rats, each weighing approximately 140 gm, was given H3Tdr,
1.0, #c/gm, and C14formate, 0.03/~c/gm, simultaneously. They were sacrificed
at intervals and the specific activities of lymph node and thymus DNA Cu and
402 PROLIFERATIVE ACTMTY O~" LYMPHATIC TISSUES
o.
z 600
c~ 500
400
3oo
200c}
"G
< IOC
z 5C
c~
Reciprocal Thymus Wt in mg X I0~
TExT-FIo. 8 a. Relationship between thymus weight and I-~DNA specific activity in rats
partially hepatectomized 5 days before IlrFdr and sacrificed between 48 hours and I0 days
after isotope administration.
X
I00
9O
p-
× 70
,k 60
Z
~ 50
~ 4O
~ 3o
~- zo
'°
I-.,-
RATS RECEIVING 0.5Fc/gm ,
I.OFc/gm end 1.5Fc/gm ond
SACRIFICED BETWEEN
I end 9 DAYS AFTER H3TDR
° ~ "
I I I
5 I0 15 20
GRAINCOUNT,
LARGE THYMOCYTES
TExT-FIe. 8 b. Relationship between thymus I-PDNA specific activity multiplied by thy.
mus weight and mean grain count of large thymic progenitor lymphocytes in rats receiving
varying dosages of HTrdr and subjected to varying degrees of operative stress prior to isotope
administration.
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI~~'IYKUTA~AND VANSLAGER 403
H 3determined, as shown in Text-figs. 9 a and 9 b. C~4specific activity in RNA
and non-DNA phosphorus pools was comparable in both tissues and followed
a curve similar to that shown for DNA. It will be noted that the slopes of
isotope loss were similar for both isotopes in both tissues and the ratio of
carbon to tritium labeling remained nearly constant. It is evident that the
initial uptake of I-PTdr into DNA, relative to the uptake of C14formate into
DNA, is less in the thymus as compared to the lymph nodes.
TExT-FIGs.9 a and 9 b. Loss of HSDNA(after I-Irrdr administration) and C14DNA (after
C14formate administration) from the thymus and lymph nodes ofnormal rats. The figuresin
parenthesesreferto the ratio ofHSDNAcr~ to C14DNA ce,~(meanof2 animalsat each time
period).
DISCUSSION
The results indicate two distinct patterns of initial uptake of I-PTdr by the
lymphatic tissue of normal rats and the subsequent loss of IPDNA. The
lymphatic tissue of the thymus cortex shows a very uniform pattern of a high
percentage of large thymocytes which incorporate some H~Tdr, albeit in small
amounts, and a sharp decline in mean grain count during the 24 hour period
following isotope administration. These findings are compatible with the pro-
liferative activity of the thymus cortex as estimated by mitotic index and DNA
turnover with other isotopes (22-25, 29, 30).
The low initial uptake of H3Tdr per thymus cell is not explainable by a longer
DNA synthetic period for these cells. The in v/frodata and the marked alteration in
H3Tdr uptake after operative stress suggest that the lower uptake is not due to di-
minished availability of the isotope because of circulatory factors.
4O4 PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY OF LYMPHATIC TISSITES
Potter and Nygaard (13, 31) have found that the rat thymus contains larger pools
of thymine nucleotides than spleen. These pools did not become labeled after admin-
istration of isotopic thymidine and appeared to have a slow turnover rate. Non-DNA
H~could not be detected in the present studies indicating that the H8label, once in
DNA, did not appear to recycle through acid-soluble pools. Potter and Nygaard did
not demonstrate precursor-product relationships between Tdr, TMP, TDP, and
DNA-T, although administered labeled Tdr moved rapidly into new DNA. They con-
cluded that the acid-soluble pools of thymine nucleotides were derived from some
other metabolic pathway, probably from deoxycytidine monophosphate (dCMP) by
means of dCMP deaminase as described by Maley and Maley (32).
In a correlative biochemical and autoradiographic study, Sugino, Frenkel, Bishop,
and Potter described the changes which occur in the thymus recovering from whole
body x-irradiation, which depletes the thymus of small cells (13, 33, 34). They showed
a marked increase in uptake of labeled Tdr, administered 2 days after x-ray, by large
precursors which they described as reticular cells and large primitive monocytoid
lymphoblasts. This is similar to the increased uptake of H~Tdr by large cells in rats
previously stressed, as described here. The loss of thymus lymphocytes following ir-
radiation was associated with enzymatic changes suggesting that the large progenitor
cells were unable to synthesize thymidylic acid from dCMP and dUMP, depending
upon donation of thymidine (or thymine nucleotides) from small lymphocytes. These
authors' findings strongly suggest a feeding of thymidine or thymine nucleotides
from small lymphocytes to progenitor cells and provide a possible explanation for
the low uptake of H3Tdr by normal thymus progenitor cells.
The transfer of labeled nuclear constituents from small thymus lymphocytes
to larger proliferating thymus cells is suggested by the finding that the serial
dilution of grain count over the large thymus lymphocytes with successive
divisions followed a biphasic curve with two exponential components of differ-
ing half-times and by the fact that, after the appearance of H3DNA in small
cells, the subsequent loss of H~DNA from the large progenitor cells occurs at the
same rate as the loss of labeled DNA from the thymus (Text-fig. 8 b). Since the
bulk of labeled DNA is in small cells after the first few divisions of labeled
progenitor cells, it would appear that the Ha label in the DNA of small thymus
lymphocytes is reentering the DNA of the large progenitor thymocytes.
Whether this apparent reutilization of DNA label can be related to the low
initial uptake of HSTdr by progenitor cells in the thymus remains to be proved.
The inability to detect non-DNA pools of labeled compounds after repeated
doses of H3Tdr and the similarity between the kinetics of DNA label loss with
C14formate and HSTdr weigh against the formation of labeled precursor pools
from breakdown of H~DNA.
The striking increase in uptake of HSTdr by thymic progenitor cells after
depletion of the tissue content of small cells is different from the change ob-
served when a tissue with a slow rate of growth, e.g., the liver, is stimulated to
replace lost tissue (35). Here, large numbers of hepatic cells which were not in
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI, ~'UKIITA,AND VANSLAGER 405
the process of cell division before partial hepatectomy can be observed to go into
DNA synthesis. The significant increase in uptake of I-PTdr involves the in-
creased number of liver cells which will incorporate the label in contrast to the
very few cells which would do so prior to hepatectomy; the mean grain count
per labeled cell is not significantly altered. The removal of liver tissue activates
enzymes concerned with DNA synthesis in cells which were not in DNA
synthesis prior to the operation. The thymus, on the other hand, has a high
mitotic index and DNA turnover rate in the resting state and contains all the
enzymes for active DNA synthesis (31, 33, 34). The sequence of enzymatic
changes which occurs in the regenerating liver prior to increased DNA synthesis
does not develop during the recovery of the thymus from depletion by whole
body x-ray (13, 31, 33, 34). There is a marked increase in the uptake of HSTdr
by each thymus progenitor cell in DNA synthesis when the small cell popula-
tion is depleted. This is presumably because some of the constituents for DNA
synthesis are normally transferred from small cells to large.
The pattern of H3DNA loss from the thymus following HSTdr admlni.~tration
is also quite different from that of peripheral lymph nodes and spleen. The
apparent retention of total thymus H3DNA for some 3 days, despite rapid
dilution of the grains over progenitor cells, could mean that the labeled small
cells, arising from divisions of these progenitors, do not leave the tissue in
significant numbers for some 3 days. It could also mean that the H*DNA which
is lost from the thymus by the loss of labeled cells is replaced by labeled cells
moving into the thymus. Thymus H3DNA and H8content after 3 injections of
HSTdr of 0.5 #c/gin at 24-hour intervals increased about five times above the
values after a single injection. This suggests the accumulation of I-I*DNAin the
thymus over the 3 day period and would be consistent with the movement of
labeled cells from the periphery into the thymus. Highly labeled small lympho-
cytes, such as those present in lymph nodes, blood, and most other tissues of the
body, were rarely observed in the thymus cortex at any time after single or
multiple doses of H*Tdr. If labeled cells move into the normal thymus they must
not be of this variety. However, a large population of small lymphocytes ex-
hibiting low grain counts after H3Tdr and rapid turnover has been described in
the normal bone marrow (36, 37), and the present findings indicate a significant
percentage of such cells in the germinal centers of lymphoid follicles in lymph
nodes and spleen. This indicates that the metabolic factors leading to this
pattern of I-I*Tdruptake in the thymus are not peculiar for that organ. Entry
of this type of labeled lymphocyte into the normal thymus would not be de-
tected by the techniques used.
The progressive loss of I-I~DNAfrom the thymus, after the 3 day plateau of
retained activity, follows a single exponential decline with a half-time of less
than 3 days. This is compatible with the previously mentioned evidence of rapid
turnover of normal rat thymus DNA. If cells containing HSDNA move into the
406 PROLI.F~..RA'rrvE ACTIVITY OP LYMPHATIC ~rISSUES
thymus to explain the 3 day plateau of retained activity, as discussed previ-
ously, these labeled cells must have a very brief sojourn in the thymus.
The interpretation of the H3DNA kinetic data for peripheral lymph nodes and
spleen is complicated by the mixed cell populations in these areas. The spleen
of the rat contains variable amounts of erythropoietic, myelopoietic, and mega-
karyocytic tissue as well as lymphatic and reticuloendothelial elements. The
lymph nodes and thymus contain such relatively small amounts of replicating
non-lymphoid tissue that the isotope kinetics probably reflect the label in
lymphocytes. The similarity of the curves for H3DNA and H3 loss from the
spleen and lymph nodes suggests that the bulk of splenic radioactivity is con-
tained in its lymphoid tissue. Nevertheless, the course of DNA label dilution
with time in lymph nodes and spleen follows a complex curve with at least two
components. Furthermore, the results of autoradiographic analysis of lympho-
blasts in these organs reveal two categories of large lymphocytes which incorpo-
rate H3Tdr (Text-fig. 3 and fig. 1). Correlation of autoradiographic findings
from imprint and section material indicates that the large lymphocytes in the
germinal centers of lymphoid follicles have a low mean grain count. Similar
findings have been made by others (27, 28).
The dilution of the DNA label in lymphocytic progenitor cells with succes-
sive divisions should reflect the rate of new DNA formation in this tissue, as
discussed in the introduction to this paper. The high percentage of large
lymphocytes which incorporate the label and the reduction of mean grain count
to one-third of the initial value after 24 hours indicate a rapid generation or
replication time for these cells. However, after 24 hours the rate of label dilution
slows and appears to approximate the loss of radioactivity from the total lymph
node. This finding is similar to the observations of Alpen ee al. (14), who re-
solved the grain dilution in lymphoblasts into a two component curve and pre-
sented the reasons for considering this as evidence for reutilization of DNA
label.
The correlation between mean grain count of the large lymphocytes and total
lymph node H3DNA, after the first 24 hours, is of considerable interest. The
total HSDNA in the lymph nodes is comprised of that in dividing cells, here
represented by large lymphoblasts, and that which enters the small lympho-
cytes by division of progenitor cells (large or medium). The small cells, each of
which contains the same amount of DNA as the interphase progenitor cells, out-
number the progenitor cells and contain about 80 per cent of the total DNA.
Therefore, the DNA of small cells is the chief determinant of DNA specific
activity after H3Tdr administration. One hour after a single injection virtually
all of the H8is in the DNA of progenitor cells (large and medium lymphocytes).
After a few divisions of the progenitor population the H8 content of the large
lymphocytes contributes very little to the level of lymph node H3DNA specific
activity or H3content. These values then reflect the H3 content of the numer-
CRADDOCK~ NAKAI~ FUKUTA, AND VANSLAGER 407
ically superior population of small lymphocytes. The gradual loss of DNA label
from the progenitor cells at a rate which approximates the loss from the entire
bulk of small lymphocytes suggests that the DNA label in small lymphocytes
reenters the progenitor lymphocytes.
Two component curves have been described for the dilution of DNA label in pe-
ripheral blood lymphocytes in humans (8-10), dogs (38), and rats (29, 39, 40). The
finding has been generally interpreted as indicating two populations of lymphocytes
in the circulating blood, one with a short life span and one with a very long life span.
The present findings of varying rates of DNA turnover in different parts of the lym-
phatic system may be consistent with this view. Certainly the experiments of Little
et al. (41) indicate a very long time for total lymphocyte DNA turnover. However,
the present findings indicate that reutilization of DNA may occur in lymphatic tissue,
as proposed by Hamilton (8) and Alpen et al. (14).
The apparent reentry of H3DNA from small lymphocytes into the actively prolifer-
ating lymphoblasts renders very difficult the interpretation of this type of labeling
data in terms of cytokinetics. Furthermore, the initial slope of loss of H3DNA from
lymph nodes may be influenced by the time required for equilibration to occur be-
tween labeled cells leaving and reentering the lymph nodes (20). These factors pro-
hibit any assignment of "life span" to lymphocytes as estimated by DNA labeling
techniques. It may be misleading to describe "short-lived" and "long-lived" popula-
tions of peripheral small lymphocytes. The actual fate of these cells is unknown.
Nevertheless, there are at least two types of peripheral lymph node lymphocytes ex-
hibiting differences in H~rdr labeling and DNA turnover. The turnover of DNA in
the lymphocytes of the thymus cortex, bone marrow (36, 37), and in germinal centers
(27, 28) of lymphoid follicles is rapid, and mitotic cells are most numerous in these
areas. These findings point to a rapid rate of new cell formation. This is in contrast
to the very slow rate of DNA turnover in the small lymphocytes formed in the mantle
zones around lymphoid germinal centers and in the medullary cords and pulp of
lymph nodes and spleen. The latter type of cell comprises the majority of peripheral
lymphocytes.
Various mechanisms for the reentry of DNA from small lymphocytes into the
nuclei of proliferating lymphoblasts have been proposed. These include phagocytosis
of nuclear debris by reticuloendothelial elements capable of differentiating into lym-
phocytes (2, 39), pinocytosis or some similar process (4) and cellular transformation
(2, 7). In view of the convincing demonstrations by others that small lymphocytes
from the peripheral blood or thoracic duct are capable of reassuming the appearance
and mitotic activity of lymphoblasts both in vivo (7, 21, 42, 43) and in vitro (44), it
would seem that this mechanism may explain the findings in peripheral lymph nodes
and spleen. The resumption of proliferative activity by small cells undergoing anti-
genic exposure in various parts of the far flung peripheral lymphatic tissue of these
rats living with the usual laboratory microbial flora could explain the apparent reentry
of H3DNA from small cells into large progenitor cells without invoking actual transfer
of nuclear material between cells.
The possibility that small lymphocytes may assume the appearance and
408 PEOLI~EEATIVE ACTIVITY OF LYM~IIATIC TISSUES
mitotic behavior of lymphoblasts might explain several enigmatic observations
concerning the response of the lymphatic tissue to injury. Nygaard and Potter
employed serial determination of CI~DNA specific activity in the lymphatic
tissues of rats receiving labeled thymidine and then subjected to 400 roentgens
whole body irradiation (13). They found little or no alteration from normal in
the rate of DNA label loss from the tissue remaining, although the volume of
lymphatic tissue was markedly reduced. They concluded that the x-rays must
have destroyed small cells and large progenitors in roughly equal numbers.
Alpen, Cooper, and Barkley, in a similar study (14), found that the rate of
dilution of labeled DNA in progenitor cells of lymph nodes was unaffected by
300 r whole body irradiation. The findings reported here in a small number of
rats subjected to operative stress with resulting involution and recovery of
lymphatic tissue are similar. Recovery from this type of acute depletion results
in a shift in cell population toward more immature larger lymphocytes The
surprising failure of these severe perturbations to cause profound alterations in
the rate of DNA renewal and turnover, as reflected by the rate of DNA label
loss could be explained if the small lymphocytehas the same proliferative capa-
bility as the larger cell. If this were the case removal of lymphocyteswould re-
move cells with the ability to divide regardless of whether they are large and
"immature" or small and "differentiated."In terms of DNA labeling the present
findings show that it is not possible to draw a clear line between small, morpho-
logically mature cells and large progenitor cells capable of mitosis. The concept
of the small lymphocyte as a progenitor cell, discussed extensively by Yoffey
(45), originates from the early observations of Maximow (46), Jordan (47), and
others.
The absence of recirculation to the thymus of small lymphocytes formed in
the mantle zones around germinal centers may have significancewith respect to
certain views of the participation of the thymus in immune reactions (48-50).
There now appears to be ample evidence that thymus small lymphocyteshave
a role in immunological events that differs from that of lymph node or spleen
small lymphocytes.Thymus cellsdo not have the potency of peripheral lympho-
cytes in transferring adoptive immunity or initiating the graft versus host
reaction when given to tolerant recipients (51, 52). The metabolic and kinetic
differences between "thymus-like" lymphocytes and peripheral lymphocytes
may reflect basic differences in physiology and function between various types
of lymphoid cells.
S ~ Y AND CONCLUSIONS
Cytokinetic data are presented, employing quantitation of H3DNA in the
lymphatic tissues of normal rats serially sacrificed after H3Tdr administration.
A marked difference in the patterns of initial labeling and label loss was ob-
served between the thymus and peripheral lymphatic tissue.
CRADDOCK, NAKAI, :FU-KUTA, AND VANSLAG:E:R 409
The data are compatible with other indications of rapid cell renewal in the
thymus. There is suppression of initial uptake of H3Tdr into the DNA of each
large lymphocytic progenitor cell in the thymus, apparently because of a feed-
back of thymidine containing material from small lymphocytes in the thymus.
Depletion of the thymus of small cells, as by operative stress or whole body
x-ray, leads to a marked increase in the uptake of H3Tdr into the DNA of large
thymocytes. This finding, which is in agreement with the previous findings of
Sugino et al. (33, 34) suggesting transfer of thymine nucleotides from small
thymus lymphocytes to precursor cells, may or may not be related to the ap-
parent transfer of DNA label between thymic cells. The evidence for the latter
consists of the curvllinear dilution of the DNA label in the thymus proliferating
cell population and the relationship between the rate of DNA label dilution in
large cells and the I-PDNA in the small cells in the thymus.
After the DNA label in progenitor cells in the thymus and lymph nodes has
entered the small cell population, the subsequent dilution of grains in these
dividing cells follows the same slope as the loss of radioactivity from the entire
lymph node. There is a long retention of some I-PDNA label in the dividing
lymph node cell population. This suggests that the loss of radioactivity from the
dividing cells and from the small cell population as a whole occurs equally. This
pattern prevails regardless of whether the percentage of large and small cells is
altered experimentally. These findings can be explained by an interchange of
the DNA nuclear label between small lymphocytes and large lymphocytes. This
could occur by some process such as phagocytosis or pinocytosis, or by trans-
formation of the small lymphocyte into a large, dividing cell. The data fit best
with the latter possibility. All or any of these mechanisms would lead to an
equilibration of the DNA label between large and small cells. This finding pre-
vents the assignment of a finite life span to lymphocytes on the basis of DNA
labeling kinetics. Nevertheless, there appear to be at least two different types of
lymphocytes. One, the "thymus-type" lymphocyte, is found in the thymus
cortex, bone marrow and germinal centers of lymphoid follicles. The other type,
found abundantly in the widespread peripheral lymphatic tissue, shows a very
prolonged retention of DNA label and is believed to be the recirculating, "im-
munologically committed" cells described by others. These cells do not appear
to enter the thymus cortex.
The authorswishto acknowledgethe technicalassistanceof MissMaryBaker,Mr. Robert
Yelenosky,MissShirleyGordon,MissAliceOhtomo,and Mrs. GloriaBuchbinder.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bryant, B. J., Reutilization of leukocyte DNA by cells of regenerating liver,
Exp. CellResearch, 1962, 27, 70.
2. Diderholm, H., Fichtelins, K.-E., and Linder, O., Availability time of Hs label
after administration of I-Is thymidine in vivo,Exp. CellResearch, 1962,27, 431.
410 PROLIFERATIVE ACTMTY OF LYMPHATIC TISSUES
3. Lipkin, M., Bell, B., and Sherlock, P., Cell proliferation kinetics in the gastro-
intestinal tract of man. I. Cell renewal in colonand rectum, J. Clin. Inv., 1963,
42, 767.
4. Rieke, W. O., The in rivo reutilization of lymphocyte and sarcoma DNA by cells
growing in the peritoneal cavity, J. Cell Biol., 1962, 13, 205.
5. Craddock, C. G., Rytomaa, T., and Nakai, G. S., The transfer of labeled DNA
from blood cells to regenerating liver, in The Thymus in Immunobiology, New
York, Harper & Row Publishers, Inc., 1964, in press.
6. Cronkite, E. P., The kinetics of blood cell production, in Aplastic Anemia, Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Ross Conference on Pediatric Research, 1964,in press.
7. Gowans, J. L., The fate of parental strain small lymphocytes in F1 hybrid rats,
Ann. New York Acad. Sc., 1962, 99, 432.
8. Hamilton, L. D., Control of lymphocyte production, Brookkaven Syrup. Biol.
1957, No. 10, 53.
9. Ottesen, J., On the age of human white cells in peripheral blood, Acla Physiol.
Scan&, 1954, 32, 75.
10. Osgood, E. E., Tivey, H., Davidson, K. B., Seaman, A. J., and Li, J. G., The
relative rates of formation of new leukocytes in patients with acute and chronic
leukemias, Cancer, 1952, 5, 331.
11. Robinson, S. H., and Brecher, G., Delayed incorporation of tritiated thymidine
into DNA, Science, 1963, 142, 392.
12. Lipkin, M., and Quastler, H., Cellpopulation kinetics in the colon of the mouse,
J. Clin. Inv., 1962,41, 141.
13. Nygaard, O. F., and Potter, R. L., Effect of x-radiation on DNA metabolism in
the rat. II. Recovery after sublethal dose of irradiation, Radiation Research,
1960, 12, 120.
14. Alpen, E. L., Cooper, E. H., and Barkley, H., Effects of ionizing radiation on
rat lymphoid tissue in vivo, Intemat. J. Radiation Biol., 1960, 9., 424.
15. Hall, C. E., and Cavalieri, L. F., Four-stranded DNA as determined by electron
microscopy, J. Biophys. and Biochem. Cytol., 1961, 10, 347.
16. Cottier, H., in The Thymus in Immunobiology, New York, Harper & Row Pub-
lishers, Inc., 1964, in press.
17. Buyske, D. A., Kelly, R., Florini, J., Gordon, S., and Reets, E., Determination
of tritium and carbon-14 in biological sample by rapid combustion techniques,
Atomlight, 1961,No. 20, 1.
18. Craddock, C. G., and Nakai, G. S., Leukemic cell proliferation as determined by
in vitro deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis, ]. Clin. Inv., 1962, 41, 360.
19. Feinendegen, L. E., and Bond, V. P., Differential uptake of tritiated thymidine
into the soluble fraction of single bone marrow cells determined by autoradi-
ography, Exp. Cell Research, 1962, 9.7,474.
20. Rieke, W. O., Everett, N. B., and Caffrey, R. W., The sizes and interrelations
of lymphocytes in thoracic duct lymph of normal and stimulated rats, Acta
Haematol., 1963, 30, 103.
21. McGregor, D. D., and Gowans, J. L., The antibody response of rats depleted of
lymphocytes by chronic drainage from the thoracic duct, J. Exp. Med., 1963,
117, 303.
C~DOCK~ NAKAI, PIYKUTA~ AND VANSLAGER 411
22. Osogoe,B., Ito, H., and Monden, Y., cited in Dynamics of Proliferating Tissues,
(D. Price, editor), Chicago, The Univ. of Chicago Press, 1959,66.
23. Kindred, J. E., A quantitative study of the hemopoietic organs of young albino
rats, Am. J. Anat., 1940, 67, 99.
24. Leblond, C. P., and Sainte-Marie, G., Models for lymphocyte and plasmacyte
formation, in Ciba Symposium on Haemopoiesis, (G. E. Wolstenholme and M.
O'Connor, editors), London, J. and A. Churchill, Ltd., 1950, 152.
25. Andreasen, E., and Christensen, S., The rate of mitotic activity in the lymphoid
organs of the rat, Anat. Rec., 1949, 103, 401.
26. I-Iiggins,G. M., and Anderson, R. M., Experimental pathologyof the liver, restora-
tion of liver of white rats following partial surgical removal, Arch. Path., 1931,
19., 186.
27. Fliedner, T. M., Kesse, M., Cronkite, E. P., and Robertson, J. S., Cell prolifera-
tion in germinal centers of the rat spleen, Ann. New York Acad. Sc., 1964,
113, 578.
28. Cottier, H., Odortchenki, N., Keiser, G., Hess, M., and Stoner, R. D., Incorpora-
tion of tritiated nucleosides and amino acids into lymphoid and plasmacytoid
cells during secondary response to tetanus toxoid in mice, Ann. New York Acad.
Sc., 1964, 113, 612.
29. Andreasen, E., and Ottesen, J., Investigations on the nucleic acid turnover in the
lymphoid organs, Acta Physiol. Stand., 1945, 10, 258.
30. Schooley, J. C., Bryant, B. J., and Kelly, L. S., Preliminary autoradiographic
observations of cellular proliferation in lymphoid tissues using tritiated thymi-
dine, in The Kinetics of Cellular Proliferation, (F. Stohlman, editor), New
York, Gruue and Stratton, Inc., 1959, 208.
31. Potter, R. L., and Nygaard, O. F., The conversion of thymidine to thymine nu-
cleotides and deoxyribonucleic acid in vivo, J. Biol. Chem., 1963, 238, 2150.
32. Maley, G. F., and Maley, F., Nucleotide interconversions in embryonic and neo-
plastic tissues. I. The conversion of deoxycytidylic acid to deoxyuridylic acid
and thymidylic acid, J. Biol. Chem., 1959, 234, 2975.
33. Sugino, Y., Frenkel, E. P., and Potter, R. L., Effect of x-radiation on DNA
metabolism in various tissues of the rat. V. DNA metabolism in regenerating
thymus, Radiation Research, 1963,19, 682.
34. Frenkel, E. P., Sugino, Y., Bishop, R. C., and Potter, R. L., Effect of x-radiation
on DNA metabolism in various tissues of the rat. VI. Correlative morphologic
and biochemical changes during the regeneration of the thymus, Radiation
Research, 1963, 19, 701.
35. Looney, W. B., A cytoehemical and autoradiographic study of deoxyribonucleic
acid synthesis in individual nuclei and the effects of irradiation, in The Cell
Nucleus, (J. S. Mitchell, editor), New York, Academic Press, Inc., 1950, 92.
36. Osmond, D. G., and Everett, N. B., Radioantographic studies of bone marrow
lymphoeytes in vivo and in diffusion chamber cultures, Blood, 1964, 23, 1.
37. Craddock, C. G., Bone marrow lymphocytes of the rat as studied by autoracliog-
raphy, in press.
38. Perry, S., Craddock, C. G., Paul, G., and Lawrence, J. S., Lymphocyteproduction
and turnover, Am. Med. Assn. Arch. Int. Med., 1959, 103, 224.
412 PROLIFERATIVEACTIVITYOF LYMPHATICTISSUES
39. Rieke, W. O., Caffrey, R. W., and Everett, N. B., Rates of proliferation and
interrelationships of cellsin the mesenteric lymph node of the rat, Blood, 1963,
22,674.
40. Everett, N. B., Caffrey, R. W., and Rieke, W. O., Reeirculation of lymphocytes,
Ann. New York Acad. Sc., 1964, 113, 887.
41. Little, J. R., Brecher, G., Bradley, R. E., and Rose, S., Determination of lymph-
ocyte turnover by continuous infusion of H3thymidine, Blood,1962, 10, 236.
42. Porter, K. A., and Cooper, E. H., Recognition of transformed small lymphocytes
by combined chromosomal and isotopic labels, Lancet, 1962, 2, 317.
43. Gowans, J., Gesner, B. M., and McGregor, D. D., The immunological activity of
lymphocytes. Biological activity of the leukocyte, Ciba Found. Study Group,
1961, No. 10, 32.
44. MacKinney, A. A., Stohlman, F., and Brecher, G., The kinetics of cell prolifera-
tion in culture of human peripheral blood, Blood, 1962, 19, 349.
45. Yoffey, J. M., Quantitative Cellular Hematology, Springfield, Illinois, Charles
C Thomas, 1960.
46. Maximow, A. A., Relation of blood cells to connective tissues and endothelium,
Physiol. Rev., 1924, 4, 533.
47. Jordan, H. E., The significance of the lymphoid nodule, Am. J. Anat., 1935,
57, 1.
48. Marshall, A. H. E., and White, R. G., Immunological reactivity of the thymus,
Brit. J. Exp. Path., 1961, 42, 379.
49. Burnet, F. M., The immunological significance of the thymus: An extension of
the clonal selection theory of immunity, A~stralian Ann. Meg., 1962, 11, 79.
50. Miller, J. F. A. P., Role of the thymus in immunity, Brit. Meg. J., 1963, l, 459.
51. Thorbecke, J. G., Immunological competence and responsiveness of the thymus,
Wistar Institute Symposium, Conference on The Thymus, Philadelphia, April,
1964, to be published.
52. Billingham, R. E., The difference in properties of thymocytes and lymphocytes,
Wistar Institute Symposium, Conference on The Thymus, Philadelphia, April,
1964, to be published.
53. Davidson, J. N., The Biochemistry of the Nucleic Acids, London, Methuen and
Co., Ltd., 1960.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES
PLATE39
FIG. 1. Germinal center in mesenteric lymph node of normal rat sacrificed 1 hour
after HaTdr, 0.5/~c/gm, showing highly labeled cells (black dots) in the periphery
of the follicle and in the pulp of the node. The germinal center (arrow) shows large
numbers of less highly labeled lymphocytes. X 168.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE VOL. 120 PLATE 39
(Craddock et al.: Proliferative activity of lymphatic tissues)
PLATE 40
FIG. 2 a. Imprint showing labeled large lymphoid cells in the thymus cortex of a
normal rat sacrificed 1 hour after 1.0 #c/gm of H3Tdr. × 1400.
FIG. 2 b. Highly labeled large and medium lymphocytes in the mesenteric lymph
node of the same rat. × 1400.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE VOL. 120 PLATE 40
(Craddock et al.: Proliferative activity of lymphatic tissues)
PLATE 41
FIG. 3. Labeled large lymphoid progenitor cells in the thymus cortex of a rat sub-
jected to 50 per cent hepatectomy 3 days before administration of 0.5 #c/gin of H3Tdr
and sacrificed 1 hour later. )< 1400.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE VOL. 120 PLATE 41
(Craddock et al. : Proliferative activity of lymphatic tissues)
