ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF NORMAL AND
PATHOLOGICAL HUMAN BLOOD SERUM AND
PLASMA
BY LEWIS G. LONGSWORTH, PH.D., THEODORE SHEDLOVSKY, PH.D., AND
DUNCAN A. MAcINNES, PH.D.
(Fromthe Laboratories of The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research)
(Received for publication, July 17, 1939)
As is now well known, Tiselius' (1) development of the moving boundary
method for electrophoresis has been of great service in the study of solutions
of proteins. In that method a plane of contact is first made between a solu-
tion of the proteins in a buffer and the pure buffer. When a current is
passed, under appropriate conditions, a series of boundaries is formed.
With the aid of the Toepler schlieren technique these boundaries may be
seen on a ground glass or may be recorded photographically. Evidence of
the different boundaries consists of bands of shadow, the number of which
indicate the presence of constituents having different electrophoretic
mobilities (if certain "boundary anomalies" are excluded). The motions
of the bands yield the values of the mobilities under the conditions of the
experiment. Stenhagen (2), using this procedure, has made an extended
study of human blood plasma, showing the variation of the mobilities of the
different protein constituents (albumin, fibrinogen, and a,/3, and "y globu-
fins) with the pH. However, the schlieren method, as originally used,
yields no quantitative information as to the relative amounts of the proteins
present. Estimates of the quantities of the various constituents in solu-
tion, as well as their mobilities and relative homogeneities, may be obtained
with the aid of the Lamm "scale" method (3). In that procedure a photo-
graph of a graduated scale is taken through the electrophoretic boundaries,
and the displacement of the lines of the scale produced by variations of the
refractive index is then obtained with a comparator. If the boundaries
are not too sharp, i.e., if the refractive index gradients are not too great,
this method yields data which may be plotted in such a way that the de-
termination of the areas under the various "peaks" measures the con-
centrations. Although the method requires many hours of tedious work
with a comparator, interesting and important results with the method have
been obtained by Tiselius and Horsfall (4) and Tiselius and Kabat (5).
399
400 ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SERUM AND PLASMA
Longsworth (6) has, however, shown that the schlieren method may be
adapted to give all the information furnished by the scale method. This
has led to the development of the "schlieren scanning" technique, on
which a brief note has already been published (7).
Technique
The principles of the schlieren and of the sehlieren scanning methods are illustrated in
Fig. 1. An image at P of the thin horizontal slit S, illuminated by the lamp L, is formed
by the schlieren lens D. In front of the lens the cell E (in which the electrophoresis is
carried out) is placed in the position shown. The camera objective O is focussed on the
cell E and forms an image (full sized in our apparatus) on the screen G. Now if the fluid
in the cell E is homogeneous the image of this fluid at G will be uniformly illuminated.
On the other hand, if there is a boundary, A, between, for instance, a protein-bearing
,.
~-~;
~ ---b .... N
I :r
Fro. 1. Diagram of schlieren scanning method.
i; ]i • t,i
solution and a buffer, there will be a region in which the refractive index varies with the
height in the cell, and light which would normally pass to P is deflected downward,
since the solution with the greater refractive index is on the bottom. If the "schlieren
diaphragm" Q is raised to a point p where it intercepts the most deflected light, a dark
band will appear on the screen, conjugate to the region of steepest gradient in the bound-
ary. Such a band is illustrated in the figure at p'. This, and all of the diagram to the
right of the line G, is in a plane at right angles to the page.
However, a boundary between two solutions does not consist of a single geometric
plane, but of a region in which the composition varies gradually from that of one solution
to that of the other. The refractive index, n, in such a region changes continuously
with the height, k, of the liquid in the cell. The gradient, dn/dk, of refractive index, for
each boundary, will thus, theoretically at least, vary from zero to a maximum, and back
to zero. In Fig. 1 the variation of the gradient, dn/dk, is represented by the density of
the shading. The pencil of light passing thorough the layer having the maximum value
of the gradient will be most bent from the normal path and will be the first to be inter-
cepted when the schlieren diaphragm Q is raised. On lifting this diaphragm still further,
i.e., to the level q, less refracted pencils of light will also be intercepted and the schlieren
band will widen, as is shown in q': This can obviously be continued until the whole field
has been covered and may include several boundaries instead of only one. In the
schlieren scanning method, as described by Longsworth (7), this process is made con-
L. G. LONGSWORTH~ T. SHEDLOVSKY~ AND D. A. MAClNNES 401
tinuous. A narrow vertical slit is placed at G and a photographic plate is moved at a
constant rate across this slit. At the same time, and actuated by the same mechanism,
the schlieren diaphragm Q is given a steady movement upwards. The resulting (positive)
photographic record for a typical single boundary is indicated by the cross-hatched area
e-f-g. The contour of this area indicates both the position of the boundary and the
magnitude of the refractive index gradients existing in it. It will thus be seen that the
usual schlieren hands, p', q'..., are sections through this area. By a system of gears
the ratio of the rates of motion of the schlieren diaphragm Q to that of the plate in the
plane G is given a constant value, such as one to three, and this ratio can he varied
within certain limits at wiU. The movement of the plate is along the dimension, z, per-
pendicular to the plane of the diagram.
If the increase of the refractive index is proportional to the concentration of protein
the following considerations will show that the area e-f-g is a measure of the change of
concentration of protein from one side of a boundary to another. The angular deviation
of a pencil of light in a thin horizontal layer of a boundary is proportional (a) to the
gradient, dn/dh, in the layer, and (b) to the breadth a of the cell. The displacement,
A, of the schlieren diaphraghm, Q, from the position, P, which just intercepts the deflected
pencil, is also proportional to the "optical lever arm" distance, b. Therefore, we have
the relation:
dn
A = Oh-- (1)
dk
In our apparatus using unit magnification the dimension h of the diagram e-fig is equal to
the corresponding height in the cell. The dimensions along the axis z have, due to the
gear mechanism mentioned above, a definite ratio to values of A, i.e., A = kz, in which k
is a constant. The area e-fig is given by the integral
f z ah = f . dh ab r dn d ab
J 3, h = (,,,- ,.) (2)
in which n9 and nl are the refractive indices of the two solutions which meet at the
boundary, and a, b, and k are, it will be recalled, constants of the apparatus. The
integration indicated in equation 2 may be conveniently carried out with a planimeter.
The method for obtaining the base line e-g of the area ¢-f-g will be shortly explained.
Having obtained n2 - nl, as just described, the difference of the concentration C of
protein constituent to which the boundary is due may be found from the relation
C = K(n2 -- nl) (3)
in which the coefficient, K, the specific refractive increment, depends upon the nature
of the protein. Some information as to the values of K is available and is discussed
below but more should certainly be obtained in the near future.
A reproduction of the electrophoretic pattern or diagram of normal human blood
plasma, just as obtained from a typical experiment, is shown in Fig. 2, except that it has
been turned through an angle of 90°. The left and right sections of the figure are the
patterns from the rising and descending boundaries respectively. The different peaks are
those produced by albumin (A), the a, 3, and "r globulins, and fibrinogen (qb)as marked.
The bands ~, v' and s, s' at the top of the patterns are of use in obtaining concentrations
and mobilities, as will be shown later in this article.
402 ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SERUm AND PLASMA
It will be observed that the patterns from the rising and descending boundaries are
far from being exact mirror images of each other. The main reason for this lack of
symmetry is the fact that the movement of the boundaries produces changes in the
conductance of the solutions between the boundaries, and these changes, in turn~ affect
the distribution of protein and buffer salts. This question of boundary anomalies
has been discussed in a recent paper from this laboratory (8). An additional difference
v\
J
A A
+/V'
\e,
¥
¥
(+O
.t •
(a) Rising (b) Descending
FIG. 2. Electrophoretic pattern of normal blood plasma.
between the two patterns is the "13globulin disturbance" almost always observed in the
pattern of the descending boundaries. This is undoubtedly due to convection, resulting
from a reaction in the neighborhood of this boundary, following the electrophoretic
separation of the constituents. It may be noted that the fl globulin in the descending
boundary is migrating in the absence of albumin and a globulin, whereas in the rising
boundaries this is not the case. It is of interest that turbidity occasionally develops at
the site of this disturbance. In spite of this complication we have based our computa-
tions of concentrations and mobilities on the patterns for the descending boundaries,
since both theory and experiment indicate that the anomalies associated with these
boundaries are less pronounced.
L. G. LONGSWORTH~ T. SHEDLOVSKY, AND D. A. MACINN'ES 403
Some Typical Electrophoraic Patterns
A selection from our measurements of the electrophoretic patterns of
human sera and plasma is given in Figs. 4 and 5.
The diagrams have been obtained under very nearly the same experimental conditions
in order to make comparisons possible. The blood samples were obtained in the morning
before breakfast. A buffer with a pit of 7.8 at 25°C., consisting of 0.025 ~x lithium
diethyl barbiturate, 0.025 xt diethyl barbituric acid, and 0.025 ~s lithium chloride, has
been used. The buffer salt and acid being univalent avoid the difficulties due to highly
charged ions. The relatively low mobility of the lithium ion constituent results in a low
electrical conductance of the buffer solution and a reduction of effects due to heating.
The buffer appears to have a relatively high solvent effect on the proteins. Experi-
mentally the boundary anomalies have been found to be less pronounced than with a
phosphate buffer of the same pH and of 0.1 ionic strength.
In the dialysis of the protein solution against the buffer two procedures were used,
both of which brought the material into a Don-
nan equilibrium with the original buffer. In
one case the serum or plasma (diluted usually
with 3 volumes of buffer solution) was placed
in a bag made from ~ inch cellophane tubing)
The ratio of surface to volume of this bag was
increased by flattening the tubing by the intro-
duction of a form made of glass rod. The bag
containing the protein was placed in a tube
with 150 cc. of the buffer, and the latter ro-
tated at room temperature for 1 hour. The cel-
lophane bag and contents were then transferred
to 2 liters of fresh buffer and allowed to stand
at 0-2°C. for 24 hours or more. In the second
procedure static dialysis was used at 0-2°C.
with a change of buffer each day for 3 days.
Before introduction into the electrophoresis cell
f :::::r~
Fro. 3. Conductivity cell for protein
solutions.
the protein solution was in both procedures clarified in an angle centrifuge operated at
0°C. Conductance and pH measurements were made on the resulting buffer and protein
solutions. The establishment of a Donnan equilibrium has been assumed when further
dialysis produces no change in the conductance of the protein solution and the outside
solution has the conductance of the original buffer. We have found that this test is
far more sensitive than that obtained by following the dialysis with pH measurements.
The conductance measurements were made with the solutions in a cell of the type
shown in Fig. 3. The main difference of this form of cell over one of the conventional
1For the case of the plasma the blood was withdrawn into a tube containing a dry
mixture of ammonium and potassium oxalates in accordance with the procedure of
Heller and Paul (Heller, V. G., and Paul, H., ]. Lab. and Clin. Med., 1934, 19, 777).
Heparin was used in a few cases.
404 ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SERUM AND PLASMA
9'
A
i
(a) Normal (b) Pneumonia (c) Peritonitis
i
(d) Peritonsillar abscess (¢) Rheumatic fever
FIG. 4
(f) Lymphatic leukemia
L. G. LONGSWORTH, T. SHEDLOVSKY, AND D. A. MAClIqNES 405
(a) Normal plasma (b) Multiple myeloma plasma (c) Nephrosis serum
A
A
A
(d) Aplastic anemia
serum
(e) Obstructive jaundice
phsma
FIG. 5
(f) Obstructive jaundice
plasma (ether extracted)
406 ELECTROPHORETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SER~ AND PLAS~F.A
type is in the use of hollow truncated platinum cones, e-e in the figure, as electrodes, as
suggested by Shedlovsky (9). These electrodes are sealed to the glass wall of the cell,
and make contact with mercury in the tubes t-t by means of platinum wires fused into
the glass. Due to the relatively unimpeded flowwhen the cellis filledby means of the
tubesf-f the protein solutions do not foam. This tendency to form bubbles makes most
conductance ceils nearly useless with protein solutions. The glass rod, r-r, is used for
strengthening, and the projections are used for supporting the cell. As a thermostat for
the conductance measurements a Dewar vessel containing a mixture of crushed ice and
water was used. The conductivity bridge was of the design described by Shedlovsky
(10) and had more than adequate precision. The pI-Imeasurements weremade using a
glass electrode of the type designedby MacInnes and Belcher (11) in conjunction with a
vacuum tube potentiometer reading to 0.5 my., i.e., 0.01 pH unit.
Of the group of electrophoretic diagrams shown in Fig. 4, a is that of
normal human serum. This differs from that shown for plasma in Fig. 2 b
only in the absence of the peak ~ due to fibrinogen. It is our experience
that the patterns due to normal serum are reproducible within quite narrow
limits, and that any marked deviation is due to abnormal conditions. The
other diagrams shown in the figure are those of sera of patients suffering
from various pathological conditions, i.e. pneumonia, peritonitis, peritonsil-
lar abscess, rheumatic fever, and acute lymphatic leukemia. One common
characteristic of these conditions is that they are accompanied by fever.
It will be noted that when compared with the diagram for the normal serum,
all of the other diagrams indicate an increase of the ot globulin. This has
been found to be true as far as our observations have gone. Further data
dealing with this subject wiU be given in Table I. In the case of the peri-
tonsiUar abscess (Fig. 4 d) a sample of plasma was obtained after recovery
of the patient. This is shown in Fig. 5 a. The electrophoretic diagram
was found to be quite normal, the height of the a globulin peak, in particu-
lar, having decreased to that observed for healthy individuals.
Fig. 5 also contains the electrophoretic patterns of other samples of
pathological sera and plasmas. Of these Fig. 5 b is that of plasma of a
multiple myeloma patient. The most marked difference between this
pattern and that of normal plasma is the great increase of the peak due to
globulin, or, more exactly, of material moving with the mobility ascribed
to/~ globulin. It must be emphasized that any peak or maximum may
arise from two or more materials moving with essentially the same velocity
under the influence of the potential gradient. However, it will be observed
that there is some evidence of the ~ globulin disturbance in this pattern.
The peak for fibrinogen, 4,, is also higher than for normal plasma. Of the
three cases of multiple myeloma studied, another gave a pattern similar to
Fig. 4 b in that there was a very large increase over the normal of material
TABLE I
Mobilities and Concentrationsof the Components of Normal and Pathological
Sera and Plasma
No.
I0
II
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Material
Normal
c~
" "1"
" §
Pregnancy
Stored bloodll
,Aplasticanemia
Rheumatic fever
Pneumonia
" it
Peritonitis
Peritonsiliarabscess
Acute lymphatic leukemia
Lymphogranuloma
Obstructive jaundice
Lipoid nephrosis
Myeloma ~;$
,, $$
,, ~
* All values of "y/A in this table are probably high by a few per cent due to the super-
position on the 7 boundary of an ~boundary, i.e. a gradient of buffer salts. See reference
8, page 283.
t Plasma of No. 21 after recovery.
Non-fasting sample from same source as No. 2 taken 2 months later.
§ Taken from Svensson (14) for comparison.
[1Stored for 53 days with especial precautions to be described by Dr. John Scudder
in a forthcoming publication.
** Complicated by infection.
tt Pooled, dilution not known exactly.
:~:~Plasma cell myeloma.
407
408 ELECTROPHOILETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SERUM AND PLASMA
with the mobility of fl globulin, whereas the third yielded a pattern that was
normal. The results are summarized in Table I. The variability of serum
proteins in cases of myeloma has been observed by Dr. A. B. Gutman. ~
It may be mentioned in this connection that the diagnosis of the myeloma
cases was confirmed by biopsy.
A particularly interesting pattern is that for the serum from a case of
nephrosis, shown in Fig. 5 c. Here it will be observed that the peak due to
albumin is very low, whereas the maxima in the region of the a and
globulins are relatively high. This result is in accord with the low value of
the albumin/globulin ratio observed, using the customary methods, for this
disease. As initially obtained the serum was turbid owing to the presence
of suspended fatty substances. To obtain the pattern shown in Fig. 5c
the serum was clarified by the use of a high speed centrifuge (30,000 R.P.M.).
A considerable decrease of the material ascribed to/3 globulin is observed if
the clarification is carried out by extraction with ether. Such conclusions
as can be made from this observation will be considered below. A more
complete discussion of our results on electrophoretic studies on nephrotic
serum and urine will be given in another paper.
Fig. 5d shows the pattern of serum from a case of aplastic anemia. It
differs little from that of normal serum. However, as will be shown in
Table I, we have found that the albumin/globulin ratio is slightly but con-
sistently low, this decrease being due mainly to an increase in 7 globulin.
Figs. 5 e andf are electrophoretic patterns of a sample of plasma which
was found upon analysis to have a quite abnormal content of cholesterol.
The patient was suffering from obstructive jaundice. It will be noted that
the peak due to material moving with, roughly, the mobility of fl globulin
is very high. However, on extraction of the plasma with ether this peak
is very much reduced as is shown in Fig. 5f. The question as to whether
the serum lipids are migrating as such, or in loose combination with
globulin is now under investigation.
The Mobilities of the Protein Constituents of Serum and Plasma
From electrophoretic patterns, such as are shown in Figs. 2, 4, and 5, it
is possible to obtain mobilities of the various constituents if the following
data are available, (a) the starting position of the boundary between the
protein solution and buffer, (b) the specific conductance, x., of the protein
solution, (c) the current, I, in amperes, (d) the time, t, during which a given
boundary has moved the distance, h, from the starting position, and (e)
Forthcoming publication.
L. G. LONGSWORTH, T. SHEDLOVSKY, AND D. A. MACINNES 409
the cross-sectional area, A, of the cell. With these data the mobility, U,
may be computed with the aid of the formula:
It
In order toobtain the starting positionof the boundariesthe following procedureis used.
The initially sharp boundaries between the protein solution and buffer, which are out of
sight because they are hidden behind the sliding plates of the cell, are brought into view
by forcing a small volume of buffer into one side of the electrophoresis apparatus. The
schlieren band due to the initial boundary is recorded on the photographic plate. The
result is shown on the strips s, s' of Fig. 2. The electrophoresis is then carried out for the
measured time, t, the plate is shifted slightly in the camera, and the scanning process, as
described above, is carried out. The distance, h, between the starting position and that
of a given boundary may then be measured with a comparator. The position ofa
boundary, for instance, that of the albumin, A, in Fig. 2 b, has been assumed to bethat
of the maximum ordinate. Mobilities computed from data obtained from rising bound-
aries are found to be, under the conditions of our experiments, over 10 per cent greater
than those found from descending boundaries. The reasons for this discrepancyhave been
discussed in a previous paper (8) from this laboratory. As already mentioned, the data
have been obtained from descending boundaries since the phenomena, at least for the
leading boundary, are somewhat more simple for that case.
Mobilities vary markedly with the pH values, the ionic strength, the
temperature, and to a lesser extent with the protein concentration. For
the data recorded in columns 4 to 8 in Table I these variables were kept
within narrow limits. It will be observed that the values of the mobility
assigned to a given constituent vary but slightly. Some differences that
have been found can possibly be assigned to minor variations of one of the
conditions just mentioned and to difficulties of measurement. However,
some of the variations are undoubtedly real. For the present purpose the
use of the mobilities is in definitely classifying a given peak or maximum.
Further study of the mobility values and their variation with pH and ionic
strength is expected to throw much light on the physical chemistry of normal
and pathological plasma proteins.
The Concentrations of the Protein Constituents
As already described the concentration of a component may be obtained from the area
formed, in the schlieren pattern, by a given boundary, if the coefficient K of equation 3,
connecting the refractive index increment with the concentration, is known. However,
it is very important for this purpose to establish the base line of the pattern. This will
be the position on the pattern of undeviated light, including any slight refractions due to
irregularities of the cell walls, and is located as follows. Before the boundaries are in
view; the schlieren diaphragm, Q, of Fig. 1, is brought to a position just below P, i.e.
below the normal image of the slit S, and the scanning process, as described, is then
410 ELECTROPttOI~TIC PATT~..tLNSO1a BLOOD SERUM AND PLASMA
carried out until the diaphragm has passed P. A typical result of this process is shown
in the strips r and r' at the top of Fig. 2. From the readings of the micrometer head
registering the position of the schlieren diaphragm, Q of Fig. 1, and the ratio connecting
the rates of motion of the diaphragm with the distance, z, along the plate, the reading of
the micrometer head at which the undeviated light is intercepted may be interpolated.
If there are irregularities of the cell wall this reading may be found as a function of the
height, h, in the cell. When the protein pattern is taken by the schlieren scanning
E
5
4
3
1
°o.I ;i \]~-cm.
FIG. 6. Tracing of electrophoretic pattern for estimation of concentrations.
method the positions along the vertical direction (as reproduced in Fig. 2) are also known
in terms of readings of the micrometer head. The lower edge of the electrophoretic
pattern, i.e. the base line, can thus be accurately plotted. In determining the area due
to a given component with a planimeter it is necessary to make a more or less arbitrary
separation due to the fact that the refractions due to the different boundaries overlap.
Following Tiselius and Kabat (5) the areas have been divided as is shown in Fig. 6, a
vertical line being drawn from the lowest point between two adjacent peaks. The areas
were obtained with a planimeter from tracings made from projections giving a 2½ times
linear enlargement. To interpret the resulting areas in terms of compositions the values
of the specific refractive increment, K, for human serum albumin and globulin, found by
Schretter (12) for the sodium D line have been used. These have been corrected for the
wave length of the light used in our measurements by assuming human serum corn-
L. G. LONGSWORTH, T. SHEDLOVSK¥, AND D. A. MAeINNES 411
ponents to have the same dispersionsas thosefound by Pedersen and Andersson (13)
for horse serum.
In Table I the per cent of albumin in each plasma or serum is given in
column 9. In column l0 is shown the albumln/globulin ratio (A/G),
i.e. the ratio of albumin to the sum of the three globulins, and the following
three columns contain ~/A, fl/A, and "Y/A, which are the ratios of the con-
centrations of the separate globulin fractions to the concentration of al-
bumin. In column 14 is given the ratio of the concentration of fibrinogen,
4, to that of albumin in the plasmas. In the cases in which the electro-
phoretic pattern has been reproduced in this article a reference is given in
the last column.
The data obtained from presumably normal individuals are given in
Nos. 1 to 6. It will be observed that although there is some variation, both
of concentration and of composition ratios, they are within rather narrow
limits. A welcome independent check on the validity of these figures is
given from the work of Svensson (14) which appeared while this paper was
in preparation. He has obtained an electrophoretic pattern of a sample of
human blood using an optical method quite different from ours. The
ratios, A/G, etc., from his results are given in the table in the seventh line.
It will be seen that they are within the limits we have found for normal
serum, and are almost identical with that found for sample 2)
With regard to the pathological sera an inspection of the figures in the
table will be found to confirm quantitatively the conclusions already out-
lined above.
The cases of aplastic anemia; Nos. 10 to 14, show somewhat lower values
of the albumin/globulin ratio due largely to a relatively high 3' concentra-
tion, but otherwise are not far from normal. No. 14, which has a high
ot/A ratio was complicated by an infection, as indicated in the table.
8Since this paper was submitted for publication a~ article on "The electrophoretic
analysis of normal human serum" by R. A. Kekwick (Biochem. Y., 1939,3,~ 1122) has
appeared. The averages of his results for six normal sere are A/G -- 1.44, a/A =
0.08, ~/A = 0.19, and 3,/A = 0.43. It may be noted that although the values of
oz/A and/~/A are in satisfactory agreement with our results for normal sere, Nos. 1
to 7, Table I, the value of 3,/A is over twicethe averagevalue wehave observed. Kek-
wick made his computations from the pattern of the rising boundaries, neglecting,
however,the contribution of a ~ effectto ~he rising 3' globulinboundary. In our pat-
terns, Fig. 2, for example,the area due to the slowestrising boundary, i.e., 3' q- 8,has
been nearly twice that of the slowest descending boundary, 3" + ¢. Neglectof the
effect probably accounts for the highvalue of 3"/A obtained by Kekwick. Both
theory and experimentsto be reported later indicate, however,that the ¢ effectat the
descending3"globulinboundary is small. See footnote (*) to Table I.
412 ELECTROPHOILETIC PATTERNS OF BLOOD SERUM AND PLASMA
The values of a/A for all of the sera from febrile patients, Nos. 15 to 22,
are all high compared with the normal. The average value of a/A for the
eight samples of febrile sera is, as a matter of fact, over twice that found for
the average of the corresponding ratio for normal sera.4 In these cases,
also, the A/G ratio is relatively low.
Quite striking variations from the normal both in composition and in
concentration ratios are found in the various diseased conditions listed in
Nos. 23 to 29. In all these cases, and indeed in all the pathological condi-
tions studied, the albumin/globulin ratio has been found to be less than that
for the normal. The most abnormal ratios are observed for the cases of
nephrosis. Although two of three multiple myeloma sera gave exception-
ally high/3/A ratios, the third is within the normal range.
The investigationdescribedin the foregoingpageshas beenpossibleonly becauseof
the kind cooperationof colleaguesin providing samplesof serumand plasma together
with the correspondingdiagnoses. For the material dealing with nephrosiswe are in-
debted to Drs. D. D. Van Slykeand Jaques BourdiUon,on pneumoniato Drs. OswaldT.
Avery and RoUinD. Hotchkiss,on rheumatic feverto Drs. Homer F. Swiftand George
K. Hirst, and on anemiato Dr. CorneliusP. Rhoads, all of The RockefellerInstitute for
Medical Research. For the material bearing on myeloma, lymphogranuloma, and
obstructive jaundice we are obliged to Drs. A. B. Gutman and E. M. Gutman of the
Presbyterian Hospital. Dr. John Scudder of the Presbyterian Hospital and of The
Rockefeller Institute, in addition to providing us with material on peritonitis and a
sample of stored blood, has actively aided us in the manipulations and has furnished
valuable information and technique.
SUMMARY
The electrophoretic patterns of a series of normal and pathological human
sera and plasmas have been obtained using the schlieren scanning
method. From these patterns the mobilities and concentrations of the
electrophoretically distinct protein components have been computed. The
mobilities fall into five we~l defined groups corresponding to albumin,
cz,/3, and %' globulins, and fibrinogen. The concentrations of the different
components in pathological sera have been compared with those in normal
sera, and the following tentative generalizations may be made. The al-
bumin/globulin ratios for pathological sera have been consistently lower
than those for normal sera. The values of the a globulin/albumin ratio
for the sera of the febrile patients studied were high, the average value being
4We have been privately informed of work by Blix confirmingthe large increase
of a globulin for the case of pneumonia but have located the published paper (Blix,
G., Z. ges. exp. Med., 1939, 105, 595) just on going to press.
L. O. LONGSWORTH~ T. SHEDLOVSKY~ AND D. A. MACINNES 413
over twice the normal value. The 7 globulin/albumin ratios for aplastic
anemia and rheumatic fever sera were also above normal. Certain patho-
logical conditions, notably nephrosis, were accompanied by large increases
in a fl globulin. There is evidence that, in part at least, this consists of a
labile lipo-protein.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Tiselius, A., Tr. Faraday Soc., 1937, 33, 524.
2. Stenhagen, E., Biochem.J., 1938,32, 714.
3. Lamm, 0., Nova Acta RegiaeSoc.Scient. Upsaliensis, IV, 1937,10, 6.
4. Tiselius, A., and Horsfall, F. L., Jr., Y. Exp. Med., 1939,69, 83.
5. Tiselius, A., and Kabat, E. A., J. Exp. Med., 1939,69, 119.
6. Longsworth, L. G., Electrophoresis, Ann. New York Acad. Sc., 1939,39, in press.
7. LongswortJa, L. G., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1939, 61, 529.
8. Longsworth, L. G., and MacInnes, D. A., Chem.Rev., 1939,9.4,271.
9. Shedlovsky, T., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1932, 54, 1411.
10. Shedlovsky, T., J. Am. Chem.Soc., 1930,52, 1793.
11. MacInnes, D. A., and Belcher, D., Ind. and Eng. Chem.,Analytical Edition, 1933,5,
199. MacInnes, D. A., and Longsworth, L. G., Tr. Electrochem.Soc., 1937,71, 73.
12. Schretter, G., Biochem.Z., 1926,177, 349.
13. Pedersen and Andersson, quoted by McFarlane, A. S., Biochem. J., 1935,9.9,412.
14. Svensson, H., KolIoid-Z., 1939, 87, 180.
