THE FACTORS OF COAGULATION IN THE EXPERI-
MENTAL APLASTIC ANEMIA OF BENZOL
POISONING, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE
TO THE ORIGIN OF PROTHROMBIN.*
BY S. H. HURWITZ, M.D., AnD C. K. DRINKER, M.D.
(From the Laboratory o/Surgical Research of the Harvard Medical School, and
the Medical Clinic of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, Boston.)
INTRODUCTION.
In the course of a study (I) on the factors of coagulation in a case of aplastic
anemia we were impressed with the analogy existing between the symptom-
complex in this disease and that observed by Selling (2, 3) in three cases of
benzol poisoning. The chief clinical features presented by Selling's three patients
were: first, purpura hemorrhagica, with typica! skin lesions, bleeding from the
mucous membranes, and retinal hemorrhages; second, a blood picture charac-
terized by a leucopenia of a marked grade, a striking reduction in the blood
platelets, and anemia. Pathologically these patients showed well marked aplasia
of the bone marrow. A study of his three patients induced Selling to try to
produce in animals aplastic anemia with benzol. This he accomplished success-
fully in' rabbits and showed that benzol is a powerful leucotoxic agent, acting
chiefly upon the bone marrow, although producing changes of some degree also
in other hematopoietic organs.
Workers who have studied the blood in benzol poisoning have concerned
themselves thus far chiefly with the formed elements. Selling (3) found both a
reduction in the red corpuscles and a striking diminution in the leucocytes, with
an almost total disappearance of these elements in the blood of fatally poisoned
animals. In addition, Duke (4) found a marked drop in the platelet count. Ac-
cording to Duke, a sufficiently low reduction in blood plates will lead to the pro-
longed bleeding time noted in benzol intoxication. Duke's studies included also
occasional determinations of the blood fibrinogen; but we have been unable to
find any complete and systematic studies of the factors of coagulation in experi-
mental conditions associated with aplasia of the bone marrow.
The present series of experiments was undertaken with the hope
of learning something about the factors of coagulation in benzol
poisoning, but as the work progressed it seemed to give additional in-
formation concerning the relation of the bone marrow to the origin
of the factors of coagulation studied by us; namely, prothrombin,
antithrombin, and fibrinogen.
* Received for publication, February 8, 1915.
401
402 Aplastie Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
Our observations have shown that the clinical symptoms of an
animal poisoned with benzol, as far as the hemorrhagic features are
concerned, give only slight indication of the profound changes which
this myeloid tissue poison produces in the blood of such animals.
The latter do not, as a rule, exhibit the usual hemophilic tendency
with which we are familiar,--delayed bleeding time, purpura, bleed-
ing from the gums and mucous membranes, etc. Very occasionally
one meets with prolonged bleeding from cuts and ear pricks, which,
according to the recent observation of Duke (5), occurs only when
the plates are reduced to a dangerously low level, 5,ooo to 15,ooo
per cubic millimeter. With the exception of a few instances in
which the blood, at autopsy, was found to remain fluid for a long
time, no striking departure from normal clotting was noted. A
study of the blood showed, however, that striking changes had re-
sulted both in the formed elements and in the prothrombin content,
although such changes were not of a degree sufficiently marked to
produce the clinical picture of hemorrhagic disease.
As far as the effect of benzol upon the formed elements is con-
cerned, our experiments confirm the work of Selling and of Duke.
Following the administration of benzol, there is a rapid disappear-
ance of the white cells from the peripheral circulation. We have
observed also an initial rise in some instances (experiments B, F, G,
and H). The red blood corpuscles are much less affected than the
white. In a few experiments (]3, E, and G) the count remained un-
altered, whereas in the majority of observations the red cell count
was reduced by 5o per cent. or more.
The platelets showed usually the same general reduction in num-
ber, though to a less extent. We were impressed with the observa-
tion that the blood plates may remain at a high level at a time when
the white cells have almost entirely disappeared from the circula-
tion. In only one instance were we able to reduce the number of
platelets so low as to reproduce the symptoms of hemorrhagic dis-
ease. Such experiments suggest the possibility that the megakaryo-
cytes of the bone marrow either regenerate very rapidly or else are
more resistant to the toxic action of benzol than are the forerunners
of the polymorphonuclear leucocytes and erythrocytes.1 This view,
1According to Selling's work (loc. cir. (3), P. 53), the polymorphonuclear
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 403
if correct, would help to explain the difficulty encountered in repro-
ducing by benzol injections the features to which attention has been
called.
Besides the formed elements, we have followed the factors of
coagulation in the majority of our animals. These studies showed
that benzol exerts an important influence in reducing the circulating
prothrombin and that this substance is dependent for its production,
in part at least, upon bone marrow activity. Two of the other factors
of blood clotting, antithrombin and fibrinogen, were also followed in
the majority of the experiments. These were found to fluctuate
little from the normal.
Our results are in harmony with the recent proof that blood
plates contain prothrombin. They give addit.ional evidence in sup-
port of the view that fluctuations in the amount of prothrombin may
be produced by substances which affect the number of platelets, and
that any toxin which produces a reduction in their number will simul-
taneously cause a diminution in the available prothrombin of the
circulating blood. Our knowledge, moreover, of the origin of blood
platelets from the megakaryocytes (6) of the bone marrow empha-
sizes the importance of this tissue in maintaining the normal pro-
thrombin equilibrium of the blood. Although the marrow plays
this important part in the elaboration of prothrombin, no definite
parallelism could be established between the extent of bone marrow
injury, the number of blood plates, and the relative amounts of pro-
thrombin. This would suggest that it is not possible to create a
dangerous prothrombin deficiency by a reduction in the number of
blood platelets alone, and that some other tissue or tissues play
some part in prothrombin formation.
It will be seen, too, that the marrow in no way participates in ghe
production of antithrombin and fibrinogen, for we did not observe
any changes in these substances in the blood of animals with aplastie
marrow.
METHODS.
Experimental Benzol Poisoning.--The technique employed by us
for producing aplasia of the bone marrow was the same as that used
amphophils in the marrow are more resistant than large lymphocytes, myelocytes,
erythroblasts, and giant-cells.
404 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
by Selling. Because of the knowledge of the pathological lesions pro-
duced by benzol in the rabbit, gained from the fundamental observa-
tions of this worker, these animals were chosen for our experiments.
Injections were made subcutaneously with chemically pure benzol.
The average dose injected was two cubic centimeters of benzol daily
per kilogram of body weight, although smaller doses were used when
the animals began to show signs of marked intoxication. Sudden
death may follow the injection of too large doses. The acute symp-
toms accompanying such sudden deaths are referable chiefly to the
central nervous system, sufficient time not having been allowed for
the development of the myelotoxic effect of this poison. It is essen-
tial, therefore, to proceed slowly with smaller doses in order to pro-
duce the chronic type of poisoning which results in the typical
changes in the hematopoietic organs.
We have found certain animals quite resistant to the poison. In
some instances, many injections were necessary in order to produce
the desired effect. Such resistance, however, is not the usual rule.
Most animals succumb after ten doses, and at autopsy show fairly
well marked aplasia of the marrow. It was our original plan to
bring about an aplasia of the bone marrow, after which regeneration
was to be permitted to occur, and to follow the fluctuations of the
prothrombin as the animals were returning to a normal state. It
was difficult, however, to obtain such an ascending series because re-
peated injections were necessary to produce demonstrable changes in
the prothrombin content of the blood and these usually resulted
fatally.
Variations in the white cell count and in the number of blood
platelets give a fair index of the condition of the bone marrow, the
counts dropping as the aplasia becomes marked. Selling2 has
pointed out that when the number of white cells has reached as low
a level as 2oo to 8oo cells per cubic millimeter, any additional in-
jections usually prove fatal. This has been our experience also.
Thus far we have been unable to reduce the blood platelets to a
dangerously low level. In only three experiments did the number of
platelets fall below IOO,OOO, and in only one instance to 3o,ooo.
This observation may be of interest in connection with a point to
2 Selling, loc. cit. (3), P. II.
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 405
which attention will be directed later, that it is also impossible by this
method to diminish sufficiently the prothrombin of the circulating
blood so as to render these animals hemophili¢.
Obtaining Blood.--The problem of obtaining specimens of blood
from rabbits with the precautions which are necessary for this work
was solved by resorting to cardiocentesis with a graduated Luer
syringe. Before introducing the needle the interior of the syringe
was coated with a thin layer of a mixture of white petrolatum 25
parts and ether 3o0 parts, and the needle was filled with salt solu-
tion. With a little practice it is possible to obtain blood in this way
after one attempt. This precaution is important, since repeated
thrusts of the needle into the heart may traumatize its muscle, setting
free neutralizing tissue juices, and frequently producing a hemo-
pericardium which may embarrass the heart's action and cause sud-
den death. By the exercise of skill it is possible to repeat cardiocen-
tesis many times without endangering the life of the animal.
For our purposes ten cubic centimeters of blood sufficed. This
was immediately emptied into a centrifuge tube containing two
cubic centimeters of a I per cent. solution of sodium oxalate (made
up in 0.9 per cent. solution of sodium chloride). After being thor-
oughly mixed the specimen was centrifugalized at a constant speed (a
definite number of revolutions on our centrifuge) for ten minutes.
The plasma, which in rabbits is usually watery or opalescent, due to
a slight lipemia, was pipetted off and examined for the various fac-
tors of coagulation, according to the methods of Howell (7, 8).
Enumeration of Formed Elements.--Of all the methods proposed
for the enumeration of blood platelets, that of Wright and Kinnicutt
(9) appears to have given the most reliable results in the hands of
recent workers. As used by Duke (5) this method has given con-
stant results and was the one we used.
Quantitation of Prothrombin, .4ntithrombin, and Fibrinogen.--
In the writings of Howell and his coworkers will be found a compre-
hensive description of the methods introduced by him for determin-
ing the amount of prothrombin and antithrombin in blood. In a
recent paper the authors have already commented upon the various
methods and their usefulness. For purposes of clearness, however.
we wish to mention them briefly at this time, particularly with refer-
406 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
ence to certain precautions to be followed in carrying out the pro-
thrombin test.
Prothrombin.--As yet no good method is available for the isola-
tion and absolute quantitation of prothrombin in blood plasma. An
idea of the relative amount or relative strength of the prothrombin
in the blood may be obtained, however, by a simple method devised
by Howell.8 This depends upon the observation that the act of oxa-
lating, that is, the decalcifying of the s.olution, intensifies the activa-
tion of prothrombin to thrombin by a subsequent calcification. This
results apparently in a greater production of available thrombin for
interaction with the fibrinogen of the plasma.
In practice the reaction is carried out as follows: To a series of
tubes containing a constant amount of oxalated plasma is added
dilute calcium chloride in varying amounts. Coagulation will result
and the time of coagulation, as measured by the invertibility of the
clot, will be shortest in the tube containing the optimum amount of
calcium. Tested by this method, the clotting time of normal rabbit
plasma averages about ten minutes.
To insure uniform results, it is necessary to take two precautions :
first, the employment of an equal quantity of each reagent; second,
centrifugalization of the plasma at a constant speed and for a con-
stant number of minutes in all comparable observations. That the
speed of this prothrombin reaction can be influenced by centrifugal-
ization was shown by Lee and Vincent (Io) and again emphasized
by Howell in a recent publication (II). This was shown to de-
pend upon variations in the thromboplastin content of plasma cen-
trifugalized for different periods of time. Failure to observe these
two points may lead to erroneous results in experiments where no
wide differences exist between the quantity of prothrombin present
in normal and in pathological blood.
Antithrombin.--The method of demonstrating the anticoagu-
lating action of normal and pathological plasmas has been so clearly
described in recent papers that only brief mention of the technique
need be considered here. The test plasma is heated slowly to 60° C.
and then centrifugalized to remove the fibrinogen and prothrombin.
A drop of this plasma containing the antithrombin is then added to
3 Howell, loc. cit. (7), P. 78.
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 407
known amounts of thrombin solution. After a short period of incu-
bation, fibrinogen solution is added. The addition of the antithrom-
bin delays or inhibits completely the action of thrombin on fibrino-
gen. In tests in which the thrombin is nearly neutralized by the an-
tithrombin, it is very difficult to ascertain when clotting has occurred,
since under such circumstances the clot forms in several stages. For
purposes of uniformity we have adopted as the end-point of this re-
action the first appearance of a delicate or filmy clot. In clinical
tests the relative amount of antithrombin in the oxalated plasma of
the patient is compared always with a similar specimen from a
normal person; in our animal experiments the initial observation
made upon the healthy animal always under exactly the same condi-
tions, and with the same thrombin and fibrinogen solutions where
possible, served as the control. Reference to one of the protocols
given below will help to make clear the method of making the com-
parisons.
Fibrinogen.--The heat coagulation method of determining fibrino-
gen has also been described many times in recent communications.
For details of this method reference should be made to papers by
Whipple and Hurwitz (12) and by Whipple (13).
EXPERIMENTALDATA.
With the exception of one or two experiments, to which attention
will be directed later, the observations may be divided into two main
groups: first, those in which the animals showed great susceptibility
to the poison, as indicated clinically by a great drop in the formed
elements, and pathologically by an aplasia of the bone marrow of
varying degree; second, those in which less striking reduction in the
formed elements, particularly in the blood platelets, could be pro-
duced, and in which autopsy revealed either a less well marked
aplasia or in a great many instances a marrow in which the regen-
erative process was keeping pace with the destructive changes. In
the first group a diminution in the circulating prothrombin was dem-
onstrable; whereas in the second group little or no change from the
normal was observed.
In all, about fifteen complete experiments were performed. Of
these the following two, one from each group, will be summarized,
408 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
since they are fairly complete and quite representative of all the other
experiments.
TABLE I.
Rabbit P.
Date.
Nov. I I
Nov. I2-15
Nov. 15
Nov. 16-I8
Nov. 19
Nov. 20--24
Nov. 25
Formed elements.
Weight r~ d 1
ingm.Ig.alm-~ Platelets. ~.B.C R.B.C.
1,4o0
1,350
I,I75
I,I00
Factors of coagulation.
Prothrombin. I Antithr°mbin'4
-Toooo,
16
[2 480,000
4
I 185,ooo
8
128,000
I
CaCI2
7,800 5,20o,o0o i
2
3
4
_~.2oo 4,7oo,ooo I
2
3
4
1,9oo 3,71o,ooo i
2
3
4
500 1,810,OOOJ I
2
3
4
Min. I bin. i Mi t.
Ii 3 I
15 4
15 5
I5
40 3 N
clo~ in
31 4
30 5
38
60 3 23
60 4
60 5
6o
50 3 5
55 4 12
65 5 5
95
Fibrin-
ogen in
gin. per
ioo c.c.
o.719
o.656
0.684
0.638
PROTOCOL.
Rabbit P.--(Table I.) Nov. II. Young brown male; weight 1,4oo gin. Red
blood count 5,2oo, ooo; white blood count 7,8oo; platelets 920,0oo; fibrinogen o.719
gm. per IOO c.c. of plasma.
Oxal~ed plasma.
5 drops
5 drops
5 drops
5 drops
Heated plasma. Thrombin.
I drop 3 drops
I drop 4 drops
I drop 5 drops
Prothrombln Test.
CaCh, ~per cent. Coagulation.
I drop II min.
2 drops 15 rain.
3 drops 15 min.
4 drops 15 min.
Antithrombin Test. 5
Time interval. Fibrinogen solution. Coagulation.
15 rain. 7 drops 15 rain.
I5 min. 7 drops 5 rain.
I5 min. 7 drops 5 rain.
Benzol 2 e.e. given subcutaneously.
4 Control solutions of fibrinogen and thrombin clotted in from two to four
minutes.
5 Control 2.5 to 3 min.
S. H. Huru~itz and (7. K. Drinker. 409
Nov. 12, 13, and 14. On each of these dates 2 c.c. of benzol were injected.
Following the injections the animal became dull, drowsy, and inactive.
Nov. 15. Weight 1,35o gm.; red blood count 4,7oo,ooo; white blood count
3,2oo; platelets 480#oo; fibrinogen 0.656 gin. per IOO c.c. of plasma.
Prothrombin Test.
Oxalated plasma. CaClz, x per cent. Coagulation.
5 drops I drop 4o min.
5 drops 2 drops 31 rain.
5 drops 3 drops 3o rain.
5 drops 4 drops 38 min.
Antithrombin Test.o
Heated plasma. Thrombin. Time interval. Fibrinogen solution. Coagulation.
I drop 3 drops 15 rain. 7 drops No clot in I hr.
I drop 4 drops 15 min. 7 drops 6 min.
I drop 5 drops 15 rain. 7 drops 8 rain.
Nov. 16, 17, and 18. Daily injections of benzol amounting to 4 c.c. Animal
is beginning to look very ill; very weak ; does not eat. No paralysis of legs noted.
Nov. 19. Weight I,I75 gin. Red blood count 3,7IO,OOO; white blood count
1,9oo; plate]ets I85,ooo; fibrinogen 0.684 gin. per ioo c.c. of plasma,
Prothrombin Test.
Oxalated plasma. CaCI~, t per cent. Coagulation.
5 drops I drop 60 min.
5 drops 2 drops 60 min.
5 drops 3 drops 6o rain.
5 drops 4 drops 6o rain.
Antithrombin Test.7
Heated plasma. Thrombin, Time interval. Fibrlnogen solution. Coagulation.
I drop 3 drops 15 min. 7 drops 23 rain.
I drop 4 drops 15 rain. 7 drops 7 rain.
I drop 5 drops 15 min. 7 drops 7 min.
Benzol I c.c. given subcutaneously.
Nov. 20, :21, 22, 23, and 24. Benzol 8 c.e. injected during these five days.
Animal becoming very weak and emaciated.
Nov. 25. Weight I,IOO gin. Red blood count 1,8IO,OOO; white blood count
5oo; platelets 128,ooo; fibrinogen o.638 gin. per IOO c.e. of plasma.
Prothrombln Test.
Oxalated plasma. CaCI2, x per cent.
5 drops I drop
5 drops 2 drops
5 drops 3 drops
5 drops 4 drops
e Control 2.5 min.
Control 3.5 min.
Coagulation.
5o rain.
55 min.
65 rain.
95 rain.
410 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
Antithrombin Test.s
Heated plasma. Thrombin. Time interval. Fibrinogen solution, Coagulation,
I drop 3 drops 15 rain. 7 drops 5 min.
I drop 4 drops 15 rain. 7 drops i2 rain.
I drop 5 drops 15 min. 7 drops 5 min.
Nov. 26. Animal killed and autopsied at once. Serous cavities were all
normal except for a small organized clot in the pericardial sac. The heart
showed many small scars covered with fibrin at the points where the cardiac.
muscle was pierced in obtaining blood. No gross changes were demonstrable in
any of the other organs. Bone marrow obtained from the middle of the femur
was mottled brown, of fair consistency, with small pin-point hemorrhages.
Microscopical sections showed an aplastic marrow in the stage of fairly
advanced regeneration. In some parts of the section the aplasia was found to be
fairly complete, but superimposed upon the edematous aplastic reticulum there
were groups and clumps of parenchymal cells; these consisted of granulocytes
and normoblasts. Megakaryocytes were present in fairly large numbers.
Reference to the protocol and to table I and text-figure I will
TExT-FIG. I. Formed elements: heavy dots and dashes= red blood cor-
puscles; open circles and dashes ~ white blood corpuscles; solid line ~ blood
platelets. Factors of coagulation: broken line-----prothrombin; small dots and
dashes = antithrombin ; dotted line --~fibrinogen.
s Control 3 rain.
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 411
show the effect of benzol poisoning upon both the formed elements
and the factors of coagulation in this particular animal. The ob-
servations, in this instance, were carried on over a period of two
weeks. At the outset the animal was healthy, active, and weighed
about I.5 kilograms. Examinations of the formed elements and the
factors of coagulation made at the beginning of the experiment
(November I I) showed normal figures. It may be said, however,
Lhat the platelet count represents the high limit of normal, and that
this is true also of the blood fibrinogen. Benzol injections were
given daily, the average dose being two cubic centimeters. Only
after four such injections were given did the animal begin to mani-
fest any signs of intoxication. Studies of the blood at this time
showed about 5° per cent. reduction in the blood platelets, a similar
reduction in the white cells, a moderate grade of anemia, a prothrom-
bin content (as measured by the coagulation time of the recalcified
plasma) one-third of the control, an unaltered antithrombin content,
and a very slight reduction in the blood fibrinogen.
As the benzol injections were continued, the animal began to ex-
hibit more marked loss of weight, emaciation, anorexia, and dullness.
No tendency to bleed was observed, however ; but, as indicated in the
protocol, both the formed elements and the prothrombin showed a
still greater reduction at this time. At the end of two weeks, after
twenty-three cubic centimeters of benzol had been injected, a final
study of the blood was made. The platelets had fallen to 13 per
cent. of the normal, and the prothrombin diminished to such an extent
that the coagulation time was six times the control. The anti-
thrombin and fibrinogen values were found to show normal varia-
tions.
For purposes of brevity the protocol for experiment G is not re-
produced here. The results obtained on this animal are recorded in
table II. In this experiment, an example of the second group, de-
terminations of the formed elements and coagulation factors were
made over a period of six weeks (September I to October II). At
the beginning of the experiment all the formed elements and the pro-
thrombin showed normal values. Unfortunately the antithrombin
and fibrinogen were not followed until several weeks after the benzol
injections were commenced. Throughout the course of the experi-
412 Aplastic Anemia of Benzo~ Poisoning.
TABLE II.
Rabbit G.
Date.
Sept. I
Sept. 2-5
Sept. 5
Sept. 7-9
Sept. 9
Sept. zi
Sept. I3
Sept. I4
Sept. x6
Sept. I7-I8
Sept. I9
Sept. 22--26
Oct. 2
Oct. 3-4
Oct. 5
Oct. 6-i1
1,89o
1,83o
1,795
1,425
4
2 196,ooo
I6 276,ooo
1,4oo 3,730,000
1,46o 3,780,000
1,4oo 4,23o,ooo
Factorsof coagulation.
Prothrombin..Min. Throm-Antithr°mbin'bin.Min,
CaCI2
0
9
IO
II
0
17
14
45
13
13
I2
I3
8
6
8
8
45
IE
5
25
7
7
40
27
I0
~qo cb-
3err z-
tio: i
20
20
Fibrino-
- - gen in
gin. per
zooe.c.
0.925
o.9oo
0.252
0.273
ment, this animal showed unusual resistance to benzol poisoning, and
in spite of the development of transient palsy of the right leg, re-
mained fairly healthy. As the intoxication progressed, the plate-
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 413
lets reached as low a level as 18o,ooo, the white cells 1,2oo, and the
red cells 2,800,000. Determinations of the coagulation time of the
recalcified plasma during this period showed variations between nine
and eighteen minutes, the time becoming less than normal (six min-
utes) toward the end of the experiment. This shows that the pro-
thrombin content of the blood remained normal in spite of the long
period of intoxication and the quite well marked drop in the platelets.
The first antithrombin determinations were made two weeks after
the experiment began; this factor was followed subsequently, and
at the completion of the experiment no change was noted from the
initial determination.
The fibrinogen in the blood fell precipitously during the last three
weeks of the experiment. From an initial high level of 0.900 of a
gram it fell to 0.273 of a gram.. At the time of the last determina-
tion, the animal was much emaciated, having lost about 400 grams in
weight. This is the only instance in which we have observed such an
extensive reduction in fibrinogen following benzol poisoning. We
are not prepared to explain this, unless it is due to the gradual wast-
ing and emaciation which developed during the long period of in-
toxication.
At autopsy we were interested to find that this animal showed evi-
dences of a wide-spread regeneration of the bone marrow. Zones of
aplasia still were present, but these were small. Parenchymal ele-
ments were found scattered diffusely in long strands throughout the
edematous reticulum. Granulocytes and normoblasts were present
in abundance, and the megakaryocytes were also found in consider-
able number. The relatively high platelet count, in spite of repeated
benzol injections, is in keeping with such a regenerating marrow.
SUIVIMARYOF RESULTS.
Formed Elements.--By referring to tables III and IV, it will
be seen that all the formed elements are reduced materially in the
blood of benzolized rabbits, although the leucotoxic action is the
most pronounced. In normal rabbits the average leucocyte count is
7,820 with variations between II,OOO and 4,200. With few excep-
tions :benzol injections cause a striking drop in the count. In our
series the white cells dropped to an average level of 1,39o, with varia-
414 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
<
~q
°~
~ I'~[:~ ~
~,'~ ,o
"~o ~
.~ I ~
d ° }~
~-~ .
{
~u m
{
o
2 ~ i'=
o~ ~,~ q:~ ~
~o~J> ~
•~ ~I ~ J.~
-~~ 100~-~! ~ol~ .,~ ~o
~ d6 dddd I ~m ~r-' dd 56
@:~ i ° ~ ~l "l " ~
oo oooo oooooo;ooolooo; ::i : oo o i:o o o oo o o o o o o o oo o o o o o ood °° °°0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
~g
o o o olo o olo o o o o]o o o old g° Iooo o°°°oo ooo oooo o°o°o° °°°° °°o~o°~etel ol ~
ooo ooo oooooolooo oooooo;:t o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o° o°
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000 0o0 O~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
"~ 4~o~ o6d~ 0"4 4 6 4 6 64C 0~6~06 64
>.-=
"~ I I 1
m N M i ~ Z ', 0 m i ~
r~ ~ J
m
.<.<
H
• . .~ • . . . . . . . . . . .
. .... ~io~o~o~o~io~o~o~ o~o~o>o~ro~
oooo ooolzzzz zzzlzzzzlz
~.~
oB
~8
N'~
~.~ Nm ~
~ m
. ~ =
~ o ~
o ,_oo
o 0 "t
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 415
.< ..~
5
o
o
.E.- ~.~
o .~
0 ~lm~ 0
o
0 0 0
/~:
~-~
a~
o ooo o d~ ~c~]oooo
°°°1°° !ooo oo~o°o°o°o°o° o°~! °°oo o°o° oooo°°°°0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
d
i ~ ~o~, ooo~,~oo oo oo oo ~
O~ 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 010 0 0 0 0 0 ~ '~- ~ t..~ e~"~ 0 O0 0 0 0 0 0 0 O0 O0 O0 O0 O0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
",0 u'~rO aO t.~O c,I ct ~ ',-: r.,.,c,I "~'~ 0 'u,~ia0 ..~-~ ro
~t-i •
~,~.~
• .o~o~og..-..ol,-,o ° °o°°°
d
ol
0
0
0
5~
~ .
~ 0
~o
"~ "tJ
:.~
416 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
tions between 3,800 and the complete disappearance of leucocytic
elements from the circulating stream. The extent of reduction de-
pends upon the susceptibility of the animal. We have records of
only two instances in which the intoxication was associated with a
leucocytosis. In one of these (experiment K), after an initial fall,
the white cells rose rapidly to 2o,8oo; autopsy gave no satisfactory
explanation of this leucocytosis. In the second observation (experi-
ment H) the leucocyte count rose forty-eight hours after the first
injection. This may be explained by the initial stimulating action of
the benzol.
Some reduction in the number of platelets of the circulating blood
is invariably the rule. The fall in count, however, is not usually so
pronounced, in most instances, as that of the leucocytes. The
average platelet count in normal rabbits was found to be 683,4oo,
with variations between 92o,ooo and 4o8,ooo. These averages ap-
proximate those recorded by Duke (4) (average 757,ooo, with varia-
tions between z,2oo,ooo and 38o,0oo). Following benzol inocula-
tions wide variations in the extent of platelet reduction occur. In
our series the average number of platelets following benzol injections
was 233,8oo. Only once were we successful in lowering the count
to 3 z,ooo. This fact explains our inability to produce in these ani-
mals hemorrhagic symptoms, such as occur only after more extreme
lowering of the platelet count.
Where the platelets and leucocytes were found much diminished
in number, the marrow usually showed fairly well marked aplasia.
It should be emphasized, however, that destructive changes rarely
were noted without signs of regeneration. In some specimens mega-
karyocytes could hardly be found ; whereas in others giant-cells were
present in enormous numbers (experiment Q). In the latter case
it was apparent that regeneration was going on at a very rapid rate.
It is not unlikely that such rapid regenerative phenomena offer some
explanation for the difficulty encountered in reducing the blood
platelets in rabbits to a dangerously low level.
Although the erythroblastic tissue of the bone marrow suffers, the
circulating erythrocytes are injured relatively little. From an aver-
age cell count of 5,zoo,ooo the erythrocytes in our series fell to an
average level of 3,SOO,OOOfollowing benzol injections. The lowest
S. H. Huru~itz and C. K. Drinker. 417
reduction in number was obtained in experiment P, in which the
red cells were reduced to 1,8oo,ooo. As marked an anemia as Sell-
ing noted in his clinical cases of benzol poisoning (640,000 and
I, 150,000 red cells) apparently cannot be reproduced experimentally
in this way.
Antithrombin.--Determinations of the amount of antithrombin in
the blood were made in twelve of the fifteen experiments. Great
care was exercised to keep the technique uniform throughout the
series, and in seven of the experiments the same strengths of throm-
bin and fibrinogen solutions were used, so that these latter are com-
parable among themselves. In none of the examinations was the
variation from the control found to be large. Of the twelve com-
plete records, about six (experiments G, H, O, P, Q, and T) showed
an unaltered antithrombin content following benzol inoculations;
three (experiments K, L, R) showed a slightly diminished, and three
(experiments N, I, and U) a slightly increased amount. The
slight diminution or excess observed in some instances depends prob-
ably upon the period during which the observation was made. It
will ~beseen from text-figure I (rat)bit P) that there was an interval
during the experiment (November I9) when the antithrombin of the
blood was present in excess (compare also experiments G, L, and O).
Such fluctuations in the relative amount of antithrombin are due
most likely to variations in the supply of tissue juices (thromboplas-
tin), for it will be recalled that during the normal circulation, plate-
lets are continually undergoing dissolution, and that the thrombo-
plastin which they furnish is capable of neutralizing antithrombin.
Prothrombin.--The relative amounts of prothrombin, before and
after benzol injections, were determined by the method already
described. It may be said, in general, that the time of coagulation
of the recalcified plasma of normal rabbits was fairly constant, aver-
aging about ten minutes, with variations between six and fifteen
minutes. The average coagulation time of such plasma of benzo-
lized rabbits was found to be about fifty minutes, although, as will
appear from table III, wide variations of between twenty-four and
three hundred and ten minutes were observed. It is of interest
that in the latter experiment, which represents an isolated instance
where the coagulation time was so markedly prolonged, the marrow
418 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
at autopsy showed the most complete aplasia observed in the entire
series.
The delayed coagulation of the recalcified plasma of benzolized
rabbits may be explained theoretically in one of two ways : it may be
due, in the first place, to the presence of an excessive amount of an-
tithrombin; or, in the second place, to a deficiency of prothrombin.
In the preceding paragraphs it has been shown, however, that the
amount of antithrombin is not altered materially by benzol injec-
tions ; in fact, there may be relative diminution in the amount, so that
the prothrombin deficiency may be even greater than the recorded
coagulation time indicates. It is fair to assume, therefore, that the
delay in the coagulation time of the recalcified plasma is due to an
actual deficiency of prothrombin, and not to an excess of anti-
thrombin.
An examination of table III will show, furthermore, that this pro-
thrombin deficiency does not parallel absolutely the reduction in
blood platelets. For instance, certain animals with a much lower
count may show a less marked diminution in prothrombin than ani-
mals with a higher count (compare experiments E, P, and U with
O and Q). Such findings are readily explainable, however, if it is
kept in mind that regeneration of the myeloid tissue usually goes
hand in hand with aplasia, and that the number of platelets at any
given time will depend largely upon the degree of regeneration.
This fact helps also to explain why such difficulty is encountered
in lowering both the platelets and the prothrombin of the circulat-
ing blood to a dangerous point.
No definite parallelism was demonstrable between the prothrombin
deficiency and the reduction in leucocytes. The white cells may be
much reduced or absent at a time when the prothrombin content is
little altered (experiments F and G), or there may be some defi-
ciency in prothrombin associated with a leucocytosis (experiment K).
In general, however, a prothrombin deficiency has been found asso-
ciated with a reduction in the number both of platelets and leu-
cocytes.
Fibrinogen.--All the fibrinogen determinations were made by
the method of heart coagulation. In every instance the reading was
corrected for the oxalate solution used in receiving the blood, so that
S. H. Hurwitz and C. K. Drinker. 419
the results represent the quantity of fibrinogen in IOO cubic centi-
meters of actual plasma. Wide fluctuations in the blood fibrinogen
of normal rabbits were observed. The average was 0.560 of a gram
per IOO cubic centimeters of plasma, but variations between a min-
imum of o.I23 of a gram, and a maximum of 0.925 of a gram were
noted. This is in harmony with Whipple's figures for normal
healthy dogs (average 0.466 of a gram; minimum o.I98 of a gram;
maximum 0.867 of a gram) (I3). In almost'all instances repeated
injections of benzol (four to forty-two cubic centimeters) caused a
rise in the blood fibrinogen. The average of the final readings
made from two to thirty days after the initial determination was
found to be o.6I 7 of a gram per Ioo cubic centimeters of plasma,
but in some individual observations enormous rises were observed
(experiments I, K, L, N, Q, T, and U). In about three experiments
(O, P, and R) little variation from the normal occurred, and in
only one instance (experiment G) was there a striking reduction
in the blood fibrinogen. A possible explanation for this drop has
been found in the marked loss of weight and extreme cachexia pro-
duced in this animal by the benzol inoculations. Similar reduc-
tions in the quantity of fibrinogen have been reported by Whipple
in human cases of cachexia. The low values in such cases are
difficult to explain.
The rise in blood figrinogen observed in the majority of animals
following benzol injections has been observed also in other condi-
tions associated with intoxication.12 It is possible that benzol may
stimulate the fibrinogen-forming organs to over-functional activity
and that the fibrinogen may rise above normal at these times. Such
an increase is not out of keeping with the gross anatomical and the
histological appearance of the liver in benzol poisoning. Aside from
a slight degree of parenchymatous change, no other pathological
lesion was demonstrable in the liver parenchyma.
THE RELATION OF THE BONE MARROW TO THE ORIGIN OF
PROTHROMBIN~ ANTITHROMBIN~ AND FIBRINOGEN.
The experiments and observations already detailed throw some
additional light upon this more complex problem of coagulation. In-
12Whipple, loc. cir. (I3), p. 57.
420 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
terest in the origin of the various su'bstances concerned in the clotting
of blood has stimulated much work among investigators in this field.
From time to time different tissues and organs have been made re-
sponsible for the elaboration of the factors participating in the
process; and, although there are still some workers (14, I5, 16)
who ascribe to the liver the important function of form.ing all the
fibrin factors, the majority are agreed that certain of the formed
elements of the blood play an important part in the origin of
some of these substances. Without entering upon a discussion of
the experimental basis for their views, we wish to review briefly
some of the work of .different observers which is or is not in har-
mony with our deductions,la
Origin of Prothrombin.--VVith the exception of Wooldridge 14 all workers
since Alexander Schmidt (I7) have recognized the importance of the formed
elements of the blood in the elaboration of prothromb,in. The view, which origi-
nated with Schmidt, that the leucocytes give rise to this fibrin factor has been
discredited largely by later work (II, I8). Bizzozero (I9) was the first to sug-
gest the ptatelets as the possible prothrombin formers. To him, too, we owe
the knowledge that these elements are independent morphological structures and
not degeneration products of leucocytes or erythroeytes. The work of Morawitz
(I8) has furnished the necessary experimental evidence that the theory of Biz-
zozero and others was correct. Both Morawitz and more recently Bayne-Jones
(2o), working in Howell's laboratory, have demonstrated conclusively that
aqueous extracts of platelets obtained by differential centrifugalization contain
a substance which will clot fibrinogen solutions in the presence of calcium. They
have shown further that platelets contain another substance, thromboplastin, so
that the disintegration and solution of platelets, when blood is shed, facilitate
clotting in two ways: first, by setting free prothrombin; second, by liberating a
thromboplastic substance which hastens coagulation by neutralizing the anti-
thrombin present normally in circulating blood.
Origin of Antithrombin.--It has long been known that the intravenous injec-
tion of peptone solutions into animals gives rise in the blood of these animals
to a substance which is capable of inhibiting coagulation (Schmidt-Mfilheim,
188o). The French School, in particular, has done much experimental work to
learn in what organ and by what mechanism this anticoagulation substance is
formed. The work of Contjean (2I), Delezenne (22), and others has estab-
lished with certainty that the liver is essential for the formation of this sub-
stance, and that antithrombin is not formed if the liver be excluded. There is
no direct evidence, however, that this coagulation-inhibiting substance is of the
same nature as the antithrombin present normally, in greater or less amount, in
13 Excellent discussions of this phase of the subject will be found in the papers
by Morawitz (prothrombin), Delezenne (antithrombin), and Whipple and Hur-
witz and Meek (fibrinogen).
14 Cited by Morawitz (18).
S. tl. Hurwitz and C. K. D~inker. 421
the blood of animals and man. Their identity is assumed because they both act
in a similar way. In this connection it is of interest to note that Whipple (23),
in a study of clinical cases, observed fluctuations in antithromhin in the blood of
patients suffering from liver disease and in one patient with aplastic anemia.
In the latter instance antithrombin was present in excess, although the marrow
was completely aplastic. It would appear, therefore, that the reaction of the
bone marrow is not a factor in the production of antithromhin. This observa-
tion is in harmony with the conclusion deduced from our experiments; namely,
that aplasia of the marrow in rabbits produces no appreciable change in the anti-
thrombin of the blood.
Origin of Fibrinogen.~An extensive discussion concerning the origin of blood
fibrinogen is not needed, as this phase of the subject has been treated fully in
several recent papers (13, 24). Suffice it to say that various workers have
adduced evidence in support of one or other of the following theories regarding
its origin: first, that fibrinogen is formed by the intestine (Mathews (25));
second, that fibrinogen is either produced in the liver or is wholly dependent
upon that organ for its production (Doyon (26) and his coworkers, Nolf (27) ,
Whipple and I-Iurwitz (I2), and Meek (24)); third, that fibrinogen is formed
by the bone marrow and is perhaps dependent upon the white cells (Miiller (28),
Morawitz and Rehn (29)).
It would appear that the best experimental evidence is in favor of the second
view, although recent studies (Goodpasture (30)) on the regeneration of fibrin-
ogen show that normal fibrinogen production is a result of the combined activity
of the liver and the intestine, the latter organ being an important contribt~ting
factor in the rapid formation of fihrinogen.
As far as the authors are aware, no direct experimental proof has been pro-
duced for or against the view of Mfiller and of Morawitz and Rehn that the
bone marrow is a fibrinogen former. Only a few casual observations are re-
corded by recent workers upon this function of the marrow. Whipple and Hur-
witz15 noted that with the rapid drop in fibrinogen following chloroform poison-
ing, there may be a leucocytosis caused by the liver necrosis and repair, and that
the bone marrow at such a time may be hyperplastic. Conversely, Whipple,16 in
a study of a clinical case of aplastic anemia, has shown the blood fibrinogen to
be normal (0.4032 of a gram), whereas the bone marrow at autopsy was found
to be completely aplastic. Similarly in our observations upon experimental
aplastic anemia in benzolized rabbits, we have seldom noted low fibrinogen
values associated with aplasia of the bone marrow. In almost all our observa-
tions the fibrinogen was found either little changed from the normal or some-
what higher than normal. In only one experiment (G) was there any appre-
ciable drop in fibrinogen, and we believe that this has been satisfactorily ex-
plained. It seems fair to conclude from such evidence that the bone marrow
does not participate in the production of blood fibrinogen.
15 Whipple and Hurwitz, loc. cit., p. I38.
16 Whipple, loc. cit. (I3), P. 59.
422 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
DISCUSSION.
The experimental observations recorded have shown that injury
to the myeloid tissue by benzol causes a diminution in the prothrom-
bin content of the blood, and that this tissue must be intimately asso-
ciated with the elaboration of this substance. Our experiments offer
no convincing evidence, however, as to the relative importance of
the various formed elements of the marrow 'in prothrombin produc-
tion; but the more direct proof given by other workers makes it fairly
certain that the ptatelets and not the leucocytes are the essential ele-
ments. Neither Morawitz (18) nor Howell (II) have been able
to obtain satisfactory proof that the white cells contain any appre-
dable amount of prothrombin, whereas both workers have prepared
active prothrombin solutions from aqueous extracts of blood plate-
lets. In view of these observations the conclusion appears justified
that the blood platelets play more than a mere mechanical part in the
process of coagulation. Presumably, during the normal circulation,
these elements undergo more or less gradual dissolution and thus help
to maintain the prothrombin equilibrium of circulating blood.
Already attention has been directed to the lack of paralIelism be-
tween the drop in prothrombin and the extent of destruction of
myeloid tissue. This finding is in keeping with the experimental
and clinical observations of other workers. Pratt (3I), for in-
stance, has shown that there is no direct interdependence between the
number of platelets and the coagulation time. More recently Duke
has emphasized this point by showing that blood in which the plate-
lets are reduced to IO per cent. of normal by repeated benzol injec-
tions may clot at a normal rate. Undoubtedly in such extreme cases
the delayed bleeding time must depend upon the mechanical impor-
tance of these elements, for it is well known that agglutination of
platelets is essential to effective clotting. It follows, therefore,
that the platelet count and the Circulating prothrombin may be con-
siderably diminished without causing symptoms of hemophilia.
On the whole, the conservative conclusion would seem to be that
the maintenance of the prothrombin equilibrium of the blood de-
pends only in part upon the blood platelets. Besides the facts al-
ready mentioned, there is other evidence in support of this view.
It is well established, for instance, that the platelet count may be
S. H. Hurw4tz and C. K. Drinker. 423
perfectly normal in tlemophilia in which the coagulation time may
be markedly prolonged in consequence of a deficiency in the amount
of the contained prothrombin (7). Furthermore, in a recent pub-
lication, Howell ( I I ) has shown that prothrombin is present in solu-
tion in the circulating lymph, although blood platelets do not con-
stitute a normal element of this fluid. The delayed clotting of
lymph depends rather upon a deficiency in the contained thrombo-
plastin, and consequently upon a relative excess of anfithrombin.
Such evidence suggests the possibility that some tissue in addition to
the bone marrow is concerned with prothrombin formation. This
view is supported also by the knowledge, to which reference has
already been made, that the elaboration of fibrinogen depends upon
the combined activity of at least two organs,--liver and intestine.
The maintenance of the prothrombin equilibrium of the blood is
obviously so important for the organism that the assumption that
other tissues or organs participate in this process harmonizes be~er
with our present conception of the factors of safety in physiological
processes emphasized by Meltzer.
Our experiments afford no support for or against the view of
Nolf and others that liver cell activity is essential for prothrombin
production, nor do they make it clear what tissues besides the
marrow play a part in its elaboration.
CONCLUSIONS.
I. Subcutaneous injections of benzol in rabbits produce marked
destructive changes in the hematopoietic organs, especially in the
myeloid tissue.
2. Benzol poisoning registers a change not only in the formed
elements of the blood, but also in the factors of coagulation.
3. The circulating prothrombin is considerably reduced in amount
and in most instances animals in which such a diminution occurs
show aplasia of the bone marrow.
4. The association of extreme aplasia of the marrow without a
fatal diminution in the circulating prothrombin suggests one of two
possibilities: either other tissues and organs in addition to the bone
marrow are concerned with prothrombin formation; or a minimum
amount of myeloid tissue suffices to maintain the quantity of pro-
thrombin above a dangerous level.
424 Aplastic Anemia of Benzol Poisoning.
5. The myeloid tissue plays no part in the production of anti-
thrombin.
6. Bone marrow activity is not essential for the production of
fibrinogen.
In conclusion we desire to express our appreciation to Dr. Kather-
ine R. Drinker for numerous fibrinogen determinations, and to the
Pathological Department of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital for
many courtesies.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
I. Drinker, C. K., and Hurwitz, S. H., Arch. Int. Med., 1915, xv (in press).
2. Selling, L., Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 191o, xxi, 33.
3. Selling, Johns Hopkins Hosp. Rep., Monographs, 1913, No. 2.
4. Duke, W. W., Arch. Int. Med., 1913, xi, IOO.
5. Duke, Jour. Am. Med. Assn., I9IO, lv, 1185; Jour. Exper. Med., 1911, xiv, 265.
6. Wright, J. H., Boston Med. and Surg. Jour., 19o6, eliv, 643.
7. Howell, W. H., Arch. Int. Med., 1914, xiii, 76.
8. Howell, An,. Jour. Physiol., i91o, xxvi, 453; I9II-I2, xxix, 187; 1912-13,
xxxi, i; 1913, xxxii, 264; 1914, xxxv, 474.
9. Wright, J. H., and Kinnicutt, R., ]our. Am. Med. Assn., 1911, lvi, 1457.
IO. Lee, R. I., and Vincent, B., Arch. Int. Med., 1914, xiii, 398.
II. Howell, Am. Jour. Physiol., 1914, loc. cit.
12. Whipple, G. H., and Hurwitz, S. H., Jour. Exper. Med., 1911, xiii, 136.
13. Whipple, G. H., Am. ]our. Physiol., 1914, xxxiii, 50.
14. Nolf, P., Ergebn. d. inn. Med., 1913, x, 275.
15. Corin, G., and Ansiaux, G., Jahresber. ii.d. Fortschr. d. Thierchem., 1894,
xxiv, 642.
16. Loeb, L., Med. News, 19o5, Ixxxvi, 572.
17. Schmidt, A., Zur Blutlehre, Leipzig, 1892.
18. Morawitz, P., Deutsch. Arch. f. klin. Med., I9O4, lxxix, 215.
19. Bizzozero, J., Virchows Arch. f. path. Anat., 1882, xc, 26i ; cited by Morawitz,
loc. cit., p. 216.
2"0. Bayne-Jones, S., Am. Jour. Physiol., 1912, xxx, 74.
21. Contjean, C., Arch. de physiol, norm. et path., 1895, xxvii, 245.
22. Delezenne, C., Arch. de physiol, norm. et path., 1896, xxviii, 655.
23. Whipple, G. H., Arch. Int. Med., 1913, xii, 637.
24. Meek, W. J., Am. ]our. Physiol., I912, xxx, 161.
25. Mathews, A., An,. Jour. Physiol., 1899-19oo, iii, 53.
26. Doyon and Kareff, N., Compt. rend. Soc. de biol., 19o4, lvi, 612.
27. Nolf, P., Arch. internat, de physiol., 19o5-o6, iii, I.
28. Miiller, P. T., Beitr. z. chem. Phys. u. Path., 19o5, vi, 454.
29. Morawitz, P., and Rehn, E., Arch. f. exper. Path. u. Pharmakol., 19o7-o8,
lviii, 141.
30. Goodpasture, E. W., Am. ]our. Physiol., 1914, xxxiii, 70.
31. Pratt, J. H., Arch. f. exper. Path. u. Pharmakol., 19o2-o3, xlix, 299.
