I. EFFECTS OF THE INTRAVENOUS INJECTION OF COL-
LOIDAL SILVER UPON THE HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
IN DOGS
BY SAMUEL S. SHOUSE, M.D., AND GEORGE H. WHIPPLE, M.D.
(FromtheDepartmento/Pathology of the Universityof RochesterSchoolo/Medicine
and Dentistry, Rochester,N. Y.)
(Receivedfor publication,December12, 1930)
In this laboratory during several years much experimental work has
been done to study the effect of diet upon blood regeneration in dogs
with anemia caused by bleeding (6). The anemia is continued at a
uniform level of about one-third normal by repeated blood withdrawal
from the jugular vein. Under such conditions the bone marrow of all
bones shows extreme hyperplasia and presumably is functioning at
maximal capacity due to a continued maximal demand associated with
severe anemia.
If an aplastic anemia with great depletion of bone marrow cells
couldbeproduced experimentally,a rare opportunitywouldbe offeredto
study the life cycle of the red cell under carefully controlled conditions.
This ideal condition has never been produced experimentally in the
dog although Muller (3) reports suggestive observations in the rabbit.
We had hopes that by means of colloidal silver or Roentgen radiation
or both it might be possible to cause a type of aplastic anemia which
would yield much valuable information.
As sometimes happens in such experiments we were able to take a
step toward our goal of experimental aplastic anemia but so many
complicating factors developed simultaneously that we were unable
to get any clear-cut evidence as to the life cycle of the red blood cell in
the circulation of the dog.
As is evident from the protocols given below the colloidal silver
injections in dogs cause no aplasia of the marrow but rather a distinct
marrow hyperplasia. Moreover there is some hemolysiswhich in some
way must be related to the silver injections. This hemolysismay be in
413
414 I. HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
part responsible for the marrow hyperplasia although the phagocytosis
of silver by marrow cells may also be concerned.
It is possible, although very difficult, to produce a condition of
aplastic anemia in dogs by means of Roentgen radiation. At the
same time however there is almost complete disappearance of white
cells and platelets from the blood. Multiple hemorrhages then
develop due to platelet deficiency or to endothelial injury or both.
Terminal infections (agranulocytosis) are all too frequent. It is
obvious that this type of experimental aplastic anemia with the
hemorrhagic complications is not suitable for the proposed study of the
circulating red cells.
Method
Our studies were made on healthy and well nourished full-grown dogs. All of
them were under observation at least 2 weeks before the experiments were begun.
A diet of mixed kitchen scraps was used generally, but a few of the animals were
fed small amounts of raw beef after they had become inactive and refused to eat
the usual food.
All the blood studies were made on blood obtained by hypodermic puncture of
the jugular vein. The red blood cell hematocrit was determined before the silver
injectionswere begun and at 1or 2 day intervals thereafter. The same hematocrit
tube was used for each dog throughout. Approximately 10co.ofbloodwereadded
to 2 cc.of 1.6 per cent sodium oxalate solution,and centrifugalizedat 2,400 revolu-
t.ionsper minute for ½hour.
In these experiments we employed only colloidal silver. The preparation used
was collargolum, a crystallinematerial supplied by the Heyden Chemical Company.
It is said to contain 85.87per cent of metallic silver and a small percentageof albu-
men. A 1per cent emulsion of this was prepared with distilled water, filtered, and
kept in a brown bottle in a refrigerator. As an additional precaution against its
disintegration, the stock bottle of the crystals was also kept in a refrigerator. Just
prior to each injection the emulsion was carefullywarmed in the syringe to approx-
imately body temperature. It was slowly introduced into a jugular vein. The
dosage varied, as described in the following protocols.
EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS
A single intravenous injection of 500 mg. of collargol is followed as a
rule by death in less than 12 hours without convulsions or clinical evi-
dences of shock. This single large dose produces moderate congestion
and marked edema of the lungs.
SAMUEL S. SHOUSE AND GEORGE H. V¢HIPPLE 415
Doses of 1,300 to 1,500 mg. of collargol are tolerated if divided and
given at the proper intervals over a period of 3 to 7 days. There is no
conspicuous tolerance afforded by repeated doses nor is the effect cumu-
lative in the strict sense. Single doses of 200 to 300 nag. are well toler-
ated. Death usually follows a single large dose even after several pre-
liminary smaller doses. Evidence of hemolysis is always present.
The following brief protocol gives the outline of a typical short
experiment:
Dog 27-249.--A male Dalmatian coach, weighing 23 kg., was given 400 rag. of
collargol intravenously in divided doses, on the Ist day of the experiment. The
next day he received two doses of 200 rag. and 300 rag. respectively. The 3rd day
he was given one dose of 400 rag. making in all 1,300 rag. No reaction occurred
during the next 40 minutes after the injection, but 4 hours after the last injection he
was found dead. Necropsy revealed marked edema and moderate congestion of
both lungs. The spleen and liver had a dark slaty color, and their reticulo-endo-
thelial cells contained coarsely granular golden brown pigment (silver). The
bone marrow showed slight hyperplasia and many large mononuclear ceils filled
with brownpigment.
In these short experiments the hematocrit drops 10 to 14 per cent
and on examination the bone marrow may present a normal appearance
or a hyperplasia. This is illustrated by the following protocol in which
a large total dose was given over a somewhat longer period.
Dog 28-114.--A male, weighing 19.4kg., received rather small divided doses of
collargol during the first 6 days, but the next 3 days he was given single daily doses
of 300 mg., making a total of 1,900mg. He was inactive and had not eaten when
the last dose was given; his condition was unchanged 8 hours later but the following
morning he was found dead. Necropsy revealed considerable edema and con-
gestion of the lungs. The spleen and liver had a dark brown color; sections showed
abundant coarsely granular golden brown material (silver) in the reticulo-endo-
thelial cells, and fine brown particles in the parenchyma cells of the liver. The
femur marrow showed hyperplasla and contained numerous deposits of coarsely
granular golden brown pigment. The initial hematocrit of 54 per cent had dropped
to 47 per cent on the 8th day.
Two dogs receiving smaller individual and smaller total injections
over 2 to 3 weeks developed distemper and death was due to this inter-
current infection. The hematocrits dropped 20 per cent and a marked
loss of weight occurred. The bone marrow was either normal or slightly
hyperplastic.
416 L HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
The following experiment shows the fluctuation of the hematocrit
and white blood cells under prolonged administration of silver in
moderate amount.
Dog27-90.~A female, weighing 14 kg. During the first 28 days she received
small doses of 20 to 50 nag. of collargol at intervals, making a total of 150 nag.
During that time there was moderate lencocytosis and an increase in the red cell
hematocrit from 46 per cent to 52 per cent. Between the 28th and 36th days she
was given 900 rag. collargol in doses of 100 to 300 rag. each. The silver injections
were stopped then because of anorexia and loss of weight. By the 49th day she
had lost 4 kg. in weight, the hematocrit was down to 39 per cent, and a nasal dis-
charge was observed. Her general condition and appetite improved after cessa-
tion of the silver injections. On the 62nd day the red cell hematocrit was 36 per
cent and the leucocyte count was 13,600. 400 rag. of coUargol were given that
day. On the 70th day the hematocrit was 29 per cent and the leucocyte count was
13,400; nevertheless, she was given another 400 nag. dose of collargol. 5 days later
the hematocrit was 24 per cent, the leucocyte count 9,500; the white count con-
tinued between 9,000 and 15,000 and she remained very lethargic until the end.
The hematocrit was 18 per cent from the 101st until the 115th day. On that day
she was given 300 rag. collargol, although her condition was bad at the time. 3
days later the hematocrit had risen to 27 per cent and it was 22 per cent on the
122nd day. At that time she was given 600 nag. of collargol, making a total of
2,600 rag. in 4 months. She was found dead the next morning. The day before
death she weighed 9.8 kg., whereas the initial weight had been 14 kg. Hemolysis
was present during and for several days after each course of collargol.
Necropsy showed an extreme emaciation; slimy exudate in the nose. The
spleen had a dark slate color, and microscopic examination showed very numerous
clumps of yellowish brown granular particles (silver), chiefly intraceUular. The
latter were not colored blue when stained for iron. A few megakaryocytes were
seen. The liver was chocolate brown, and showed numerous yellowish brown
granular particles in the sinusoids, most of which were in large phagocytes. There
were extensive central necroses in which there were moderate numbers of mono-
nuclears and ve~" prominent deposits of the granular material. The pancreas had
a gray color but microscopic examination showed many yellowish brown granular
particles (silver) scattered in the stroma. The kidney sections revealed a small
amount of similar particles in the glomernlar tufts, which did not turn blue with the
iron stain. A lymph node showed numerous clumps of these particles. The
femur marrow was very hyperplastic, and all the fat had disappeared; there were
abundant parent marrow cells and several mitotic figures were noted. The
vertebral marrow was mmilar to that of the femur, but in addition it contained a
moderate amount of the yellowish brown granular particles.
The following protocol shows the results of 3 courses of silver, fol-
lowed each time by an hemolysis, an anemia, and later by recovery.
SAMUEL S. SHOUSE AND GEORGE H. WHIPPLE 417
After the second course of silver the hematocrit was so low (20 per cent)
that a transfusion was given. This apparently had only a temporary
effect. The peripheral destruction of the blood and the hyperplasia
of the marrow are the outstanding findings.
Dog28-178.--A male, weighing 15.5kg., received between 50 rag. and 125 nag.
of collargol daily for 13 days, m~klng a total of 1,150mg. The original hematocrit
of 54 per cent had dropped to 25 per cent on the 22nd day, and the weight had
fallen to 12.9 kg. on the 25th day. By the 57th day the hematocrit had risen to
32 per cent. He was then given 70rag. of collargol daily for 10days. On the 71st
day the hematocritwas 20 per cent; that daya transfusion was done which brought
the red cell hematocrit up to 30 per cent. On the 86th day it had declined to 21
per cent and another transfusion was done which increased the red cell hematocrit
to 26 per cent. On the 97th day the red cell hematocrit was 28 per cent and his
general condition seemed very.good. Because of a rising hematocrit a third course
of silver was given, consisting of 150nag.for 4 days, on the 98th to 101st days. On
the 99th day the hematocrit was 34 per cent and on the 101st it was 33 per cent--
that day he was inactive and did not eat. This condition continued, he gradually
became weaker, and died on the 105th day. The hematocrit was 28 per cent the
day before death.
The plasma showed hemolysis from the 4th to the 15th day, but had regained
its normal color by the 17th day. It had a lemon color after the second course of
collargol, even before the transfusion. It was very red during the last 3 days
of life, following the third course of silver. The leucocyte count dropped to 4,600
on the 23rd and 24th days, but thereafter it remained between 8,000 and 13,000.
Necropsy revealed a dark brown spleen in which microscopic examination
showed very numerous clumps of coarsely granular golden brown particles (silver).
The liver showed many focal necroses with an infiltration of mononuclears and the
Kupffer cells were filled with coarsely granular golden brown particles. Bone
marrow from the femur, vertebrae, and ribs showed marked hyperplasia, with no
death of the parent ceils.
DISCUSSION
Five of the acute experiments were characterized by edema and
congestion of the lungs, obviously due to the acute toxic action of the
massive doses of silver. There is nothing specific about this reaction
which is typical of the heavy metals.
Patein and Roblin (4) reported a human death which occurred within 2 hours
after an intravenous injection of 50 nag. of coUargol. The autopsy showed acute
418 I. IIEM.ATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
pulmonary edema. Chemical analysis of the tissues of their patient showed no
silver in the lungs, a definite trace in the kidneys, and an abundance in the spleen
and liver. Those results are in harmony with the microscopic findings in our
animals, in which the endothelialcells of the liver and spleencontained large depos-
its of the silver. The spleen in our dogs usually presented a dark slaty color. An
iron stain was done on several cases, which indicated that these deposits did not
contain any hemosiderin. Voigt (5) mentions a rabbit weighing 2 kg. which was
given an intravenous injection of 120 mg. of collargol. There was no immediate
reaction,but the next morning it was found dead. Autopsy showed definiteedema
of the lungs; the liverand spleen had a black color, and contained abundant accum-
ulations of dark particles; the kidney contained none but the reticulo-endothelial
cells of the bone marrow were laden with silver particles.
Herzog and Roscher (1) injected collargol into rabbits and obtained a rapidly
developing anemia. More recently Muller (3) has found that colloidal silver,
administered intravenously to rabbits, produced first an erythrocytichyperplasia,
followed by a condition which resembled aplastic anemia. Aplasia of the erythro-
blastic bone marrow seemed to be present before there was an appreciable de-
crease in the number of circulating red blood cells. She concluded that the anemia
was caused by the endothelial cells of the bone marrow forming clasmatocytes at
the expense of the developmentof the erythrocytes.
It is noted that three of our dogs contracted distemper soon after the
silver injections were begun. We feel justified in attributing the onset
of this disease to the lowered vitality of the animals which resulted
from the silver intoxication. It is possible that these were latent cases
of distemper and that an exacerbation occurred when the resistance
was lowered. In this connection it may be noted that 30 years ago
coUargol was used as an internal antiseptic under various conditions.
During the first 5 to 8 days of the injection of collargol the red cell
hematocrits drop 7 to 14 per cent, although the bone marrow may
appear normal or moderately hyperplastic at autopsy. Although the
animals which contracted distemper have shown a decline in the hema-
tocrit of 20 to 23 per cent, the bone marrow seemed normal or slightly
hyperplastic. In animals which were studied almost 4 months a
marked anemia was observed, with a terminal hematocrit of 22 per
cent to 28 per cent, but this was accompanied by a hyperplastic bone
marrow. Thus, in none of the animals did we find the slightest sign of
bone marrow aplasia; indeed quite the opposite picture was presented.
for there were numerous parent cells which seemed perfectly capable
SAMUEL S. SHOUSE AND GEORGE H. WHIPPLE 419
of producing mature blood cells. Likewise the human cases which
died after repeated injections of collargol presented moderate anemia
and hyperplasia of the bone marrow.
This anemia observed in our experiments is probably in large part
due to an increased destruction of the circulating red blood cells,
since we observed hemolysis in the plasma of several of the animals.
Muller (3) stated that she obtained no evidence of injury to the red
blood cells in the peripheral circulation, but she notes a rapid decrease
in the number of erythrocytes in one rabbit, in which the spleen was
found loaded with pigment. Motohashi (2) found marked phago-
cytosis of the red blood cells in rabbits following the injection of collar-
gol. Voigt (5) states that after being injected intravenously, the
colloidal silver is gradually Changed into the ionized form, and he
attributes collargol poisoning to this transformation.
CONCLUSIONS
1. Colloidal silver has no specific action on the bone marrow in dogs
but is a systemic poison which may cause anorexia, weakness, loss of
weight, anemia, and death.
2. Hemolysis can be demonstrated after large doses of colloidal silver
and the anemia presumably is due in part at least to a destruction of
red blood cells in the peripheral circulation.
3. The colloidal silver, injected intravenously, is deposited as gran-
ules almost exclusively in the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system
after the manner of particulate substances.
4. Repeated injections of non-lethal amounts of this substance are
invariably followed by hyperplasia of the bone marrow. In no case
was aplasia found.
5. Large single doses of this material cause rapid death in 12 hours or
less characterized by pulmonary edema and congestion.
6. An initial increase in the number of erythrocytes and leucocytes
may occur following smaller amounts of silver, but repeated injections
cause a considerable anemia, without a definite increase in the leuco-
cytes and with no signs of blood platelet deficiency.
420 ~. IIEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Herzog, F., and Roscher, A., VirchmosArch. path. Anat., 1922,236, 361.
2. Motohashi, S., J. Med. Research,1922,43,419.
3. Muller, G. L., J. Exp. Med., 1926,43,533.
4. Patein, G., and Roblin, L.,(a)Bull. g~n.th#rap.,1909, 158, 898. (b) J. Pkarm.
et chim., 1909,30, 481.
5. Voigt, J., Z. ges.exp. Med., 1926,52, 35.
6. Whipple, G. H., Am. Y. Med. Sc., 1928, 175, 721.
