LETTER TO THE EDITORS
EBV related cerebral lymphoma in a leukemia patient treated
with alemtuzumab
B. van de Langerijt • J. K. Doorduijn •
K. H. Lam • M. J. van den Bent
Received: 19 August 2010 / Revised: 14 November 2010 / Accepted: 25 November 2010 / Published online: 7 December 2010
Ó The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Dear Sirs,
A 56 year old man was diagnosed with B-chronic lympho-
cytic leukemia (B-CLL) in another hospital (RAI 4, BINET
C, IGHV mutated; FISH: 59% of cells trisomy 12). Treat-
ment was started with ﬂudarabine, cyclophosphamide and
alemtuzumab. The patient received pneumocystis jiroveci
pneumonia prophylaxis and herpes prophylaxis with sul-
phamethoxazole–trimethoprim and valacyclovir. Evalua-
tion after two cycles showed evidence of response. Screening
for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
antibodies using ELISA was repeatedly negative. After
2 months the patient developed memory loss and a sensory
aphasia, and treatment including alemtuzumab was discon-
tinued. A cerebral MRI scan revealed several lesions with
some irregular and faint ring enhancement in the occipital
and frontal lobe of the left hemisphere and the frontal lobe of
the right hemisphere, with high signal intensity on T2
weighted images (Fig. 1). Treatment with amoxicillin and
cefotaxime was started and the patient was referred to our
hospital. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) showed 10 leucocytes
(71% lymphocytes) with an elevated total protein (1,08 g/l),
normalglucoseandamonoclonalB-cellpopulationconsistent
with the B-CLL (CD5, CD19 and CD23 positive). All CSF
cultures for micro-organisms were negative. Two days after
the last negative IgG and IgM screening for EBV, PCR for
EBV in serum and CSF showed high numbers of viral copies,
respectively, 5,01E5 and 1,31E4. A biopsy of the left parieto–
occipital lesion revealed a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), positive for CD79a and CD23 and nuclear Pax-5.
MIB-1 labeling was positive in 85% of the tumor cells. The
nuclear EBV-encoded RNA stain (EBER) was strongly
positive, ﬁtting in with the development ofan EBV-associated
lymphoma. Despite high dose dexamethasone the patient
deteriorated rapidly and he died 15 days after the initial MRI
cerebrum. Autopsy was not performed.
Symptomatic CNS involvement in patients with B-CLL
is an uncommon complication and generally limited to the
meninges. Intracerebral localisations are exceedingly rare
[4]. Although development of an aggressive large-cell
lymphoma in patients with an underlying CLL occurs in
1–10% of patients, only six case reports on malignant
transformation of CLL (or Richter’s transformation)
involving the brain parenchyma have been published [2].
Alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) is an anti-CD52 human-
ized monoclonal antibody [6]. It is indicated for poor
prognosis CLL and the drug is being investigated in
combination therapies for a variety of hematological
malignancies and in multiple sclerosis. Because of its
effects on B and T lymphocytes with prolonged T-cell
deﬁciency, the drug is highly immunosuppressive. Indeed,
alemtuzumab is associated with a variety of opportunistic
B. van de Langerijt Á M. J. van den Bent (&)
Department of Neuro-Oncology, Daniel den Hoed Cancer
Center/Erasmus University Hospital, PO Box 5201,
3008 AE Rotterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: m.vandenbent@erasmusmc.nl
B. van de Langerijt
e-mail: b.vd.langerijt@elisabeth.nl
B. van de Langerijt
Department of Neurology, St Elisabeth Hospital,
Tilburg, The Netherlands
J. K. Doorduijn
Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Hospital
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: j.doorduijn@erasmusmc.nl
K. H. Lam
Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Hospital
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: k.lam@erasmusmc.nl
123
J Neurol (2011) 258:944–945
DOI 10.1007/s00415-010-5854-3
infections, especially CMV reactivation, herpes simplex
virus, and aspergillus infections [6]. In addition, in ale-
mtuzumab treated patients, EBV reactivation has been
described and several cases of EBV associated systemic
lymphoma have been reported [5, 7].
Our patient developed a cerebral EBV-positive immu-
nodeﬁciency lymphoma during alemtuzumab treatment.
The positive CD23 staining makes a transformation from
the known B-CLL a theoretical possibility, but otherwise no
clonal relationship between the CLL and NHL were
observed. Both in CSF and serum high copy numbers of
EBV were demonstrated. Moreover, the EBER staining of
the biopsy specimen was positive, identifying the relation
with EBV. Of note, in occasional cases of malignant
transformation in CLL, EBV has been identiﬁed in the
higher-grade neoplasm [3]. A retrospective study showed
16% of 25 patients with malignant transformation of CLL to
be EBV-positive, indicating a role for EBV in malignant
transformation in leukemia [1]. In our case, PCR EBV and
CMV monitoring was not performed during treatment with
alemtuzumab, and the ELISA assay for anti-EBV antibod-
ies remained negative. Only when the patient developed
severe neurological symptoms the EBV PCR was done
which revealed both in serum and CSF the EBV reactiva-
tion. PCR techniques detecting EBV have a high sensitivity
compared to the detection of antibodies with ELISA and are
not inﬂuenced by an immunocompromised state.
Because of the increasing use of alemtuzumab and the
profound and lasting immunosuppression this drug induces,
neurologists should be aware of opportunistic infections
including EBV. Regular monitoring of EBV and CMV
using PCR is indicated in patients treated with ale-
mtuzumab. If alemtuzumab treated patients develop neu-
rological signs and symptoms, opportunistic infections and
EBV induced lymphoma must be considered.
Conﬂict of interest B. van de Langerijt reports no disclosures; J.K.
Doorduijn reports no disclosures; K.H. Lam reports no disclosures;
M.J. van den Bent reports no disclosures
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Ansell SM, Li CY, Lloyd RV, Phyliky RL (1999) Epstein-Barr
virus infection in Richter’s transformation. Am J Hematol
60:99–104
2. Bagic A, Lupu VD, Kessler CM, Tornatore C (2007) Isolated
Richter’s transformation of the brain. J Neurooncol 83:325–328
3. Foon KA, Thiruvengadam R, Saven A, Bernstein ZP, Gale RP
(1993) Genetic relatedness of lymphoid malignancies. Transfor-
mation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia as a model. Ann Intern
Med 119:63–73
4. Hanse MC, Van‘t Veer MB, van Lom K, Van den Bent MJ (2008)
Incidence of central nervous system involvement in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia and outcome to treatment. J Neurol
255:828–830
5. Kluin-Nelemans HC, Coenen JL, Boers JE, van Imhoff GW,
Rosati S (2008) EBV-positive immunodeﬁciency lymphoma after
alemtuzumab-CHOP therapy for peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
Blood 112:1039–1041
6. Martin SI, Marty FM, Fiumara K, Treon SP, Gribben JG, Baden LR
(2006) Infectious complications associated with alemtuzumab use
for lymphoproliferative disorders. Clin Infect Dis 43:16–24
7. Scheinberg P, Fischer SH, Li L, Nunez O, Wu CO, Sloand EM,
Cohen JI, Young NS, John Barrett A (2007) Distinct EBV and
CMV reactivation patterns following antibody-based immunosup-
pressive regimens in patients with severe aplastic anemia. Blood
109:3219–3224
Fig. 1 Cerebral MRI Axial MRI images a–c showing lesions in the
central and occipital regions of the left hemisphere and frontal region
of the right hemisphere with low signal intensity on T1-weighted
sequences (a), faint ring enhancement on T1-weighted sequences
after gadolinium (b) and high signal intensity with subtle low signal
intensity parts on T2 weighted sequences (c). The low signal intensity
parts on T2 weighted sequences suggests a lymphoma, but the faint
ring enhancement is not typical for this diagnosis
J Neurol (2011) 258:944–945 945
123
