REVIEW
Clinical practice
The bleeding child. Part I: primary hemostatic disorders
C. Heleen van Ommen & Marjolein Peters
Received: 16 May 2011 /Accepted: 29 June 2011 /Published online: 29 July 2011
# The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Mucocutaneous bleeding is common in child-
hood and may be the result of primary hemostatic disorders
such as vascular abnormalities, von Willebrand disease,
thrombocytopenia, and platelet dysfunction. A detailed
bleeding history and physical examination are essential to
distinguish between normal and abnormal bleeding and to
decide whether it is necessary to perform further laboratory
evaluation. Initial laboratory tests include complete blood
count, peripheral blood smear, mean platelet volume, von
Willebrand factor (VWF) antigen assay, VWF ristocetin
cofactor activity, and factor VIII activity. Once thrombocy-
topenia and von Willebrand disease have been excluded,
platelet function should be tested by platelet aggregation.
Additional specific diagnostic tests, such as platelet
secretion tests and flow cytometry for the detection of
platelet surface glycoprotein expression, are needed to
confirm the raised hypothesis.
Keywords Primary hemostasis . Thrombocytopenia . Von
Willebrand disease . Platelet function disorders . The
bleeding child . Diagnostics
Introduction
Children either with overt bleeding or with a history of easy
bruising and/or recurrent bleeding episodes are frequently
seen in daily practice. These signs and symptoms may be
caused by an underlying bleeding disorder, and the
challenge for pediatricians is to decide whether these
children have an “abnormal” bleeding pattern and need
further laboratory investigations. Knowledge of the hemo-
static physiology and pathology is essential to order and
interpret proper laboratory tests. This review focuses on the
clinical and laboratory diagnosis of primary hemostatic
disorders in children.
Physiology of primary hemostasis
Hemostasis is a complex process that leads to the formation
of a blood clot at the site of vessel injury and three phases
can be distinguished: primary hemostasis or formation of a
platelet plug, secondary hemostasis, or coagulation and
fibrinolysis [21]. Primary hemostasis starts immediately
after damage of the vessel wall with vasoconstriction as a
result of local contraction of vascular smooth muscle cells
(Fig. 1). Next, von Willebrand factor (VWF) binds to the
exposed subendothelial collagens. Platelets are tethered to
the site of endothelial cell injury through the binding of
VWF to the glycoprotein Ib receptor of the platelet.
Platelets roll over VWF in the direction of flow and get
slightly activated. Platelets finally attach to the subendo-
thelium by participation of other receptors, such as
GPIIbIIIa, and the collagen receptors GPVI and α2β1.
After adhesion, spreading of the platelets occurs, which is
important to endure the shear forces of the blood flow. The
platelets are subsequently activated by strong agonists
present at the site of injury, mainly collagen and thrombin.
Upon activation, the GPIIbIIIa receptor changes conforma-
tion, thereby facilitating aggregation. The GPIIbIIIa recep-
tor binds fibrinogen or VWF, which cross-links platelets
together by binding GPIIbIIIa receptors on neighboring
platelets. At the same time, the contents of the platelet α-
C. H. van Ommen (*) :M. Peters
Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Emma Children’s Hospital AMC,
Meibergdreef 9,
1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: c.h.vanommen@amc.nl
Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
DOI 10.1007/s00431-011-1532-4
granules and dense granules, including the soluble agonist
adenosine 5′-diphosphate (ADP), are released and throm-
boxane A2 (TXA2) is synthesized from arachidonic acid
released from platelet membrane phospholipids. Both ADP
and TXA2 bind to their platelet receptors to support platelet
aggregation. Concomitantly, platelets undergo a change in
morphology and expose negatively charged phospholipids
on their surface membrane. These phospholipids are
essential in the assembly of several coagulation factors for
the secondary hemostasis, the coagulation process.
In summary, to form a firm platelet plug, it is necessary
to have healthy blood vessels, VWF, and sufficient and
well-functional platelets. Diseases of these three players
cause primary hemostatic disorders including vascular
anomalies, von Willebrand disease (VWD), thrombocyto-
penia, and platelet function disorders.
Primary hemostatic disorders
Vascular anomalies
Vascular anomalies causing bleeding complications in
children are various forms of structural anomalies, such as
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, disorders of the
connective tissue (including Ehlers–Danlos disease and
osteogenesis imperfecta), and small vessel vasculitis [24].
The Ehlers–Danlos disease includes a clinically and
genetically heterogeneous group of connective tissue dis-
eases of which the key features are skin hyperextensibility,
delayed wound healing with atrophic scarring, joint
hypermobility, easy bruising, and generalized connective
tissue fragility.
In children, excessive bruising is frequently the present-
ing symptom, especially in the vascular type of Ehlers–
Danlos disease. Other common signs are bleeding from the
gums following brushing of the teeth and after tooth
extraction. Ehlers–Danlos syndrome is often associated
with platelet or coagulation abnormalities such as platelet
function disorders and deficiencies of factors XIII, IX and
XI. However, generalized vascular fragility dominates the
clinical picture. It sometimes leads to severe varicosities
and arterial rupture, which may cause sudden death, usually
in the third or fourth decade of life.
Von Willebrand disease
VWD was first described by Erik von Willebrand in 1926.
Several decades later, it was recognized that it is caused by
deficient or defective VWF, a very large multimeric
glycoprotein, which (1) promotes the adhesion of platelets
to the injured vessel and to each other and (2) binds and
stabilizes factor VIII (FVIII). It is the most frequent
inherited bleeding disorder with an incidence around 1%
[6]. VWD is classified into six different types: type 1 is due
to partial quantitative deficiency of VWF, types 2A, 2B,
2M, and 2N are due to qualitative defects of VWF, and type
3 to a total absence of VWF. Type 1 accounts for about 70%
of all VWD cases and is inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner. Type 2 accounts for 25% of all cases
and the inheritance is either autosomal dominant or
autosomal recessive. Type 3 accounts for less than 5%
and is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. The
clinical picture varies but usually comprises mild to
moderate mucocutaneous bleeding including bruising with-
out trauma, epistaxis, prolonged bleeding after dental
extractions, menorrhagia, and prolonged or excessive
bleeding after childbirth. Clinical manifestations in type
2N resemble those of mild hemophilia A. Type 3 is the
most severe form of VWD because of the combination of
the absence of VWF and profound deficiency of FVIII.
Bleeding manifestations are mucocutaneous hemorrhages
but most of all prolonged bleeding after surgery. Desmo-
pressin is generally an effective preventative or curative
treatment for bleeding in type 1. Desmopressin is a
synthetic analog of the pituitary antidiuretic hormone
vasopressin. It induces an increase in plasma levels of
VWF and FVIII, and it improves platelet adhesion and
aggregation. The exact mechanism of action, however, is
agonist
GPIIb:IIIa
GPIb GPVI α2β1
GPIIb:IIIa
ADP
thromboxane
receptor
ADP
receptors
thromboxane A2 ADP
thromboxane A2
collagen
Fig. 1 Primary hemostasis. Von Willebrand factor ( ) binds
to the exposed collagen. Platelets are tethered to the site of the injured
endothelium through the binding of VWF to the glycoprotein Ib
(GPIb). They attach to the collagen by participation of other receptors
including GPVI and α2β1. After activation, the GPIIb:IIIa changes
conformation and binds fibrinogen ( ) or VWF, initiating
platelet aggregation. Adenosine 5′-diphospate (ADP) and thrombox-
ane A2 are released, supporting aggregation
2 Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
not fully understood [16]. In patients with type 2 VWD, the
response to desmopressin is variable and therapy with
purified human VWF is often required. Patients with type 3
VWD need therapy with purified human VWF in combi-
nation with FVIII. These children should be seen by an
experienced hematologist.
Thrombocytopenia
The normal platelet count for neonates and children ranges
from 150 to 450×109
/L. Thrombocytopenia is defined as a
platelet count of less than 150×109
/L. In general, the risk of
bleeding is relatively small unless the platelet count drops
to less than 50×109
/L. Spontaneous bleeding usually does
not occur until the platelet count is less than 20×109
/L and
is also dependent on the cause of thrombocytopenia. For
example, the risk of intracranial hemorrhage is higher in
neonates with a platelet count of less than 30×109
/L caused
by alloimmune thrombocytopenia than by autoimmune
thrombocytopenia. When thrombocytopenia is detected,
therapy is not always necessary. It is essential to implement
reasonable precautions to minimize bleeding complications
such as avoiding aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, intramuscular injections, and contact sports in school
children and adolescents. However, in some patients,
prompt treatment is required to prevent long-term disability.
Neonatal thrombocytopenia
Neonatal thrombocytopenia usually develops within 72 h of
birth (early neonatal thrombocytopenia) or after 72 h of
birth (late neonatal thrombocytopenia) [29] (Table 1). The
most frequent causes of early neonatal thrombocytopenia
are placental insufficiency, perinatal asphyxia, and perinatal
infections. Thrombocytopenia in these neonates is usually
self-limiting and resolves within 10 days. Late neonatal
thrombocytopenia is the result of sepsis and necrotizing
enterocolitis in more than 80% of the neonates. Thrombo-
cytopenia develops very quickly, can be severe, and lasts
for more than 1 week.
The most important cause of early neonatal thrombocy-
topenia is neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
(NAITP), although it only accounts for a small portion of
all cases of early neonatal thrombocytopenia. The incidence
is estimated to be 1:1,000–1,500 pregnancies. It occurs
when fetal platelets contain an antigen inherited from the
father and absent in the mother. The mother forms IgG class
antiplatelet antibodies against the foreign antigen. The
Neonatal thrombocytopenia Childhood thrombocytopenia
Early onset (<72 h) Destructive thrombocytopenia
Placental insufficiency Immune thrombocytopenia
Perinatal asphyxia Medication
Perinatal infection Infection
Disseminated intravascular coagulation Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Alloimmune Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Autoimmune Catheter-related thrombosis
Congenital infection Heart disease
Thrombosis Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Bone marrow infiltration replacement Von Willebrand disease type 2B
Kasabach–Merritt syndrome Kasabach–Merritt syndrome
Metabolic disease Hypersplenism
Congenital/inherited Hypothermia
Massive bleeding
Late onset (>72 h)
Sepsis Decreased production
Necrotizing enterocolitis Inherited (large/normal/small platelets)
Congenital infection Congenital aplastic anemia
Autoimmune Congenital amegakaryopoeiseis
Catheter-related thrombosis Bone marrow infiltration
Kasabach–Merritt syndrome Vitamin B12 deficiency
Metabolic disease Folic acid deficiency
Medication Acidosis
Congenital Infection
Inherited (large/normal/small platelets) Medication
Table 1 Classification of
thrombocytopenia in the neonate
and child
Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10 3
antibodies cross the placenta and destroy fetal platelets.
About 75% of the cases are caused by fetomaternal
incompatibility for human platelet antigen-1a (HPA-1a).
Other antibodies, such as HPA-5b (16%) and HPA-15b
(4%), are often involved as well [10]. Neonatal thrombo-
cytopenia is often severe (less than 20×109
/L) and results
in intracranial hemorrhage in 10–20% of the untreated
pregnancies. The diagnosis is made by demonstrating
platelet antigen incompatibility between the mother and
the father. To prevent intracranial hemorrhages, it is
extremely important to consider NAITP as a possible
diagnosis in every healthy neonate with thrombocytopenia
at birth, especially term neonates. Neonates with NAITP
should have a cranial ultrasound to look for intracranial
hemorrhages. As a result of the high risk of intracranial
hemorrhages, neonates with a platelet count of less than
30×109
/L and sick or preterm neonates with platelets less
than 50×109
/L should be treated with platelet transfusions
[28]. The treatment of choice is HPA-compatible platelets
(HPA-1a/5b-negative platelets). Alternatives are random
platelets, immunoglobulin, steroids, and washed maternal
platelets.
Less common thrombocytopenia in newborns is caused
by maternal platelet autoantibodies as result of maternal
immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) or other immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia. The incidence is 1–5 in
10,000 pregnancies. Thrombocytopenia is usually mild
and intracranial hemorrhages do not often occur (<1%).
Thrombocytopenia may worsen over the first few days,
making close monitoring of platelets for at least 5 days after
birth mandatory. The platelet count returns to normal within
3 months. In neonates with a platelet count less than 30×
109
/L, treatment consists of immunoglobulin 1 g/kg for
2 days.
Inherited thrombocytopenias are very rare. The classifi-
cation is usually based on the size of the platelets [13].
Thrombocytopenia in children
In children, the causes of thrombocytopenia can be
classified according to the pathologic mechanism involved:
destruction of platelets (including sequestration and pool-
ing) or decreased platelet production (Table 1). The most
common cause of thrombocytopenia as a result of platelet
destruction is ITP. ITP is defined as a peripheral blood
platelet count of less than 100×109
/L and the absence of
any obvious initiating and/or underlying cause of thrombo-
cytopenia. Only 3% of children with ITP have clinically
significant manifestations. Severe bleeding occurs more
often in children with platelets of <10×109
/L. The
incidence of intracranial bleeding is about 0.1% to 0.5%.
As result of the lack of significant bleeding, most children
can be managed without therapy. Initial treatment of
children with moderate to severe bleeding or at increased
risk of bleeding consists of intravenous immunoglobulin
(0.8–1 g/kg), corticosteroids (1–2 mg/kg/day for a maxi-
mum of 14 days, or 4 mg/kg/day for 3–4 days), or
intravenous anti-D immunoglobulin (50–75 ug/kg). In life-
threatening situations, a double dose of platelets should be
given together with intravenous high-dose corticosteroids
and immunoglobulin or anti-D. In children with ITP and no
improvement after 3 to 6 months, it is recommended to test
for antinuclear and antiphospholipid antibodies and immu-
noglobulins (IgG, IgA, and IgM) to exclude chronic
diseases associated with thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow
evaluation is recommended when abnormalities of other
cell lines in the bone marrow are present or systemic
features such as bone pain or enlarged spleen. All children
with chronic ITP (≥12-month duration) should be seen by
an experienced hematologist. In these children, treatment
options include dexamethasone, high-dose methylpredniso-
lone, and rituximab. Recently, an international consensus
with the abovementioned recommendations has been
published [27].
Platelet function disorders
Platelet function disorders in children can be classified into
acquired or inherited disorders. Most platelet function
disorders are acquired. The most frequent cause of acquired
platelet dysfunction is medication including nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, aspirin, valproic acid, beta-lactam
antibiotics, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [23].
Acquired platelet dysfunction can also be a complication of
an underlying disease such as renal failure, liver disease,
and malignant disorders [4]. Inherited disorders of platelet
function are a rare and heterogeneous group of diseases,
which are characterized by easy bruising, epistaxis, menor-
rhagia, and mucocutaneous and perioperative bleeding.
Classification of these disorders is usually based on
alterations in function or structure [13]. In the German-
speaking countries, the incidence has been estimated to be
1.3 to 2.2 affected children per one million children [18].
Only in half of the children, defects were well classified:
32% presented with Glanzmann thrombasthenia, 21% with
aspirin-like defects, 17% with platelet receptor defects, 15%
with storage pool disorders, 8% with Bernard–Soulier
syndrome, and 7% with other defects.
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a rare autosomal recessive
defect in the platelet membrane receptor GPIIbIIIa, the
main fibrinogen receptor on the platelet surface, resulting in
ineffective platelet aggregation. Platelet aggregation
responses to all agonists except ristocetin.
Bernard–Soulier syndrome results from a defect in one
of the components of the GP Ib-IX-V complex on the
platelet, causing a defective binding of platelets to VWF. It
4 Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
is characterized by giant platelets and thrombocytopenia. It
is an autosomal recessive disorder.
The term storage pool deficiency (SPD) is used for
platelet disorders associated with deficiencies in platelet
secretion granules, changing the contents of dense granules
(δ-SPD), alpha-granules (α-SPD or gray platelet syn-
drome), or both (αδ-SPD). These deficiencies can be
idiopathic or part of a more complex disorder such as
Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome. The bleeding tendency is
usually mild.
Treatment of platelet function disorders consists of
desmopressin, antifibrinolytic agents, or transfusion of
platelets. Many disorders respond well to desmopressin
[18, 33]. It is advisable to test the therapeutic efficacy of
desmopressin. Platelet transfusions should be used in
patients with severe bleeding complications, which do
not respond on medical therapy and platelet defects that
cannot be managed by desmopressin therapy. Alloanti-
bodies either to human leucocyte antigens or missing GPs
may easily occur. An alternative in patients who no longer
respond to platelet transfusions is recombinant factor VIIa
[14].
Medical history and physical examination
To decide whether a bleeding child needs further evaluation
for one of the above discussed primary hemostatic
disorders, the medical history and clinical findings are
important tools (Table 2). Bleeding can be called “abnormal”
if the duration or the quantity of the bleeding is longer and
more severe than one would expect. Small bruises can be
seen on forehead, knees, and shins in all children from the
time they begin to crawl. Children with underlying bleeding
disorders usually have bruises on parts of the body that are
involved in falls or trauma. If these bruises are larger or more
than one would expect, a bleeding disorder must be ruled
out. Before crawling, bruising is unusual and one should
keep the possibility of nonaccidental trauma in mind.
Uncommon sites of bruising such as the back, buttocks,
arm, and abdomen should also trigger suspicion for child
abuse [32].
The type and pattern of bleeding may be important
indications for primary or secondary bleeding disorders.
Petechiae, bruising, and mucosal bleeding, such as gingival
hemorrhage, epistaxis, and menorrhagia, are suggestive of
disorders of platelets and blood vessels or VWD. Bleeding
into soft tissues, muscles, and joints implies the presence of
a coagulation factor deficiency such as hemophilia. A
persistent bleeding, for example after surgery, is indicative
for a primary hemostasis problem, whereas a delayed
bleeding is more suggestive of a secondary bleeding
disorder.
It is important to explore the time of onset of the
bleeding symptoms. The symptoms of acquired disorders,
including ITP, usually present over days, whereas symp-
toms of a longer duration are suggestive of a congenital
disorder such as congenital platelet disorders or VWD.
Parents tend to forget events from the past, so it is
worthwhile to ask precisely about any bleeding symptoms
directly after birth, the shedding of the umbilical stump,
heel prick, immunizations, minor surgical interventions,
including circumcision and adenotomy, and the time that
their child started to crawl. The hemostatic system needs to
be adequately challenged before the bleeding disorder
becomes evident. Severe bleeding disorders may manifest
in infancy or early childhood. Mild bleeding disorders,
however, may become apparent later in childhood or even
in adulthood after more significant challenges to the
hemostatic system such as surgery, dental extractions, or
menstruation.
A comprehensive family history is extremely valuable as
most children have not come across a lot of challenges to
the hemostatic system. All family members of both sexes
should be recorded with regard to abnormal bleeding
tendencies. For X-linked disorders, such as X-linked
thrombocytopenia, one should particularly take a detailed
history of maternal grandfathers, uncles, and cousins. For
autosomal recessive disorders, such as type 3 VWD, history
of consanguinity is of significance. It is essential to ask
about surgery, dental extractions, menstruations, trans-
fusions, fluxus postpartum, and unexpected deaths of all
family members. The questions should be specific. Do not
ask whether blood loss after dental extractions was normal,
but ask precisely how many days it took before bleeding
stopped.
Table 2 Evaluation of a bleeding child: medical history
Type, localization, severity, and course of bleedings
Pregnancy: medication of mother, immune thrombocytopenia
of mother, HELPP syndrome, placental insufficiency
Birth: asphyxia, cephalohematoma, and type of delivery
Heel prick
Circumcision
Umbilical stump
Immunizations
Time when child starts to become mobile
Dental extractions
Surgery, such as adenotonsillectomy
Menstruation
Trauma
Concomitant illnesses and medication
Family history
HELLP hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count
Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10 5
The presence of concomitant illnesses can be an
indication for the cause of bleeding. Chronic renal failure
is associated with platelet function disorders [4]. An
enlarged spleen can be the cause of thrombocytopenia.
Wilms’ tumor is known to cause acquired VWD, which can
be the cause of bleeding. Children with systemic lupus
erythomatosus may bleed because of ITP or systemic
vasculitis. Furthermore, many platelet function disorders
are associated with inherited syndromes [12]. For example,
thrombocytopathy as result of platelet dense granule
deficiency occurs in children with oculocutaneous albinism
in Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome or Chediak–Higashi syn-
drome. On the other hand, most congenital bleeding
disorders occur in otherwise healthy-looking children.
Medication history is essential as well. For example,
aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs cause
irreversible as well as reversible platelet function disorder.
Valproate therapy may cause thrombocytopenia or acquired
VWD [20].
Collection of the bleeding history and its interpretation is
very subjective. For this reason, questionnaires on bleeding
history have been developed [34]. The Bleeding Score was
originally developed as a research tool to evaluate bleeding
severity in adults with known VWD [30]. A pediatric
adaptation of this adult score has been developed by
Bowman et al., termed the Pediatric Bleeding Question-
naire, and a prospective study has shown that a score of ≥2
was predictive of a diagnosis of VWD in a primary care
setting [7]. In a pediatric tertiary care setting, however, this
score appeared to have limited predictive value for
identifying patient with common mild bleeding disorders
such as type 1 VWD or platelet function disorders [25]. So,
until now, this score cannot be used as a diagnostic tool to
discriminate between patients with or without bleeding
disorder.
Physical examination is another important tool for
diagnosis of a bleeding disorder. Petechiae are usually
present in primary hemostatic disorders, especially throm-
bocytopenia or thrombocytopathy. Other signs of primary
hemostatic disorders are small and/or many scattered
ecchymoses as well as mucosal hemorrhages. Ecchymoses
in unusual places, such as the thorax or back, may be
suggestive for both primary and secondary bleeding
disorders. The same is true for large bruises, too large for
the degree of trauma, or for palpable hematomas. In case of
epistaxis, the nose should be examined to exclude excor-
iations and damaged vessels as results of trauma. Joint and
intramuscular bleeding with or without trauma is always
abnormal in children and suggestive for especially second-
ary bleeding disorders. Physical examination is also
important for the evidence of associated abnormalities of
syndromes with platelet function disorders such as albi-
nism, bilateral hypoplastic or absent radii in thrombocyto-
penia with absent radii syndrome, and eczema in Wiskott–
Aldrich syndrome [12]. The possibility of child abuse
should always be kept in mind while evaluating a bleeding
child.
Laboratory evaluation
Children with a positive individual and/or familial
history of bleeding should undergo coagulation testing.
Laboratory evaluation of bleeding disorders includes
testing for defects of the secondary hemostasis (pro-
thrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time),
which will not be discussed in the present article. Initial
coagulation studies for primary hemostatic disorders
include complete blood count, peripheral blood smear,
mean platelet volume (MPV), bleeding time or platelet
function analyzer-100 (PFA-100), VWF antigen assay
(VWF:Ag), VWF ristocetin cofactor activity (VWF:
RCo), and FVIII activity. If thrombocytopenia and
VWD have been excluded, platelet function tests should
be performed including light transmission aggregometry
and platelet secretion tests (Fig. 2).
Complete blood count
It is essential to perform a complete blood count to study
the number of platelets. The result of the blood count
will rapidly eliminate or diagnose thrombocytopenia as
the cause of bleeding. It is important to realize that a low
number of platelets affects potential platelet function
testing. In the past, platelets were counted manually with
phase-contrast microscopy. The introduction of automat-
ed full blood counters has improved the precision and
velocity of counting. Additionally, these counters made it
possible to record various platelet indices including MPV.
Normal ranges for platelet counts and MPV do not differ
from adult normal ranges [2, 9]. In giant platelet disorders
such as Bernard–Soulier, MPV is high, whereas in
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, MPV is low, reflecting the
small size of the platelets in this syndrome. MPV may not
always reflect the actual platelet size, especially in
thrombocytopenia and in giant-platelet disorders. Further-
more, the presence of anemia may give an indication for
the severity of acute or chronic blood loss as a result of
bleeding. Chronic blood loss is usually represented by a
hypochomic, microcytic anemia, while acute blood loss is
characterized by a normocytic anemia. Both anemias are
accompanied by a low number of reticulocytes. If
thrombocytopenia is caused by bone marrow failure, it is
usually accompanied by another suppressed blood cell
line, i.e., normocytic anemia with reticulopenia and/or
leucopenia.
6 Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
Peripheral blood smear
A peripheral blood smear is indispensable in any patient
with a potential platelet disorder to rule out thrombocy-
topenia which is the result of clumping of the platelets, to
identify abnormal cells including blasts, and to examine
platelet morphology. Electron microscopy can, for exam-
ple, identify the absence of α-granules in gray platelet
syndrome.
Bleeding time and platelet function analyzer-100
The bleeding time, developed by Duke in 1910, was the
first test to assess primary hemostasis in vivo [11]. In this
test, which was improved by Ivy, the patient was stabbed by
a lancet on the ventral side of the forearm while a blood
pressure cuff was placed on the upper arm and inflated to
40 mmHg. Blood was drawn off every 30 s by a filter
paper, and the bleeding time was documented as the time
from when the wound was made until bleeding stopped.
Andrew et al. used a modified device that makes a smaller
skin incision and showed that bleeding times in neonates
are shorter than those in adults [1]. The shorter bleeding
time or enhanced platelet–vessel interaction in healthy
neonates compared to older children or adults is caused
by the higher concentration and activity of circulating VWF
and higher hematocrit [15]. In the recent past, this test has
become less popular due to its invasiveness, low sensitivity
and specificity, and its inability to predict bleeding in
unselected patients. Especially in neonates and infants, this
test is time-consuming and difficult to perform and
standardize [8]. In most hospitals, the in vivo bleeding
time is, therefore, replaced by the in vitro bleeding time
devices in particular the PFA-100. This test needs about
1 ml of citrated whole blood, is easy to perform, and
produces results very rapidly. In the PFA-100, citrated
whole blood is applied to a cartridge with a membrane that
is coated with collagen/epinephrine or collagen/ADP. This
membrane has a very small aperture, which occludes after
contact with the applied blood. The time necessary to
occlude the aperture is the closure time. Term neonates have
shorter closure times than older children or adults [5].
Infants and older children have closure times in the same
range as those in adults [22]. Although the PFA-100 is more
Complete blood count, peripheral smear
Low number of platelets Normal number of platelets
VWF:Ag, VWF:RCo, FVIIIAge
See table 1
PFA-100
Normal Abnormal
VWDPlatelet aggregation
Specific pattern Non-specific pattern
or normal
Nucleotide studies
Secretion tests
Flow cytometry
Electron microscopy
Genetic studies
Glanzmann
Bernard Soulier
Storage pool disease
Aspirin
Nucleotide studies
Secretion tests
Renal, liver function
Acquired disorders:
Renal or liver disease
Medication
Storage pool disease
CONDITIONS
ADDITIONAL
INVESTIGATIONS
Fig. 2 Algorithm for children with symptoms and signs of primary hemostatic disorders
Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10 7
sensitive and reliable than the bleeding time, it is not the
perfect screening tool for primary hemostatic disorders
[31]. It is highly sensitive for severe VWD and platelet
defects, including Bernard–Soulier syndrome, but it is
insensitive for mild disorders such as mild type 1 VWD,
storage pool disease, and Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome.
False-positive results may easily occur, especially in anemic
patients. As a consequence, PFA-100 may help to exclude
severe forms of VWD and platelet defects in children,
especially when it is difficult to obtain blood. However, if
clinical suspicion of a bleeding disorder is high and PFA is
normal, other tests are still required including VWF and
platelet function tests. Additionally, because abnormal PFA-
100 results are not specific, further investigation is required
in patients with abnormal PFA-100 results.
Diagnosis of von Willebrand disease
Besides mediating the initial adhesion of platelets at the
sides of vascular injury, an additional function of VWF is
binding and stabilizing FVIII in the circulation. Therefore,
initial tests to detect VWD or low VWF include VWF:Ag,
VWF:RCo, and FVIII activity [26]. The normal values of
these tests range from 50 to 150 IU/dL. VWF:Ag is a
qualitative immunoassay that measures the concentration of
VWF protein in the plasma. VWF:RCo is a functional assay
of VWF that measures its ability to interact with normal
platelets. In this assay, the antibiotic ristocetin causes VWF
to bind to platelets resulting in platelet clumps. Several
methods can be used to detect platelet clumping.
FVIII coagulant assay is a measure of the function of the
clotting factor FVIII in plasma. In VWD, the VWF:Ag and
VWF:RCo are both decreased. A low VWF may result in a
low level of FVIII leading to a prolonged activated partial
thromboplastin time.
The coefficient of variation of all three assays is high,
especially that of the VWF:RCo assay. It has been
measured in laboratory surveys at 30% or greater, and it is
still higher when the VWF:RCo is lower than 12–15 IU/dL.
Nevertheless, it is still the most broadly accepted laboratory
test of VWF function. The coefficient of variation of the
VWF:Ag and FVIII assay is also relatively high (about 10–
20% or greater) [17]. The quality of laboratory testing
varies among laboratories as well. Repeated testing for
VWD is sometimes necessary to detect low levels of VWF.
Plasma levels of VWF increase due to systemic inflamma-
tion, administration of oral contraceptives, and stress
including surgery, exercise, anxiety, and crying in an
anxious child. The phlebotomy should be performed in a
quiet setting and as atraumatic as possible to limit exposure
of tissue factor from the site and the activation of clotting
factors, minimizing falsely high or low values. Further-
more, individuals who have blood type O have concen-
trations approximately 25% lower compared to persons
Table 3 Classification of von Willebrand disease based on specific von Willebrand factor tests
VWD type VWF:Ag VWF:RCo RCo/Ag FVIII Multimer pattern Low-dose RIPA Platelets
1 ↓ ↓ = N or ↓ N Absent N
2A ↓ ↓ RCo<Ag N or ↓ Abnormal Absent N
2B ↓ ↓ RCo<Ag N or ↓ Abnormal ↑ N or ↓
2M ↓ ↓ RCo<Ag N or ↓ N Absent N
2N N or ↓ N or ↓ = <30 IU/dL N Absent N
3 Absent Absent NA <10 IU/dL Absent Absent N
RIPA ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation, VWF von Willebrand factor, VWD von Willebrand disease, NA not applicable, N normal, VWF:Ag
VWF antigen assay, VWF:RCo VWF ristocetin cofactor activity, FVIII factor VIII
Table 4 Characteristic findings on light transmission aggregometry
Platelet aggregation
Disorder Platelet morphology Epinephrine ADP Collagen Ristocetin AA
Glanzmann Normal − − − + −
Bernard Soulier Giant platelets + + + − +
Aspirin Normal + + ± + −
Storage pool disease
Gray platelet syndrome Large with decreased α-granules + − − + +
δ-Granules deficiency Decreased δ-granules − ± − ± ±
AA arachidonic acid, ADP adenosine 5′-diphosphate
8 Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
who have other ABO blood types. In conclusion, the high
variability of the three diagnostic assays as well as the
variability of plasma levels of VWF and FVIII as result of
conditions of the patient or blood sample make it difficult to
diagnose VWD or classify the VWD subtype.
The VWF:RCo-to-VWF:Ag ratio can help to discriminate
between type 1 and type 2 VWD. A ratio of <0.5–0.7 is
suggestive of type 2A, 2B, and 2M VWD (Table 3). Most tests
to classify the subtypes of VWD, such as multimer analysis,
can only be performed in specialized coagulation laboratories.
Classification of subtypes of VWD is mandatory, as
desmopressin therapy causes thrombocytopenia in type 2B
and is therefore contraindicated. Genetic testing may help to
find the correct diagnosis and select affected family members.
Diagnosis of platelet function disorders
Platelet aggregation tests remain the “gold standard” for the
evaluation of platelet function. In the second step, specific
diagnostic tests should be used to confirm the hypothesis
such as platelet secretion tests, flow cytometry, and
measurement of platelet nucleotides. All these specialized
tests are only performed in specialized coagulation labora-
tories. These tests are time-consuming, technically chal-
lenging, and require large volumes of freshly drawn citrated
blood, which is an important drawback in studying young
children. Investigating neonates without bleeding symp-
toms but with a positive family history should therefore be
deferred to a later date when the child is older. In healthy
children older than 1 year, platelet aggregation and dense
granule release of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) do not vary
significantly with age and are not different than results in
adults, which suggest that established adult normal ranges
may be used in children beyond 1 year [19].
The most common method of assessing platelet function
is light transmission aggregometry. In this test, agonists
such as ADP, epinephrine, collagen, or arachidonic acid are
added to platelet-rich plasma in a cuvette at 37°C, which is
stirred between a light source and a photocell. When an
agonist is added, the platelets aggregate and absorb less
light, which is detected by the photocell, producing a
specific aggregation trace. Characteristic patterns of aggre-
gation tracings obtained using an agonist panel can be
indicative of a specific diagnosis, especially abnormalities
of the platelet receptors (Table 4). For example, an absent
aggregation to all agonists with a normal response to
ristocetin indicates Glanzmann thrombasthenia. The diag-
nosis can be confirmed by flow cytometry that determines
the lack of GPIIbIIIa on the platelet surface. In patients with
abnormalities of the platelet granules causing SPD, there is
a large variability in platelet aggregation. In a large study of
106 patients with δ-SPD, only 33% had typical aggregation
traces, whereas about 25% had normal aggregation. To
detect patients with SPD, measurement of platelet nucleo-
tides or lumi-aggregometry may be more sensitive than
light transmission aggregometry. Lumi-aggregometry is a
modification of light transmission aggreggometry, which
measures ATP release from the dense granules. Detailed
algorithms for diagnostic approach to children with sus-
pected inherited disorders of platelet function have been
published [3, 13].
Summary
Children with bruising and bleeding are a major challenge
for pediatricians. A comprehensive medical history and
physical examination should help the pediatrician to decide
which children need further diagnostic laboratory evalua-
tion. Initial laboratory testing of primary hemostatic
disorders includes the number of platelets, examination of
the blood smear, and VWD testing. If thrombocytopenia
and VWD have been excluded, platelet function tests
should be performed in a specialized coagulation laboratory.
And finally, keep vascular abnormalities in mind!
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. J.C.M.
Meijers for his comments and suggestions.
Conflict of interest The authors state that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Andrew M, Paes B, Bowker J, Vegh P (1990) Evaluation of an
automated bleeding time device in the newborn. Am J Hematol
35:275–277
2. Arad ID, Alpan G, Sznajderman SD, Eldor A (1986) The mean
platelet volume (MPV) in the neonatal period. Am J Perinatol 3:1–3
3. Balduini CL, Cattaneo M, Fabris F, Gresele P, Iolascon A,
Pulcinelli FM, Savoia A (2003) Inherited thrombocytopenias: a
proposed diagnostic algorithm from the Italian Gruppo di Studio
delle Piastrine. Haematologica 88:582–592
4. Boccardo P, Remuzzi G, Galbusera M (2004) Platelet dysfunction
in renal failure. Semin Thromb Hemost 30:579–589
5. Boudewijns M, Raes M, Peeters V, Mewis A, Cartuyvels R,
Magerman K, Rummens JL (2003) Evaluation of platelet function
on cord blood in 80 healthy term neonates using the Platelet
Function Analyser (PFA-100); shorter in vitro bleeding times in
neonates than adults. Eur J Pediatr 162:212–213
6. Bowman M, Hopman WM, Rapson D, Lillicrap D, Silva M,
James P (2010) A prospective evaluation of the prevalence of
symptomatic von Willebrand disease (VWD) in a pediatric
primary care population. Pediatr Blood Cancer 55:171–173
Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10 9
7. Bowman M, Riddel J, Rand ML, Tosetto A, Silva M, James PD
(2009) Evaluation of the diagnostic utility for von Willebrand
disease of a pediatric bleeding questionnaire. J Thromb Haemost
7:1418–1421
8. Cariappa R, Wilhite TR, Parvin CA, Luchtman-Jones L (2003)
Comparison of PFA-100 and bleeding time testing in pediatric
patients with suspected hemorrhagic problems. J Pediatr Hematol
Oncol 25:474–479
9. Forestier F, Daffos F, Galacteros F, Bardakjian J, Rainaut M,
Beuzard Y (1986) Hematological values of 163 normal fetuses
between 18 and 30 weeks of gestation. Pediatr Res 20:342–346
10. Ghevaert C, Campbell K, Walton J, Smith GA, Allen D,
Williamson LM, Ouwehand WH, Ranasinghe E (2007) Manage-
ment and outcome of 200 cases of fetomaternal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia. Transfusion 47:901–910
11. Harrison P, Mumford A (2009) Screening tests of platelet function:
update on their appropriate uses for diagnostic testing. Semin
Thromb Hemost 35:150–157
12. Israels SJ (2009) Diagnostic evaluation of platelet function
disorders in neonates and children: an update. Semin Thromb
Hemost 35:181–188
13. Israels SJ, Kahr WH, Blanchette VS, Luban NL, Rivard GE, Rand
ML (2011) Platelet disorders in children: a diagnostic approach.
Pediatr Blood Cancer 56:975–983
14. Kaleelrahman M, Minford A, Parapia LA (2004) Use of
recombinant factor VIIa in inherited platelet disorders. Br J
Haematol 125:95–96
15. Katz JA, Moake JL, McPherson PD, Weinstein MJ, Moise KJ,
Carpenter RJ, Sala DJ (1989) Relationship between human
development and disappearance of unusually large von Willebrand
factor multimers from plasma. Blood 73:1851–1858
16. Kaufmann JE, Vischer UM (2003) Cellular mechanisms of the
hemostatic effects of desmopressin (DDAVP). J Thromb Haemost
1:682–689
17. Kitchen S, Jennings I, Woods TA, Kitchen DP, Walker ID, Preston
FE (2006) Laboratory tests for measurement of von Willebrand
factor show poor agreement among different centers: results from
the United Kingdom National External Quality Assessment
Scheme for Blood Coagulation. Semin Thromb Hemost 32:
492–498
18. Knofler R, Olivieri M, Weickardt S, Eberl W, Streif W (2007) First
results of the THROMKID study: a quality project for the
registration of children and adolescents with hereditary platelet
function defects in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. Hamosta-
seologie 27:48–53
19. Knofler R, Weissbach G, Kuhlisch E (1998) Platelet function tests
in childhood measuring aggregation and release reaction in whole
blood. Semin Thromb Hemost 24:513–521
20. Koenig S, Gerstner T, Keller A, Teich M, Longin E, Dempfle CE
(2008) High incidence of vaproate-induced coagulation disorders
in children receiving valproic acid: a prospective study. Blood
Coagul Fibrinolysis 19:375–382
21. Kriz N, Rinder CS, Rinder HM (2009) Physiology of hemostasis:
with relevance to current and future laboratory testing. Clin Lab
Med 29:159–174
22. Lippi G, Manzato F, Franchini M, Brocco G, Florenziani G, Guidi
G (2001) Establishment of reference values for the PFA-100
platelet function analyzer in pediatrics. Clin Exp Med 1:69–70
23. Litalien C, Jacqz-Aigrain E (2001) Risks and benefits of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in children: a comparison
with paracetamol. Paediatr Drugs 3:817–858
24. Malfait F, De PA (2009) Bleeding in the heritable connective
tissue disorders: mechanisms, diagnosis and treatment. Blood Rev
23:191–197
25. Marcus PD, Nire KG, Grooms L, Klima J, O'Brien SH (2011) The
power of a standardized bleeding score in diagnosing paediatric
type 1 von Willebrand's disease and platelet function defects.
Haemophilia 17:223–227
26. Patzke J, Schneppenheim R (2010) Laboratory diagnosis of von
Willebrand disease. Hamostaseologie 30:203–206
27. Provan D, Stasi R, Newland AC, Blanchette VS, Bolton-Maggs P,
Bussel JB, Chong BH, Cines DB, Gernsheimer TB, Godeau B,
Grainger J, Greer I, Hunt BJ, Imbach PA, Lyons G, McMillan R,
Rodeghiero F, Sanz MA, Tarantino M, Watson S, Young J, Kuter
DJ (2010) International consensus report on the investigation and
management of primary immune thrombocytopenia. Blood
115:168–186
28. Roberts I, Murray NA (2008) Neonatal thrombocytopenia. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 13:256–264
29. Roberts I, Stanworth S, Murray NA (2008) Thrombocytopenia in
the neonate. Blood Rev 22:173–186
30. Rodeghiero F, Castaman G, Tosetto A, Batlle J, Baudo F, Cappelletti
A, Casana P, De Bosch N, Eikenboom JC, Federici AB, Lethagen S,
Linari S, Srivastava A (2005) The discriminant power of bleeding
history for the diagnosis of type 1 von Willebrand disease: an
international, multicenter study. J Thromb Haemost 3:2619–2626
31. Roschitz B, Thaller S, Koestenberger M, Wirnsberger A, Leschnik
B, Fritsch P, Muntean W (2007) PFA-100 closure times in
preoperative screening in 500 pediatric patients. Thromb Haemost
98:243–247
32. Sugar NF, Taylor JA, Feldman KW (1999) Bruises in infants and
toddlers: those who don’t cruise rarely bruise. Puget Sound Pediatric
Research Network. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 153:399–403
33. Tauer JT, Gneuss A, Lohse JE, Jurgens T, Knofler R (2011)
Evaluation of desmopressin effect on primary haemostasis in
pediatric patients with aspirin-like defect as hereditary thrombo-
cytopathy. Klin Padiatr 223:169–172
34. Tosetto A, Castaman G, Rodeghiero F (2008) Bleeding scores in
inherited bleeding disorders: clinical or research tools? Haemo-
philia 14:415–422
10 Eur J Pediatr (2012) 171:1–10
