REGULAR ARTICLE
The bone marrow compartment is modified in the absence
of galectin-3
C. Brand & F. L. Oliveira & L. Ricon & M. L. Fermino &
L. C. Boldrini & D. K. Hsu & F. T. Liu & R. Chammas &
R. Borojevic & M. Farina & M. C. El-Cheikh
Received: 3 May 2011 /Accepted: 17 October 2011 /Published online: 27 November 2011
Abstract Galectin-3 (gal-3) is a β-galactoside binding
protein present in multivalent complexes with an extracel-
lular matrix and with cell surface glycoconjugates. In this
context, it can deliver a variety of intracellular signals to
modulate cell activation, differentiation and survival. In the
hematopoietic system, it was demonstrated that gal-3 is
expressed in myeloid cells and surrounding stromal cells.
Furthermore, exogenous and surface gal-3 drive the
proliferation of myeloblasts in a granulocyte–macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-dependent manner.
Here, we investigated whether gal-3 regulates the formation
of myeloid bone marrow compartments by studying
galectin-3−/−
mice (gal-3−/−
) in the C57BL/6 background.
The bone marrow histology of gal-3−/−
mice was signifi-
cantly modified and the myeloid compartments drastically
disturbed, in comparison with wild-type (WT) animals. In
the absence of gal-3, we found reduced cell density and
diaphyseal disorders containing increased trabecular pro-
jections into the marrow cavity. Moreover, myeloid cells
presented limited capacity to differentiate into mature
myeloid cell populations in gal-3−/−
mice and the number
of hematopoietic multipotent progenitors was increased
relative to WT animals. In addition, bone marrow stromal
cells of these mice had reduced levels of GM-CSF gene
expression. Taken together, our data suggest that gal-3
interferes with hematopoiesis, controlling both precursors
and stromal cells and favors terminal differentiation of
myeloid progenitors rather than proliferation.
Keywords Hematopoiesis . Galectin-3 . Myeloid
differentiation
Introduction
Galectin-3 (gal-3) is a highly promiscuous lectin detected in
the extracellular matrix, on the cell surface and within the
nucleus and cytoplasm, where it can regulate several
biological systems (Henderson and Sethi 2009). In extra-
cellular environments, gal-3 is capable of modulating
inflammatory responses by favoring monocyte and neutro-
phil activation (Liu et al. 1995; Yamaoka et al. 1995). In
parallel, galectin-3 null mice (gal-3−/−
mice) subjected to an
acute and/or chronic inflammatory reaction exhibited a
reduced influx of neutrophils and macrophages into the
inflammatory site as well as a delayed capacity of
monocyte–macrophage differentiation (Colnot et al. 1998;
Hsu et al. 2000; Sano et al. 2000; Oliveira et al. 2007;
C. Brand :F. L. Oliveira :L. Ricon :L. C. Boldrini :
R. Borojevic :M. Farina :M. C. El-Cheikh (*)
Laboratório de Proliferação e Diferenciação Celular,
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, 393,
CEP: 21941-902 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
e-mail: marcia@histo.ufrj.br
M. L. Fermino
Laboratório de Glicobiologia e Imunoquímica - Departamento de
Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Faculdade de Medicina Universidade de São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil
D. K. Hsu :F. T. Liu
Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine,
University of California Davis,
Sacramento, CA, USA
R. Chammas
Laboratório de Oncologia Experimental e Instituto do Câncer do
Estado de São Paulo - Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
São Paulo and Centre for Cell-Based Therapy CEPID-FAPESP,
São Paulo, Brazil
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
DOI 10.1007/s00441-011-1276-5
# The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Nieminen et al. 2008). Recently, we described the regula-
tion of B1 and B2 lymphocyte differentiation into plasma
cells in the bone marrow, peritoneal cavity and mesentery
compartments by gal-3 (Oliveira et al. 2007, 2009).
Several biological molecules control specific stages
of proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) into mature blood cells inside the bone
marrow (Weissman 2000; Sugiyama et al. 2006). The
continuous production of cells of both lymphoid and the
myeloid lineages depends on the correct spatial organiza-
tion of putative HSCs and their progenies located in
specific stromal cell niches and in constitutive contact
with growth factors, such as granulocyte–macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). By controlling cell
adhesion, motility and differentiation, extracellular matrix
components such as glycosaminoglycans (Gallagher et al.
1983) and cell membrane components, including integrins
and gangliosides, have been identified as important
regulators in hematopoiesis (Andrade et al. 2006; Ziulkoski
et al. 2009).
Although gal-3 is expressed by bone marrow cells, the
role of the lectin–carbohydrate interaction during hemato-
poiesis is still unclear. In this context, it was shown that
bone marrow cells alter the surface lectin patterns during
the process of differentiation (Krugluger et al. 1994) and
that endogenous gal-3 modified the GM-CSF-driven pro-
liferation of immature myeloid cells (Krugluger et al.
1997). Moreover, it was also demonstrated that gal-3 was
expressed in myeloblasts, mature myeloid cells and
surrounding stromal cells, suggesting that this lectin is
involved with the organization of the myeloid compart-
ments (Krugluger et al. 1997). Recently, we described the
presence of gal-3 in a well-defined B220high
B cell
subpopulation in the bone marrow and that in its absence,
there is accelerated differentiation of B cells into plasma
cells (Oliveira et al. 2007).
Here, we investigated whether myeloid subpopulations
were modified in absence of gal-3, considering that both
extracellular and surface gal-3 drive the proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells in physiological and
pathological conditions. Thus, we analyzed the bone
marrow compartment in wild-type (WT) and gal-3−/−
mice.
Materials and methods
Mice
Inbred C57/BL6 (WT) mice and gal-3−/−
mice (backcrossed
to C57/BL6 for 9 generations) (Hsu et al. 2000), age and
sex matched, were obtained from the colony bred at the
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). Mice
manipulations were performed in accordance with institu-
tional guidelines for the use and care of laboratory animals
(protocol DAHEICB 009, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil).
Histological analysis of bone marrow
For histological evaluation, intact femurs of WT and gal-3−/−
mice were surgically removed, carefully cleaned by
mechanical procedures and immersed in a solution contain-
ing 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4% formaldehyde freshly
prepared from paraformaldehyde in 0.1M phosphate buffer
for 24 h. Afterwards, the samples were washed in the
buffer, dehydrated in an acetone series from 30 to 100%
(v/v in water), 15 min in each step and embedded in the
Spurr resin (Ted Pella, Redding, CA, USA). Transverse
semithin sections of circa 5 μm from the femurs at the
diaphysis region were obtained with a diamond knife in
a Sorvall Porter-Blum MT2-B ultramicrotome and double
stained with toluidine blue and basic fuchsin (Sigma-
Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA). The slides obtained
were mounted using Entelan (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
and analyzed in a Zeiss Axioplan (Oberkochen, Germany)
light microscope in the bright-field mode. The micrographs
obtained were digitalized with an Evolution MP 5.0 cooled
CCD color camera (MedyaCybernetics, Bethesda, MD,
USA). The cell density was performed by histomorphometric
analyses using the ImageJ software in five fields of each
sample imaged with a ×40 objective.
Bone marrow cell suspensions
Bone marrow cells were obtained ex vivo by flushing the
femoral cavity of WT and gal-3−/−
mice with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.2, with 3% fetal bovine serum
(FBS, LGC; Cotia, São Paulo, Brazil). Cells were washed,
quantified by counting and prepared for further experimen-
tation. When indicated, red blood cell lyses were done with
hypotonic ACK (ammonium chloride potassium) solution.
Antibodies and flow cytometry analysis
In order to saturate Fc receptors, 1×106
cells/mL bone
marrow-derived cells were incubated with the Fc blocker
antibody, produced by clone 2.4G2 (obtained from the Rio
de Janeiro Cell Bank PABCAM, Federal University, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil), for 10 min before adding specific mono-
clonal antibodies (mAbs). Cells were incubated with mAbs
for 30 min; unbound mAbs were washed out with PBS. The
following mAbs were used: FITC-labeled Sca-1, Mac-1 and
IgM; PE-labeled CD34, Ter-119 and B220; PE Cy5.5-
labeled Gr-1 and Biotin-labeled Lin−
and IgD; PerCP-
labeled streptoavidin and APC-labeled c-Kit (all from BD
Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were acquired in
428 Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
a flow cytometer (FACScalibur; BD Bioscience) using Cell
Quest software and analyzed using WinMDI 2.9 software.
Cell lines
Primary cultures of M3/38, L929, MM3 and WeHi3B
cells secreting anti-gal-3 antibody, macrophage colony
stimulating factor (M-CSF), granulocyte–macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-3
(IL-3) respectively, were obtained from the Rio de
Janeiro Cell Bank PABCAM, Federal University of
Rio de Janeiro. The supernatants were harvested from
confluent cultures, filtered, aliquoted and stored at −20°C
until used.
Cultures of bone marrow-derived cells
Soft-agar cultures Cell culture systems were prepared as
described by Heyworth and Spooncer (1993). Briefly, total
bone marrow-derived cells obtained from WT and gal-3−/−
mice were plated at 5×104
/ml in double-layer soft-agar
assays. The bottom layer was prepared at a 0.4% final agar
concentration in Iscove's medium (Sigma-Aldrich) with
10% FBS, plated in 35-mm Petri dishes (Corning, New
York, USA). The upper layer containing the cells (0.33%
final agar concentration) were supplemented either with
10% conditioned medium from MM3, L929 or WeHi3B
cells.
Long-term cultures of bone marrow-derived cells Total
bone marrow-derived cells of WT and gal-3−/−
mice were
plated in culture medium and, after 4 h, the cultured cells
were washed vigorously and the resting adherent cells
evaluated. After 4 weeks in culture, the morphological and
molecular essays were performed in the stromal cells.
Short-term cultures of bone marrow-derived cells Liquid
cell cultures were performed with non-adherent bone
marrow-derived cells of WT mice. To obtain non-adherent
cells, total bone marrow was plated in a plastic dish of 60
mm for 1 h and nonadherent cells were cultured in 24-well
culture plates (Corning) in α-MEM (Sigma-Aldrich) sup-
plemented with 5% of FBS in the presence of medium
alone, in presence of 20% conditioned medium containing
GM-CSF factor and with GM-CSF plus anti-gal-3 antibody.
Part of the cells were harvested after 48 h, quantified,
centrifuged on glass slides in a cytospin, stained and
analyzed morphologically. The cells were quantified as
myeloid precursors, including those with the ring-form
nucleus, polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) and mono-
cytes (El-Cheikh and Borojevic 1990). After 48 h of
treatment with GM-CSF and GM-CSF plus anti-gal-3
antibody, the remaining cells were harvested and plated in
methylcellulose medium (Methocult M3630; Stem Cell
Technologies, Vancouver, Canada), to evaluate their capac-
ity of proliferation.
For the semisolid culture system, such as soft-agar and
methylcellulose, colonies (>50 cells) and clusters (<50
cells) were quantified after 8 days in an inverted micro-
scope (Olympus CKX41SF; Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan).
Morphological analyses were confirmed in agar cultures
fixed overnight with formol vapor, floated onto microscope
slides, dried and stained with May-Grunwald and Giemsa
(Sigma-Aldrich) and analyzed in a Zeiss-Axioplan, or an
Olympus CKX41SF light microscope. The images of the
clusters and colonies were acquired in the bright-field mode
using a camera Evolution MP 5.0 RTV (Color-Media
Cybernetics, Canada).
Real-time quantitative PCR analysis
After 1 week in culture, the non-adherent bone marrow-
derived cells were discarded and the adherent fraction was
extracted. The total RNA was isolated by using the TRIzol
reagent (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA,
USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA
synthesis was performed in a final volume of 20 μL, using
ImProm-II reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI,
USA). The reaction mixture contained 4 μg total RNA, 20
pmol oligo dT primer (Invitrogen Life Technologies, San
Diego, CA, USA), 40 U RNasin, 500 μM of dNTP mix and
1 U reverse transcriptase in the 1× reverse transcriptase
buffer. The cDNA was treated with 10 μg RNase (Gibco,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) and then immediately used or stored at
-20ºC. PCR amplification and analysis were done using an
ABI Prism 7500 sequence detector (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA). All the reactions were done with
SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) using a 25-
μL volume in each reaction, which contained 2 μL template
cDNA, 5 pmol each primer and 12.5 μL SYBR Green.
The primers used for PCR amplification were β-actin
(forward: 5-AGCTGCGTTTTACACCCTTT-3, reverse:
5-AAGCCATGCCAATGTTGTCT-3); GM-CSF (forward:5-
CCTGGGCATTGTGGTCTACAG-3,reverse:5-GGTTCA
GGGCTTCTTTGATGG-3). The relative expression of GM-
CSF gene was obtained using the comparative CT method and
was normalized using β-actin as an endogenous control. Data
are expressed as relative gene expression ratios between
mRNA levels of the target gene versus β-actin.
Statistical analysis
The statistical tests were accomplished using Tukey’s
multiple comparison test (t test) and the significance
threshold was fixed for α=0.05. Therefore, P values
≤0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437 429
Results
Histological aspects of bone marrow
Considering that gal-3 is present in bone marrow
compartments, we first performed histological analysis
of the femural diaphysis in both WT and gal-3−/−
mice
(Fig. 1a and b, respectively). As previously described
(Weiss and Geduldig 1991; Bianco et al. 2001; Sacchetti
et al. 2007), we noted that bone marrow of WT mice had a
classic diaphyseal organization, containing a high cellular
density and poorly infiltrated with trabecular projections.
Moreover, we confirmed that the subendosteal microenvi-
ronment was continuously connecting the bone surface
and densely packaged hematopoetic cells (Fig. 1a, c). On
the other hand, the bone marrow compartment of gal-3−/−
mice showed a lower cellular density and a higher quantity
of trabecular projections in the marrow cavity (Fig. 1b, d).
Megakaryocytes that are normally located on the central
region of the bone cavity (Fig. 1c) were frequently present
surrounding the endosteum in these knockout mice
(Fig. 1d, arrow). A significant lower cellularity was also
observed in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice (Fig. 1e).
Together, these data suggested that structural changes in
the architecture of the bone marrow in absence of gal-3
can be associated with homeostatic systems that control
the cell density within the bone marrow.
Absence of galectin-3 modifies the pattern of precursor
cells inside the bone marrow
Hematopoiesis is a well-regulated process that depends on
the correct distribution of different precursors and their
progenies and on the equilibrium between stem cells,
committed progenitors and mature cells (Weissman 2000;
Sugiyama et al. 2006). Considering that the bone marrow of
Fig. 1 Bone marrow/endosteum
interface of wild type (WT) and
in gal-3−/−
mice, at a diaphysis
region near the metaphysis. a)
Longitudinal section of samples
from WT mice showing a
continuous and smooth contour
of the endosteum region
and normal appearance of
the marrow cavity with a
homogeneous distribution
of hematopoetic cells. b
Longitudinal section of a region
similar to the previous figure
from a femur of a gal-3−/−
mice.
In this case, a lower density was
observed as well as the presence
of projections of bone tissue
(insert) in the bone marrow
cavity. c, d Detailed views of
regions described in (a) and
(b). In gal-3−/−
mice (d),
megakaryocytes attached to
the endosteum region were
observed (arrows). e
Quantification of the number
of cells per field for WT and in
gal-3−/−
mice. Data are
reported as mean±SD and
are representative of three
independent experiments, each
one carried out with three WT
and gal-3−/−
mice. Statistical
analysis: Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test (*, P<0.05).
All sections were stained with
toluidine-blue followed by basic
fuchsin
430 Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
gal-3−/−
mice was empty, we quantified by flow cytometry
the different cell populations in both experimental groups.
The results described here are expressed in percent instead
of the absolute numbers, since bone fragmentation proce-
dures to perform flushing can influence total cell yields.
There was no statistical difference in the number of
hematopoietic multipotent progenitors (Lin−
, Sca-1+
, c-
Kit+
, CD34−
cells) that contain the putative hematopoietic
stem cells with a capacity for long-term bone marrow
repopulation when WT and gal-3−/−
mice were compared
(Fig. 2a). However, the number of hematopoietic multi-
potent progenitors (Lin−
, Sca-1+
, c-Kit+
, CD34+
cells),
including cells with short-term capacity to repopulate a
bone marrow, was increased in gal-3−/−
mice when
compared with WT mice (Fig. 2b). Related to hematopoi-
etic cascade of cell differentiation, we analyzed down-
stream progenitors: common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs,
Lin−
, Sca-1low
, c-Kitlow
, CD34−
) and common myeloid
progenitors (CMPs, Lin−
, Sca-1−
, c-Kit+
, CD34+
). CMPs
were increased in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice
(Fig. 2c) but no difference was observed as to CLPs
numbers in both groups (Fig. 2d). There was no significant
differences observed in megakaryocytic/erythroid pro-
genitors (MEPs, Lin−
, Sca-1−
, c-Kit+
, CD34−
) (Fig. 2f)
and in erythroid progenitors (Ter 119+
) (data not shown).
However, myelomonocytic progenitors (CD34−
, c-Kit+
,
Mac-1+
, Gr-1+
), mature granulocytes (CD34−
, c-Kit−
,
Mac-1+
, Gr-1high
) and monocytes (CD34−
, c-Kit−
, Mac-
1+
, Gr-1low
) were significantly reduced in absence of gal-3
(Fig. 2e, g and h, respectively). These data obtained from
phenotypic analyses suggested that in the absence of gal-3
the bone marrow compartment is altered toward an
increase of hematopoietic multipotent progenitors with a
low capacity to differentiate in mature myeloid and
monocyte cell populations.
In order to access the proliferate capacity of these
myeloid progenitors in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice,
we performed cell culture experiments using conditioned
semisolid substrate (soft-agar) and monitored the growth of
cell colonies and clusters. After 1 week, the number and
size of both clusters and colonies were significantly
increased in samples obtained from bone marrow of gal-
3−/−
mice (Fig. 3a and b, respectively). In the morpholog-
ical analysis performed in the colonies, we observed a
prevalence of immature and mature polymorphonuclear
neutrophils in colonies derived from WT mice (Fig. 3c,
insert). In contrast, mononuclear monocyte-like cells were
predominant in colonies obtained from gal-3−/−
mice
(Fig. 3d, insert). Considering the increased number and
size of clusters and colonies after in vitro stimuli, we
analyzed the blood of these mice to quantify neutrophils
and monocytes. In fact, there was a neutropenia in the
blood of these gal-3−/−
mice (Fig. 3e) without modification
Fig. 2 Phenotypic characterization of bone marrow myeloid cells in
WT (solid bars) and gal-3-/-
mice (open bars). a Long-term
hematopoietic multipotent progenitors (LT-HMP, Lin−
, Sca-1+
, c-
Kit+
, CD34−
). (b) Short-term hematopoietic multipotent progenitors
(ST-HMP, Lin−
, Sca-1+
, c-Kit+
, CD34+
). (c) Common myeloid
progenitors (CMPs, Lin−
, Sca-1−
, c-Kit+
, CD34+
). (d) Common
lymphoid precursors (CLP, Lin−
, Sca-1low
, c-Kitlow
, CD34−
). (e)
Myelomonocytic progenitors (MMPs, CD34−
, c-Kit+
, Mac-1+
, Gr-1+
).
(f) Megakaryocytic/erytrhoid progenitors (MEPs, Lin−
, Sca-1−
, c-Kit+
,
CD34−
). (g) Granulocytes (Mac-1+
, Gr-1high
). (h) Monocytes (Mac-1+
,
Gr-1low
). The data were obtained from three independent experiments
carried out with three WT and gal-3−/−
mice. Statistical analysis:
Tukey’s multiple comparison test (*, P≤0.05)
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437 431
in monocyte numbers (Fig. 3f), in contrast to the results
obtained in the bone marrow (Fig. 2h).
Absence of galectin-3 altered the behavior of bone marrow
stromal cells in vitro
The long-term bone marrow culture system (LBMC) is an
in vitro model that permits the study of hematopoietic and
stromal cell interactions in a time-dependent manner since
stem cells and progenitors cells can be maintained for
extended periods in culture (Dexter et al. 1977). In order to
evaluate if the myeloid disturbance observed in gal-3−/−
mice
could be related to stromal defects, we cultured bone
marrow-derived cells in long-term conditions. After 48 h of
cell culture, a well-defined monolayer in both groups was
observed. However, hematopoietic cells of gal-3−/−
mice
were predominantly organized in clusters (Fig. 4b) when
compared with WT samples (Fig. 4a). After 4 weeks, when
the stromal feeder layer was established, we observed
significant morphological differences in reticular cells, when
compared with WT and gal-3−/−
mice (Fig. 4c and d,
respectively). In the long-term cultures, the reticular stromal
Fig. 3 Numbers of colony-
forming units (CFU) in soft-agar
clonogenic assays in 5 × 104
/ml
bone marrow cells from WT
and gal-3−/−
mice. a Number
of clusters (≤50 cells) and b
colonies (≥50 cells) analyzed at
8 days of culture. c The size
and the predominant cell type
in the colonies from WT
(insert in granulocytes) and d
in gal-3−/−
mice cultures
(insert in mononuclear cells).
e Quantification of neutrophils
in blood smears of WT and
gal- 3−/−
mice. f Quantification
of monocytes in blood smears of
WT and gal-3−/−
mice. Results
represent mean values and
standard errors of three
independent experiments using
three WT and gal-3−/−
mice.
Statistical analysis: Tukey’s
multiple comparison test
(*, P<0.05)
432 Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
cells of gal-3−/−
mice presented as a blanket of cells residing
over hematopoietic cells, forming cobblestone areas and
accumulating lipid droplets (Fig. 4d, arrow). It is important
to note that rare stromal cells from WT mice accumulated
lipids and the cobblestone areas were not observed (Fig. 4c).
As these morphological changes could be associated with
disturbed myelopoiesis and neutropenia, we monitored and
found a significant reduction in mRNA GM-CSF levels
expressed by stromal cells from bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice (Fig. 4e). Together, these data suggest that gal-3
participates in the regulation of hematopoiesis by stromal
cells, partly by influencing GM-CSF gene expression.
Fig. 4 The long-term bone
marrow cell cultures and
molecular assay. The adherent
bone marrow-derived cells of
WT (a) and gal-3−/−
mice (b)
were maintained in culture for
48 h. The hematopoietic cells
from gal-3−/−
mice proliferate
more in vitro as demonstrated
by the presence of clusters in
culture (arrowhead). After 4
weeks, the cells of gal-3−/−
mice (d) in culture presented
cobblestone areas (white arrow)
and stromal cells accumulating
lipids droplets (black arrow)
compared with WT mice cells in
culture (c). e Levels of mRNA
expression of GM-CSF in 106
adherent cells obtained from
bone marrow of WT (solid bar)
and gal-3−/−
mice (open bar)
after 4 weeks of culture. Results
represent mean values and
standard errors of three
independent experiments using
three WT and gal-3−/−
mice.
Statistical analysis: Tukey’s
multiple comparison test
(*, P<0.05)
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437 433
Galectin-3 modifies GM-CSF-driven bone marrow myeloid
cell differentiation
Short-term bone marrow cell culture is an excellent in vitro
system that permits evaluation of the terminal steps of cell
differentiation in response to specific hematopoietic growth
factors in a stroma-independent manner. In order to
investigate whether gal-3 and GM-CSF are both involved
in terminal differentiation of myeloid cells, we performed
short-term culture of bone marrow-derived cells from WT
mice and treated part of these cells with anti-gal-3 antibody.
After 48 h in contact with exogenous GM-CSF, committed
myeloid precursors differentiated into mature polymorpho-
nuclear neutrophils (Fig. 5a). However, when the bone
marrow-derived cells were treated with anti-gal-3 antibody
in the presence of GM-CSF, the myeloid progenitors cells
with typical ring nuclei outnumbered mature polymorpho-
nuclear neutrophils (Fig. 5b). In fact, the treatment with
GM-CSF induced a significant increase in the absolute
number of the polymorphonuclear neutrophils and mono-
cytes in vitro (Fig. 5c). On the other hand, a part of the
myeloid cells remained as progenitor cells and the addition
GM-CSF was not sufficient to induce the proliferation and
differentiation into mature neutrophils and monocytes
(Fig. 5c). Together, these data indicate that the partial
inhibition of gal-3 in vitro increased the proliferative
capacity of myeloid progenitor cells instead of differentia-
tion into neutrophils and monocytes cells, corroborating the
in vivo data.
In order to confirm the proliferative capacity of these
myeloid precursors generated in the short-term culture
system, the remaining non-adherent cells were cultured in
the semisolid medium (methylcellulose) for 1 week and
clusters and colonies were quantified. Cells pre-treated with
GM-CSF alone promptly responded to growth factors in
methylcellulose medium and formed well-defined colonies
(Fig. 6a). However, cells pre-treated with GM-CSF and
anti-gal-3 antibody were more responsive and showed an
increased proliferation capacity (Fig. 6b). In fact, the
number of colonies and clusters were significantly in-
creased when these hematopoietic progenitor cells from
WT mice were treated with GM-CSF and anti-gal-3
antibody (Fig. 6c and d, respectively). No colonies or
clusters were observed in cultured cells obtained 48 h in
medium supplemented only with fetal bovine serum (data
not shown). These data permitted us to propose that gal-3
regulates myeloid cell proliferation/differentiation steps in a
GM-CSF-dependent manner. The data obtained in vivo and
in vitro reinforce the role of gal-3 on the myeloid bone
marrow compartment.
Fig. 5 Morphological analysis
and counts of non-adherent
hematopoietic cells of WT mice
in short-term bone marrow
culture. a Cells stimulated with
GM-CSF and b cells stimulated
with GM-CSF and treated with
anti-gal-3. c Differential
counts of myeloid precursors
(arrowhead in b), (PMN)
polymorphonuclear neutrophils
(arrow in a) and monocytes
in control group (medium
supplemented with FCS),
GM-CSF stimulated and
GM-CSF plus anti-gal-3 treated
cells. Results represent mean
values and standard errors of
three independent experiments
using three WT mice. Statistical
analysis: Tukey’s multiple
comparison test ( *, P<0.05)
434 Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
Discussion
Our results obtained in vivo and in vitro show alterations in
the bone marrow compartment of gal-3−/−
mice. The
femoral diaphysis in these mice was intensely trabecular,
containing a significant infiltrate of the bone tissue inside
the medullar cavity contributing to a spongy fragility and
increased interface between bone tissue and hematopoietic
cells. The fragility of femurs was observed in the flushing
procedures to obtain bone marrow cells, when femurs of
gal-3−/−
mice were more easily fragmented than the controls
(personal observation, data not shown).
Dominici and colleagues (2009) demonstratated that, after
bone marrow irradiation, the megakaryocytes leave their
vascular niches and migrate to the endosteal surface, where
osteoblasts secrete large amounts of SDF-1, responsible for
their homing and survival. In gal-3−/−
mice, we observed
reduced cell density in the marrow cavity, although less
drastic than that observed in bone marrow ablation but an
abnormal subendosteal localization of megakaryocytes.
Thus, the physical dislodged of megakaryocytes in bone
marrow could be a consequence of disturbance in the
production of homing factors (Dominici et al. 2009) as well
as in the structural organization of the bone marrow, or both.
In bone development, gal-3 is found in osteoblasts,
osteoclasts and chondrocytes (Aubin et al. 1995; Colnot et
al. 1999). In addition, gal-3 is implicated in chondrocyte
death and vascular invasion altering the chondrogenesis
process (Colnot et al. 2001). The histological disturbance
observed in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice can be a
consequence of the abnormal chondrogenesis (Colnot et al.
2001) and studies in the earlier phases of bone development
could explain the relationships between the ossification
process and hematopoiesis. Moreover, these improperly
located trabeculae could promote rearrangement of bone cells,
such as osteoblasts and osteoclasts, favoring the displacement
of hematopoietic niches. These arguments corroborate with
our findings in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice, where we
detected increased numbers of multipotent hematopoietic and
common myeloid precursors.
Here, histological data also showed lower cell popula-
tions in the diaphyseal bone cavity in gal-3−/−/
mice, where
we found that the number of granulocytes Mac-1+
Gr-1high
and monocytes/macrophages Mac-1+
Gr-1low/neg
was signif-
icantly reduced, thus explaining this moderate aplasia. In
contrast, the in vitro assays performed revealed a high
proliferation potential of myeloid progenitor cells and a
reduced expression of GM-CSF in stromal cells. These
results support the idea that these cells were not differen-
tiating normally in vivo due to lower levels of GM-CSF
present in the bone marrow compartment but they
responded readily when this growth factor was added to
Fig. 6 Clonogenic assay of
non-adherent hematopoietic
cells of WT mice after 48 h in
culture in the presence of
GM-CSF (a) and GM-CSF
plus anti-gal-3 antibody (b),
performed in methylcellulose
medium for 1 week. The
colonies (>50 cells) (c) and
clusters (<50 cells) (d) were
quantified in cultures of cells
previously treated with
GM-CSF (solid bar) and with
GM-CSF plus anti-gal-3
antibody (open bar). Results
represent mean values and
standard errors of two
independent experiments using
WT mice. Statistical analysis:
Tukey’s multiple comparison
test (*, P<0.05)
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437 435
the culture system as we demonstrated in vitro. In this
context, Krugluger and colleagues demonstrated that
extracellular gal-3 is restricted to the myeloid environ-
ments especially on the cell surface of precursors and
mature myeloid cells (Krugluger et al. 1997). These
authors also demonstrated that gal-3 suppressed GM-CSF-
induced proliferation of bone marrow cells, suggesting
that this lectin regulates myelopoietic environments,
possibly controlling the availability of specific growth
factors (Krugluger et al. 1997). Our results demonstrated
that gal-3 indeed regulates the expression of GM-CSF at
the stromal level, favoring the maintenance of precursors
instead of myeloid cell differentiation.
The predominance of precursors in bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice is validated in vitro when the adherent cells provided a
microenvironment to maintain the precursors for more time in
culture (Prockop 1997). The long interactions between
precursors and adherent cells could induce structural and
functional modification in the adherent cells, such as
decreased expression of GM-CSF, presence of blanket cells
with cobblestone appearance and more fat-storing cells, as
observed in the long-term cultures in the absence of gal-3.
Altogether, these results suggest that in the absence of
gal-3, GM-CSF is not available to maintain an equilibrium
between proliferation versus differentiation of myeloid
cells. This hypothesis was confirmed in the experiments
where gal-3 was blocked by anti-gal-3 antibody. In fact, the
bone marrow-derived cells differentiated partially into
segmented neutrophils, thus reproducing the data described
in vivo. As gal-3 binds to the cell surface and controls the
response of myeloid cells to GM-CSF, we propose that gal-
3 favors differentiation rather than proliferation of these
cells. In B1 and B2 lymphocytes, gal-3 regulates the
differentiation of these cells into plasma cells (Oliveira et
al. 2009). These results suggest an important role of gal-3
on the cell membrane in the control of cell differentiation
cascades.
Gal-3 is involved in neutrophil activation and adhesion
(Kuwabara and Liu 1996), chemoattraction of monocytes/
macrophages (Sano et al. 2000) and opsonization of
apoptotic neutrophils (Karlsson et al. 2009). The classical
study done by Colnot et al. (1998), which demonstrated a
delay in neutrophil recruitment into the peritoneal cavity
after inflammatory stimulus in gal-3−/−
mice, could also be
explained by the decrease of mature neutrophils inside of
the bone marrow and not only by a defect in their initial
recruitment. In this study, the authors discarded apoptosis
as a mechanism to explain the delay in neutrophil
recruitment (Colnot et al. 1998). Here, we propose a new
function for gal-3 in neutrophil biology, since the lack of
this lectin delayed neutrophil differentiation.
Gal-3 is defined as an important marker of monocyte
differentiation into macrophages (Liu et al. 1995). As
described here, myelomonocitic precursors and monocytes
were decreased in the bone marrow of gal-3−/−
mice
followed by the reduction in peripheral blood and
inflammatory tissue (Oliveira et al. 2007). Thus, we
consider that gal-3 is crucial at the bone marrow level in
the process of differentiation of myelomonocitic precursors
to monocytes, although the quantity of common myeloid
progenitor cells was superior in gal-3−/−
mice. The lower
number of monocytes available in the marrow could alter
the kinetics of mobilized inflammatory cells during the
Schistosoma mansoni infection, interfering with the orga-
nization and collagen distribution in hepatic granulomas
(Oliveira et al. 2007).
In the last decade, several hematological diseases had
been characterized by hypocellularity in the bone marrow,
reflected in a peripheral blood pancytopenia, such as
aplastic anemia (Gaman et al. 2009). Preferentially, these
hematological pathologies are associated with bone marrow
stromal cell disorders that disturb the hematopoetic system.
In addition to hypocellularity and blood neutropenia, fat
cell hyperplasia, residual lymphocytosis, plasmocytosis and
mastocytosis are common in the bone marrow of these
experimental models or human patients that receive
immunosuppressive treatment and additional hematopoietic
growth factors, such as GM-CSF (Socie et al. 2007; Gaman
et al. 2009). Some of these characteristics are observed in
gal-3−/−
mice. However, as the bone marrow of these mice
accumulates myeloid progenitors and shows delay in
differentiation into mature myeloid cells, we suggested that
gal-3 should be a critical molecule in the interface between
physiological and pathological states.
In summary, we proposed a new role of gal-3 in early
stages of myelopoiesis, delaying the process of differenti-
ation via modulation of GM-CSF both in stromal and
hematopoietic progenitors cells and a possible target for
future investigations in hematological disorders, such as
anemia and leukemia. The molecular mechanisms involved
in the role of gal-3 in the bone marrow myelopoiesis are
under evaluation.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License that
permits any noncommercial use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are
credited.
References
Andrade CM, Ziulkoski AL, dos Santos AX, Boldrini LC,
Trindade VM, Borojevic R, Guma FC (2006) Gangliosides
of the stroma layer participate in the interferon-gamma
receptor-dependent controls of myelopoiesis. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1761:1030–1040
436 Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437
Aubin JE, Liu F, Malaval L, Gupta AK (1995) Osteoblast and
chondroblast differentiation. Bone 17:77S–83S
Bianco P, Riminucci M, Gronthos S, Robey PG (2001) Bone marrow
stromal stem cells: nature, biology, and potential applications.
Stem Cells 19:180–192
Colnot C, Ripoche MA, Milon G, Montagutelli X, Crocker PR, Poirier
F (1998) Maintenance of granulocyte numbers during acute
peritonitis is defective in galectin-3-null mutant mice. Immunol-
ogy 94:290–296
Colnot C, Sidhu SS, Poirier F, Balmain N (1999) Cellular and subcellular
distribution of galectin-3 in the epiphyseal cartilage and bone of fetal
and neonatal mice. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-Grand) 45:1191–1202
Colnot C, Sidhu SS, Balmain N, Poirier F (2001) Uncoupling of
chondrocyte death and vascular invasion in mouse galectin 3 null
mutant bones. Dev Biol 229:203–214
Dexter TM, Allen TD, Lajtha LG (1977) Conditions controlling the
proliferation of haemopoietic stem cells in vitro. J Cell Physiol
91:335–344
Dominici M, Rasini V, Bussolari R, Chen X, Hofmann TJ, Spano C,
Bernabei D, Veronesi E, Bertoni F, Paolucci P, Conte P, Horwitz
EM (2009) Restoration and reversible expansion of the osteo-
blastic hematopoietic stem cell niche after marrow radioablation.
Blood 114:2333–2343
El-Cheikh MC, Borojevic R (1990) Extramedullar proliferation of
eosinophil granulocytes in chronic schistosomiasis mansoni is
mediated by a factor secreted by inflammatory macrophages.
Infect Immun 58:816–821
Gallagher JT, Spooncer E, Dexter TM (1983) Role of the cellular
matrix in haemopoiesis. I. Synthesis of glycosaminoglycans by
mouse bone marrow cell cultures. J Cell Sci 63:155–171
Gaman A, Gaman G, Bold A (2009) Acquired aplastic anemia:
correlation between etiology, pathophysiology, bone marrow histol-
ogy and prognosis factors. Rom J Morphol Embryol 50:669–674
Henderson NC, Sethi T (2009) The regulation of inflammation by
galectin-3. Immunol Rev 230:160–171
Heyworth CM, Spooncer E (1993) In vitro clonal assays for murine
multipotential and lineage restricted myeloid cells. In: Testa NG,
Molineux G (eds) Haemapoiesis. A practical approach. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp 37–53
Hsu DK, Yang RY, Pan Z, Yu L, Salomon DR, Fung-Leung WP, Liu
FT (2000) Targeted disruption of the galectin-3 gene results in
attenuated peritoneal inflammatory responses. Am J Pathol
156:1073–1083
Karlsson A, Christenson K, Matlak M, Bjorstad A, Brown KL,
Telemo E, Salomonsson E, Leffler H, Bylund J (2009) Galectin-3
functions as an opsonin and enhances the macrophage clearance
of apoptotic neutrophils. Glycobiology 19:16–20
Krugluger W, Koller M, Allmaier M, Boltz-Nitulescu G, Forster O
(1994) Ligation of N-acetylgalactosamine-containing structures
on rat bone marrow cells enhances myeloid differentiation and
murine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-
induced proliferation. J Leukoc Biol 55:127–132
Krugluger W, Frigeri LG, Lucas T, Schmer M, Forster O, Liu FT,
Boltz-Nitulescu G (1997) Galectin-3 inhibits granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-driven rat bone
marrow cell proliferation and GM-CSF-induced gene transcription.
Immunobiology 197:97–109
Kuwabara I, Liu FT (1996) Galectin-3 promotes adhesion of human
neutrophils to laminin. J Immunol 156:3939–3944
Liu FT, Hsu DK, Zuberi RI, Kuwabara I, Chi EY, Henderson WR Jr
(1995) Expression and function of galectin-3, a beta-galactoside-
binding lectin, in human monocytes and macrophages. Am J
Pathol 147:1016–1028
Nieminen J, St-Pierre C, Bhaumik P, Poirier F, Sato S (2008) Role of
galectin-3 in leukocyte recruitment in a murine model of lung
infection by Streptococcus pneumoniae. J Immunol 180:2466–
2473
Oliveira FL, Frazao P, Chammas R, Hsu DK, Liu FT, Borojevic R,
Takiya CM, El-Cheikh MC (2007) Kinetics of mobilization and
differentiation of lymphohematopoietic cells during experimental
murine schistosomiasis in galectin-3 -/- mice. J Leukoc Biol
82:300–310
Oliveira FL, Chammas R, Ricon L, Fermino ML, Bernardes ES, Hsu
DK, Liu FT, Borojevic R, El-Cheikh MC (2009) Galectin-3
regulates peritoneal B1-cell differentiation into plasma cells.
Glycobiology 19:1248–1258
Prockop DJ (1997) Marrow stromal cells as stem cells for non-
hematopoietic tissues. Science 276:71–74
Sacchetti B, Funari A, Michienzi S, Di Cesare S, Piersanti S,
Saggio I, Tagliafico E, Ferrari S, Robey PG, Riminucci M,
Bianco P (2007) Self-renewing osteoprogenitors in bone
marrow sinusoids can organize a hematopoietic microenvironment.
Cell 131:324–336
Sano H, Hsu DK, Yu L, Apgar JR, Kuwabara I, Yamanaka T,
Hirashima M, Liu FT (2000) Human galectin-3 is a novel
chemoattractant for monocytes and macrophages. J Immunol
165:2156–2164
Socie G, Mary JY, Schrezenmeier H, Marsh J, Bacigalupo A,
Locasciulli A, Fuehrer M, Bekassy A, Tichelli A, Passweg J
(2007) Granulocyte-stimulating factor and severe aplastic ane-
mia: a survey by the European Group for Blood and Marrow
Transplantation (EBMT). Blood 109:2794–2796
Sugiyama T, Kohara H, Noda M, Nagasawa T (2006) Maintenance of
the hematopoietic stem cell pool by CXCL12-CXCR4 chemo-
kine signaling in bone marrow stromal cell niches. Immunity
25:977–988
Weiss L, Geduldig U (1991) Barrier cells: stromal regulation of
hematopoiesis and blood cell release in normal and stressed
murine bone marrow. Blood 78:975–990
Weissman IL (2000) Stem cells: units of development, units of
regeneration, and units in evolution. Cell 100:157–168
Yamaoka A, Kuwabara I, Frigeri LG, Liu FT (1995) A human lectin,
galectin-3 (epsilon bp/Mac-2), stimulates superoxide production
by neutrophils. J Immunol 154:3479–3487
Ziulkoski AL, dos Santos AX, Andrade CM, Trindade VM, Daniotti
JL, Borojevic R, Guma FC (2009) Anchored and soluble
gangliosides contribute to myelosupportivity of stromal cells.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 388:17–20
Cell Tissue Res (2011) 346:427–437 437
