EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS.
I. ANEMIA PRODUCED BY COLLARGOL.
BY GULLI LIN-DH MULLER, M.D.
(From the Thorndike Memorial Laboratory of Boston City Hospital, Boston.)
P~vE 19.
(Received for publication, December 14, 1925.)
As a part of an investigation of the processes which underlie the
various types of anemia, the attempt is made in the present study to
analyze the factors of blood formation and blood destruction in a form
of experimental anemia produced by collargol or colloidal silver.
Colloidal silver was employed experimentally by Cohn (1) in 1904. He dem-
onstrated that the silver particles were engulfed in phagocytic cells in the same
manner as other substances existing in a finely subdivided state. Since that time
numerous experiments have established the fact that many varieties of particulate
matter, when introduced in the blood stream, are deposited in phagocytic cells
supposedly of reticular and endothelial origin. Because of the functional simi-
larity of these cells, Aschoff (2a) introduced the all including term "reticulo-
endothelial system," but Sabin (3a) has recently differentiated the reticulum and
endothelium and their respective genetic phagocytic derivatives into "monocytes"
and "clasmatocytes." Throughout this paper the terminology of Sabin is ad-
hered to.
Kiyono (4) studied the difference of the deposition of collargol and carmine.
He found that collargol passes very slowly through the vessel wall, carmine more
quickly. Hence it was much more difficult to make the clasmatocytes of
the interstitium of the internal organs take up silver granules even after repeated
injections. He concluded, therefore, that collargol has a more selective action
than carmine on the endothellum of the so called blood-forming organs. Similar
results were obtained by Tschaschin (5). The avidity of Kupffer's cells for col-
loidal silver in comparison with other colloidal metals has been noted by Br6tz
(6). A difference of deposition and distribution of colloidal substances has also
been observed by Evans (Ta), Evans and Schulemann (7b), Nissen (8), and
Drinker, Shaw, and Drinker (9).
Interest in the phagocytosis of particulate matter has been superseded by in-
vestigation of other functions of these widely distributed phagocytic cells. Rib-
bert (10), the first one to demonstrate these cells by use of vital dyes, as early as
533
534 BONE MARROW REACTIONS. I
1904, suggested that they might be of importance in metabolic activity. More
recent efforts have been directed towards two main problems; namely, the site
of bile pigment and antibody formation.
Very little attention has been devoted to the effects of particulate
matter on the bone marrow from the point of view of blood formation
and blood destruction. For this purpose, colloidal silver was em-
ployed in the present study. This colloid is not easily eliminated
from the body, lodging in the so called hematopoietic organs; i.e.,
mainly in liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. It is evident
that colloids easily dispersed and eliminated from the body may differ
in the results produced.
Material and Methods.
The conclusions of this paper are based on observations of 25 rab-
bits and 46 rats, 20 of the rats being splenectomized. The animals
all appeared to be in excellent health.
The collargol or colloidal silver employed is said to contain 78 per cent of
metallic silver and a small percentage of egg albumia and its oxidation product
(11). It is manufactured by the H¢yden Chemical Works, and distributed by
Schering and Glatz, New York. The size of the particles has been determined
by Bechhold (12) to average 20 millimicra (~,), the individual particle consisting
of aggregates of metallic silver and the protective colloid. The concentration of
the coUoidal suspension, which was made up in small doses in sterile distilled water
and filtered immediately before use, varied between 0.1 and 2 per cent. Physio-
logical saline as a solvent was tried, but a white precipitate was formed on stand-
ing and the suspension changed color. The same observation was made by
Voigt (13a).
As a rule injections were given intravenously every 2nd day. Ear veins were
used in the rabbits and tail veins and femoral veins in the rats. A small amount
of ether was given the rats and their skin was nicked before inserting the needle.
Frequent examinations were made of the peripheral blood. For blood counts
the median artery of the ear of the rabbit was pricked with a needle and the tail
of the rat snipped with a pair of sharp scissors. The hemoglobin was read in a
Duboscq colorimeter against the Newcomer standard. Vital stains with bril-
liant cresyl blue were made in all instances and the smears counterstained with
Wright's stain.
Some of the rabbits were killed with a blow on the head and subsequent bleed-
ing, after one or more injections; others succumbed to the anemia produced.
The surviving rats were killed by ether and bleeding. All tissues were fixed in
Zenker's fluid, stained with watery eosin 5 per cent, and counterstained with
GULLI LINDH MULLER 535
methylene blue. Ammonium sulfide and potassium ferricyanide were used for
iron stain. The latter dissolves out the silver from the cells, thus removing a
substance which otherwise would have obscured any iron present in the tissue.
The bone marrow specimens of the rabbits were consistently taken from the
right femur. The cross-sections studied were obtained from the upper third at
the level of one of the nutrient arteries entering the bone about ½inch below the
head of the femur. Longitudinal sections were taken from the middle and the
lower end of the femur. In rats the entire bone marrow from the right femur
was fixed.
Normal animals and animals receiving distilled water intravenously were
studied as controls.
Experimental Observations on Rabbits.
The most satisfactory results were obtained with rabbits as their
femoral bone marrow is normally more fatty and less hyperplastic
than that of rats. Of the twenty-five rabbits studied, eleven received
colloidal silver in sufficient amounts to produce a fatal anemia. Of
these, eight died and three were killed when moribund. The other
fourteen animals were killed at various intervals before a fatal anemia
had developed.
Three fairly well defined stages followed the injection of colloidal
silver into rabbits; namely, an initial stage of erythropoietic hyper-
plasia, an intermediary stage with myeloid hyperplasia predominating,
and a final, comparatively aplastic, stage.
1. The stage of erythropoietic hyperplasia may be illustrated by
two groups of experiments.
(a) This included three animals killed after one dose of collargol.
Rabbit H-45, a female weighing 1843 gin., received 4 cc. of a 2 per cent sus-
pension, and was killed 24 hours after the injection. The autopsy and micro-
scopical examination gave essentially normal findings except for the deposition
of collargol to a small extent in endothelial cells and clasmatocytes.
Rabbit H-3, a female weighing 1498 gin., also received one dose of 6 cc. of a
0.4 per cent collargol suspension, but was killed 7 days after the administration.
Microscopical examination of the marrow revealed a slight but definite endothe-
lial and erythropoietic stimulation. Not only the endothelium lining the patent
sinuses showed this early stimulation, but also the endothelial cells between the
fat cells were large and swollen, many of them indicating a potential cornm~li-
cation between two widely open sinuses. The picture seen in this early stimu-
lated marrow resembles the description given by Doan, Cunningham, and Sabin
536 BOm~ mARROW REACTIONS. I
(14a) of early stimulated marrow in pigeons and rabbits. It also illustrates
beautifully the intersinusoidal capillaries described by Doan (14b) and their
opening up between the fat cells when the marrow is stimulated. A fair number
of clasmatocytes and endothelial cells contained small amounts of collargol,
many of them situated in clusters of erythroblasts and normoblasts. A few
myelocytes showed mitosis, but erythroblastic stimulation predominated. In
Fig. 1 is shown an isolated focus illustrating endothelial hypertrophy and mitosis
in close approximation to megaloblasts and clasmatocytes containing small
amounts of colloidal silver.
(b) Animals receiving more than one injection showed a greater
degree of hyperplasia. After a certain number of injections, however,
varying in different animals, a hypoplasia was produced.
Rabbit I-I-13,a large male weighing 2755 gin., was killed when the peripheral
blood showed marked erythropoieticactivity (22 normoblasts were seen in stained
specimen while 100 white blood cells were counted), without appreciable decrease
of red cells. The total amount of collargol administered was 174 rag. per kilo.
The bone marrow showed a more advanced stage of erythropoietic stimulation
than that of Rabbit H-3. This hyperplasia included the endothelial cells, which
were definitely swollen in most places, with an increase of the number of foci of
megaloblasts, erythroblasts, and normoblasts. The myeloid elements were
increased only to a moderate extent. Architecturally, the bone marrow was in-
tact, but many fat cells appeared shrunken with consequent increase of the inter-
stices between the fat cells. The venous sinuses were dilated but there was no
apparent extravasation of the blood into the parenchyma. The collargol was
deposited mainly in clasmatocytes, and, in very small amounts, in the endothelial
cells.
The above experiments show the first stage of the reaction following
the intravenous injections of colloidal silver. A considerable amount
of the silver was taken up by the phagocytic cells of the liver, spleen,
and lymph nodes, and only a small amount reached the bone marrow
where it produced a slight stimulation of the endothelial cells with an
increase of clasmatocytes and cells of the erythrocytic series. Evi-
dence of this erythropoietic stimulation was found in the outpouring
of normoblasts in the peripheral blood. It is interesting to note that
an outpouring of young cells occurred at some stage in all the animals
receiving moderately large amounts of collargol intravenously, even
before any decrease of blood cells had taken place. Stimulation of
the myeloid series was less marked.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 537
A similar stimulation of the bone marrow has been observed inci-
dentally after injections of other colloids.
Nissen (8) found a hyperplastic bone marrow after five doses of "elektroferrol"
and five doses of carmine, with erythroblastic hyperplasia predominating. Doan,
Cunningham, and Sabin (14a) describe endothelial and reticular hypertrophy in
pigeons after injections of three doses of trypan blue and carmine. A pigeon
receiving trypan blue when fasted did not develop a hypoplastic bone marrow as
the result of inanition, but the dye had a stimulating effect on cell production in
the marrow, and a hyperplastic bone marrow was obtained. The stimulating
effect of the dye seemed to be dominant over the influence of inanition, which
usually decreases hematopoiesis in pigeons.
2. The second or intermediary stage is represented by Rabbits
H-35, H-34, and H-47.
Rabbit H-35,femaleweighing 1850gin., received the same amount of collargol per
kilo body weight as Rabbit H-13, given, however, in four large doses. The periph-
eral blood, just before the animal was sacrificed, showed practically no erythro-
poietic stimulation and no anemia. Microscopically, the marrow showed a hyper-
plasia, the cellularity being approximately the same as in Rabbit H-13. The in-
teresting feature in this marrow was the definite shifting of the stimulation to
the myeloid series. The clasmatocytes were prominent, loaded with collargol,
but collargol was also deposited in the endothelium lining the wide open sinuses.
The endothelium showed very little activity, and there was practically no evidence
of erythroblastic stimulation. The fat cells were shrtmken in size and irregular
in outline.
Rabbit H-34, of about the same weight and receiving the same treatment as
No. H-35, showed marked erythropoietic stimulation, indicated in the peripheral
blood by the number of normoblasts present (20 normoblasts seen in stained speci-
men while 100 white blood cells were counted). Red blood cells were normal
(5,100,000). The bone marrow was intensely hyperplastic; this hyperplasia in-
cluded both the erythrocyte and the myeloid series, the increase of the myeloid
elements predominating.
Rabbit H-47, a female, was given 140 nag. per kilo body weight, administered
in seven doses. When the animal was killed there were no normoblasts in the
peripheral blood and the red blood cells were decreased (3,730,000). The bone
marrow picture is practically identical with that of No. H-35 described above.
These animals represent a more advanced phase of the effects of
colloidal silver on the bone marrow. In the case of No. H-35, owing
to larger dosage and perhaps somewhat to individual susceptibility,
the phase of erythrocyte hyperplasia was passed and there was little
538 BONE ~A_RROW REACTIONS. I
or no evidence of hyperplasia of the endothellum. Rabbit H-34
possibly represents a transition between the first and second stage,
while Rabbit H-47, as shown by the red blood cell count, was rapidly
approaching the final stage.
In all the animals so far described as showing red cell stimulation
(Group 1, and No. H-34, Group 2), there was a coincident hyperplasia
of endothelial ceils, many of which were normal in appearance and
without phagocyted particles. In the remaining animals of Group 2,
however, many of the endothelial cells contained collargol. Fat
absorption and myeloblastic hyperplasia have been noticed by Nissen
(8) after five doses of "elektrokollargol." Doan, Cunningham, and
Sabin (14a) found a mild myeloid hyperplasia with very little red blood
cell activity in a rabbit subjected to fifteen intravenous injections of
trypan blue. The endothelium in this case contained trypan blue in
contrast to that of animals receiving only a few injections of the dye.
3. The final stage is shown by the animals which were killed when
moribund as the result of the collargol injections or which died spon-
taneously with signs of grave aplastic anemia. Their course is best
represented by charts.
Rabbit H-16, Chart 1, a young female, showed an unusuallyrapid course. On
the 2nd day after the last dose the animal was moribund. On microscopical
examination of the bone marrow all normal structure was gone, and the fat cells
were replaced by an acidophilic fibrin-like ground substance or stroma with few
developing cells. The marrow cells were definitely decreased and the few cells
remaining were in lines in close relation to the blood vessels. The collargol was
deposited in both claslnatocytes and endothelial cells. The endothelial cells
lining the patent sinuses and those in between the sinuses were hypertrophied.
An occasional megaloblast was seen; most of the red blood cells present, however,
were in the erythroblastic stage, while the normoblastic elements were practically
absent. The more mature myelocytes had largely disappeared, but a few loci
of young myelocytes were seen here and there. The spleen was loaded with iron,
which may be due to an early stimulation of the endothelial cellsand their deriv-
atives to red blood cell phagocytosis, as has been observed by Motohashi (15)
after injection of collargol.
The rapidly fatal course of No. H-16, with the marked diminution
of the cellular elements in the peripheral blood, suggests that, in
addition to the depression of blood formation, a very active destruc-
tion must have taken place, perhaps by means of red blood cell
GULLI LINDH MULLER 539
phagocytosis in the spleen. This, however, was not a prominent
feature in the other animals with a fatal course.
Rabbit H-27, Chart 2, a male, had a more protracted course and lived 6 days
after the last injection of collargol. The day before exitus the hemoglobin was
lbO0
1400
!t3ooI
i 1200 1.0
i 11ooi o.9
g !o.8
] 0.7
Q3
10
o 8
~0
~z
#
ZO ,~
18
16
50 14 ~0 ~...
45 12 4b -]
40 I0 4D
S~ I 8 °"
I O.
I
I
3o~ 6
"-
~ zo 2
~ •
= N
co,,m,N1 zomQ [•
D~y5 1
7 \
., ~,...
- ~" -~ "~" '~" .~ "o ~,
":.., ~'! .o•
,,Eli| | • |
Z 6 4 5 ~ 7 6 9 lOll
GolJem~oI1lOe~cent ~ntravenous[y
In Charts 1 to 4 the number of normoblasts given is the number per 100 white
blood cells.
CmtRX 1. Rabbit H-16. Unusually rapid course in young animal. The
spleen was filled with iron, which suggests increased blood destruction in addi-
tion to depression of blood formation. Striking evidences of blood destruction
not found in other animals similarly treated.
12 per cent, red blood cells 1,200,000, and leucocytes 4100. The bone marrow was
grossly grayish and firm. Microscopically, the fat cells showed signs of shrink-
age, the widened interstices being filled with the same eosin-staining ground sub-
stance as in No. H-16. The collargol was aggregated in large masses, consisting,
apparently, of several clasmatocytes filled with pigment. Around these masses
540 BONE MARROW REACTIONS. I
pg~p pu~no~
mmmmnnmmmmmmmmmmmm
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmum
mmmmmmmm~nmJmmmmmm
mennmJmmmnmmmmmmm~
mmNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmrl
Nmmmm~wmmmmmmmmmm
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmu
|mmmmmmmmmm©mmmmmm~m
i i iii i ii i i.,'ii i
IIIIIIIIl~lll
.-I11111 I)}ill)I...~
/
/
° 4
m~umm~m , ,
I/nnlly ......
.~III(/) .~
/))))X!. / II A I
Bt" I
mmninmmummmmm~mmm
mnmimimlmmllmlmm!
lmmmmmmnmmmm~mmm
mmmmmmmmmmml~mmml
mmmmmmmm~mmmmmmm|
mmmmmmmmumummmm
mmmmmmmmmlummmm|
mmmmmmmmm~m~mmmm
~,11I.I'I'
..~1 I
~ kAI I
=~I'q I
I
i
b t
i
/ ~." ..,L"
/
I nm
iiiiii'-"
ii~mmimml
imammi
mmmmmmmmm
mmmmmm
m~nmmm
mmmmmmmm
nmmmmm
mmmmmmmmm
mmmmmm
mmmmmmmmm
mmmmmmmmm
ummmmm
mmmmmmmm
mummmmlImmmmmmm
•~ 0
0")
~0
o
o,.1
co
I I I I*~kli~i ill I ; ,~lllii(
~pu.enotI~ u! O'gN
............... %ueO ~,ad'mq~]~
........ ~IIeo p~apunq ~J. ~e~qomaoN
....... pu! 7o0
0 0 0 o
o') ~0 r-- ¢0
....... uA5 ~4~N
O
r..)
a":
o o
~{°
O m
~to
GULLI LINDH MULLER 541
there was no evidence of inflammatory reaction or encapsulation. A moderate
amount of collargol was found in the endothelium which, in places, showed hyper-
trophy. A small number of erythroblasts were present with a moderate number
of normoblasts. A moderate number of myelocytes of the later stage were seen.
The cells of both the erythrocytic and myeloid series were definitely decreased.
This animal showed a decrease of the number of megalocaryocytes. This was
noted in two other animals, in one of which death was precipitated by hemorrhages
from the intestinal mucosa.
The bone marrow of No. H-27 gave very little evidence of endo-
thelial hypertrophy or erythropoiesis. This animal, however, showed
a proliferation of the endothelium in the small veins of the mesenteric
lymph nodes. The endothelium in these places did not show any
collargol in contrast to the endothelium of the sinuses, which contained
a moderate amount of silver. The phase of division was not caught
in this section and there are no evidences in what direction these new
cells were differentiating.
Rabbit H-29, male, Chart 3, was killed when moribund 6 days after the last
dose. The peripheral blood just before death showed: hemoglobin 18 per cent,
red blood cells 2,100,000, white blood cells 3500. Microscopical examination of
the bone marrow showed essentially the same as in No. H-27. This animal il-
lustrates beautifully the outpouring of normoblasts (see chart) beginning before
any decrease of red blood cells has taken place and stopping when the peripheral
blood shows a decrease of red blood cells--a time when one would expect to find
normoblasts and other evidences of active blood formation.
Rabbit tI-1 is noteworthy from two points of view; namely, the more chronic
course with more severe bone marrow aplasia, and the failure to regenerate al-
though life was prolonged for 18 days after the last injection. In all 660 mg. per
kilo body weight were administered over a period of 41 days. 8 days before death,
the hemoglobin was 22 per cent, red blood cells 2,480,000, leucocytes 10,150 with
1 normoblast in 100 leucocytes counted. The marrow showed the same eosin-
staining fibrillar ground substance found in this group of animals and marked
cellular aplasia except at the periphery of the cross-section, where there was a
cellular area not containing collargol. An enormous number of clasmatocytes
contained collargol, in comparison with which the endothelial cells contained but
little colloidal silver. The endothelinm showed no signs of hypertrophy and
most of the endothelial cells present were lining the dilated venous sinuses and
capillaries which persisted throughout. The architecture and the striking diminu-
tion in number of cells in this bone marrow are well shown in Fig. 2.
In all the animals the number of blood cells remained normal for a
considerable length of time after the injection of collargol had begun.
542 BONE MARROW REACTIONS. 1
To see whether the animals would recover if the injections were
stopped as soon as the red blood cells began to decrease and before a
definite anemia had developed, the following experiment was per-
formed. Five rabbits of about the same weight were given eight
injections of 4 cc. of 2 per cent collargol each. One animal was
killed 6 hours after the last dose, two animals were killed 4 days after
the last dose, and two animals succumbed spontaneously.
I ~,~0
i z~00
, ~300 l.t
I ZI00
"~0 i a6
~1900 ". a7
e
70
: 65 t6
: 60 14
20 55 IZ
i Oi i
!4o 6
~ ..~
gzo
~0 ~ \
~9 "" ' , ' N [ ' I
"(,i
IINHIII
IINmlNI
IINIIII
IIImnml
INIIIIH
ImNmIII
IIINNII
IIIIJlI
III~I.~
IInIIlI
IIInnIIi
Colt~v[oi20m~. [EI-I :I ~I2 -IIE I ] - I 121312S222]
D~y31 Z ~ 4 5 6 ~ 6 9 10tl lZt3141b161716 1920Z1~Z~324~2TZ8~30
Coll~oi Z p¢~ cent ~nt~v~nously
C~T 3. Rabbit H-29, illustrating the outpouring of normoblasts begin-
ning before any decrease of red blood cells has taken place and stopping when
the peripheral blood showed a decrease of red blood cells.
The course of three of these experiments is represented graphically
in Chart 4, a, b, and c.
Rabbit H-52, female, Chart 4, a, was killed 6 hours after the last dose. As may
be seen from the chart, the red blood cells showed some decrease in number.
The bone marrow showed a moderate hyperplasia of both the erythrocyte and
myeloid series, but the latter predominated. One may classify this marrow as
belonging to the second or intermediary group. The general architecture and
cellularity are represented in Fig. 3.
GULI.I LINDtt MULLER 543
In Rabbit H-33, female, Chart 4, b, killed 4 days after the last dose of collar-
gol, the marrow showed a comparatively normal structure as far as fat cells,
65 14
60 12
10
8 55 10
0
50 5
tO
5
0
o
.c b
0
¢z
70 18
65 16
6O 14
55 12
50 iO
7b
70
65 ZO
60 i6
55 16
I
50 I 14
45 I IZ
40 to
35 5.~
~zb .~ 4 .~
20~ zNp:;
C
Gotle,~2ol 2.0
D~y51 Z 5 4, 5 6 7 6 9 1011lZ 13141~16171~i9 20Zl 2223242bZ6£72~
ColJe~ol 2 pe~ cent{ntr~ve~ou~ly
CURT 4, a to c. (a) Rabbit H-52, killed 6 hours after the last dose. For
architecture and cellularity of bone marrow see Fig. 3. (b) Rabbit H-33 killed
4 days after the last dose at a time when blood was beginning to show some de-
crease in erythrocytes and hemoglobin. The marked decrease in marrow cells
and deposition of collargol in the endothelium is illustrated in Fig. 4. (c) Rab-
bit H-32 killed when moribund. Bone marrow similar to that in Fig. 4.
544 :BOl~ MARROW REACTIONS. I
blood vessels, and megalocaryocytes were concerned. There was, however, a
marked decrease in cells of both the myeloid and erythroid series. The collargol
was deposited in considerable amounts in the endothelium, which did not seem
hypertrophied and was present as well in large amounts in clasmatocytes.
The bone marrow of Rabbit H-32, female, Chart 4, c, killed when moribund,
showed very few marrow cells and fat cells decreased in number and shrunken
in size. The blood capillaries and sinuses were well maintained, practically all
of them lined with a hypertrophied endothellum containing collargol. An oc-
casional focus of red blood cells was present, mainly in the erythroblastic stage
with a rare megaloblast. A few groups of normoblasts also remained. The mye-
locytes were scant, most of them being immature forms.
Fig. 4 illustrates the deposition of collargol in the endothelium as well as the
general structure and cellularity of the marrow of No. H-33. In several of the
animals receiving 2 per cent collargol, the fat cells did not disappear to the same
extent as in those animals receiving less concentrated solutions. This seems to
indicate that the stage of stimulation was less protracted in those animals receiv-
ing the higher concentration of the silver suspension. Ribadeau-Dumas and
Debr6 (16) have also noticed that the bone marrow reaction in rabbits was modi-
fied towards hyperplasia by weak and moderate doses of collargol, but that the
reaction was less intense after concentrated doses.
The marrow of the other two of the five animals similarly treated was practi-
cally the same as that of those described above.
The animals just described (Nos. H-52, H-33, and H-32) present
several interesting points. The administration of collargol was
stopped after eight injections and before the animals had begun to
show any appreciable anemia. The bone marrow of the rabbit (No.
H-52) killed 6 hours after the last dose showed considerable signs of
activity and stimulation, and was in marked contrast to that of the
animals allowed to live without further administration of collargol.
This suggests that the action of the colloidal silver continues after the
administration has been stopped, probably by the mechanism of
disintegration of the clasmatocytes containing collargol and the
engulfing of the particles thus set free by new clasmatocytes and endo-
thelial cells. The bone marrow of the animals killed 4 days after the
last dose showed a greater depression of the erythropoietic function
than that of the animals allowed to live until moribund. The striking
coincidence of a bone marrow aplasia without any anemiain the periph-
eral blood indicates that collargol injures the bone marrow without
affecting the formed red cells. Mter the injury is accomplished, the
animal continues to live until the circulating formed blood elements
GULLI LINDH MULLER 545
decrease in the course of normal blood destruction to a point incom-
patible with life. There is, however, some slight effort on the part
of the bone marrow to produce blood cells, evidenced by the occasional
loci of erythroblasts, although this effort is wholly inadequate and
the animal dies with signs of grave anemia.
The peripheral blood of all the animals in which a fatal anemia was
produced showed a marked anisocytosis towards the end, with pro-
nounced central pallor and a tendency to microcytosis. Platelets,
as noted in the smears, were abundant. Normally, the blood of
rabbits shows some polychromatophilia and reticulated cells. Dis-
counting this, all the animals receiving several doses of collargol
showed certain constant characteristics; namely, the progressive
increase of young cells in the peripheral circulation followed by
decrease, until finally neither polychromatophilia, reticulated cells,
nor normoblasts were present. This later stage was seen only in
animals running a fatal course. The color index in most instances was
decreased.
The autopsy findings, other than those already discussed, were
uniform in the eleven animals which died from anemia. As was to
be expected, large accumulations of collargol were found in phagocytic
ceils in the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. In the kidneys the
collargol was deposited in the endothelium of the capillaries, but very
little was found in the glomeruli or in the epithelium of the tubules.
Voigt (13b), studying the fate of coIlargol in rabbits, found that
kidneys and intestines contained silver. He examined urine and
feces but could not demonstrate the presence of silver.
That the distilled water used as solvent for the collargol played no
part in the results produced was conclusively proven by findings
in control animals.
Experlmental Observations on Rats.
A. Normal Rats.
As indicated above, rats did not prove to be as satisfactory experi-
mental animals as rabbits. Many factors probably contributed to
this, the most important being the very active hematopoietic function
in rats, and the comparatively large spleen and liver which seem to
546 BONE MARROW REACTIONS. I
form an efficient protective barrier to substances injected in the blood
stream. Nevertheless, in spite of this, anemia, secondary in type, was
produced in all animals receiving a moderate amount of collargol, and
a few animals died as a result of this anemia.
While the red blood cells and hemoglobin of the rabbits gradually
decreased if the injections were stopped when the initial decrease
had begun, the rats recovered promptly as soon as the injections were
discontinued, unless hemoglobin and red blood cells had reached a
dangerously low point. Therefore, in order to produce an anemia,
injections had to be continued. In the later stages the administra-
tion became increasingly precarious, and the experiments were inter-
rupted in many cases by the animals dying under the ether or shortly
after.
Chart 5 illustrates the course of Rat R-26, which died 6 days after the last
injection with signs of grave anemia. The bone marrow in this, as well as in
many other animals, could not be analyzed as no definite structure could be made
out, but there was a relative decrease of cellular elements and most of the cells
present were young forms. The megalocaryocytes were definitely decreased.
Six rats were injected with a 0.1 per cent suspension, the lowest concentration
employed in these experiments. The course of all these animals seems to point
to a direct relationship between the amount of collargol injected and the anemia
produced.
That the general experimental procedure and the distilled water used for sol-
vent of the coUargolplayed little or no part in the production of the anemia was
shown by the five controls.
In comparing rats and rabbits certain differences stand out. The
bone marrow of the rabbit contained more collargol after the adminis-
tration of comparatively smaller amounts, and the degree of depression
of the hematopoietic function was more marked in rabbits than in
rats. Leucopenia, a comparatively constant finding toward the end
in rabbits, was not obtained in rats. Iron was always found in the
spleen of rabbits dying from anemia, but in rats it was practically
absent after the administration of a small number of medium sized
injections in spite of the fact that the spleen of the adult rat is normally
loaded with iron.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 54?
/
II
I
.............%u~ ~i'.q~
Sg~
...... "pu~ Ioo
o o o O O O o
....... -u~'~q~aM
0
°r.4
t~
a
0
,6
o
c~
CD
548 BONE MARROW REACTIONS. I
B. Splenectomlzed Rats.
To see whether it would be possible to cause collargol to be de-
posited in larger amounts in the bone marrow, a series of rats was
splenectomized.
The general course of the splenectomized rats did not differ from that of the
non-splenectomized ones. As in the non-splenectomized series, animals were
killed at different stages. As far as could be determined, there was no appreciable
difference in the degree of anemia produced in the same time interval with the
same amount of collargol, nor did there seem to be any marked increase in the
amount of collargol deposited in the bone marrow.
The findings described above seem to indicate that the chief site of
clasmatocyte formation differs in animals of different species. In the
rabbit, the bone marrow participates to a considerable extent, while
in rats, after the removal of the large spleen, most of the compensatory
function is shifted to the liver. This probably holds true for non-
splenectomized animals also, after overloading the spleen with particu-
late matter.
That the site of compensatory activity varies in different animals
has been shown by several observers.
Pearce and Austin (17) found that in spleneetomized dogs a compensatory
activity took place in lymph nodes and liver. In splenectomized rats, Lepehne
(18) found compensatory activity in Kupffer's cells in the liver. Motohashi
(15), in a series of splenectomized rabbits, observed that hemophagic activity of
the spleen in rabbits had been transferred to the bone marrow and, to a lesser
extent, to the liver. This compensatory functionhas been emphasized by Krumb-
haar (19).
DISCUSSION.
The above experiments indicate that the administration of com-
paratively small amounts of coUargol produced, first, a stimulation
of the endothelium, of the erythrocyte series, and, to some extent,
of the myeloid series; and, second, the accumulation of the collargol
mainly in the clasmatocytes and, to a much less extent, in the endo-
thelial cells. The animal's health remained unimpaired and the blood
counts were normal.
If larger amounts of collargol were administered over a longer period
of time, the bone marrow changed from a hyperplastic to a compara-
GULLI LINDH MULLER 549
tively aplastic one, and, in addition to the clasmatocytes, the endo-
thelial cells took up a considerable amount of collargol. At this
stage, there was a very marked anemia and scarcely any evidence of
red cell formation in the bone marrow. The myeloid series showed
more activity and the leucocytes in the peripheral blood decreased in
number only towards the end.
That collargol produces similar results in man has been shown by
accidental fatalities from therapeutic use.
Two cases were reported by Herzog and Roscher (20a), in 1922, in which, after
large doses of collargol, constitutional symptoms appeared, both cases ending
fatally, one in 9 days and the other in 16 days. Leucocytosisand outpouring of
normoblasts occurred in these cases just as in the rabbits, before anemia had
developed. In the chronic case leucocytosis was replaced by leucopenia before
the end. The prominent feature, however, was the purpura and the bleeding
from the mucous membranes.
Bleeding was not seen in my series of animals except in Rabbit H-29, which
showed extensive hemorrhages from the intestinal mucosa, with a marked dimi-
nution of the megalocaryocytes in the bone marrow. The authors considered
the human cases similar to those of benzene and radium poisoning, interpreting
their findings as an initial stimulation of the bone marrow followed by depres-
sion.
As the above cases had received, in addition to collargol, two doses of salvarsan,
Herzog and Roscher (20b), in an attempt to find out the cause of death, injected
one rabbit with collargol, administering 912 mg. in twelve doses, distributed over
a period of 27 days. The animal died with signs of severe anemia and their
results are similar to those of the experiments described above, with this difference,
that no leucopenia was obtained and myeloid metaplasia was observed in the
spleen.
The explanation of the anemia produced by the injections of collar-
gol must, in the light of the experiments described in this article, be
sought in the bone marrow. The coincidence of a stimulated endo-
thelium, with erythropoietic activity, and of a quiescent endothelium,
with decrease or lack of erythropoiesis, is, to say the least, striking,
while myeloid activity seems to be independent of the endothelial
changes. The suggestion, therefore, presents itself that a close rela-
tion must exist between the erythrocytes and the endothelium and
its derivatives.
As the result of recent research, the theory that the endothelium is the pro-
genitor of the clasmatocytes and the red blood cells is gaining ground. The
550 BONE MARROWREACTIONS. I
most recent investigation and the most convincingproof of the endothelial origin
of the clasmatocytes, first suggested by Mallory (21) in 1898, are offered by
Sabin (3b).
Due to the researches of Sabin et al., new evidencehas been brought forth also
in support of the theory of the endothelial origin of the erythrocytes. Sabin
(3c), in 1920, demonstrated this genetic relationship in the chick embryo, while
Doan (14c)in 1922,analyzing the bone marrow of the adult pigeon, and Cunning-
ham and Doan (22a), studying the mammalian bone marrow, drew the same
conclusions. From this analysis the conclusionwas also drawn that white blood
cellsarise fromthe reticular cellsextravascularly in the intervascular parenchyma
(Curmingham, Sabin, and Doan (22b)).
Accepting the evidences offered of the endothelial origin of the
clasmatocytes and the red blood cells as a working hypothesis, it
ought to be theoretically possible to influence functionally this wide-
spread system of endothelial cells and indirectly the production of
both red blood cells and clasmatocytes.
As seen in the experiments described in this paper, the first action
of collargol is a stimulation of the bone marrow with outpouring of
young erythrocytes and normoblasts. This stimulation is observed
after the injection of many colloidal substances. The increased
activity is, however, not confined to the erythrocytic series of cells,
but also includes the clasmatocytes.
Experimentally, large phagocytic cells were produced by Evans and Winter-
nitz (7c), in 1911, Aschoffand Kiyono, in 1913 (2b),and Kiyono, in 1914 (4),
who found these cells in the circulation after repeated injections of carmine,
isamine blue, trypan blue, and collargol. Simpson (23) confirmed these obser-
vations, employing various colloidal suspensions.
It is of significance to note that the stimulation caused by the
colloidM substances includes both red blood cells and clasmatocytes.
Theoretically, one may conceive that if the rate of excretion of the
colloid injected is in any way commensurable with the rate of intro-
duction, a continued stimulation of the endothelium could be ob-
tained with new formation of erythrocytes and clasmatocytes. If,
however, colloidM substances with a low rate of diffusibility, such as
collargol, are injected continuously, the development of the clasmato-
cytes from the endothelium becomes paramount at the expense of the
red blood cell formation and finally the endothelium is filled with
GULLI LINDH MULLER 551
particulate matter and becomes genetically inactive; the animal lives
only until the already formed blood elements have been destroyed in
the daily wear and tear of the red blood cells. The reticulum, which
is less phagocytic than the endothelium, is moderately stimulated
throughout and not until the end is a leucopenia observed in the
peripheral blood.
CONCLUSIONS.
1. The effect produced by the intravenous administration of
collargol on the bone marrow of rabbits varies directly with the
amount of coUargol injected, and three fairly well defined stages could
be recognized.
(a) An initial stage after comparatively few and small doses, with
erythrocytic and endothelial hyperplasia in the bone marrow and with
evidences of this stimulation in the peripheral blood in the form of
young erythrocytes and normoblasts.
(b) An intermediary stage which followed the injection of larger
amounts of collargol, and which was characterized by a predominant
myeloid hyperplasia.
(c) A final stage with marked bone marrow aplasia and with col-
loidal silver deposited in endothelial cells, as well as in clasmatocytes.
This was associated with a high grade anemia with low color index,
resembling aplastic anemia in its main features. This stage ter-
minated fatally.
2. There was no evidence of injury to blood cells in the peripheral
circulation. The erythrocytic bone marrow aplasia was present
before any appreciable decrease of red blood cells was found in the
peripheral blood.
3. The results were less clear-cut in a series of rats, but anemia of a
similar type was produced in all animals when sufficiently large doses
were injected.
4. Splenectomy did not alter the course in rats materially.
5. It is fair to conclude that the cause of the anemia produced may
be sought in the deviation of the parental endothelial cell toward
clasmatocyte formation at the expense of the development of erythro-
cytes.
6. It is suggested that the results may be offered in support of the
552 BO}VE MAR_ROWREACTIONS. I
theory of the endothelial origin of both clasmatocytes and red blood
cells.
I am deeply indebted to Dr. Francis W. Peabody for valuable sug-
gestions in the course of the experiments and it gives me great pleasure
to acknowledge his and his staff's constant assistance.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
1. Cohn, E., Beitr. path. Anat. u. allg. Path., 1904, xxxvi, 152.
2. (a) Aschoff, L., Ergebn. inn. Ided. u. Kinderheilk., 1924, xxvi, 2. (b) As-
choff, L., and Kiyono, K., Folia hcematol., 1. Tell, 1913, xv, 383.
3. (a) Sabin, F. R., Doan, C. A., and Cnnningham, R. S., Carnegie Institu-
tion of Washington, Pub. No. 361, Contributions to Embryology, 1925, xvi,
125. (b) Sabin, F. R., Bull. Johm Hopkins Hosp., 1921, xxxii, 314; (c)
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Pub. No. 272, Contributions to Embry-
ology, 1920, ix, 213.
4. Kiyono, K., Folia ha,matol., 1. Tell, 1914, xviii, 149.
5. Tschaschin, S., Folia hcematol., 1. Tell, 1913-14, xvii, 317.
6. BrStz, W., Frankf. Z. Path., 1909, iii, 931.
7. (a) Evans, H. M., Anat. Rec., 1914, viii, 98. (3) Evans, It. M., and Schule-
mann, W., Science, 1914, xxxix, 443. (c) Evans, I-I. M., and Winternitz,
C., unpublished work, 1911, quoted by Simpson, M. E., J. Med. Research,
1922, xliii, 77.
8. Nissen, R., Z. ges. exp. Med., 1922, xxviii, 193.
9. Drinker, C. K., Shaw, L. A., and Drinker, K. R., J. Exp. Med., 1923, xxx~ii,
829.
10. Ribbert, It., Z. allg. Physiol., 1904, iv, 201.
11. New and nonofficial remedies, Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry, Pub-
lished by Am. Med. Assn., 1924, p. 339.
12. Bechhold, H., Z. Chem. u. Ind. Kolloide, 1907-08, ii, 3.
13. (a) Voigt, J., Biochem. Z., 1914, lxii, 280; (b) lxiii, 409.
14. (a) Doan, C. A., Cunningham, R. S., and Sabin, F. R., Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Pub. No. 361, Contributions to Embryology, 1925,xvi, 163.
(b) Doan, C. A., Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1922, xxxiii, 222; (c) Proc.
Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med., 1922-23, xx, 260.
15. Motohashi, S., J. Med. Research, 1922, xliii, 419.
16. Ribadeau-Dumas, L., and DebrC, R., Compt. rend. Soc. biol., 1908, lxv, 289.
17. Pearce, R. M., and Austin, J. H., J. Exp. Meal., 1912, xvi, 780.
18. Lepehne, G., Deutsch. reed. Woch., 1914, xl, 1361.
19. Krumbhaar, E. B., Am. J. Med. Sc., 1923, clxvi, 329.
20. (a) Herzog, F., and Roscher, A., Virchows Arch. path. Anat., 1922, ecxxxvi,
361; (b) Z. ges. exp. Med., 1922, xxix, 224.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 553
21. Mallory, F. B., J. Exp. Med., 1898, iii, 611.
22. (a) Cunningham, R. S., and Doan, C. A., Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med.,
1922-23, xx, 262. (b) Cunningham, R. S., Sabin, F. R., and Doan, C. A.,
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Pub. No. 361, Contributions to Em-
bryology, 1925, xvi, 227.
23. Simpson, M. E., J. Med. Research, 1922, xliii, 77.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE 19.
Fie. I. Rabbit H-3. Isolated focus between the fat ceils in early stimulated
marrow showing hypertrophied endothelium and mitosis adjacent to megaloblast
and clasmatocytes containing silver granules. × about 800.
FIG. 2. Rabbit H-I. Bone marrow of animal succumbing 18 days after the
last injection of collargol. The normal architecture is gone, being replaced by
an eosin-staining ground substance containing many clasmatocytes filled with
collargol, but very few ceils of the erythromydoid series. Blood vessels are in-
tact, lined with apparently inactive endothelium. × 370.
FIG. 3. Bone marrow of Rabbit H-52 given eight doses of 2 per cent collargol
and killed 6 hours after the last dose. Moderate hyperplasia of both the eryth-
rocyte and myeloid series, the latter predominating. × about 800.
FIG. 4. Bone marrow of Rabbit H-33 subjected to the same treatment as No.
H-52, but killed 4 days after the last dose. The peripheral blood showed some
decrease in erythrocytes and hemoglobin. Fat ceils are intact, but very few
cells of either myeloid or erythrocyte series remain. The coilargol is deposited
in clasmatocytes and in the endothelium lining blood vessels. × about 800.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE VOL. XLIII. PLATE 19.
(Muller: Bone marrow reactions. I.)
