STUDIES ON THE SOMATIC C POLYSACCHARIDE OF
PNEUMOCOCCUS
I. CUTANEOUS AND SEROLOGICALREACTIONS IN PNEUMONIA
B~ THEODORE J. ABERNETHY, M.D., ANDTHOMAS FRANCIS, JR., M.D.
(Fromthe Hospital of The RockefellerInstitutefor MedicalResearch)
(Received for publication, July 30, 1936)
In 1930, Tillett and Francis (1) observed that the sera of individuals
acutely ill with lobar pneumonia possess the capacity of precipitating
a non-protein, carbohydrate fraction derived from Pneumococeus.
This fraction was termed the C substance. It was shown that the
precipitating action of patients' serum with the C substance is demon-
strable early in the course of pneumonia, persists throughout the course
of the active disease, and disappears during convalescence.
Subsequent tests with sera from certain other diseases showed that
the precipitation of fraction C is not limited to the sera of individuals
with pneumococcus infection. The phenomenon was also demon-
strated in cases of rheumatic fever, bacterial endocarditis, and lung
abscess, but not in all febrile diseases. The sera of patients suffering
from malaria, tuberculosis of the lungs, typhoid fever, measles, and
varicella did not react with fraction C. While the exact nature of
the mechanism of the precipitation reaction with C is not understood,
Tillett and Francis suggested that the principles involved in the
anamnestic reaction described by Cole (2) might be used to explain
the phenomenon.
Further studies by Tillett, Goebel, and Avery (3) on the chemical
and immunological properties of the C substance showed that it is a
complex polysaccharide contained within the body of the pneumo-
coccus cell. It is species specific and is found in all pneumococci
irrespective of type or virulence. It is distinct from the type specific
capsular polysaccharide not only in its chemical properties but in its
serological reactivity. Later, Heidelberger and Kendall (4) showed,
in a study of the chemical properties of the polysaccharides of Type
59
60 SOCRATICC POLYSACCHARIDE OF PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
IV Pneumococcus, that the C substance contains 4 per cent of phos-
phorus firmly bound in organic combination.
A preliminary report on the cutaneous reactions to C in 30 cases of
pneumonia has previously been given (5). Recently amounts of the
somatic polysaccharide of sufficient purity have been obtained to
undertake a further study of both the cutaneous and serological
reactions in pneumonia to this substance. Data included in the
present paper record primarily the relationship of the cutaneous
reaction to the clinical course and outcome of the disease, and the
parallelism between the in vitro serum precipitation reaction and the
in vivo response to intradermal injection of C polysaccharide. Obser-
vations on the nature of the C precipitation reaction have been
reserved for subsequent publication.
Materials and Methods
Subjeas.--The patients observed in this study were admitted to the wards of
the Hospital of The Rockefeller Institute. Group A comprised 46 cases of pneu-
mococcuslobar pneumonia, of which 39 recovered and 7 died. As soon as possible
after entry sputum typing was attempted by means of the Neufeld reaction. This
was successful in a high proportion of the cases. When unsatisfactory, however,
the typing was determined by the mouse method. Distribution of types among
the 46 cases was as follows: Type I, 11 cases; Type II, 2 cases; Type III, 9 cases;
Type V, 1 case; Type VII, 4 cases; Type VIII, 6 cases; Type IX, 2 cases; Type X,
X.IV, XVI, XVIII, 1 case each; and unclassified types, 7 cases. On admission, a
blood culture, complete blood count, and roentgenogram of the chest were made on
each patient. The progress of the pneumonic lesion was followed by daily physical
examination of the chest and by frequent x-ray examination throughout the course
of the disease. The general treatment of each patient was the same. Specific
serum .treatment was given to all but one patient with Type I infection, to a
smaller number of individuals with Type II, and to a few patients with Type V,
VII, and VIII infection. Artificial pneumothorax was used in a few instances.
Group B comprised 10patients sufferingfrom diseases other than pneumococcus
pneumonia. There were 5 patients in whom the diagnosis of rheumatic fever had
been made; 3 patients ill with bacterial infections of known etiology; and finally
2 cases of non-infectious fevers.
Group C comprised 19 normal healthy adults free from any obvious infection.
None of these individuals had had pneumonia.
Skin Testing Materials.--The C substance used for intracutaneous inoculation
was prepared in a state of high purity by methods employed in this laboratory (3)
from an R strain derived from Type II pneumococci. The preparation was a
T. J. ABERNETHY AND T. ~RANCIS, JR. 61
white powder, readily soluble in physiological salt solution. Intracutaneous
injections of a solution of C substance in amounts of 0.1 cc. containing 0.1 mg. of
polysaccharide were given to all the patients. Physiological salt solution, 0.1 cc.,
was used as a control. Frequent skin tests were performed on the patients ill
with lobar pneumonia (group A). An initial test was always performed shortly
after the admission of each patient, and was repeated at intervals during the course
of the disease. Tests on the control cases (groups B and C) were made less fre-
quently. The inoculated sites were observed frequently during the succeeding 24
hours.
Precipitation Tests.--Serum was collected before each intradermal inoculation
and the samples were tested for capacity to precipitate in the presence of the C
substance. The precipitation tests were performed in the usual manner, i.e., 0.2
cc. serum, diluted with 0.3 cc. of physiologicalsalt solution was mixed with 0.5 cc.
of varying dilutions of the C substance. Readings were made after the mixtures
had been incubated at 37°C. for 2 hours and had stood' in the ice box overnight.
In positive tests the precipitate that forms settles rapidly to the bottom of the
tubes, and on shaking can be readily broken up. No disc formation is seen.
The Cutaneous Reaction
The capacity of two other components of the pneumococcus cell,
the type specific capsular polysaccharide and the nucleoprotein frac-
tion, to elicit characteristic cutaneous reactions in pneumonia has been
described previously (6). The reaction to the capsular polysaccharide
is of the immediate wheal and erythema variety, is type specific,
and appears only when the recovery processes have been initiated.
It may persist during convalescence and is always associated with the
presence of type specific antibodies in the patient's serum. The skin
reaction to the nucleoprotein, on the other hand, is of the delayed
variety, not appearing until several hours after inoculation, is negative
during the acute stages of pneumonia, and becomes positive late in
the period of convalescence. A high percentage of normal individuals
react to the bacterial protein injected intradermally. Circulating
antibodies to the nucleoprotein, as measured by precipitin tests, are
demonstrable in about equal titer both during the acute disease and
the period of recovery.
In striking contrast to the cutaneous reactions elicited with the
capsular polysaccharide which occur with the onset of recovery, and
those following the injection of the nucleoprotein which appear later
in convalescence, cutaneous reactions to the C substance are present
62 SOMATIC C POLYSACCIIAPJ~E O~' PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
during the height of the disease. The character of the positive cuta-
neous reaction is distinctive and may be described as follows:
Within 15 to 30 minutes following the intradermal inoculation of 0.1 mg. of the
C substance there appears at the site of injection a wheal surrounded by a zone of
erythema. This reaction in its early development resembles the capsular poly-
saccharide skin test, but the zone of erythema is less intense and "pseudopods"
extending out from the central wheal, so frequently seen in the latter, are rarely
encountered. Within an hour this acute phase has usually faded and is then
followed by the delayed reaction, an edematous erythema. The center of the
ares of delayed erythema is frequently dark, reddish brown, sometimes hemor-
rhagic, about which there may be a pale white halo, and beyond this a bright red
erythema. The delayed reaction begins to appear in 2 to 3 hours, is well marked
in 6 to 10hours, persists for 18 to 24 hours, and then fades, leaving a residual brown
stain. The size of reacting area may reach 5 cm. in diameter, but is usually 2 to 3
can.in maximum diameter. There is frequently tenderness at the site of injection.
The skin test is considered positive if a delayed reaction occurs with an area of
erythema larger than 1 cm. in diameter. The reaction is called doubtful if the
erythema is between 5 and 10 ram., and negative if the erythema is less than 5 x 5
mm. While the classification is an arbitrary one, experience has justified the use
of this relative standard.
Results in Pneumococcus Pneumonia
Recovered Cases.--Frequent observations upon the C skin test in 39
recovered cases of pneumococcus pneumonia have shown that in all
patients, irrespective of the type of invading pneumococcus, a positive
reaction was elicited during the acute stage of the disease. The
reaction appeared early, in one instance as early as 12 hours after the
initial chill, and persisted throughout the acute febrile period. With
the onset of recovery, whether associated with crisis or lysis, the re-
action decreased markedly in intensity, and during an uncomplicated
convalescence, in the majority of cases could no longer be demon-
strated. Parallel determinations of the serum and cutaneous re-
actions with the C substance have shown striking uniformity in
results and have confirmed the observations of Tillett and Francis on
the appearance of the precipitation reaction during the acute phase
and its disappearance in convalescence. Chart 1 depicts graphically
the occurrence of the cutaneous and serological reactions to the C
substance in a typical uncomplicated recovered case of pneumococcus
pneumonia.
T. J. ABERNETHY AND T. FRANCIS~ JR. 63
The patient was a 21 year old mechanic admitted to the hospital on the second
day foUowing a characteristic onset of acute lobar pneumonia. The admission
physical examination revealed consolidation of the lower portion of the right upper
lobe which was confirmed by x-ray. Type XIX Pneumococcus was recovered
from the sputum. Blood culture was sterile. The lesion spread to involve the
whole of the right upper lobe. A crisis occurred on the 6th day of the disease,
after which an uncomplicated convalescence followed. He was discharged on the
21st day, completely recovered.
A skin test with 0.1 nag. pneumococcus C fraction on the day of admission
showed a strongly positive reaction which first appe~ed 3 hours after inoculation
Dayofd
0 1:1,
2
m 1:
CHART I. Type XIX pneumococcus pneumonia.
asa reddish brown area of erythema 1.1 x 1.3 cm. in size. This lesion gradually
increased in size, becoming of maximum intensity at the end of 24 hours. The
center was a deep red color surrounded by a thin white halo, around which an area
of erythema 2 x 2.5 cm. was present. Subcutaneous edema was noted, and the
lesion was slightly tender. A control injection of normal saline done at the same
time was negative. Serum taken on the day of admission precipitated the C sub-
stance to a dilution of 1:320,000. Following the crisis skin tests were repeated,
on the 8th and 15th days of the disease. On neither occasion was the skin reaction
positive to 0.1 mg. of the C substance. At the same time, precipitation tests with
the patient's serum were also negative.
64 SOMATICC POLYSACCHARIDEOF PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
Persistence of the positive cutaneous and serum reactions to the C
substance was frequently noted in patients in whom the disease ran a
protracted course by reason of delayed resolution or the occurrence of
some complication, such as sterile pleural effusion or empyema. With
the onset of convalescence, however, both reactions to the C substance
disappeared. Moreover, reappearance of the C reaction was noted
in a few patients who suffered some complication late in the disease
after the acute febrile period had subsided. The following observa-
Day orcl~eaee
°E
I05
I04
IOS
S
J.o2
~_ lO1
i~ 100
9g
98
S 4 5 6 "[ 8 9 10 i1 12 15 14 15 18 19
i
I
d
I
I
{") 1:1,280,0.,q
1." SL'O,OOC
1: 80,000
1." 2o,oooi
t: ,ooo
1
~T 2. Type V pneumococcus pneumonia.
tions were made upon an individual in whom the disease was compli-
cated by the development of pleural effusion, and the results of the
serum and skin tests are represented in Chart 2.
The patient was a 39 year old white male admitted to the hospital 24 hours after
an acute onset of pneumonia with chill, cough, and pain in the lower left chest.
Physical examination revealed consolidation of the left lowerlobe. Pneumococcus
Type V was recovered from the peritoneal cavity of sputum-injected mice. In
order to relievethe intense pleural pain artificial pneumothoraxwas attempted, but
upon entering the pleural cavity a small amount of thick turbid fluid was dis-
T. J. ABER.~ETHY AND T. I~RABICIS,JR. 65
covered,and consequentlyno air was injected. Culture of the pleural fluidyielded
PneumococcusType V. On the 4th day of disease, an extension of the pneumonia
to the left upper lobe occurred. On the 5th day a small amount of fluid, which
proved to be sterile on culture, was removed from the left chest. Subsequently
additional fluid accumulated, and on the 7th, 13th, and 16th days of his disease a
total of 770 cc. of sterile fluid was aspirated. Following a crisis on the 7th day
there was marked improvement in his general condition, although the temperature
did not remain permanently normal until the 16th day. He was discharged com-
pletely recoveredon the 33rd day.
Both serum and skin tests with the C substance were done on the 3rd day of
acute illness and repeatedly following crisis. The initial skin test was markedly
positive, and at the same time the patient's serum precipitated the C substance in
dilution of 1:640,000. On the day following the crisis, at a time when the skin
reaction in uncomplicated cases is usually negative or at most weakly positive, a
strongly positive reaction was observed, and the precipitability of the patient's
serum with C substance was still marked. These findings were confirmed 2 days
later, at which time a large collection of pleural fluid was present. On the 14th
day a doubtfully positive skin reaction, an area of erythema between 5 and 10ram.
in diameter, was observed, but the precipitation test was negative. During the
convalescent period neither the skin nor serum reaction to C could be demon-
strated.
Fatal Cases.--While in the recovered cases positive cutaneous and
serological reactions were observed throughout the acute phase of the
disease, persisting or reappearing if complications developed, and
disappearing with the onset of recovery, in the fatal cases sharp differ-
ences were noted in the skin reactivity to C. Seven of the 46 cases
terminated fatally. Three of these patients had Type III pneu-
mococcus infections; in the remaining four patients pneumococci of
Types I, II, VII ~, and X were the invading organisms. All seven of
these patients failed to give a skin reaction to the C substance during
some stage of the acute disease. Two of the seven cases gave positive
skin reactions upon admission, but subsequent tests later on in the
acute phase of the disease were negative. Parallel observations on
the serum of these patients, however, showed that precipitation with
the C substance occurred in samples tested throughout the disease.
Chart 3 presents the findings in one patient illustrative of five fatal
cases in each of which skin reactions were uniformly negative, although
the serum reacted positively during the entire course of disease.
The patient was a 45 year old school teacher admitted on the 1st day of illness.
His past history revealed a tuberculous infection of the lungs in 1932 which by
66 SO~rIC C POLYSACCHARIDE OP PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
x-ray had subsequently been shown to be inactive. The onset of the present
illness was abrupt, with the classical chill, pain in the left chest, and cough with
bloody sputum. He was acutely ill when first seen, and examination disclosed an
extensive consolidation of the left lower lobe. Type III Pneumococcus was identi-
fied in the sputum. Because of the marked pleural pain attempts were made on
two occasions to induce a small artificial pneumothorax, but these proved unsuc-
cessful because of multiple pleural adhesions. The patient became progressively
worse with the spread of the pneumonic consolidation to involve all pulmonary
lobes. Blood cultures remained consistently negative. Death occurred on the
6th day of disease.
Dayo~di~e~e I ~ 3 4 5 6
105k
5kin te~t NO tegt
o 1:
~ 1."
CH~Lt~T3. Type III pneumococcus pneumonia.
Skin reactions to the 12substance on the 2nd and 4th days of disease were nega-
tive. However, precipitation of C by samples of serum taken on the 2nd, 3rd, and
4th days of disease occurred in high titer.
A loss of skin reactivity to C substance occurred during the course
of the acute disease in two of the seven fatal cases. In both instances
the skin reaction was positive on admission, but subsequent tests
failed to provoke cutaneous reactions, although the serum throughout
the disease precipitated when C was added in high dilution. A case
illustrative of these findings is given in Chart 4.
T. I. AB~I~NETHY AND T. FRANCIS, JR. 67
The patient was a 37 year old white male admitted on the 5th day of lobar
pneumonia of classical onset. Examination showed involvement of the right
middle and lower lobes. Type X Pneumococcus and Hemopkilusinfluenzaewere
recovered from the sputum. The admission blood culture showed no growth,
but on the 8th day a culture was positive, less than i colony per 2 cc. of blood, and
on the 12th day the colonies had increased to 50 per cc. of blood. The right upper
and left upper lobes became successively involved and with this spread the signs
of toxemia increased. He finally succumbed on the 13th day of disease despite
the usual supportive measures. Postmortem examination showed extensive
Day of disease
I04
t.~ lOG
6 7 B 8 iO il 9' i~
~c~ %e~t
i:I,~60,000 )P~iPitation ~t
/I: 3~,000
l: 8~ooo:
.9
"~ i: ~0,000
1: 5,000
CHART4. Type X pneumococcus pneumonia.
consolidation of the right upper, right middle, and left upper lobes, and beginning
resolution in the right lower lobe.
A skin test done on the 6th day showed a markedly positive reaction, similar
to that seen in the acute stage of cases which subsequently recover. There was an
area of erythema 2 cm. in diameter, and at the same time the serum was precipi-
tated in the presence of dilution of C as high as 1:640,000. However, on the 8th
day, 5 days before death, no skin reaction to C substance was elicited, and none
when the test was repeated on the llth day of disease. Unfortunately, the serum
precipitation test was not done on the 8th day, but on the llth day it was found to
be markedly positive.
68 SOMATIC C POLYSACCHARIDE OF PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
A summary of results obtained in 46 cases of pneumococcus pneu-
monia is given in Table I.
Results in Control Cases
In. the light of the observations of Tillett and Francis (1) and of
Ash (7), who found thatprecipitation with C was not confined to the
sera of individuals with pneumococcus pneumonia, it seemed of
interest to test the C skin reactions in a group of patients suffering
from other febrile diseases. For this purpose ten individuals were
selected for study. The fever in 8 of the patients was known to be
of infectious origin. In this group were some types of infection in
TABLE I
Cutaneous and Serological Reactions to C PoIysaccharide in 46 Cases of
Pneumococcus Pneumonia
Classification
Recovered
Fatal
No. of
cases
39
Stage of disease
Acute
Convalescent
Acute
Skin reactions
Positive Doubtful Negative
39 0 0
2 1 36
0t 0 7
Precipitation tests
Positive Negative
39 0
1" 38
7 0
* Convalescence complicated by active rheumatoid arthritis.
t 2 of 7 fatal cases gave positive reactions when first admitted.
sequently became negative.
Reaction sub-
which the serum precipitation test with C had previously been noted
by the above mentioned authors. In the remaining 2 cases the fever
was found to be of non-infectious origin. As a further control cuta-
neous and serological reactions were noted in a group of normal
healthy adults.
Infectious Fevers.---Observations were made upon 5 individuals with acute
rheumatic fever. Each of these patients was tested during the active febrile
period and again some weeks later when clinically and by laboratory tests the
disease was considered to be quiescent. In all 5 patients the cutaneous reaction
to the C substance was positive during the febrile period and became negative
during the inactive phase of the disease. Precipitation tests with the serum of
these individuals paralleled the cutaneous reaction, except in one case in which the
serum failed to precipitate with C during the acute phase of the disease; the serum
T. J. ABERNETHY AND T. ]~RANCIS~ JR, 69
of all 5, however, showed an absence of precipitation reaction with C during the
convalescent period.
In addition to the 5 cases of rheumatic fever, observations were made upon an
individual with subacute bacterial endocarditis. On admission to the hospital
the patient was found to have chronic rheumatic heart disease and septicemia due
to Streptococcus viridans. His course was steadily downward, with progressive
toxemia and multiple embohc phenomena, finally terminating 1 month later with
a pulmonary embolus. The skin reactions to C were markedly positive both when
tested 1 week after admission and 9 days before death. At the same time the
patient's serum precipitated C when the substance was added in high dilution.
One patient with empyema of hemolytic streptococcus origin was similarly
studied. When tested twice during the acute febrile disease the cutaneous and
TABLE II
Cutaneous and Serological Reactions to C Polysaccharide in 29 Control Cases
Diagnosis No. of
ca$¢8
gheumatic fever
Bacterial endocarditis
Empyema-hemolytic Strepto-
coccus
S,plastic anemia and B. coli
septicemia
,VIyeloblasficleukemia
/~alafia
Normal individuals
5
1
1
i
1
1
19
Stage of disease
"Active
Inactive
Acute
Acute
Acute (shortly be-
fore death)
Acute
During paroxysm
Skinreactions
Posl- Nega- Pod-
tive tlve tlve
5 0 4
0 5 0
1 0 1
1 0 1
0 1 1
0 1 0
0 1 0
I 18 0
Precipitation
tests
Nega-
tive
1
5
0
0
0
!
1
19
serum reactions with the C substance were strongly positive. Tests during con-
valescence could not be done because the patient was transferred to another hos-
pital for operation.
Finally, tests were made upon one patient with aplastic anemia whose disease
terminated in the devdopment of septicemia with Bacillus coli. A skin test with
C substance performed 4 days before death, at which time the blood had not yet
been invaded, was completely negative. The serum, however, precipitated when
C was added in dilution as high as 1:640,000. It wiU he noted that the results of
the skin and serum tests in this case were precisely the same as those in the fatal
cases of pneumococcus pneumonia. It was of interest to note at autopsy of this
patient that, in addition to an aplastic bone marrow, hemochromatosis, and absces-
ses of the kidneys, a bronchopneumonia was present.
Non-Infectious Fevers.--Observations made on 2 cases of non-infectious fevers
70 SOMATICC POLYSACCHARIDEOF PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
showed negative cutaneous and serum reactions to the C substance. One patient
with acute myeloblastic leukemia was tested on two different occasions, but at
neither time reacted positively. The second patient, admitted for treatment of
chronic amebiasis, developed a recurrence of a latent malarial infection while in
the hospital. The parasites of tertian malaria were found in the blood, and a
series of four chiUs with rises in temperature to 104-105° occurred prior to the
administration of quinine. The skin and serological tests done at the height of
one of these febrile paroxysms were completely negative.
Normal Individuals.--In order to determine the reaction of normal individuals
to C, a group of 19 healthy adults free from obvious infection were selected for
study. Skin and precipitation tests were performed in the manner described
above. The serum of these individuals did not precipitate with the C substance
even when the latter was added in high concentration, and the skin tests were
negative in all but one instance. This person, upon subsequent inquiry, gave a
history ofhay feverand chronicpostnasal discharge for many years and was known
to be skin-sensitive to a variety of bacterial antigens as well as to pollen. Whether
or not the positive reaction to C substance in this individual was related to a wide-
spread sensitivity cannot be stated. A summary of results in the control cases is
given in Table II.
DISCUSSION
From the present study of 46 patients with pneumococcus pneu-
monia it is apparent that the presence or absence of the cutaneous
reactions to the C substance bears a definite relationship to the clinical
course and outcome of the infection. In the 39 recovered cases all
patients gave a positive skin reaction to the C substance during the
acute illness. In a few patients in whom the disease was prolonged
by complications the skin test remained positive until recovery ensued.
Although in certain cases the capacity of the skin to react did not dis-
appear abruptly, the test became negative in all but three patients
within the first few days of convalescence. In striking contrast to
these results are the findings noted in seven fatal cases. All of the
latter patients failed to react to the C substance during the acute
stage of the disease. Of particular interest were the results of skin
tests in 2 fatal cases in which the reactions were positive early in the
disease and later became negative as the disease progressed.
Simultaneous observations on the precipitability of the serum with
C have confirmed and extended the observations of Tillett and Francis.
In the recovered group, as well as in the fatal cases, sera taken during
the febrile period precipitated on the addition of minute amounts of C
T. J. AB~RNETHY AND T. FRANCIS, JR. 71
substance. Moreover, the precipitation test was positive extremely
early in the disease. The serum remained positive if complications
ensued, but became negative when normal convalescence followed.
The failure of the skin to react to the C substance despite the
presence of a positive serum precipitation test would appear to be of
prognostic significance. However, no conclusions can be made re-
garding the importance of the test as a prognostic sign until a larger
group of cases has been studied. Tillett and Francis in their original
paper noted that the precipitation test with C was not specific for
pneumococcus infection. In a small group of cases they observed
that "precipitation of C fraction occurred most definitely in those
instances where Gram-positive cocci were proven to be or were sus-
pected of being the etiological agent." These implications, however,
were not substantiated by the work of Ash (7), who found that the
serum of certain patients ill with Gram-negative bacillus infections
possess the capacity of precipitating C. These observations, there-
fore, together with the results of studies now being carried out in this
laboratory, to be reported later, suggest that the C precipitation
phenomenon differs from usual immune reactions.
It is apparent, from the present investigation of 46 cases of pneu-
morda, and of 29 control patients, that the results of the skin and
serum tests with C roughly parallel each other. Only in the fatal
cases were the observations at variance. Thus, in view of this
parallelism and despite the non-specific character of both reactions it
would seem that some factor or change occurring in the serum in
response to bacterial infection is capable of being mobilized in the
tissues and thereby of reacting locally with the C substance. That
some factor or change in the serum is essential for the skin reaction is
suggested by the fact that the cutaneous response is almost invariably
accompanied by a positive serum test. However, that the serum
factor alone is solely responsible for the skin reaction seems improbable
in the light of results in the fatal cases, in which the cutaneous test
was negative although the serum reacted positively in precipitation
tests. It would seem, therefore, that in addition to the serum factor,
the state of reactivity of the tissue cells is also essential for the cuta-
neous response to C. When tissue reactivity is depressed by toxic
products of the disease, as seems not improbable in fatal cases, the skin
72 SOMATIC C POLYSACCHARIDE OF PNEUMOCOCCUS. I
test may be negative even though the serum reacts with ¢ in vitro.
A similar hypothesis has been advanced by Francis (8) in an explana-
tion of the failure to obtain skin reactions to the capsular poly-
saccharide in fatal cases of pneumococcus pneumonia.
A recent communication by Finland and Dowiing (9) has confirmed
our earlier report upon the delayed cutaneous reactions to the somatic
C polysaccharide. Using preparations of the "cellular carbohydrate"
of Wadsworth and Brown (10) these authors found that "delayed
cutaneous reactions with the 'cellular carbohydrate' of an atypical
Type I Pneumococcus were obtained regularly during the febrile
stage of a variety of infectious diseases and could not be elicited soon
after recovery in such cases." Wadsworth and Brown in their
original publication reported that the cellular carbohydrates were
distinct from the soluble specific substance (SSS) and also from the C
fraction, and gave type specific reactions with immune horse serum.
Our experience with preparations of the cellular carbohydrateI has
been limited to a few observations on the precipitation test with acute
phase pneumonia sera. The sera of patients during the height of the
disease have been found to precipitate with each preparation of the
cellular carbohydrate tested, irrespective of the specific type of
Pneumococcus from which the material was isolated. While the titer
of these precipitation reactions was not so high as with the C sub-
stance, the tests were in each instance markedly positive. These
observations, if confirmed in a larger series of cases, would indicate
that the cellular carbohydrate of Wadsworth and Brown irrespective
of specific type derivation may react with human sera during the
acute stage of pneumonia as does the C substance.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
A study of 46 cases of pneumococcus pneumonia has shown that a
characteristic response may be elicited by the intracutaneous injection
of 0.1 mg. of the somatic C polysaccharide of pneumococcus. During
the acute febrile period in patients who recover, the response consists
of a delayed erythema which reaches its maximum intensity in 18 to 24
hours. During convalescence the reaction is not demonstrable. In
1Kindlyfurnishedby Dr. Wadsworth.
T. J. ABERNEI"I:IYAND T. ~RANCIS~ JR. 73
patients in whom the disease is prolonged by complications the capac-
ity of the skin to react persists. In 7 fatal cases the skin failed to react
to C polysaccharide.
Parallel studies of the reaction of the patients' serum with C have
confirmed and extended the observations of Tillett and Francis on the
appearance of the precipitation phenomenon during the acute stages
and its disappearance in recovery.
That the cutaneous and serological reactions are not specific for
pneumococcusinfection is shown by the results in 29 control cases. 8
patients with infectious febrile diseases not of pneumococcus origin
gave responses similar to those noted in pneumonia. 2 patients with
non-infectious fevers and 18 of 19 normal individuals failed to give
either skin or serum reactions.
These observations emphasize the importance of using separate
components of the bacterial cell in the interpretation of cutaneous and
serological reactions in pneumonia. The parallelism in results of the
skin and serum tests in pneumococcus pneumonia with the somatic
carbohydrate C, the significance of the reactions in relation to the
clinical course and outcome of the disease, and the frequency of occur-
rence of both reactions in bacterial infections other than those of
pneumococcal origin, are discussed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. TiUett, W. S., and Francis, T., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1930, 52, 561,
2. Cole, R., Z. ttyg. u. Infectionskrankh., 1904, 46~ 371.
3. Tillett, W. S., Goebel, W. F., and Avery, O. T., J. Exp. Med., 1930, 52~895.
4. Heidelberger, M., and Kendall, F. E., J. Exp. Med., 1931,53,625.
5. Francis, T., Jr., and Abernethy, T. J., f. Clin. Inv., 1934,13, 692.
6. Tillett, W. S., and Francis, T., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1929, 50, 687.
7. Ash, R., J. Infect. Dis., 1933, 53, 89.
8. Francis, T., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1933, 57~617.
9. Finland, M., and Dowling, H. F., J. Immunol., 1935,29~285.
10 Wadsworth, A., and Brown, R., J. Immunol., 1933, 9.~,349.
