e ve t ,.o Iita lttt t
EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS.
iii. POLYCYTB-EMIA,NOR~OBLASTOSIS, AND ERYTHROCYTIC
HYPERPLASIA O~" TBX BONE MARROW PRODUCED
BY Gt~ Sm~LLAC.
Bx GULLILINDH MULLER,M.D.
(From the Thorndike Memorial Laboratory, Boston City Hospital, Boston.)
PLAam26.
(Receivedfor publication, January 7, 1927.)
In the study, both experimental and clinical, of the hematopoietie
system, attention has been directed almost exclusively to the pe-
ripheral blood. This is due to the ease with which the peripheral
blood may be examined and the difficulties encountered when attempts
are made to analyze the bone marrow and interpret the results ob-
tained. The recent work of Sabin, Doan, and Cunningham (1-3),
however, on the structure and function of the bone marrow has greatly
facilitated the study of the hematopoietic organs. The theory of
these authors as to the origin of red blood cells and clasmatocytes
from the endothelium lining the sinuses of the bone marrow, furnishes
a working hypothesis for the study of the function of the bone marrow,
and its reaction to external influences.
In a series of investigations on bone marrow reactions the hypothe-
sis of the endothelial origin of the red blood cells and the cla~matocytes
has been used as aworking basis. In a former study (4, a) it was found
that a colloidal suspension of a heavy metal (collargol) produced an
aplastic anemia, interpreted as due to injury to the endothelial cells
of the hematopoietic organs. In a control experiment (4,b) with a
colloidal suspension of carbon particles in the form of drawing ink,
the results warranted the conclusion that carbon particles as such
stimulate phagocytosis, but do not inhibit, to any appreciable extent,
the formation of erythrocytes. This seems to indicate that the parti-
cles ingested by the phagocytic cells must exert a toxic action if they
753
754 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
are to suppress the function of the cells. The importance of this is
evident in the choice of colloids for so called "blocking" of the "re-
ticulo-endotheIial system."
During the latter investigation with India ink, a non-dialysable
substance passing through a Berkefeld filter was found to stimulate
markedly the bone marrow as evidenced by the outpouring of nu-
cleated red cells in the peripheral blood and erythropoietic hyper-
plasia of the bone marrow. Through the courtesy of F. Weber Co.
the composition of this particular ink was obtained. All the ingredi-
ents were tried, but only one gave the results interpreted as a stimula-
tion of the bone marrow. This was a gum shellac used as a protective
colloid. Experiments were continued with this substance with two
purposes in mind: first, to elucidate, if possible, the mechanism of
stimulation of the red ceils and their delivery, and secondly to see
whether this gum would prove to be a therapeutic agent. The second
project, in view of the many substances proposed and rejected as bone
marrow stimulants, was entered upon with justifiable hesitation.
Most of the work on stimulation of the erythropoietic centers has
been done in search for a therapeutic agent, the importance of which
is evident and reflected in a vast literature.
No attempt will be made to review this as recent papers have summarized
differentphases of the question (5, 6, 7, a, 8). If, however, one accepts as criterion
of erythropoieticactivity the Hseof the number of erythrocytes, together with the
appearance of young cells in the peripheral blood stream and a hyperplastic mar-
row, the experimentalevidences are meager. Polycythemia,due to various agents,
is common. Many of those reviewed by Lamson (5) in 1915, however, may be
explained in aU probability by other conditions than actual bone marrow stimu-
lation. Others give data insufficient for drawing any definite conclusions.
The recent search for therapeutic agents, stimulated by advances in our knowl-
edge of the internal secretions and hormone activities, has been directed toward
the isolation of substances in the animal organism. Following Danilewsky and
Selensky (9), Krnmbhaar and Musser (10) and Downs and Eddy (11) found that
spleen extract caused a rise in the number of red blood cells with comparatively
less increase in hemoglobin. Krumbhaar and Musser obtained no evidence of an
increased number of young ceils in the blood, while Eddy and Downs (7,b)
founda graduallyincreasing normoblastosis in rabbits given large doses of protein-
free splenic extract subcutaneously. The number of red ceils in the peripheral
blood fluctuated with a generally rising tendency. Neither of these authors report
any examination of the bone marrow.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 755
Leake and associates (12, a, b) found a combination of splenic and bone marrow
extract more effective than splenic extract alone. In the rabbits injected the
reticulated cells showed an increase in a few cases, while of six animals examined
the bone marrow in two was hyperplastic. Whether this hyperplasia was ery-
thropoietic is not stated.
The reports of Eddy and Downs (7, b) and Leake and Leake (12, a) seem to
indicate that some definite effect was produced on the bone marrow. They con-
clude that hormones are involved. That some substance capable of stimulating
• red blood cell formation is present in the serum and the bone marrow after bleeding
was suggested by Camot and Deflandre (13).
Among inorganic agents for stimulation of the erythropoietic organs, iron and
arsenic have been used extensively in clinical work. Experimental work seems
to indicate that neither iron nor arsenic exerts any marked effect on blood forma-
tion (14--16). Nissen (17), however, reports that erythroblastic hyperplasia is
produced by the intravenous injection of "elektroferrol." Excluding anemia from
various causes, and especially anemia due to blood loss, low oxygen tension (18, 19)
seems to be the most effective stimulant of blood formation as evidenced by in-
crease in erythrocytes and a hyperplastic marrow.
Material and Methods.
The gum shellac employed was obtained from the F. Weber Co., Philadelphia.
Gum shellac is said to be a product of plant excretion or secretion, due to the action
of the lac insect, Coccus lacca. Chemically it has been partly analyzed although
some of its components are very unstable (20). The gum shellac used is soluble in
water containing sodium borate. In concentrated solutions it is a cloudy dark
brown fluid which in dilutions employed after filtering appears as a clear, port
wine-colored liquid. The solutions employed varied in strength from 4.4 to 0.44
per cent of the gum, and, correspondingly, the salt used to keep the gum in solution
varied from 1.8 to 0.18 per cent. The solutions were sterilized in the autoclave,
occasionally by boiling. Injections varied both in amount and interval of admin-
istration, as it was desirable to see the effects not only of various concentrations
but also of the frequency of administration. The experimental procedure was
essentially the same as in a previous investigation (4, b).
Bone marrows were studied from three points of view: in sections, in smears
made directly from the bone marrow, and in smears made after centrifuging the
emulsified bone marrow in 2 per cent sodium citrate. In addition, supmvital
counts were made of all the bone marrows, following the method of Sabin
(3, b).
Rabbits bought in the market usually improve when given better food in the
laboratory. To exclude this factor as far as possible, they were kept in the stock
pen for a considerable period, then put in individual cages under the same condi-
tions for from 2 to 4 weeks before the investigation was begun.
756 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARI~OW REACTIONS. III
EXPERIMENTAL.
Healthy male rabbits were used except in a few instances which will
be noted. They wer,e divided into groups according to the strength of
the solution employed: (1) Strong solution--equal to the amount of
gum shellac contained in the original ink; i.e., 4.4 per cent. This
was intensely toxic. (2) Medium solution--2.2 per-cent. This was
toxic to some animals, stimulating to others, as evidenced by increase
of red blood cells and hemoglobin and a characteristic outpouring
of nucleated red cells. (3) Weak solution-l.1 per cent. This was
usually stimulating, although slightly so in some cases. In 0.4 per
cent solutions no reaction was elicited.
I. Injections of 4.4 Per Cent Gum Shellac Solution.
Nine animals were injected with a 4.4 per cent solution. Of these
five died instantaneously after the first intravenous injection of 4 cc.,
two died suddenly after the second dose, and one after four doses of 2.5
cc., and a fifth dose of 3 cc. The remaining animal had seven doses of
4 cc., subcutaneously, without apparent systemic effects. Locally
there was induration and edema of the subcutaneous tissues but no
apparent necrosis.
The mode of death in the animals was similar. About ½ minute
after the injection, and in a few instances before the needle had been
withdrawn, there were signs of collapse with rapid breathing but little
or no muscular contraction of body and limbs. Then the breathing
stopped while the heart continued to beat for a short varying interval
after the cessation of respiration. At autopsy the lungs were found
collapsed with little or no injection; the right heart was distended and
engorged with blood; the left heart was empty; the abdominal viscera
were greatly congested. The impression was gained that there was a
sudden interruption of the blood flow in the pulmonary circulation.
The microscopical sections gave no clue to the cause of death. Many
of the smaller and medium sized vessels were closely packed with
erythrocytes but no agglutination of the latter had taken place as far
as could be determined from fixed sections.
In conjunction with Dr. V. H. Norris, the effect of the solution on
blood pressure and respiration was tested. With a fatal dose in an
GULLI LINDH MULLER 757
animal under heavy morphine anesthesia the respiratory rate in-
creased and the blood pressure rose, but the animal had convulsions in
the agonal struggle thus interrupting the record. When smaller,
non-fatal doses were given, there was a definite increase in the respira-
tory rate as well as a rise in blood pressure, both well sustained for a
considerable period of time. Physiological sodium chloride in the
same dosage had no effect on respiration or blood pressure.
The cause of sudden death in animals from toxic substances as well
as death due to anaphylactoidphenomena has been analyzed by many
observers (21'-23). It is probable that the fatal outcome in the ani-
mals injected with 4.4 per cent gum solution may be explained as an
anaphylactoid phenomenon, although paralysis of the respiratory
center cannot be excluded. The fact stands out that a solution of this
strength given intravenously was fatally toxic to all the animals in-
jected. This is in sharp contrast to the effect of the same substance in
contact with carbon particles in the India ink which in no instance
was fatal in the same concentration. The inert carbon particles must
haveexerted a detoxifying influence on the solution in which they were
suspended, That t'hey acted as a protective was shown in one animal
which had been injected with India ink to which had been added an
equal quantity of the 4.4 per cent solution of gum shellac. Three
injections of 4 cc. each were given without ill effect. The fourth injec-
tion of 4 cc. of the solution in which the ink had been replaced by
distilled water caused the death of the animal in the same sudden
manner as described above.
H. Injection of 2.2 Per Cent Gum Shellac Solution.
Seventeen rabbits were injected with 2.2 per cent gum shellac solu-
tion. Of these four died as a result of the injection. Three died sud-
denly, one after the first, one after the second, and one after the fifth
dose. The remaining animal was found dead 24 hours after the second
dose.
:Microscopically,No. H-76, succumbing after the first dose, showedextensive
hemorrhage in the bone marrow, amounting practically to a dissolution of the
vascular bed. This animal had indications of a hyperplastie marrow prior to the
injection causedby lossofblood. No. H-91, dying after the fifth injection, showed
a hyperplastic bone marrow, comprising mainly the erythroeytie series, with a
758 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
moderatenumberofmegaloblastsand erythroblastsand~tgreat manynormoblasts.
Endothelium,whereverseen, was hypertrophied. In addition, the megalocaryo-
cyteswereincreasedandanoccasionalclasrnatocytewasseenfilledwitha yellowish
pink substance which did not take the iron stain. No pathology to account for
the sudden death could be made out in any of the animals except in No. H-95
which died24 hours after the seconddose, showingfibrinousexudate in the lung
alveoli.
Thirteen rabbits were repeatedly injected with a 2.2 per cent gum
shellac solution. All these animals showed one thing in Common;
namely, the outpouring of normoblasts and later erythroblasts in the
40 gO
30 gO
:ZO
A :.
• 0
/i. ", //
i¢ °
/
/
®1' " y;y
0 SO , ""'~"::
zc~ iii II III III
DAY I
llllI I illlll
I ~r/ 43
In Charts 1 to 5 the number of normoblasts is in thousands, the hemoglobin
inper cent, and the erythrocytesin millions.
CHART1. Rabbit H-83 illustrates the rise of hemoglobinand erythrocytes and
theoutpouringofnormoblastsafter mediumsizeddosesinan animal withachromia
of the red bloodcells. The bonemarrowshowedintensehyperplasia.
peripheral blood. The number of red blood cells and the hemoglobin
values following the injection of this strength solution were variable,
some animals showing a slight initial drop after several doses, followed
by a rise, others an initial rise followed by a decrease. The lowest
point of erythrocytes and hemoglob~u was usually conoomitant with
the greater number of nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral
blood stream, although exceptions occurred.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 7S9
Rabbit H-83, Chart 1, when injections were begun, was in good condition except
for low hemoglobin and a marked achromia of the erythrocytes. Twenty 4 cc.
injections were administered over a period of 45 days. The first few doses were
followed by a slight fall in the number of erythrocytes, concomitant with a slight
increase in white blood cells; then there was a definite rise, both in hemoglobin and
erythrocytes. Nucleated red blood cells were present in the peripheral blood
after the second dose, the highest number (37,600 per c.mm.) being reached on the
32nd day, after which there was a decline with still further increase in hemoglobin
and erythrocytes. The animal was killed at a time when the hemoglobin showed
an increase of 80 per cent of the initial determination and the red cells an increase of
approximately 36 per cent. The general condition was excellent, the weight had
~ ~
~ a6 a
/
2¢¢.,| | | ||
DAYS I 7
; '\ .....*~.\
i " "
- / "~/° \
~4o17 ./ .... ,-"" ;'""" f..---
/ , ..... ~
IBB II
13 19 25 4~ 40 55 (
CHART 2. Rabbit H-~ showed a tremendous number of nucleated red cells
in the peripheral blood stream, which did not disappear until the 28th day after
the last injection. Bone marrow 38 days after last dose was essentially normal.
increased from 2610 to 2775 gin. The gross autopsy findings were normal except
for an enlarged spleen and liver. Microscopically, the liver, spleen, and bone
marrow showed a great many phagocytic cells, enlarged, staining a pale pink
with eosin, and containing various sized conglomerations of a substance staining
a deep red. The spleen contained many nucleated red cells, mainly normoblasts.
Many open spaces were lined with cells which looked like erythroblasts and me-
galoblasts, and the impression was gained that erythrocyte hyperplasia was present
in the spleen. The protoplasm of the liver cells looked vacuolated and granular,
but as this was observed in untreated animals it probably may be disregarded.
The kidney showed a few patches of fibrosis in the medullary region with occasional
round cell infiltration in the cortex. There was no indication of increased blood
destruction, no iron being found. The bone marrow was intensely hyperplastic.
760 F__.XPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
This hyperplasia included mainly the erythrocyte series and the megalocaryo-
cytes. The normoblasts and late erythroblasts predominated but a consider-
able number of the earlier forms were also present (see Fig. 1.) The predominance
of the nucleated red cells was verified additionally by (1) supravital studies, (2)
fixed smears prepared directly from the bone narrow, and (3) fixed smears pre-
pared after centrifuging the emulsified bone marrow in 2 per cent sodium citrate.
From these additional studies it was found that the leucocytic elements consti-
tuted about 25 to 38 per cent and the nucleated red cells from 62 to 75 per cent,
varying with the method used, but giving an average value of one-thlrd white
blood cells and two-thirds nucleated red cells. That the increase was considerable
may be concluded from the fact that most of the fat cells of the bone marrow had
been replaced, although some deduction of space must be made for the clasmato-
16 N5 9
8 E 7
<•4:eSl6
o (9 m
/
l
J
..*'
~,...."
2CC.~ .., .• .., .., .- m m
DAYS I 7 i3 19 25 31
CI~.4.RT3. Rabbit H-100 illustrates the effect of small dosage. Normoblastosis
was less striking, but the final rise in erythrocytes and hemoglobin was marked.
cytes which were both enlarged and increased in number. The blood vessels of the
bone marrow were everywhere intact but the high power lens frequently showed
these vessels to be lined with nucleated red cells in various stages of maturation
(see Fig. 2.)
To see how long the presence of nucleated red blood cells would continue in the
peripheral blood, Rabbit H-84 was given 10 doses of a 2.2 per cent solution (see
Chart 2.) On the 2nd day after the last dose 82,400 erythroblasts and normo-
blasts per c.mm. were found in the blood stream. Not until the 28th day after the
last injection did the nucleated red blood cells disappear permanently from the
peripheral blood stream. The stimulation in this animal seemed to produce a
tremendous excess of cells of the erythrocyte series, and the subsequent course
indicated that these cells gradually matured and were thrown into the peripheral
GULLI LINDH MULLER 761
circulation, increasing the hemoglobin and the red cells. At autopsy, 38 days
after the last dose, little or no evidencewas present in the bone marrow to indicate
the stage of intense erythropoietic hyperplasia through which the animal had
passed.
Rabbit H-100, Chart 3, illustrates the effectof smaller dosage (2 cc.). The ini-
tial decreaseof red blood cells and hemoglobinwas negligible, the outpouring of the
nucleated red cells was correspondingly less, the final rise of hemoglobin and ery-
throcytes was marked, with values customarilynot encountered in rabbits. There
was an increase in weight from 2755to 3160gin., and when killed the animal was in
perfect condition except for an enlarged but normal looking liver and kidney.
Microscopically, the bone marrow was normal except for slight irregularity in the
contour of the fat cells. By estimation the proportion of cells seemed normal;
i.e., about two-thirds leucocytes, one-third of the erythrocyte series. This was
verified by fixed smears and supravital studies in which the actual counts varied
from 33 to 37 per cent nucleated red blood ceils, and from 63 to 69 per cent white
blood cells. A few clasmatocytes were enlarged in the bone marrow; the number
of megalocaryocyteswas not increased.
Another animal treated similarly to No. H-100 showed the same
results somewhat less marked.
In control animals the cells in the bone marrow averaged one-third
nucleated erythrocytes and two-thirds leucocytes. This is in agree-
ment with Itaani (24,) who found that the nucleated red bood cells in
the normal rabbit's marrow constituted 29½ per cent, excluding primi-
tive cells. /_n comparing animals which were killed immediately
after discontinuation of the injections with animals allowed to live
for a variable time, the impression was gained that the enlarged clas-
matocytes had decreased in number in those allowed to live, thus indi-
cating that an elimination of their contents was taking place.
III. Injection of 1.1 Per Cent Gum Shellac Solution.
Twelve rabbits were injected with 1.1 per cent solution. Both
dosage and time interval between injections were varied to see whether
optimum effects could be obtained.
With 4 cc. doses given at the same intervals as No. H-100, Chart 3,
the results were practically the same as with 2 cc. of a 2.2 per cent
solution.
The effectof 4 ce. doses administered at longer intervals is illustrated in Chart 4,
Rabbit H-104. At the beginning of the investigation this animal was thin, ill
762 RXPERTM'~.NTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
looking, anemic, with 2,970,000 red blood cells and 52 per cent hemoglobin. No
cause for the anemia was discovered; the animal had been isolated for some time
and no external injury or blood loss could be found. The peripheral blood findings
remained stationary for about 1 week except for the day on which the first in-
jection was made when the reticulated count had risen to 9.5 per cent. The
response was prompt. 3 hours after the injection the reticulated count rose to
15.3 per cent, with 1200 nucleated red blood cells per c.mm. Nucleated red blood
cells were present in the blood stream up to the 4th day as a result of the first
injection. Another injection 4 days after the first dose caused a still greater
outpouring of normoblasts. At this time the reticulated count was still high;
namely, 13.2 per cent. Before the third injection was given all the normoblasts
8 7O S
..'., .
•,o=~ j k_:
z cc.~ II II
DAYS T
.. -:..:
i '
i "
I IQ
CHART4. Rabbit H-104. Thin, anemic animal given 4 cc. doses of 1.1 per cent
gum shellac solution at long intervals. The prompt response to each injection is
noteworthy. Final hemorrhages in the glomemli of the kidneys.
had disappeared from the peripheral blood and the reticulated count was approxi-
mately normal (2.5 per cent). The prompt response to the third injection is in-
dicated on the chart. In 25 days the blood count had reached a low normal value
and the animal was gaining weight, although far from appearing healthy. The
fourth injection was given 10 days later. Next morning the rabbit was moribund.
At autopsy the large kidneys, with extensive hemorrhages throughout, were note-
worthy. Microscopically, this was verified, practically every glomernlus being
obliterated. There were numerous hemorrhages in the lung and around the cen-
tral vein of the liver. The bone marrow was hyperplastic. This hyperplasia
included mainly the leucocytic series. There were no evidences of dissolution of
the vascular bed of the bone marrow.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 763
The outstanding features in Rabbit H-104 were (1) the prompt re-
sponse to the injections, evidenced by the increase in reticulated cells
and nucleated red blood cells and the rise in the number of erythro-
cytes and hemoglobin, and (2) the final hemorrhages. Possibly the
kidneys were damaged before injections were begun, but there seems to
to be no doubt that the last injection was the cause of the extensive
hemorrhages.
The striking similarity in the picture of blood regeneration after
hemorrhage and the appearance of normoblasts in the peripheral
blood after injection of gum shellac solution is well illustrated in No.
H-104 and healthy companion animals. In No. H404 a few normo-
blasts were present in the blood 3 hours after the first injection, while
in healthy animals they did not appear till after 24 hours. After
hemorrhage in raIJblts nucleated red blood cells appear in 24 to
48 hours (25r-27). Usually the normoblastic crisis after hemorrhage is
of short duration, while after gum shellac injection the presence of
nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood stream was more
prolonged.
A healthy rabbit treated in the same way as No. H-104 did not
show any signs of illness after the fourth dose. To see whether
hemorrhage could be produced, ~ cc. of a 2.2 per cent solution (double
previous doses) was given 6 days after the fourth dose. When killed
24 hours later a few small:hemorrhages were found in the lungs and in
the bone marrow. The latter had been suspected from the appear-
ance of the peripheral hlood. The white blood Cells had risen from
14,000 to 98,000 cells per c.mm. and many immature forms were
present.
As hemorrhages had not been a feature of the previous experiments
in which the injections had been given every 2r~dday, they seemed to
be the result of injections after long intervals apparently after the ani-
mal had been sensitized to the drug. To test this theory, one animal
was injected in the same manner as No.; H-84 (see Chart 2). 40 days
after the administration of the last consecutive dose the equivalent
of a single previous dose was given. When killed the following day,
considerable hemorrhages were found in the bone marrow, corrobo-
rated before death by the appearance of immature ceils of both the
764 EXPERIMENTAL BONE M.ARROW REACTIONS. III
leucocyte and erythrocyte series in the peripheral blood. Rabbit
H-102 was given six doses of 4 cc. each of the 1.1 solution. 16 days
later another dose produced no ill effect. Hemorrhages in the bone
marrow were found, however, after a similar dose administered 14
days later. In this animal the surface of the kidney was studded
with what appeared to be hemorrhagic spots. The microscopical
examination revealed this to be an extreme dilatation of the blood
vessels in about 50 per cent of the glomeruli, amounting to dissolution
of the vascular bed in a few instances. The bladder urine showed
blood microscopically.
4 IlS $
31(:5 B
z~7 I
C :: /
....
oi",., .., , L'-"
z 0:1:75,., r --
2CC.~ ]~ •
2
.~..d
/ p
/
....•'
DAYS I 7 13- t9 ?.5 31
CHART5. Rabbit H-105. Healthy animal given 2 cc. dosesof 1.1 per cent gum
shellacsolution at long intervals. Normoblastosis present, but slight. No hemor-
rhages produced.
It is to be noted that in all these animals showing hemorrhages,
the red blood cells and the hemoglobin had risen above the initial
level. The fact remains, however, that the administration of 4 cc.
doses of the 1.1 per cent solution at long intervals was toxic to the
endothetium of the sinuses of the bone marrow and the vessels of the
glomeruli after a certain time interval. With the same dosage as
above (4 cc.'of 1.1 per cent solution) given in divided doses at hourly
intervals once a week, no ill effects were observed.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 765
The effectof smaller dosage of the 1.1 per cent solution is illustrated
in Chart 5, Rabbit H-105.
Four 2 ce. doses were given over a period of 26 days. At the end of the experi-
ment the animal was in excellent condition. The bone marrow was moderately
hyperplastic in structure. Leucocytic hyperplasia predominated, although at the
edges of the cross-section there was considerable erythrocytic hyperplasia, the
cells being mainly in the normoblastic stage. Blood vessels were intact, wide open,
lined with a swollen endothelium wherever endothelium could be seen, otherwise
with nucleated red blood cells in all stages of development.
In conjunction with Mr. Ralph Wheeler the effectof a certain quan-
tity of gum shellac given in a definite time was obtained. As far as
possible the conditions were kept constant, the variables being the
time interval and the size of the dose. Medium sized doses given
every 2nd day were found to be more effectivethan larger doses twice
a week or smaller doses every day.
DISCUSSION.
From the findings described above, it is evident that gum shellac
is an agent which markedly influences the hematopoietic organs. In
common with many drugs this substance was fatally toxic in strong
doses, and without any demonstrable effect in minimal doses.
Medium strength solutions produced normoblastosis, accompanied by
a period of slight decrease of red blood cells and hemoglobin, concomi-
tant with the greatest outpouring of nucleated red blood cells. This
normoblastosis was either preceded or followed by a rise in erythro-
cytes and hemoglobin above the initial levels which occurred during
the period of injections or as soon as the injections were discontinued.
Microscopically, an erythrocytichyperplasia of the bone marrow was
found immediately after discontinuation of the injec~tions,and there
was a return to normal conditions after variable intervals of time.
With small doses the nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood
stream were numerically less; the decline in erythrocytes and hemo-
globin was minimal or altogether absent; the rise of erythrocytes and
hemoglobin during and after the administration was, in many in-
stances, greater than with medi,zra sized doses. Hemorrhages,
766 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
mainly in the bone marrow and occasionally in the kidney glomeruli,
were obtained under two sets of circumstances: (1) With a fatal dose
in one animal which prior to injection apparently had a hyperplastic
bone marrow. (2) a, After the fourth or fifth medium sized dose
administered at intervals of from 4 to 19 days, and b, after an injec-
tion following a rest period preceded by a course of continuous injec-
tions. The latter phenomena indicated some kind of sensitization of
the vascular endothelium. A precipitin reaction with gum shellac
was obtained both with normal serum and serum from animals sensi-
tized with gum shellac solution.
The explanation of the stimulation produced must be sought either
in an increased blood destruction and compensatory regeneration, or
in a direct stimulation of the bone marrow.
The concept suggested by Morawitz (28) that products of red blood
cell destruction may normalry stimulate the bone marrow is an at-
tractive one, but it does not explain blood regeneration after hemor-
rhage. Some authors (7, 11) have suggested that splenic extract
increases the blood destruction, a hormone being formed from these
broken down cells capable of stimulating the bone marrow. Small
doses of hemolytic serum subcutaneously (29), arsenic (30), and toluy-
lenediamine (31), both hemolytic toxins, produce an increase of
erythrocytes. Blood regeneration after destruction of red blood cells
by phenylhydrazin is more rapid than after hemorrhage (32).
The evidences of blood destruction after injection of gum shellac
are meagei'. Animals examined at frequent intervals for the first
24 hours after injection showed no decline but rather a rise in erythro-
cytes and hemoglobin. After several injections there was a decline
in red blood cells and hemoglobin, concomitant with the presence of a
great number of nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood, but
this decline did not amount to an actual anemia which would explain
the marked increase in the production of erythrocytes. The smears
showed no undue increase of fragmentation. With the method used
no appreciable increase of iron was found in the tissues. Hemoglobi-
nuria was not observed. The concept of an appreciably increased
blood destruction after injections of gum shellac solution can, there-
fore, be dismissed at least tentatively.
As evidences of stimulation of the bone marrow have been primarily
GULLI LINDH MULLER 767
sought in the peripheral blood without examination Of the bone mar-
row the facts reported in the literature are d'i~fficult to evaluate.
Excluding anemia, erythrocytic hyperplasia has been produced by low
oxygen tension (18, 19), and various colloids, such as "elektroferrol"
(17) and collargol (4, a, 33). In this connection it may be of interest
to note that Metchnikoff in 1900 (34) observed the relation between
increased phagocytosis and new formation of red blood cells in lepers
injected with horse serum.
The evidences for direct stimulation of the bone marrow in the
present investigation are suggestive although not conclusive. The
substance injected was taken up, at least partly, by the phagocytic
cells in the hematopoietic organs. Whether this substance, visible
in the phagocytic cell, is the actual stimulant of red blood cell forma-
tion or an accessory cannot be determined from data in hand. That
the endothelial cells are strongly affectSd is evidenced by their hyper-
trophy and the hemorrhages, produced by a fatal dose in one animal
with a hyperplastic marrow and after the a~lm~nistration of the drug
at long intervals in others. It is of interest to note that the hemor-
rhages produced occurred in all instances after erythropoietic stimula-
tion. The response varied with the state of activity of the endothelial
cells; i.e., an inactive cell was stimulated, while a hyperactive cell
responded to the same dosage with overstimulation which brought
about complete permeability or cell death.
Gum shellac seems to be a substance which stimulates the blood-
forming organs to a higher degree than any other substance hereto-
fore reported. Its complexity, toxicity, and the possible necessity for
intravenous administration renders therapeutic application as yet
undesirable. The effect of this drug on the endothelium may throw
some light on the various reactions of the hematopoietic system.
CONCLUSIONS.
1. The effect produced by intravenous administration of gum shel-
lac solution varied directly with the strength of the solution and the
amount injected.
(a) Strong solutions were intensely toxic and fatal to all the ani-
mals injected. Toxicity was abolished by the presence of carbon
particles in the solution.
768 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. III
(b) Medium strength solutions produced a marked normoblastosis
followed by an erythroblastosis if injections were continued, accom-
panied either by an initial rise of red blood cells and hemoglobin
followed by a decrease or an initial decline followed by an increase.
The decrease of erythrocytes and hemoglobin did not amount to an
actual anemia, and was usually concomitant with the greatest out-
pouring of nucleated red cells.
(c) Small doses elicited the same kind of response except that the
normoblastosis was less marked, the decrease of red ceils and hemo-
globin minimal or absent, the increase of red blood cells and hemoglo-
bin marked in most instances.
(d) Minimal doses elicited no appreciable reaction.
2. The bone marrow in animals killed after a course of injections
showed intense erythrocytic hyperplasia. This disappeared after a
variable length of time with a return of the bone marrow to apparently
normal condition.
3. Toxic effects with non-fatal doses in form of hemorrhages were
produced mainly in the bone marrow and occasionally in the kidney
under the following conditions.
(a) After one injection in an animal with hyperplastic marrow
(hemorrhages ih the bone marrow only).
(b) After the fourth and fifth dose when administered at long
intervals (4 to 19 day intervals).
(c) After one injection given 40 days after several successive injec-
tions (one animal only).
4. Small and divided doses administered at long intervals produced
no apparent ill effect.
5. Subcutaneous administrations did not elicit any marked systemic
reactions. Locally there was induration and edema.
6. The conclusion was drawn that gum shellac solution stimulates
markedly the production of erythrocytes in the bone marrow. The
mechanism of stimulation is not clear, but it seems unlikely that it is
due to destruction of red blood cells in the peripheral blood stream.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
1. Doan, C. A., Cunningham, R. S., and Sabin, F. R., Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Pub. No. 361, ContributionstoEmbryology, 1925, xvi, 163.
GULLI LINDH MULLER 769
2. Cunningham, R. S., Sabin, F. R., and Doan, C. A., Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Pub. No. 361, Contributions to Embryology, 1925, xvi, 227.
3.(a) Sabin, F. R., Doan, C. A., and Cunningham, R. S., CarnegieInstitution of
Washington, Pub. No. 361, Contributions to Embryology, 1925, xvi, 125.
(b) Sabin, F. R., Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1923,xxxiv, 277.
4.(a) Muller, G. L., J. Exp. Med., 1926,xliii, 533, (b) J. Exp. Med., 1927,xlv, 399.
5. Lamson, P. D., J. Pharmacol. and Exp. Therap., 1915,vii, 169.
6. Drinker, C. K., Oxford Medicine, Oxford University Press, New York, 1920,
ii, 509.
7.(a) Eddy, N. B., Endocrinology, 1921, v, 461. (b) Eddy, N. B., and Downs,
A. W., Am. J. Physiol., 1922-23, Ixiii,479.
8. Leake, C. D., and Evans, 7. S., Am. J. Med. Sc., 1924,clxviii, 819.
9. Danilewsky, B., and Selensky M., Arch. ges.Physiol., 1895, lxi, 264.
10. Krumbhaar, E. B., and Musser, J. H., Jr., J. Exp. Med., 1914,xx, 108.
11. Downs, A. W., and Eddy, N. B., Am. J. Physiol., 1922,lxii, 242.
12.(a) Leake, C. D., and Leake, E. W., J. Pkarmacol. and Exp. Therap., 1923-24,
xxii, 75. (b) Leake, C. D., and Bacon, F. J., J. Pkarmacol. and Exp.
T~rap., 1924,xxiii, 353.
13. Camot, P., and Deflandre, C., Compt. rend. Acad., 1906,cxliii, 384, 432.
14. Hooper, C. W., Robscheit, F. S., and Whipple, G. H., Am. J. Physiol., 1920,
lift, 263.
15. Whipple, G. H., and Robscheit, F. S., Arch. Int. Med., 1921, xxvii, 591.
16. Mussel J. H., Jr., Arch. Int. ]fled., 1921,xxviii, 638.
17. Nissen, R., Z. ges.exp. Med., 1922,xxviii, 193.
18. Schauman, O., and Rosenqvist, E., Z. klin. Med., 1898, xxxv, 126, 315.
19. Dalwig, H. C., Kolls, A. C., and Lowenhart, A. S., Am. J. Physiol., 1915,
x~x, 77.
20. Dieterich, K., Analysis of resins, balsams and gum-resins, Scott, Greenwood
and Co., London, 1901.
21. Coca, A. F., J. Immunol., 1919, iv, 219.
22. Hanzlik, P. J., and Karsner, H. T., J. Pkarmacol. and Exp. Therap., 1919-20,
xiv, 379, 425, 449, 479.
23. Manwaring, W. It., and Marino, H. D., J. Immunol., 1923, viii, 317.
24. Itami, S., Folia ha~matol.,1908,vi, 425.
25. Koeppe, H., Mi~nch.reed. Woch., 1895, xlii, 904.
26. Zenoni, C., VirchowsArch. path. Anat., 1895 cxxxix, 185.
27. Bunting, C. H., J. Exp. Med., 1906,viii, 625.
28. Morawitz, P., Ergebu. inn. Med. u. Kinderkeilk., 1913,xi, 277.
29. Cantacuzene, J., Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 1900,xiv, 378.
30. Schustroff, N., and Wlados, Ch., Folio h~ematol.,1923, xxix, 99.
31. Hertz, R., and Erllch, M., Deutsch. Arch. klin. Med., 1914,cxvi, 43.
32. Blumenthal, R., and Morawitz, P., Deutsch. Arch. klin. Med., 1907-O8,xcii, 25.
33. Ribadeau-Dumas, L., and Debr6, R., Compt. rend. Soc. biol., 1908, lxv, 289.
34. Metchnikoff, E., and Besredka, A., Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 1900, xiv, 402.
770 EXPERIMENTAL BONE MARROW REACTIONS. Ill
EXPLANATION OF PLATE 26.
FIG. 1. Rabbit H-83. General appearance of bone marrow immediately after
discontinuationof injections of gum shellac solution showing marked erythrocytic
hyperplasia. × about 685.
Fro. 2. Rabbit H-114. Shows a blood vessel lined with nucleated red cells in
various stages of maturation after a short course of injections of 1.1 per cent gum
shellac solution. × about 820.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICI NEVOL. XLV. PLATE 26.
FIG. 1.
F1o. 2.
(Muller: Experimentalbone marrow reactions. Ill°J
