SYNTHESIS AND RELEASE OF ERYTHROID COLONY- AND
BURST-POTENTIATING ACTIVITIES BY PURIFIED
POPULATIONS OF MURINE PERITONEAL MACROPHAGES*
BYJEFFREY I. KURLAND, PAUL A. MEYERS, ANDMALCOLM A. S. MOORE
From the Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Memorial SIoan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York
10021
The classical erythropoietic hormone, erythropoietin (Ep) 1 (1), has only recently
become amenable to study in vitro. The recent development of semisolid colony-
forming techniques (2, 3) similar to those used in the clonal detection of other
hematopoietic precursors has greatly facilitated the investigation of the role of Ep and
other humoral regulators in the control of at least two populations of committed
erythroid precursors. In the presence of Ep in vitro, murine bone marrow gives rise to
erythroid colonies after 2 d of incubation, deriving from a committed erythroid
precursor termed the colony-forming unit-erythroid (CFU-E), and large bursts after
9 d incubation, deriving from a precursor called the burst-forming unit-erythroid
(BFU-E) (4). Although it is now possible to demonstrate activity of Ep both in vivo
and in vitro, the concentrations required in vitro are much higher than those
detectable in vivo. This suggests that other host factors must potentiate the in vivo
activity of Ep. Although the nature and origin of such erythroid-potentiating activities
are not yet defined, recent studies by Iscove (5), Wagemaker (6), and Aye (7) have
shown the existence of substances that promote the action of Ep in vitro. The variously
named burst-promoting activities (BPA) or burst-feeding activities (BFA) may rep-
resent a class of molecules that are essential to the in vivo actions of Ep and may serve
to explain some of the alterations seen in in vivo erythropoiesis despite the absence of
measurable changes in the levels of Ep.
Numerous studies attest to the intimate physical relationship between macrophages
or reticular cells and developing cells of the erythroid series (8). The macrophage has
been proposed as a nurse cell that facilitates the transfer of iron to developing
erythroblasts. We have used a variety of hematopoietic tissues and cell-separation
procedures to demonstrate that the macrophage plays a role in the in vitro response
of both CFU-E and BFU-E to Ep. This potentiation of in vitro Ep activity is
independent of physical contact between macrophages and erythroid precursors,
cannot replace an absolute requirement for Ep, is produced by macrophages in the
absence of Ep, and is undetectable with any lymphocyte populations tested.
*Supported by National Cancer Institute grants CA-19052 and CA-08748, and the Gar Reichman
Foundation.
i Abbreviationsusedin thispaper: BFA,burst-feedingactivity(ies);BFU-E,burst-formingunit(s)-erythroid;
BPA, burst-promotingactivities;CFU-E, colony-formingunit(s)-erythroid; CSF, colony-stimulatingfac-
tors;Ep,erythropoietin;FCS,fetalcalfserum;GM,granulocyte-macrophage;PGE,E-seriesprostaglandins.
J. Exp.MEI).©The RockefellerUniversityPress • 0022-1007/80/04/0839/14 $1.00 839
Volume 151 April1980 839-852
840 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
Materials and Methods
Female B6D2F1 mice (Cumberland View Farms, Clinton, Tenn.), were used at 2-3 mo of
age to provide bone marrow, thymus, spleen, lymph node, and peritoneal cells.
Preparation of Cell Suspensions. Cells were prepared as previously described (9, 10). Briefly,
bone marrow was obtained by flushing the femurs from at least three mice with ice-cold serum-
free McCoy's 5A modified medium. The cells were pooled, a single-cellsuspensionwas prepared,
and the cells were washed three times by centrifugation. Spleen, thymus, axillary, mesenteric,
and inguinal lymph nodes were excised, sliced into 1-mm fragments, and teased through
stainless steel mesh. Large fragments of fat and connective tissue were removed, and the cells
were washed three times, counted, appropriately diluted, and kept on ice until needed. Resident,
noninduced peritoneal cells were collected by peritoneal lavage with ice-cold McCoy's 5A
medium that contained 1 U/ml of preservative-free heparin, washed twice at 4°C, suspended
in serum-free medium, and kept on ice until needed.
Cell Separations. Adherent cell-depleted populations were prepared by passage through
columns of Sephadex G-10 (Pharmacia Fine Chemicals, Div. of Pharmacia, Inc., Piscataway,
N. J.) with the method of Ly and Mischell (11), modified as previously described (10). Briefly,
2 ml of McCoy's 5A modified medium with 5% fetal calf serum (FCS) (Microbiological
Associates, Walkersville, Md.) that contained 1 × l0s spleen or 2.5 × 10v peritoneal cells/ml
was passaged through plastic columns of 10 ml of autoclaved Sephadex G-10 beads that were
prewarmed to 40°C in Hanks' balanced salt solution that contained 5% FCS. Cells recovered
in the column filtrate were predominantly lymphocytic and were washed three times, counted,
and appropriately diluted. In other experiments, various numbers of washed peritoneal cells
were allowed to adhere to 35-mm tissue culture dishes (Lux Scientific Corp., Newbury Park,
Calif.) in McCoy's 5A medium with 15% FCS for 1.5 h at 37°C. The nonadherent cells were
removed, washed, and saved. The cells that remained adherent after vigorous rinsing with
serum-free phosphate-buffered saline comprised 15-20% of the initial inoculum. Morphologi-
cally, the adherent cells were exclusively macrophages; they all phagocytosed latex beads and
stained positively with neutral red (12) and cytoplasmic nonspecific alpha-naphthyl acetate
esterase (13). The nonadherent cells were predominantly lymphocytes, but also contained a few
macrophages and granulocytic leukocytes.
Peritoneal cells were also separated by velocity sedimentation with a modification of the
method described by Miller and Phillips (14). Fractions of cells were examined for the number
of cells that adhered to plastic dishes as described above. The cells were also stained for
nonspecific esterase on etched grids, as described previously (10, 15), cellular morphology was
assessed by Wright-Giemsa staining of cytocentrifuged slide preparations, and phagocytosis by
quantitating uptake of 0.8-/~m latex beads. The adherent cells were used as feeder layers in
semisolid cultures designed to support the clonal growth of erythroid and granulocyte-macro-
phage precursors and B lymphocytes.
Culture and ScoringsofErythroid Colonies. Cells were cultured with the method of Iscove et al.
(3). Briefly, 2 X 10 nucleated bone marrow cells were suspended in 1 ml of alpha medium
(Flow Laboratories, Inc., Rockville, Md.) that contained 30 or 4% FCS, 1% bovine serum
albumin, 10-4 M 2-mercaptoethanol, and 0.8% methylcellulose (Dow Chemical Co., Midland,
Mich.). Various concentrations of Ep from several sources were added to the cultures. The
culture mixture was layered over underlayers that contained lymphoid or macrophage cell
populations. The underlayers, which were prepared by mixing cell suspensions with McCoy's
5A medium that contained 4 or 15% FCS and 0.5% agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, Mich.),
were established 24 h before the methylcellulose overlayers were added. Cell-free agar under-
layers were prepared where appropriate for controls, and in some experiments medium
conditioned by peritoneal macrophages was incorporated into the underlayer. The cultures
were incubated in a fully humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air at 37°C. Erythroid colonies
and bursts that developed in the overlayers were scored in situ with an inverted microscope.
Colonies were identified at 36-48 h by their characteristic appearance, as previously described
(4), and contained eight or more hemoglobinized cells. Erythroid bursts were scored after 9 d
of incubation.
Most of the experiments were performed with Ep kindly supplied by Dr. Norman Iscove
(Basel Institute of Immunology, Basel, Switzerland) with a 63 U/mg sp act that had been
J. I. KURLAND, P. A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE 841
TABLE I
Effect of Lymphoid and Peritoneal Cell FeederLayers on CFU-E and BFU-E
Number of CFU-E BFU-E
Feedercells cellsper
feeder -Ep +Ep* -Ep +Ep
None None 3 + 2 105 + 7 0 13± 2
105 5 ± 2 93 ± 6 0 13± 2
Spleen 5 × 105 3 ± 1 93 ± 11 0 11 ± 2
106 3+2 99±10 0 11±1
105 5 ± 2 103 ± 6 0 12± 2
Spleen 5× 105 3±3 88±5 0 13±2
(Sephadex G-10passaged) 106 4 ± 2 99 ± 6 0 11 ± 1
105 5 ± 2 96 ± 5 0 12 ± 2
Lymph node 5× 105 3± 1 97 4-8 0 1l ±2
106 2± 1 97± 11 0 10+ 1
105 4±2 95±8 0 12±2
Thymus 5X 105 3±2 90±8 0 13±2
106 2 :t: 2 84 ± 6 0 12 ± 2
105 18±2 159± 12 0 16±2
Peritoneal lavage 5 X 105 26 ± 4 283 ± 7 0 25 ± 5
105 54±3 311 ±23 0 32±3
Peritoneallavage 10n ND 95 ± 7 ND 12 ± 2
(Sephadex G-10passaged)
* 2 U Ep/ml. 63 U/mg sp act.
prepared from the urine of patients with aplastic anemia. Some experiments were performed
with Ep generously provided by Dr. Eugene Goldwasser (Department of Biochemistry, Uni-
versity of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.). This material had a 70,000 U/mg sp act and was pure by all
available biochemical separative teehniqu~/s (16).
Soft agar assays used for the detection of granulocyte-macrophageand B lymphocyte colony-
forming cells, supported by feeder layers of macrophages or conditioned medium, were prepared
as previously described (9, 10).
Results
Effect of Lymphoid and Peritoneal Cells on CFU-E and BFU-E. Methylcellulose eryth-
roid cultures were overlaid on agar underlayers to examine the effect of lymph node,
spleen, thymus, and peritoneal cells on the in vitro growth of CFU-E and BFU-E
(Table I). In the absence of Ep, few CFU-E and no BFU-E were detectable in cultures
prepared with a cell-free agar underlayer. The addition of 2 U/ml of Ep stimulated
developing 2-d CFU-E and permitted the growth of 9-d BFU-E. Feeder layers that
contained various concentrations of spleen, lymph node, and thymus cells had no
effect on CFU-E and BFU-E in either the absence or presence of Ep. In contrast,
feeder layers that contained peritoneal lavage ceils potentiated both CFU-E and
BFU-E in a dose-dependent fashion. Although peritoneal cells augmented CFU-E in
the absence of exogenously added Ep, the same feeder layers could not replace the
obligate requirement for Ep by BFU-E. Underlayers prepared from peritoneal cells
passaged over columns of Sephadex G-10 lost all ability to enhance erythroid
precursors. Underlayers prepared from spleen cells passaged over Sephadex G-10 had
no effect on erythroid colonies, which indicated that the Sephadex-passaged cell
suspensions were not inhibitory. Because mononuclear phagocytes represent a large
component of peritoneal cell suspensions, and Sephadex G-10 passage depletes such
842 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
cells, these results suggested a role for diffusible products of macrophages in the
potentiation of the proliferation of erythroid precursors in vitro.
The bone marrow ceils used as the source of target CFU-E and BFU-E also
contained appreciable numbers of granulocyte-macrophage (GM) precursors (CFU-
GM) that underwent clonal proliferation in the presence of colony-stimulating factors
(CSF) (GM-CSF) elaborated by the peritoneal cell underlayers. Myeloid colonies
were distinguished from erythroid colonies by gross morphology, the absence of
hemoglobinized cells, and by differences in times of appearance and persistence of
CFU-E and erythroid colonies. Individual colonies were removed for histochemical
identification to confirm their identification under the inverted microscope.
Potentiation of CFU-E and BFU-E by Adherent, but Not Nonadherent Cells. In addition
to depleting adherent cells from peritoneal cell suspensions, we examined whether
adherent peritoneal cells themselves were able to satisfy the unseparated peritoneal
cell requirement to potentiate CFU-E and BFU-E. Erythroid colony and burst
formation in methylcellulose were progressively stimulated by the addition of increas-
ing concentrations of Ep over cell-free agar underlayers.
Underlayers that contained the plastic-adherent cells from 5 × 105 unseparated
peritoneal lavage cells markedly augmented the numbers of both CFU-E and BFU-E
stimulated by each concentration of Ep tested. In contrast, underlayers that contained
5 × 105 nonadherent cells had only a slight effect on CFU-E and no effect on BFU-E
(Fig. 1). The small augmentation of CFU-E by the nonadherent peritoneal cells may
be a result of the poor efficiency of plastic adherence in depleting adherent cells in
comparison to Sephadex G-10. Because only ~20% of the noninduced peritoneal cells
adhere to plastic in the presence of serum (10), the stimulatory effects of the adherent
peritoneal cells represent the effects of only 1 × l0b cells that remained in the dish
after removal of the nonadherent cells before the addition of the agar. At the highest
concentration of Ep used, the adherent peritoneal cells were 35-40 times more potent
than the nonadherent cells in promoting erythroid colony formation for equivalent
cell concentrations. In the absence of added exogenous Ep, adherent cells potentiated
CFU-E, but not BFU-E, thus indicating that the adherent peritoneal macrophages
cannot replace the absolute Ep requirement for erythroid burst formation. The
amount of potentiation of both CFU-E and BFU-E increased with increasing Ep
concentrations.
Similar results were obtained with biochemically pure Ep (Fig. 2) (16). Despite the
large difference in purity of the Ep preparations, the presence of adherent macro-
phages stimulated a much greater number of CFU-E and BFU-E at each Ep
concentration; which indicated that both CFU-E and BFU-E become more responsive
to Ep when cultured in the presence of macrophages.
Effect of Indomethacin on the Potentiationof CFU-E and BFU-E by Macrophages. The E-
series prostaglandins (PGE) are reported to induce erythroid differentiation in Friend
erythroleukemia cells (17), potentiate the action of Ep in the stimulation of [14C]-
glucosamine, and potentiate ~gFe incorporation into newly formed erythrocytes (18).
In view of the recent demonstration that monocytes and macrophages synthesize and
release large amounts of PGE in vitro (19), we examined whether the elaboration of
PGE may, in part, mediate the erythroid-potentiating activity of macrophages (Fig.
3). The addition of indomethacin, an inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis (20), at
concentrations that completely inhibit PGE synthesis by macrophages (19), was
J. L KURLAND, P.
t~ ~ 240
t~J t.tJ 210
a 03
tO
03 +1 180
o~
~0_ "~ 150
x ',,D
120c,J
o
90
~ 60
U_ o
m
tZz;(M
(:3 laJ
,to 03
xg
w~
i
o
m m
A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE
0 i i i i i
80
70
60
50
2O
0
o .25 .5o Lo 2.o
Erythropoietin (units)
Fro. 1. Effects of adherent and nonadherent peritoneal cells on CFU-E and BFU-E. Methylcel-
lulose cultures prepared with 2 × 105 normal B6D2F] nucleated bone marrow cells with the
indicated concentrations of Ep were suspended over 0.5% agar underlayers that contained 5 X 105
unseparated washed peritoneal cells (A) the plastic-adherent cells from 5 X 10s peritoneal cells
(O), or control cell-free agar underlayers (O). The cultures were scored at 2 d for CFU-E (upper
panel) and at 9 d for BFU-E (lower panel). Results are the mean of triplicate cultures --. SEM.
843
without any effect on the enhancement of CFU-E and BFU-E by macrophages in
response to Ep. Synthetically pure PGE1 had a slight, but significant, enhancing effect
on CFU-E and BFU-E (Fig. 4).
Promotion of CFU-E and BFU-E As a Function of Macrophage Concentration. We inves-
tigated the effects of varying numbers of adherent peritoneal macrophages on the
growth of CFU-E and BFU-E in both the absence and presence of Ep (Fig. 5). In the
presence of plateau concentrations of Ep, the numbers of CFU-E and BFU-E were
progressively potentiated as a function of the number of adherent peritoneal macro-
phages in the underlayer. The enhancement of erythroid precursors approached a
plateau with >0.5 × 106 unseparated peritoneal cells. Because the nonadherent cells
were removed before the addition of the agar and because -20% of the peritoneal
cells adhered to plastic, underlayers established with 1 × 105 peritoneal cells contained
-2 X 104 adherent cells and potentiated CFU-E and BFU-E twofold. Plateau
stimulation was seen with more than from 7.5 × 104 to 1 × 105 macrophages per
underlayer.
In the absence of added exogenous Ep, no BFU-E could be stimulated by any of
the macrophage concentrations tested. In contrast, the numbers of CFU-E that were
detected in the absence of added exogenous Ep progressively increased with increasing
844 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
hi
rn +I
~ 0
xg
w~
~ o
~ rn
rn +1
z
t~
uJ~
t.L 0
rn cn
3OO
250
2O0
150
I00
50
0 i i i i i i
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
I0
0 i i i i i
0.25.50 1.0 2,0 4.0
Erylhrop0ietin (units)
FIG. 2. Effects of adherent peritoneal macrophages on the responsiveness of CFU-E and BFU-E to
purified Ep. Cultures were prepared as in Fig. 1, with 0.5% agar underlayers that contained the
plastic-adherent cells from 5 X 105 peritoneal cells (0) or no cells (O). The methycellulose overlayers
contained the indicated concentration of purified Ep (79,000 U/rag). Results are the mean +_ SEM.
concentrations of macrophages in the underlayer. Within the range of macrophages
used, there was no evidence of a plateau in this enhancing effect.
We investigated whether this macrophage stimulation of CFU-E in cultures pre-
pared in the absence of deliberately added Ep was truly independent of Ep. Because
Ep is a constituent of FCS, experiments were performed with the lowest possible
concentration of FCS that would support erythroid colony formation in the presence
of added Ep. By reducing the serum concentration from the usual 30% to 4% (Fig. 6),
no CFU-E developed in the absence or presence of increasing concentrations of
macrophages. The addition of 2 U of pure Ep alone stimulated low numbers of CFU-
E. Although macrophages were unable to stimulate CFU-E in the absence of Ep, the
presence of macrophages in the underlayers of cultures that contained pure Ep
profoundly and progressively potentiated the numbers of developing CFU-E.
Detection of E~ythroid-enhancingActivity in MacrophageCultureSupernate. Because mac-
rophages promoted erythroid colony and burst formation only in the presence of Ep
and were unable to stimulate CFU-E in the absence of Ep in cultures that contained
low concentrations of serum, we examined whether the presence of Ep itself was
essential for the production and/or release of the erythroid-enhancing activity by
macrophages. Supernatant media were harvested at different times from liquid
cultures that contained the adherent macrophages from 1 × 106 peritoneal lavage
cells prepared in the presence of 2% FCS. These conditioned media were tested at a
final concentration of 30% in cell-free agar underlayers for CFU-E-promoting activity
in methylcellulose cultures stimulated by 2 U of Ep (Fig. 7). Erythroid-enhancing
J. I. KURLAND, P. A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE
300
C~
o,1 Ld 250
m +~ 200
× ~ t50
~ ,oo
w ~
i
o •
nn
o.ff i i l l J
8O
7O
+1 60
_ _ __.~ 50
× 40
oJ o~ 3O
2ot/¢' . . . .
~ I0 / .
1313 O,j , , , ,
0 z5 50 ro 20 40
Erythropoietin (units)
FIG. 3. Effects of indomethacin on macrophage enhancement of CFU-E and BFU-E. Cultures
were prepared as in Fig. 2 with cell-free agar underlayers (open symbols) or underlayers that
contained the plastic-adherent cells from 5 × 105 peritoneal cells (closed symbols) with the indicated
concentrations of Ep. Replicate cultures were prepared in the presence of 1.4 × 10-7 M indomethacin
(A) or control diluent (0) and scored for CFU-E and BFU-E.
845
160
140
120
t~J
~n 100
-~ 8O
~ ~o
~ 40
2o
f
i i i i i
10-6 10-7 10-8 10-9 I0-10
MoPar PGE Concentration
FIG. 4. Effect of synthetic PGEj on CFU-E (0) and BFU-E (m). Single-layer methylcellulose
cultures of normal mouse bone marrow were prepared in the presence of the indicated concentrations
of PGE. Results are expressed as a percentage of erythroid colony formation in cultures that
contained a concentration of ethanol diluent identical to that in cultures that contained 10-~ M
PGE.
activity was detected after 24 h of macrophage incubation, peaked at 48 h, and
persisted over 144 h.
Sedimentation Velocity Characterization of the Cells That Elaborate Erythroid-enhancing
Activity. Peritoneal lavage cells separated by sedimentation velocity revealed two
846 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
35o
,,, 300
2oo /}"
a ! _/
oN
0.05.10 .20 .50 1.'0
80
oo 60
_~ 50o-~
× ~ 40
c,a • 30
~, ~ 20
o 10 ,
rn m
0
0.05.10 .20 .50 1.0
Peritoneal Ceils x 106
FIG. 5. Effects of varying macrophage concentrations of CFU-E and BFU-E. Agar underlayers
were prepared by allowing the indicated numbers of peritoneal cells to adhere to plastic. Normal
mouse marrow was used as a target in the methylcellulose overlayers in the absence (O) and
presence (O) of 2 U/ml of Ep.
major nucleated cell populations (Fig. 8 A). The first had a modal sedimentation
velocity of 3.6 mm/h and consisted of small lymphocytes. The second peak, which
sedimented at 6.3 mm/h, was composed of large mononuclear cells and macrophages.
All the cells that adhered to plastic dishes also stained positively with alpha-naphthyl
acetate esterase and actively phagocytosed 0.8-/im latex beads. Such cells closely
corresponded to the second major peak of nucleated cells that sedimented at 6.3 ram/
h.
Media conditioned by each of the sedimentation velocity fractions of peritoneal
lavage cells were tested for CFU-E-promoting activity in 30% underlayers with
methylcellulose overlayers that contained 2 U/ml of Ep (Fig. 8 B). The cells that
elaborated the erythroid-enhancing activity were characterized by a modal sedimen-
tation rate of 5.9 mm/h with a second peak of activity at 6.9 mm/h. The cells that
produced and released myeloid colony-stimulating activity had a sedimentation rate
of 5.9 mm/h and closely correponded to the modal population of cells that elaborated
activities that promoted CFU-E. In all instances, the cell populations that stimulated
GM colony formation and enhanced CFU-E appeared, morphologically, to be mac-
rophages and occurred among the adherent, phagocytic, and esterase-positive cells. In
J. I. KURLAND, P. A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE 847
,20
LU~
UJ 90
~003
0:3 +1
×(O 60 i
~2
~ 30
kL O
0 ~<x>o--o o o o
J)~\ %. I [ I
0 25.05.10 20 .50 1.0 2.0
Peritoneol Cells x IO6
FIG. 6. Stimulation of CFU-E by macrophages and purified Ep in low-serum cultures. Cultures
were prepared as in Fig. 5, with underlayers that contained the adherent macrophages from the
indicated numbers of peritoneal cells• Both the agar underlayers and the methylcellulose overlayers
were prepared with 4% rather than the usual 30% fetal calf serum. The methylcellulose overlayers
were prepared in the absence (O) or presence (Q) of 2 U/ml of Ep (79,000 U/mg).
c•Z;hi
× {.9
OJ
LUZ~
i
LL 0
(D m
00t
60
40
20
J i
0 24 418 7=2 9~6 120 144
Horvesting of Macrophoge
Supernate (hours)
Fro. 7. Erythroid-enhancing activity in media conditioned by macrophages in the absence of Ep.
The adherent cells from 1 X 10e peritoneal cells were allowed to condition media for the indicated
period of time. The conditioned medium was used at 30% vol/vol to prepare agar underlayers.
Methyleellulose overlayers were prepared with normal bone marrow cells and 2 U/ml of Ep. The
shaded area represents the mean + 1 SEM erythroid colonies that developed in cultures prepared
without conditioned medium.
contrast, the cells that elaborated murine B lymphocyte colony-stimulating activity
(10) were more heterogeneous, having a wide sedimentation distribution that peaked
at 5.4 mm/h, but in which the majority of activity was associated with the adherent
and phagocytic cell population.
848 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
I00
E 80
Z
~ eo
E
:~ 4o
g
2 2O
I00
"6
E 8o
o 6O
E 40
~ 2O
c~
B
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 I0
Sedimentation Velooty (mm/hour)
FIG. 8. Sedimentation velocity analysis of murine peritoneal cells for erythroid enhancing-activity.
(A) Fractions of peritoneal cells separated by sedimentation velocity at unit gravity were examined
for nucleated cells (O), plastic adherence and alpha-naphthyl acetate esterase positivity (O), and
phagocytosis of 0.8-/zm latex beads (/X). Results are expressed as percentage of respective peak value
(nucleated cells, 17 × 106; adherent esterase-positive cells, 98.8%; phagocytic cells, 97.2%). (B) Agar
underlayers were prepared from the plastic-adherent ceils obtained from 8 X l0s cells from each
fraction. Methylcellulose overlayers were prepared with normal mouse bone marrow in the absence
of exogenously added Ep and assayed for CFU-E at 2 d (O). GM precursors (O) were assayed for in
0.3% agar overlayers. B lymphocyte colony-forming cells (&) were assayed in 0.3% agar overlayers
that contained 5 X 104 lymph node cells that had been passaged over Sephadex G-10. The results
are expressed as percentage of respective peak values for each fraction. The curves indicate the
production of B lymphocyte CSF (A), GM-stimulating factor (O), or erythroid-enhancing activity
(O) by peritoneal adherent cells of various sedimentation velocities. All cultures were prepared in a
two-layer system with 0.5% agar underlayers.
Discussion
We report here that macrophages isolated from the peritoneal cavities of mice can
enhance both CFU-E and BFU-E in vitro. In constrast to cocuhivation techniques,
our use of a two-layer methylcellulose-agar culture assay selectively defined macro-
phage influence on in vitro erythropoiesis mediated by the release of diffusible
substances. This role for macrophages would therefore appear to be unrelated to that
previously documented by morphological studies that depicted an intimate physical
relationship between macrophages and developing erythroid cells in so-called
"erythroblastic islands" (8).
In the presence'of increasing number of adherent peritoneal macrophages, the
incidence of both CFU-E and BFU-E proportionately increased. Of interest, macro-
phages appeared to stimulate the growth of CFU-E, but not BFU-E, in the absence
of exogenous Ep. However, this apparent Ep independence was critically dependent
j. I. KURLAND, P. A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE 849
upon the concentration of FCS. Differing serum requirements for CFU-E and BFU-
E in methylcellulose cultures supplemented with albumin, transferrin, and lipids have
been reported by Iscove (21, 22). Reducing the FCS concentration from 30 to 4%
completely abrogated the ability of macrophages to enhance erythroid colony for-
mation in the absence of exogenously added Ep. The addition of apparently pure Ep
(16) to low-serum cultures stimulated CFU-E and allowed enhancement of erythroid
colony formation in response to increasing numbers of macrophages. Because Ep
exists in normal sera, the concentration of Ep in those cultures that contain the higher
concentration of FCS would presumably approach the concentrations normally seen
in vivo. The fact that macrophages enhance erythroid colony formation under these
conditions in which pharmacologic concentrations of Ep are not present supports a
physiologic regulatory role for macrophages in erythropoiesis.
Ep was not required for the macrophage to synthesize and release the erythroid-
enhancing activity, because serum-free media conditioned by macrophages alone
contained significant levels of enhancing activity. From a regulatory srandpoint it is
important to conclude that macrophages are not obligate for erythroid colony and
burst formation, but serve in a permissive capacity. The mechanism by which
macrophages potentiate the growth of CFU-E and BFU-E is poorly understood.
Titration experiments with two preparations of Ep, differing in their origin and
purity, indicate that the presence of macrophages augments the responsiveness of in
vitro clonable cells to a given concentration of Ep.
It has been reported that activities from lectin-stimulated murine spleen cells (5),
bone marrow (6), and human leukocyte-conditioned media (7), promote erythroid
burst formation in response to Ep. Such burst-promoting activities appear to reduce
the in vitro requirement for Ep, and thus appear similar to the in vitro erythroid-
enhancing activity produced by macrophages. Wagemaker (23) has reported that the
cells responsible for BFA production in murine bone marrow are radioresistant and
have a modal sedimentation velocity of 4.7 mm/h with a second peak of activity at
6.1 mm/h. Such sedimentation velocity characteristics are similar to the subpopula-
tion of peritoneal cells that we have shown to be adherent and responsible for the
erythroid-enhancing activity. There appears to be a physical similarity between those
murine bone marrow cells that produce BFA and the peritoneal macrophage subpop-
ulations that elaborate substances that influence Ep responsiveness. A similarly
radioresistant cell in murine spleen has been found to potentiate SaFe incorporation
into erythroid cells in response to Ep (24). The requirement for lectin in the production
of BPA by murine spleen cells suggests some modulatory role for T lymphocytes (5).
An in vivo role for macrophages in erythropoiesis is suggested by the observations of
Seki (25), who reported that macrophage-coated cellulose acetate membranes provide
a suitable environment for the focal proliferation and differentiation of erythroid as
well as myeloid precursors.
These data are in contrast to the findings of Nathan et al. (26), which demonstrated
that non-lectin-stimulated lymphocytes promoted erythroid colony formation in vitro.
Although these investigators used plasma-clot culture techniques in the study of
human peripheral blood BFU-E, it is difficult to envision any significant difference
between the two culture assays, or indeed a functional difference between murine and
human mononuclear phagocytes. Our study clearly documents that neither nonad-
herent, predominantly lymphocytic populations of resident peritoneal cells, nor
850 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
unseparated populations of lymphoid cells from thymus, lymph node, or spleen have
any effect on erythroid colony formation in the absence of lectin stimulation.
Furthermore, adherent-cell depletion of peritoneal cell suspensions by passage through
columns of Sephadex G-10 led to a loss of all erythroid-enhancing activity. An
explanation for the discrepancy between our findings and those of Nathan et al. (26)
may lie in the contamination of their lymphocyte preparations by monocytes.
Analysis by sedimentation velocity analysis confirmed that the cells that enhance
in vitro erythropoiesis are macrophages on the basis of morphologic, histochemical,
and functional criteria, and can be satisfactorily separated from lymphocytes. The
data also indicate that not all separated fractions of macrophages have the capacity
to synthesize and/or release equal amounts of this activity under unstimulated
conditions. This experimental evidence, which suggests mononuclear phagocyte het-
erogeneity, is of importance in view of the recent report that found that peripheral
blood monocytes inhibit, whereas macrophages stimulate, erythroid colony formation
in vitro (27). The purity of cell populations as well as concentration effects may well
be critical. There appears to be no significant difference between cells that release the
erythroid-enhancing activity and cells that produce GM colony-stimulating activity
(15) and B lymphocyte (10) colony-stimulating activities by sedimentation velocity
analysis. These findings suggest that the production and/or release of in vitro
hematopoietic-potentiating substances by macrophages may be limited, at least under
basal conditions, to a physically restricted subpopulation of macrophages.
The identity of the macrophage-derived substances that augment erythroid colony
formation is, at present, unknown and awaits biochemical characterization. The
cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin was used to investigate a role for prostaglandin
or products of arachidonic acid because of reports that the addition of synthetic PGE
stimulate erythroid cells in vitro (17, 18). However, in the presence of indomethacin
at concentrations that completely inhibit PGE synthesis by macrophages (19), there
was no change in the enhancement of CFU-E or BFU-E by macrophages. It would
therefore be difficult to substantiate any role for macrophage-derived PGE in stimu-
lating the growth of CFU-E and BFU-E in vitro. Additional work needs to be done
before any role for the oxygenation products of arachidonic acid metabolism can be
dismissed from consideration as regulators of erythropoiesis in vitro.
This report documents yet another population of hematopoietic cells that can be
cloned in vitro and is influenced by substances generated by mononuclear phagocytes.
The detection of an activity similar to BPA in mouse serum (23), as well as in media
conditioned by peripheral blood leukocytes, presumably implies that neither eryth-
roid-enhancing activities nor the cells that give rise to them are restricted to the bone
marrow or spleen. Although elevated levels of an erythroid-enhancing activity have
reportedly been demonstrated in the serum of mice under conditions of perturbed
erythropoiesis (23), it remains to be seen whether these activities play a genuine
regulatory role in the intact animal.
Summary
We investigated the effects of murine resident peritoneal macrophages on the in
vitro proliferation of erythropoietin (Ep)-sensitive committed precursors colony-form-
ing unit-erythroid (CFU-E) and burst-forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E) with a two-
layer cloning system of methylcellulose and semisolid agar. The addition of increasing
J. I. KURLAND, P. A. MEYERS, AND M. A. S. MOORE 851
numbers of macrophages to the agar underlayer resulted in a progressive increase in
the numbers of both CFU-E and BFU-E that proliferated in the presence ofEp. CFU-
E, but not BFU-E, proliferated to form colonies in the absence Qfexogenously added
Ep, and this proliferation was enhanced in a dose-dependent fashion by the presence
of macrophages in the underlayer. The enhancing effects of a given number of
macrophages and a given concentration of Ep were greater than the sum of the
individual effects of macrophages and Ep alone. This erythropoietic syngerism was
more evident with BFU-E because burst formation was not seen in the absence of
exogenously added Ep. Macrophage underlayers stimulated three to five times the
number of erythroid bursts seen with Ep alone. Cell-free agar underlayers or agar
underlayers prepared with nonadherent peritoneal cells or unseparated cells from
thymus, lymph node, or spleen failed to augment Ep-dependent erythroid colony
formation. No enhancement of CFU-E or BFU-E was demonstrable after depletion of
adherent cells from peritoneal cell suspensions by passage over columns of Sephadex
G-10. Analysis by sedimentation velocity of peritoneal cells confirmed that the cells
responsible for elaborating the erythroid-enhancing activity were macrophages on the
basis of morphologic, histochemical, and functional criteria. Serum-free media con-
ditioned by macrophages in the absence of Ep contained the erythroid-enhancing
activities, which indicated that Ep was not required for the elaboration of these
diffusible substances. These studies indicate that although macrophages are not
obligate for the growth of erythroid precursors, they serve as an important source of
diffusible factors that reduce the in vitro requirement for Ep.
Receivedfor publication 18 December 1979.
References
h Erslev, A. J. 1955. Physiologic control of red cell production. Blood. 10:954.
2. Stevenson, J. R., A. A. Axelrad, D. L. Mcleod, and M. M. Shreeve. 1974. Induction of
colonies of hemoglobin-synthesizing cells by erythropoietin in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 68:1542.
3. Iseove, N. N., F. Sieber, and K. H. Winterhalter. 1974. Erythroid colony formation in
culture of mouse and human bone marrow: analysis of the requirements for erythropoietin
by gel filtration and affinity chromatography on agarose-concanavalin A.J. Cell. Physiol.
83:309.
4. Gregory, C.J. 1976. Erythropoietin sensitivity as a differentiation marker in the hemato-
poietic system: studies of three erythropoietic colony responses in culture.J. Cell Physiol. 89:
289.
5. Iscove, N. N. 1978. Erythropoietin-independent stimulation of early erythropoiesis in adult
marrow cultures by conditioned media from lectin stimulated spleen cells.In Hematopoietic
Cell Differentiation. D. W. Golde, M.J. Cline, D. Metcalf, and C. F. Fox, editors. Academic
Press, Inc., New York. 10:37.
6. Wagemaker, G. 1978.Induction oferythropoietin responsiveness in vitro. In Hematopoietic
Cell Differentiation. D. W. Golde, M.J. Cline, D. Metcalf, and C. F. Fox,editors. Academic
Press, Inc., New York. 10:109.
7. Aye, M. T. 1977. Erythroid colony formation in cultures of human marrow: effect of
leukocyte conditioned medium. J. Cell, Physiol. 91:69.
8. Bessis, M. 1973. In Living Blood Cells and Their Uhrastructure. Springer-Verlag New
York, Inc., New York. 87.
9. Kurland, J. I., and M. A. S. Moore. 1977. Modulation of hemopoiesis by prostaglandins.
Exp. Hematol. (Copenh.). 5:357.
852 MACROPHAGES AND ERYTHROPOIESIS
10. Kurland, J. I., P. W. Kincade, and M. A. S. Moore. 1977. Regulation of B-lymphocyte
clonal proliferation by stimt~latory and inhibitory macrophage-derived factors.J. Exp. Med.
146:1420.
11. Ly, I. A., and R. I. Mischell. 1974. Separation of mouse spleen cells by passage through
columns of Sephadex G-10. J. Immunol. Methods. 5:239.
12. Gesner, B. M., andJ. G. Howard. 1967. In Handbook of Experimental Immunology. D. M.
Weir, editor. Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd., Oxford. 2:1019.
13. Yam, L. T., C. Y. Li, and W. H. Crosby. 1971. Cytochemical identification of monocytes
and granulocytes. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 55:283.
14. Miller, R. G., and R. A. Phillips. 1969. Separation of cells by velocity sedimentation. J.
Cell Physiol. 73:191.
15. Kurland, J. I., L. H. Pelus, P. Ralph, R. S. Bockman, and M. A. S. Moore. 1979. Induction
of prostaglandin E synthesis by normal and neoplastic macrophages: a new role for colony
stimulating factor(s) distinct from its effects on myeloid progenitor cell proliferation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 76:2326.
16. Miyake, T., C. K. H. Kung, and E. Goldwasser. 1977. Purification of human erythropoietin.
J. Biol. Chem. 252:5558.
17. Tabuse, Y., H. Furusawa, H. Eisen, and K. Shibata. 1977. Prostaglandin E, and inducer
of erythroid differentiation of Friend erythro-leukemia cells. Exp. Cell Res. 108:41.
18. Dukes, P. P., N. A. Shore, D. Hammond, J. A. Ortega, and M. C. Datta. 1973. Enhancement
of erythropoiesis by prostaglandins.J. Lab. Clin. Med. 82:704.
19. Kurland, J. I., and R. S. Bockman. 1978. Prostaglandin E production by human blood
monocytes and mouse peritoneal macrophages.J. Exp. Med. 147:952.
20. Flower, F., R. Gryglewski, K. Herbaczynska-Cedro, and J. R. Vane. 1972. Effects of anti-
inflammatory drugs on prostaglandin biosynthesis. Nat. New Biol. 238:104.
21. Guilbert, L. J., and N. N. Iscove. 1976. Partial replacement of serum by selenite, transferrin,
albumin and lecithin in hemopoietic cell cultures. Nature (Lond.). 263:594.
22. Iscove, N. N., and L. J. Guilbert. 1978. Erythropoietin-independence of early erythropoiesis
and a two-regulator model of proliferative control in the hematopoietic system. In In Vitro
Aspects of Erythropoiesis. M. J. Murphy, C. Peschle, A. S. Gordon, and E. A. Mirand,
editors. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York. 3.
23. Wagemaker, G. 1978. Cellular and soluble factors influencing the differentiation of
primitive erythroid progenitor cells (BFU-E) in vitro. In In Vitro Aspects of Erythropoiesis.
M. J. Murphy, C. Peschle, A. S. Gordon, and E. A. Mirand, editors. Springer-Verlag New
York, Inc., New York. 44.
24. Van Zant, G. E., E. Goldwasser, and J. M. Baron. 1976. Study of hematopoietic microen-
vironment in vitro. Nature (Lond.). 260:609.
25. Seki, M. 1973. Hematopoietic colony formation in a macrophage layer provided by
intraperitoneal insertion of cellulose acetate membranes. Transplantation (Baltimore). 16:544.
26. Nathan, D. G., L. Chess, D. G. Hillman, B. Clarke, J. Breard, E. Merler, and D. E.
Housman. 1978. Human erythroid burst-forming unit: T-cell requirement for proliferation
in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 147:324.
27. Reinhard, J. J., E. D. Zanjani, B. Nomdedeu, B.J. Gormus, and M. E. Kaplan. 1978. Cell-
cell interactions in erythropoiesis. Role of human monocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 62:979.
