IMMUNE RESPONSE IN HUMANS AFTER VACCINATION
WITH VACCINIA VIRUS: GENERATION
OF A VIRUS-SPECIFIC CYTOTOXIC ACTIVITY BY
HUMAN PERIPHERAL LYMPHOCYTES*
By LUC H. PERRIN,~ ROLF M. ZINKERNAGEL, ANDMICHAEL B. A. OLDSTONE
(From the Departments of lmmunopathology and Cellular and Developmental Immunology,
Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La Jolla, California 92037)
The outcome of a virus infection mainly relates to the respective characteris-
tics of the viruses, the cells they replicate in, and the immune system of the host
(1-4). The immune response of man is usually analyzed in terms of humoral or
cellular reactions. Much data have accumulated on humoral responses to viral
infections; in fact, a rise in antibody titer against a given virus or its antigenic
components is currently used to identify the agents causing a patient's infection
(5). Specific anti-viral antibodies are also a major factor in inhibiting the spread
of viral infection, resulting in the patient's recovery from a primary infection
and the prevention of reinfection with the same agent (6-8). In vitro, specific
antibodies can reduce the infectivity of most viruses that bud from cells' plasma
membranes and, when fresh serum is added to the culture as a source of
complement, can lyse virus-infected cells (9, 10). In cooperation with lymphoid
cells isolated from human peripheral blood, anti-viral antibodies lyse virus-
infected target cells in vitro, although neither reactant alone is lytically efficient
(11-14).
Yet, three lines of evidence strongly suggest that cell-mediated immunity is involved
in recovery from viral infection in man. First, delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH)1
reactions can be generated after many virus infections. Jenner probably observed such a
reaction in a patient previously exposed to cowpox and variolated (15). Others have
reported DTH reactions in humans infected with a variety of viruses (16, 17). Second,
patients with congenital or acquired gamma globulin deficiencies recover normally from
infections with measles and varicella viruses. In contrast, children having profound T-
cell defects associated with thymic lymphopenia or Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome develop
* This is publication no. 1323from the Department ofImmunopathology,and publication no. 33
from the Department of Cellular and Developmental Immunology, Scripps Clinic and Research
Foundation, La Jolla, Calif. 92037. Supported in part by U. S. Public Health Service grants NS-
12428, AI-07007,and AI-13779.
Supported by a Fellowship of the Swiss Multiple Sclerosis Society.
1Abbreviations used in this paper: ADCC, antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity; CMV, cyto-
megalovirus; DTH, delayed-type hypersensitivity; EA, ox erythrocytes sensitized with rabbit
IgG anti-ox erythrocyte; FCS, fetal calf serum; MOI, multiplicity of infection, NP-40, Nonidet
P-40; ORBC, ox erythrocyte; PBL, peripheral blood lymphocytes; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline;
PFU, plaque-forming units; SRBC, sheep red blood cells.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE" VOLUME 146, 1977 949
950 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
major complications like giant cell pneumonia and encephalitis after measles virus
infection (18-20). Vaccination of these children with vaccinia virus has led to generalized
vaccinia infection (21). Third, experiments involving either virus-infected murine target
cells mixed with thymus-derived (T) lymphocytes from infected mice or intact mice
undergoing experimental depletion and reconstitution of T cells both provide clear
evidence of a cellular immune defense mechanism against a variety of virus infections
like ectromelia, vaccinia, and lymphocytic choriomeningitis (22-24). Murine cytotoxic T
cells can also be generated in vitro during a secondary immune response to virus (25).
Observations made in mice suggest directions for seeking T-lymphocyte-mediated
responses in humans. The time-course of murine T-cell responses is sharply limited after
primary infection, since the number of cytotoxic T cells is maximal 5-7 days after
infection and negligible by the 12th day. Moreover, cytotoxic T cells lyse virus-infected
murine target cells only when both cell types share at least one gene product of the K or D
region of the major murine histocompatibility (H-2) complex (26, 27).
With this background information, we decided to investigate cell-mediated
cytotoxic responses in humans against virus-infected target cells and determine
whether this reaction is related to HLA specificities, the human counterpart of
murine K and D specificities. We wanted to see whether a similar time-course to
raise cytotoxic cells and a genetic restriction occurred in man. We chose to
immunize volunteers with vaccinia virus because its effects are relatively
inocuous and recovery is uncomplicated. Further, vaccinia virus, and the closely
related ectromelia virus, are known to elicit well-defined cytotoxic T-cell re-
sponses with H-2 restriction in mice (22, 27).
Materials and Methods
Immunization of Human Subjects. Nonimmune (normal) peripheral blood lymphoid cells
were obtained from blood of human volunteers before immunization and from other volunteers
who were not immunized. Immune cells came from 12normal adults given vaccinia virus vaccine.
These included nine males and three females, 21-43 yr of age, all free of skin disease, allergic
history,and ocular infection.All subjectshad been vaccinated with vaccinia virus during child-
hood, and two had been revaccinated 2 or more years beforethisstudy.For thisstudy,each subject
underwent a 2 cm 2 scarificationwith smallpox vaccine (Lederle Laboratories,Pearl River, N. Y.)
in the area of the leftdeltoidmuscle, and 36-48 h later induration and redness developed with
resolution within 7-10 days. Vesicles and regional adenopathy appeared by 72 h. No adverse
reactionsdue to vaccination occurred. For most subjects,30-50 ml ofblood was obtained from the
antecubital vein on the day of vaccination (day 0) and on days 1, 3, 5, 7, and 12 aftervaccination;
others gave blood on days 0, 6, 7, 8, and 21. Drawn blood was transferred sterilyto 50-ml plastic
tubes containing heparin (20 U heparin/ml blood).
PeripheralBlood Lymphocytes (PBL). Peripheral blood lymphomonocytes were obtained after
Ficoll-Hypaque gradients (28).Monocytes were removed by adherence to plasticdishes afteri h at
37°C in 5% CO2. As tested by eosin uptake, more than 95% of monocytes were removed by this
procedure. PBL were separated into T cellsand T-depleted PBL by using the abilityof T cellsto
make rosettes with sheep erythrocytes (SRBC) treated with neuraminidase (13, 29). In most
experiments the T cellsin the pelletobtained from the Ficoll-Hypaque gradient were carefully
resuspended with 5-10 ml of medium [RPMI 1640 + 20% fetalcalfserum (FCS)], and the T-cell
rosetteswere rerun through a second Ficoll-Hypaque gradient.T cellswere freed from SRBC by
warming resuspended cellsat 37°C for 20 rain,shaking vigorously, and reapplying to a Ficoll-
Hypaque gradient or by lysisofthe SRBC afterbrieflyresuspending the pelletin a low ionicacid
solution [1/3 Eagle's minimal essential medium (MEM) and 2/3 distilledwater] followed by
addition ofMEM containing 10% FCS and sodium bicarbonate.In both cases T cellswere washed
twice aftermanipulation. The T-cellpopulation recovered was greater than 98% pure on the basis
ofrerosettingwith SRBC treated with neuraminidase and by the absence ofsurface IgG markers
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 951
as tested by immunofluorescence (less than one cell positive per 200) using polyvalent fluorescein-
ated goat anti-human IgG.
In some experiments the PBL were segregated into populations of Fc receptor-positive and
negative cells by using ox erythrocytes (ORBC) treated with a subagglutinating dose of rabbit IgG
antisera to ORBC (EA) (30). In brief, 5 x 106 PBL in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS were
incubated at a ratio of 1:25 with EA for 5 rain at room temperature and spun at 1,000 rpm for 10
rain in an International PR2 centrifuge. After an incubation of 30 rain at room temperature and
gentle resuspension, the mixture was layered on the top of a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient and spun for
15 rain at 2,200 rpm using an International PR-2 centrifuge (Damon Int. Equip. Corp., Needham
Heights, Mass.). Fc.negative PBL at the interface were collected, washed twice, counted, and
resuspended at the desired concentration. Fc-positive cells were found in the pellet, resuspended
in the same medium, and rerun through a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient, after which the ORBC
were lysed by treatment with the low ionic acid solution. The lymphoid cells were pelleted and
resuspended in MEM supplemented with 10% FCS and bicarbonate. ARer 60 min incubation
at room temperature, lymphoid cells were washed twice and resuspended at the desired con-
centration. The subpopulations of Fc-positive and negative cells were each more than 95% pure
as judged by reresetting with EA. In various experiments the percent of Fc-positive cells in PBL
varied from 21 to 40%. The T-celland T-depleted populations described above were alsosegregated
into Fc-positiveand negative cellswith the above method.
Virus. The WR strain ofvaccinia virus originallypassed in L 929 cellswas a giftfrom Dr. W.
K. Joklik, Duke University, Durham, N. C. This virus was used to infectHeLa cellsgrown in
suspension in 2,000-mi flaskscontaining 400 ml of Spinner's medium supplemented by 10% FCS,
2% glutamine, and antibiotics (penicillin,75 U/ml; streptomycin, 75 ~g/ml). The cells were
infected at a multiplicityof infection (MOI) of 0.5-1. Supernatant fluidwas removed after 48 h,
and vaccinia virus was isolatedfrom the cells,sonicated,and banded in a sucrose density gradient
(31).The virus pool used titered2.5 × 109 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml on Vero cells(32).Wild-
type Edmousten measles virus was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Rock-
ville,Md. and passed on HeLa cells(33).
CellLines. Skin flbroblastswere obtained from biopsiestaken at the forearms ofeight of the
vaccinated volunteers, and processed as previously described (13).HeLa cellswere obtained from
Eric Stanbridge, Department of Microbiology, University of California Medical School, Irvine,
Calif. and were devoid of mycoplasma contamination. Another line of HeLa cellspersistently
infected with measles virus was raised as previously described (33). The Vero cells (monkey
kidney) and the mouse cell line L 929 were initiallyobtained from Flow Laboratories, Inc.,
Rockville, Md. and propagated in our laboratory. All four celllineswere grown as monolayers in
75 cm sFalcon plasticflasksat 37°C in a moist atmosphere containing 5% COs. The growth medium
consisted of MEM supplemented with 10% FCS heated at 56°C for 30 rain, bicarbonate, I%
glutamine, and antibiotics(penicillin,75 U/ml; streptomycin, 75 ~g/ml).
HLA Determination. HLA determinations on human PBL and on HeLa cellswere performed
in the laboratory of Paul Terasaki, UCLA Medical School, Los Angeles, Calif.,and by Michele
Pellegrino, Department of Molecular Immunology, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La
Jolla, Calif.
Antisera, Purification of Human Ig and of Fab's Fragments from Rabbit Anti-Human
IgG. Human IgG obtained from Pentex Inc., Kankakee, Ill. was chromatographed through a DEAE-
cellulose column equilibrated with 0.175 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.8 (13). Rabbits
were immunized at 3-wk intervals with Img of this IgG in Freund's complete adjuvant for the first
inoculation, while all subsequent immunizations were done with Freund's incomplete adjuvant.
After 3 mo of immunization, rabbits were bled several times, and sera containing more than i mg
of specific antibody against human IgG/ml were pooled. In order to purify the Fab'~ fragment from
this anti-human IgG, 250 ml of the rabbit-pooled antisera heated for 45 rain at 56°C was passed
through a 100 ml Sepharese 6B column to which more than 200 mg of human IgG had been coupled
(34). After extensive washing with 1 M NaC1, and 20% sucrose in 0.1 M NaC1, specific rabbit IgG
against human IgG was eluted with 1 M acetic acid in 0.5 M NaC1, neutralized immediately,
concentrated, digested with pepsin (14), and rechromatographed through a Sephadex G-200
column. Fab's from normal rabbit IgG was purified by chromatography through a DEAE-cellulose
column equilibrated with 0.175 M PBS, pH 7.2, and digested with pepsin (13). To obtain rabbit
antibody to vaccinia virus, two rabbits were immunized subcutaneously in multiple locations with
952 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
5 × 10~PFU of vaccinia virus at 1-wk intervalsfora month and then bled.The resultingantisera
were heat inactivated(56°C,45 min). The IgG fractionwas purifiedby DEAE-cellulose chromatog-
raphy, absorbed on HeLa cell monolayers, and conjugated with fluoresceinisothiocyanate as
reported (10).
Rabbit ORBC antiserum was raised by immunizing rabbits with increasing amounts of 10%
ORBC in PBS (0.5-3ml) twice weekly for a month. The hemagglutinating titerof the IgG anti-
ORBC and itsspecificitywere determined by published immunochemical tests(30).
Human IgG was purifiedfrom three human sera harvested from the volunteers beforevaccina-
tion with vaccinia virus (M. O.) and 15 days after vaccination (M. O. and J. H.). The purified
fractions (10 mg/ml PBS) were shown to be free of contaminants by both Ouchterlony and
immunoelectrophoresis analyses. IgG from a subject (M. O.) who was immune to vaccinia virus
was absorbed by incubating 3 ml of 10 mg immune IgG/ml PBS for I h at 37°C and then for2 h at
4°C with a confluent monolayer ofL 929 cellsgrown in a T75 Falcon flask (Falcon Plastics,Div. of
BioQuest, Oxnard, Calif.)and previously infected with vaccinia virus. The procedure was re-
peated twice, and a controlwas established by absorbing 3 ml ofthe same IgG preparation with
uninfected L 929 monolayers. The IgG preparations were centrifugedfor i h at 40,000rpm using a
SW40 rotor in a L 65 ultracentrifuge(Beckman Instruments, Inc.,Fullerton,Calif.)to eliminate
IgG aggregates, celldebris,virus-antibody complexes, and freevaccinia virus.
Detection of Viral Antigens on Cells. Living fibroblastsinfected with vaccinia virus and
uninfected were assayed for the presence of surface viralantigens by directimmunofluorescence
using fluoresceinatedrabbit IgG anti-vacciniavirus.Procedures, equipment used, and cellhan-
dling have been described (33).Similar procedures and equipment were used forthe detectionof
membrane-bound immunoglobulins on lymphocytes.
Cytolytie 5~Cr-Release Assay. Targets included human fibroblasts,HeLa, or L 929 cells.Cells
were grown as monolayers in Falcon T75 plasticflasks, trypsinized,washed twice in growth
medium, and dispersed in solution.100-~I samples containing 1-2 x 104cellsand 4/~Ci 5~Crwere
added to each well of6 mm flat-bottomedFalcon TC 3040 microtestplates.After 10 h incubation at
37°C a confluent monolayer containing I x 104or 2 × 104fibroblastsand 2 × 104HeLa or L 929 cells
formed. The monolayers were then washed twice and incubated with either50/~lofgrowth media
containing 4-8 × 104PFU ofvaccinia or 50 btlofgrowth media for4 h. After an additionalwash the
medium was removed and one drop (30 ~l) of growth medium was added to each well followed by
the additionofimmune reagents or growth medium. When anti-vacciniaantibodiesor rabbitFab's
anti-human IgG and lymphocytes were used simultaneously, a measured amount of antibody or
rabbitFab'2 dilutedin 100 ~I ofgrowth media was added firstand allowed to reactwith the target
cellsfor30 min beforethe additionoflymphocytes in 100 ~l volume. The finalvolume was adjusted
to 350/~lby the additionofgrowth medium. When cellsinfectedwith measles viruswere used, the
cellswere labeled with 5~Cr (4 ~Ci/well) for 2 h and washed twice. Then the target cellswere
infectedat a MOI of 3, incubated overnight, and finallywashed twice before use.
The addition of350 ~I ofwater and 5 pl of 5% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40) (used as maximal release)
released 80-90% of the total radioactivity.100-pI samples were removed at 6 and/or 18 h and
counted in tubes in a Searle Automatic Gamma Counter (SearleAnalytic Inc.,Des Plaines,Ill.).
All the determinations were run at least in triplicate.Variability between triplicatesamples
never exceeded 10% and averaged 4% ofthe totalsample count. The percent of 5~Cr released was
calculatedaccording to the followingformula: [(E-S)/(MAX-S)] × 100,where E isthe s~Crreleased
from infectedtarget cellsin the presence of PBL and anti-viralantibody (13,35);S is the 5~Cr
released from infectedor uninfected cellsin medium or in the presence of anti-viralantibody or
other reagents but in the absence ofPBL (thehigher value was used forcalculations);and MAX is
the total51Crreleasedfrom infectedtargetcellsupon additionofwater and NP-40. s~Crreleasewas
calculated separately in each condition for beth infectedand uninfected cells,and the release
induced by PBL or lymphocyte subpopulations from uninfected target cellswas subtracted from
the values obtained with infectedtarget cells.
Results
Preliminary Experiments. To determine optimal conditions for virus expres-
sion on the cell surface, human fibroblasts of different HLA specificities were
infected with vaccinia virus at MOIs of 0.1, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16. The living
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 953
fibroblasts, harvested and incubated with fluoresceinated rabbit antibody to
vaccinia virus, expressed viral antigens on their surface by 1 h after infection,
and by 4 h more than 95% of the fibroblasts were strongly positive when infected
at an MOI of 2 or greater. 4 h after infection with an MOI of 0.1, results were
inconsistent with between 1 and 10% of cells expressing viral antigens on their
surfaces, whereas at an MOI of 1 approximately 50% of the cells were positive
(42, 51, and 59% in three different experiments). Uninfected fibroblasts did not
express vaccinia virus antigens. HeLa and murine L 929 cells responded to this
infection similar to the fibroblasts.
To obtain the most accurate measurements of cell lysis, three different fibro-
blast lines at varying concentrations were settled into fiat-bottomed wells and
labeled 12 h later with 51Cr. Vaccinia virus was added at MOIs of 2, 4, 8, and 16,
and the spontaneous release for virus-infected and uninfected cells was deter-
mined. In an 18 h assay, it was found that the spontaneous release was minimal
at MOIs of 2 or 4 (22 _+3.4%, 24.5 _+4.1%, and 21.3 _+2.1%, respectively, for the
three different infected target cells at a MOI of 4) and that between 0.5 × 104 and
4 × 104 target cells per well functioned adequately. Spontaneous release of 51Cr
from uninfected and virus-infected cells was approximately the same. In subse-
quent experiments the number of fibroblasts used was 1-2 × 104per well and the
MOI 4.
Reports conflict as to whether normal human PBL lyse autologous or homolo-
gous human skin fibroblasts (36, 37). Therefore, we initially studied the activity
of PBL and T or T-depleted (PBL depleted of SRBC-rosetting lymphocytes)
lymphocyte subpopulations from three individuals before vaccination against
autologous or homologous fibroblasts infected or not with vaccinia at different
lymphocyte to target cell ratios. As seen in Table I, all PBL populations lysed
both autologous and homologous fibroblasts, infected or not, at a 25:1 lympho-
cyte to target cell ratio. On occasion, greater lytic activity was detected against
uninfected fibroblasts than against infected cells (data not shown). Fig. i shows
that lysis of uninfected fibroblasts was minimal with T cells and with PBL
depleted of Fc receptor-bearing cells. (Similar results were obtained with in-
fected fibroblasts and PBL from persons who were not revaccinated.) In con-
trast, lysis was maximal with T-depleted lymphocytes (Fig. 1). In all results the
amount of immune specific 51Cr release was subsequently expressed after sub-
traction of the value obtained on uninfected fibroblasts.
Cytotoxicity Induced by PBL after Vaccinia Virus Revaccination
TIME-COURSE AND EFFECT OF LYMPHOCYTE TO TARGET RATIO IN AN AUTOLOGOUS
SYSTEM. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of S~Crspecifically released from vaccinia-
infected autologous fibroblasts by immune PBL from three volunteers. PBL
were harvested from the donors at various intervals after vaccination and added
to fibroblasts, which were then assayed for 51Crrelease over several time points.
~Cr release was usually maximal around day 7 and decreased markedly by day
11. Immune PBL of five other vaccinated individuals, not shown, produced
similar degrees of cytotoxicity with similar time-courses and kinetics. PBL of
three individuals were also assayed 21 and 30 days after vaccination, and the
specific 5~Cr release from infected target cells was always less than 10% at a
lymphocyte target cell ratio of 25:1. Generally, 5~Crrelease was not increased at
954 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
TABLe. I
Lysis of Human Fibroblasts Infected with Vaccinia Virus by Different PBL Populations
Obtained from Nonrevaccinated Humans*
% Specific slCr release from human fibroblast from
donor (HLA-A/B):
Donor L.P. (1, -/8, 37) M.O. (2, 26/12,38) M.D. (2, 3/7, 17)
In- Unin- In- Unin- In- Unin-
fected fectod fected fectod fected fected
L. P. Total PBL (1, -/8, 37) 27~ 28 25 26 28 29
T cells 20 21 22 19 21 23
T-depleted PBL 32 31 29 29 32 33
S. O. Total PBL (2,26/12, 38) 26 27 24 26 27 29
T cells 20 18 23 20 21 23
T-depletedPBL 29 28 29 30 31 33
M.D. Total PBL (2, 3•7, 17) 30 31 27 29 31 32
T cells 22 21 22 21 21 22
T-depleted PBL 35 33 30 31 35 35
Spontaneous release 18 17 20 18 19 18
* Total PBL, T, and T-depleted PBL (totalPBL depleted of lymphocytos which rosette with SRBC
treated with neuraminidase) from nonrevaccinated subjects were added to virus-infected or
uninfected fibroblasts at an effector to target cell ratio of 25:1. Amount of 51Cr specifically
released after 18 h incubation was determined (see Materials and Methods).
Number reflectsthe s'Cr released without correction as a mean oftriplicate determinations. The
standard error of the mean (SEM) did not exceed 6%.
20 ~ a
10 T-DepletedP|L ~--"
~-~.:~.: ;-......... ,o.............. o--,, ,c+ c,,,e
b
.-~ 20
4 .I10 T-OepletedPDL .-'" ~
~.. ..... "- " ~ T Celis~ . PBL Depleted
~-'T':/..'---..~,-,"~.of Fc+ Cells
6.2 12.5 25 50
Ratio:Effector to Tarl(etCells
FIG. I. Total PBL, T cells,T-depleted PBL, and PBL depleted of lymphocytes bearing Fc
receptors from a nonrevaccinated subject were added to uninfected autologous (a) or
homologous (b) fibroblasts at different effector to target cell ratios. The amount of 51Cr
released was determined after 18 h incubation, calculated as described in the Materials and
Methods, and expressed as the mean oftriplicatedeterminations -+SEM. Similar values (not
reported) were obtained by using infected fibroblasts as targets and the same lymphocyte
population. Spontaneous release was 23 -+ 3% for fibroblasts in (a) and 20 -+ 5% for
fibroblasts in (b).
L. H.
75.
50-
~"i25-
O.
PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE
T
J
Days AfterVaccination
FIG. 2. Three donors' total PBL harvested at different days after vaccination with vacci-
nia virus were tested against autologous fibroblasts infected or not with vaccinia virus at an
effector to target ratio of 25:1. The amount of 51Cr released was determined after 18 h
incubation, calculated as described in the Materials and Methods, and expressed in the
figure for infected fibroblasts after subtraction of values obtained for uninfected fibroblasts.
(Mean of triplicate determination _+SEM.) Spontaneous release for uninfected fibroblasts
was between 18 and 25%, while for infected fibroblasts it was between 19 and 26%.
955
day 7 as compared to day 0 when PBL were added to uninfected fibroblasts, but
when enhanced, this increase never exceeded 7% of the total SlCr release.
CYTOTOXICITY INDUCED BY PBL IN AUTOLOGOUS, HOMOLOGOUS, OR HETEROLO-
GOUSCOMBINATIONS. Immune PBL from 10 donors of known HLA specificities
were tested 7 days after vaccination against a panel offibroblasts of known HLA
specificities and against murine L 929 cells. There was no relationship between
the homology of HLA antigens of PBL and infected target cells and the ability of
immune PBL to lyse vaccinia-infected target cells in 9 of 10 individuals tested
(Table II). The one exception was J. H. (Table II, Fig. 3c ), whose PBL lysed his
own fibroblasts and two other fibroblast lines which shared one or two HLA
specificities with his PBL. In contrast his PBL did not lyse a third infected
fibroblast line devoid of common HLA determinants. Table II shows also that
PBL from the three vaccinated females (L. E., P. B., and T. T.) were less
cytotoxic for virus-infected targets (always less than 25% at 12.5:1 ratio) than
PBL from males. This occurred despite the similarity in response to vaccination
by females and males.
Not only did autologous effector and target cell combinations show similar
cytolytic activity to homologous combinations, but immune PBL also lysed
heterologous L 929 virus-infected cells (Table II). To exclude the possibility that
this response was quantitative rather than qualitative, different PBL to target
ratios were used in systems sharing or not sharing HLA determinants and in
heterologous systems using mouse L 929 target cells. As seen in Fig. 3, homology
in HLA antigens between PBL and the virus-infected target cells for individuals
R. Z. (Fig. 3a) and L. P. (Fig. 3b) bears no direct relationship to the degree of
lysis measured. Yet, for J. H. (Fig. 3c) a quantitative effect occurred; at a high
lymphocyte to target cell ratio (20:1), target cells with or without HLA antigens
in common with the PBL were lysed to similar degrees, but at lower ratios (5:1) a
restriction was seen. PBL from R. Z. (Fig. 3a) and L. P. (Fig. 3b) lysed L 929
cells and human fibroblasts with a similar efficiency; unfortunately, there were
insufficient PBL from J. H. (Fig. 3c) to test against L 929 targets.
CELL POPULATIONS INVOLVED IN THE CYTOTOXIC ACTIVITY. Since the killing
of virus-infected cells by human immune PBL did not usually require sharing of
956 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
TABLE II
Relationships between HLA Determinants on PBL and Those Expressed on Vaccinia Virus-
Infected Targets during Immune Specific Lysis*
% Specific S~Crrelease from infected human fibroblasts from donors (HLA-A/B)
Mouse
Donors HLA type J.H. (2, M.O. M.B. (9,
L. P. (1, R.Z. (2, T.T. (3, C. C. (2, L-929
28/12, (2, 26/ 11/35,
-/8, 37) 3/35, 8) 10/7, -) 28/7, 14)
14) 12, 38) -)
J. H. 2, 28/12, 14 42.3~: 3.5
L. P. 1, -/8, 37 45.0 30.5
R.Z. 2, 3/35, 8 25.8 27.9 38.1 19.3
T.T. 3, 10/7, - 17.8 13.9 22.9
M. O. 2, 26/12, 38 35.5 42.1
M.B. 9, 11/35, - 30.2 38.3
M. D. 2, 3/7, 17 32.6 39.8 39.5 26.8
F. T. 25, 28/12, 39 6.9 11.3 16.5 14.3
L. E. 30, 33/14, 13 3.9 7.8 3.2 -3.0
P. B. 3, -/7, 5 21.2 7.6
39.0 18
74.0 51.0
28.7 25.8 55.6
23.4
33.2 37.4 35.5
37.3 32.9 36.3
41.5 32.6 23.0
13.9 17.5
4.3
22.9 16.3
* PBL harvested 7 days after vaccination with vaccinia virus were mixed with vaceinia-infected or uninfected fibroblasts of different HLA
specificities or with murine L 929 cells at an effector to target cell ratio of 12.5:1 for 18 h. Tests were run in triplicate, and the SEM did not
exceed 6%. Experiments were done on different days and the spontaneous release varied from 17 to 29% for uninfected fibroblasts and from
19 to 32% for infected fibroblasts. Within each experiment the spontaneous release was similar among the various fibroblast targets.
Spontaneous release for uninfected and infected L 929 cells was between 17 and 26%.
Number refers to the mean value of the specific S'Cr released from infected cells. Autologous combinations are underlined.
?5"
~50-
25'
,-'~HLA A2,2i 012,3|
% /
4`/ .~
~,;," . v
I
l b ,2- "" ~,.. ~.,
/.,,.lita a2,2a 112,30"
J
J
J
Ratio Effector to Tar|at Calls
2.OtA i,~,2i 111231/ \
HLA~I 1037
i'o 2'~ s'o
FIG. 3. Three donors' total PBL harvested 7 days after vaccination with vaccinia virus
were tested against autelogous and homologous fibroblasts as well as routine L 929 cells
infected or not with vaccinia virus at different effector to target cell ratio. Condition of the
5~Cr assay and calculations are the same as described in Fig. 2. HLA specificities are
indicated in the figure and shared HLA specificities between donor PBL and target cells are
underlined. (a) R. Z., (b) L. P., and (c) J. H. Spontaneous release of the various targets was
the same as described in Table II.
HLA markers between lymphocytes and infected targets, we sought to identify
the killer cells. Whole PBL, T-cell, and non-T-cell subpopulations separately
were assayed against autologous, homologous, and heterologous virus-infected
target cells. As seen in Fig. 4, the T-depleted subpopulation usually showed one-
half to two times greater specific lysis of virus-infected cells than did the total
PBL population and was efficient against autologous (Fig. 4a) and homologous
(Figs. 4b and c) infected targets. In contrast, T cells caused only limited specific
lysis that was also unrelated to homology of HLA antigens between T lympho-
cytes and target cells.
Lo Ho R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONEPE RRIN,
75-
50- T-depleted PBL
•%%,.~
25- "~"" \
' 1'o 2'o
Ratio'.Effectorto TargetCells
40- c
T-Depleted PDL s,,~
I J
25"~ .~Totil PBL
5 10 20
T-depleted PDL
\/.1.
30- /
t
/
20- ,~/
~ e.ot,~....{
2.~ ; 1'o
Fro. 4. Two donors' total PBL, T cells, and T-depleted cells harvested 7 days after
vaccinationwith vaccinia virus were tested against autologous (a) and homologous (b and
c) targets. Conditionsofthe 51Crassay and calculationsare the same as described in Fig. 2.
Spontaneous release was 18 and 24% for (a), 17 and 25% for (b) and (c) for uninfected and
infected fibroblasts, respectively. Donor PBL: (a and b) L. P.; (c) M. D.
TABLE III
Immune Lysis of Vaccinia Virus-Infected Target Cells by Different Lymphocyte
Populations After Vaccination with Vaccinia Virus*
957
% Specific 51Crrelease from infected human fibroblasts by
donor PBL harvested at:
Do- Lymphocyte popu-
nors lations Day 5 Day 6 Day 7
Autol- Homol- Autol- Homol- Autol- Homol-
ogous ogons ogous ogous ogous ogous
L. P,
T, W.
Total PBL (1, -/8, 37) 65 7 23 19 45 30
T 8 3 5 4 4 5
T-depleted PBL 6 7 55 32 67 36
Total PBL (3, 10/7, -) 6 6 21 25 23 24
T 5 3 5 5 6 3
T-depleted PBL 7 7 37 42 39 45
* PBL autologous or homologous to vaccinia virus-infectedfibroblasts were harvested 5, 6, and 7
days after vaccination. Total PBL, T, or T-depleted subpopulationswere added to virus-infected
or uninfected fibroblasts at an effector to target cell ratio of 12.5:1 for 18 h. Tests were run in
triplicate and the SEM did not exceed 6%. Spontaneous release of uninfected and infected
fibroblasts was between 17 and 22%.
5 Number refers to the average value of the specific 51Crreleased.
Since in prior experiments (not shown), autologous infected fibroblasts were
sometimes lysed to a greater extent than homologous fibroblasts and L 929 cells
at day 5, we examined the possibility that the early immune response involves a
different mechanism and/or a different cell population. However, this is not the
case. Table III shows that specific 5~Cr lysis of fibroblasts infected with vaccinia
virus by autologous or homologous immune PBL, T cells, and T-depleted PBL
occurs at days 5, 6, and 7 with the same pattern.
Macrophages and monocytes are not a prerequisite for the lytic activity
detected, since all PBL, T cells, and T-depleted PBL had been depleted of plastic-
adherent cells. Moreover, in other experiments, three donors' PBL, whether
958 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
TABLE IV
Role of Fc Receptor-Bearing PBL on the Lysis of Human Fibroblasts Infected with
Vaccinia Virus*
Donors Lymphocyte populations
% 5~Crrelease from infected human fi-
broblasts
Lymphocytes depleted of Fc+ bearing
cells:
No Yes
K. P. (not done)
T. T. (3, 10/7, -)
M. B. (9, 11/35, -)
Total PBL 23 +- 4 5 _+35
T 6+-2 6_+2
T-depleted PBL 39 +- 6 8 +- 3
Total PBL 23 +- 5 4 _+2
T 4_+3 4_+2
T-depleted PBL 39 _+5 6 _+3
Total PBL 32 -+ 5 4 +- 3
T 5_+3 4_+1
T-depleted PBL 47 _+6 7 _+3
* PBL obtained 7 days after vaccination were separated into total PBL, T, or non-T subpopula-
tions. Various lymphocyte populations were depleted of Fc receptor-bearing IgG cells by reset-
ting with ORBC-IgG (see Materials and Methods). Lymphocyte populations with and without Fc
receptor-bearing cells were added to vaccinia virus-infectedor uninfected fibroblasts at a ratio of
12.5:1 for 18 h. Subject two was tested on autelogous targets, whereas subjects one and three
were assayed on homologous test systems. Assays were run in triplicate. Numbers represent the
mean specific 51Crrelease _+SEM. Spontaneous release of uninfected and infected target cells
was less than 23%.
$ When Fc receptor-bearing PBL purified from total PBL were tested against the same infected
target cells at a ratio of 12.5:1, they induced a specific51Crrelease of 15 _+3% (K. P.), 14 _+4% (T.
T.), and 17 _+5% (M. B.).
depleted of adherent cells or not, lysed similar amounts of autologous fibroblasts
infected with vaccinia 7 days after the donor's vaccination (less than 10%
variation at 25:1 PBL:target ratio).
Depletion of Fc receptor-bearing lymphocytes from the total immune PBL or
from non-T-cell subpopulations harvested 7 days after vaccination almost com-
pletely abrogated the cytolytic potential of both populations (Table IV and Fig.
5). Yet, when Fc receptor-positive lymphocytes were added to virus-infected
targets, minimal amounts of immune specific lysis occurred, suggesting either
that a second factor or a second cell population was required or that the Fc
receptors were blocked by immune complexes (rabbit IgG anti-ORBC-ORBC
antigens).
Suppressor T cells may modulate the response of cytotoxic T cells. In humans,
T cells bearing Fc receptors for IgG can act as suppressor T cells in some systems
(38). 2 Total T-cell populations or T-cell subpopulations depleted of cells bearing
Fc receptors for IgG caused minimal or no killing of virus-infected target cells
(Table IV). In contrast, when we depleted T cells bearing Fc receptors for IgG in
a known suppressor system, the expected suppression was lost. 2
20ldstone, M. B. A., A. Tishon, and L. Moretta. 1977. Maternal-fetal interrelationships: active
thymus derived suppressor lymphocytes are found in human cord blood.Nature (Lond.). In press.
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE
50
0-
6
40 ¸
30-
._~
•"=- 20"
g
10-
Total PDL -- ]~
/T
PBL Depleted ___ /"
|: :: :: .. i= :-- - - -
li.5 2's ;o
Ratio: Effector To Target Cells
959
Fro. 5. Two donors' total PBL (0--0 and A--A) and total PBL depleted of Fc receptor-
bearing lymphocytes (Q---O and /X---/X)harvested 7 days after vaccination with vaccinia
virus were tested against human fibroblasts infected or not with vaccinia virus at different
effector to target cell ratios. Conditions of the 5~Crassay and calculations are the same as
described in Fig. 2. Spontaneous release was 19% for uninfected and 21% for infected
fibroblasts.
Inhibition of Lysis of Vaccinia-Infected Fibroblasts. When the FAB'~ frag-
ment of rabbit anti-human IgG antisera was added in varying amounts to virus-
infected target cells before the addition of immune PBL, immune specific lysis
decreased more than 95% at 6 ~g/ml of the Fab'2 preparation (Fig. 6). Lysis of
uninfected fibroblasts only partially decreased when Fab'2 rabbit anti-human
IgG was added. Rabbit Fab'2 without antibodies to human IgG did not block
immune specific lysis of infected fibroblasts. In other experiments with immune
PBL from two additional donors, Fab'2 anti-human IgG at a concentration of 25
~g/ml similarly abrogated specific lysis of vaccinia virus-infected fibroblasts by
more than 95% (ratio 10 PBL:I target cell).
Specificity of Lysis. Human fibroblasts were infected either with measles
virus or vaccinia virus and used as targets to assess the specificity of lysis by
immune PBL (Table V). Measles virus-infected fibroblasts were lysed equiva-
lently by PBL harvested at days 0 and 7, whereas vaccinia virus-infected
fibroblasts showed a marked increase in 51Cr release when mixed with PBL
taken at day 7 compared to PBL obtained at day 0. In other experiments
measles-infected fibroblasts were lysed specifically by PBL obtained from chil-
dren 7 days after vaccination with live attenuated measles virus (L. Perrin, D.
Reynolds, and M. B. A. Oldstone, unpublished observation).
Antibody-Dependent Cell Cytotoxicity (ADCC) in the Vaccinia System. The
above experiments implicate non-T cells with Fc receptors taken from donors
recently vaccinated with vaccinia virus as the responsible immune killer cell.
This suggests that ADCC might be the mechanism by which the vaccinia-
infected target cells are lysed. Therefore, the ability of nonimmune PBL to lyse
vaccinia-infected target cells upon addition of specific antibodies against vacci-
nia virus was studied. Human IgG preparations purified from the sera of two
individuals 15 days after revaccination and one of these two individuals before
960 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
100-
75-
~ 5O-
e~
~ 25,
~g of RFab'2 aHulg/ml
FIG. 6. Different amounts of specific rabbit (R) Fab'2 anti-human IgG (aHuIg) were added
to human fibroblasts infected or not with vaccinia virus before addition of PBL harvested
from two individuals 7 days after vaccination with vaccinia virus. Results are expressed as
percent of inhibition of lysis obtained in the absence of rabbit Fab'~ anti-human IgG [42%for
donor I (M. B.) (D--Q) and 26% for donor 2 (T. T.) (Q---O)]. The effector to target ratio was
25:1. Conditions of the s~Cr assay and calculations are the same as described in Fig. 2.
Spontaneous release was between 21 and 24% for uninfected and infected fibroblasts.
TABL~ V
Specificity of Vaccinia-Immune PBL as Tested on Human Fibroblasts Infected with
Vaccinia or Measles Virus*
Donors % Specifc 51Crrelease from targets infected with:
Vaccinia virus Measles virus
Day 05 Day 7 Day 0 Day 7
R. Z. (2, 3/35, 8) -2 -+ 3 55 _+ 6 10 +_ 3 12 +_3
T.T. (3, 10/7, -) -6+- 2 26_+ 3 5_+ 2 4+_ 2
M. B. (9, 11/35, -) 1 -+ 3 41 _+4 23 _+ 5 26 -+ 5
Spontaneous release 16-21§ 16-20 17-23 19-23
* PBL harvested just before vaccination (day 0) and 7 days after vaccination were added either to
vaccinia or measles virus-infected or uninfected target cells at a ratio of 25:1 for 18 h. All three
PBL-target systems were autologous and each sample was run in triplicate. Number represents
the mean specific 5~Crrelease _+SEM.
Day of vaccinia virus vaccination.
§ Experiment for each individual was done at a different time. Range of values for spontaneous
release of slCr from target cells during test periods.
revaccination were tested for their ability to lyse target cells infected or not with
vaccinia virus in the presence of nonimmune PBL. None of the three IgG
preparations enhanced lysis of uninfected target cells. In contrast, both the
postvaccination IgG preparations and to a lesser extent the prevaccination IgG
preparation over a wide range of concentrations significantly enhanced lysis of
vaccinia-infected target cells (Fig. 7). When absorbed on monolayers of L 929
cells infected with vaccinia virus, the activity of a postvaccination IgG prepara-
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE
,o]
30- ~
i ~. ~"J'~"f " ~ ..... T
20-
lo lo'oo so'oo
Final Concentration of IgG Added in/pg
Fro. 7. Three IgG preparations [(A--A), J. H.; (O-.-©), MO after revaccination; (O-nO),
MO before vaccination] were incubated for 30 min with fibroblasts infected or not with
vaccinia virus, before addition of PBL of a nonrevaccinated individual. The effecter to
target cell ratio was 25:1, and the 51Crassay read at 6 h. Calculations were the same as
described in Fig. 2. The spontaneous release was 9% for uninfected and 10% for infected
fibroblasts.
961
tion decreased by more than 90% (31-2% specific 51Cr release, 0.5 mg/ml IgG,
and PBL:target cell ratio of 25:1 in a 6 h assay). Absorption on uninfected L 929
cells had no significant effect (21-18%).
Next, varying PBL to target cell ratios and varying concentrations of immune
IgG were studied in the ADCC assay. Fig. 8 shows the effect of varying the
PBL:target cell ratios. Maximum lysis occurred using immune IgG at 1 mg/ml
and a PBL:target cell ratio of 50:1. At a ratio of 25:1 (ratio used in the previous
experiments), the killing of PBL harvested from eight nonrevaccinated donors
in the presence and absence of added anti-vaccinia antibody was studied. Table
VI shows that specific 51Cr release was marked at 6 h, increased at 18 h when
specific anti-vaccinia antibodies and nonimmune PBL were added to infected
target cells. This antibody-dependent lysis equalled that caused by immune
PBL 7 days after vaccination in the absence of added antibodies (Tables II and
V). We also noted that HeLa cells were more readily lysed than human fibro-
blasts.
To learn whether cytophilic antibodies act as inducers of lysis in the presence
of PBL, immune PBL from three individuals bled 7 days after vaccination were
treated with trypsin (2.5 mg/ml in MEM at 37°C for 30 min) to remove their IgG,
washed twice with complete media, incubated at room temperature for 3 h,
washed again, and tested in parallel with untreated immune PBL. Less than 2%
immunoglobulin-positive lymphocytes could be detected on the PBL treated by
trypsin when tested by direct fluorescence using a polyvalent goat anti-human
immunoglobulin serum. Lysis by PBL treated with trypsin was not significantly
reduced in two preparations [before/after treatment % specific 51Cr release _+
962 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
50" "[" T
" 25
~ •
o 1; is
Effector to Target Rati~
FIG. 8. Total PBL from two individuals not revaccinated: (A---/x, ©-.-©) were added at
different effector to target ratio to fibroblasts infected or not with vaccinia virus after a
previous incubation of the target with 100 /~I of a solution containing 1 mg/ml of anti-
vaccinia antibodies. (A---A) represents the killing ofinfected target cellsby PBL from donor
(A---A) in the presence of the same antibody to vaccinia virus previously absorbed with
vaccinia-infected L 929 cells (see Materials and Methods). Conditions and calculation as if
the 51Cr assay were the same as in Fig. 7. The spontaneous release was 10% for uninfected
and 11% for infected fibroblasts.
TABLE VI
Specific Antibodies to Vaccinia Virus and Nonimmune PBL
Lyse Vaccinia Virus-Infected Cells*
% Specific 51Cr release from infected cells
Donors HeLa cells at:
Hu fibroblasts at 6 h
6h 18h
1 32-+ 5 40-+ 5 46-+ 7
2 20-+ 4 37- 4 45-+ 8
3 15-+ 3 24- 6 32-+ 3
4 24-+ 6 34-+ 7 57-+ 5
5 12-+ 2 27-+ 3 35-+ 3
6 18-+ 5 28-+ 3 37-+6
7 9-+7 18-+2 22-+5
8 24-+ 5 36-+ 3 53 -+ 4
Specific 5'Cr release induced by PBL from eight individuals not revac-
cinated combined with human antibodies against vaccinia virus. As-
say was run for 6 h or 18 h and the spontaneous release was 8 -+ 3% for
human fibroblasts infected for 6 h and 9 -+ 3% and 20 + 5%, respec-
tively, for HeLa cells infected with vaccinia virus. Specific antibodies
did not enhance the 5'Cr release observed in their absence. Lympho-
cytes induced a release varying from 5 to 9.5% at 6 h for both infected
fibroblasts and HeLa cells, 11-22% at 18 h from infected HeLa cells,
and 8-20% from uninfected HeLa cells. These values were subtracted
from the values obtained upon addition of anti-vaccinia antibodies to
PBL. Results are expressed as the mean of triplicate determination
-+SEM.
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 963
SEM: 39 _+5% vs. 35 -+ 6% (donor M. B.), 45 _+4% vs. 36 _+5% (donor R. Z.)], and
reduced 50% in the third [42 _+ 6% vs. 21 _+ 7% (donor M. O.)].
Discussion
This investigation was undertaken for two purposes. First we wished to follow
the reactivity of PBL from humans vaccinated with vaccinia virus against
vaccinia-infected human fibroblasts. For ethical reasons, only individuals who
had been previously vaccinated during their childhood were revaccinated and
all except one developed local induration suggestive of DTH reactions. Second,
we wished to study T-cell cytotoxic killing in humans and determine whether an
HLA restriction governs killing of virus-infected target by the host's lympho-
cytes as H-2 restricts the vaccinia virus T-cell cytotoxicity in the mouse model
(26, 27).
A good immune-specific cytotoxic activity against vaccinia-infected cells was
detected in PBL by day 5 after vaccination, peaked by days 7-8, and subsided by
day 12. There were only weak suggestions of participation of cytotoxic T cells.
First, in only 1 of 12 individuals studied was there restricted lyric activity of PBL
for fibroblasts sharing common HLA-A or B determinants. Second, a few
individuals' PBL lysed more autologous than homologous virus-infected target
cells. In contrast, the results indicate that non-T cytotoxic lymphocytes bearing
Fc receptors and acting in the presence of specific antibodies are primarily
responsible for the lysis of virus-infected target cells.
PBLs from 11 of the 12 individuals newly vaccinated with vaccinia virus lysed
fibroblasts infected with vaccinia virus. The lytic activity with one exception
was not limited to autologous fibroblasts since homologous fibroblasts with or
without HLA antigens of the A and B loci shared by the immune PBL, as well as
murine L 929 cells, were also lysed. Thus, histocompatibility between effector
and target cells did not seem to be necessary for lysis. These results appear to
contrast with experiments reported in the mice whose spleen cells must share at
least one gene product of the K or D region of the H-2 complex with the virus-
infected target cell if the latter is to be lysed. However, since the major effector
cells in human PBL after vaccination are non-T cells and they require the
participation of antibodies, HLA restriction may not be expected. Other consid-
erations are that the HLA system may be far more polymorphic and present
more cross-reactivity than the H-2 system (39). Also, the HLA antigens are not
completely defined; for example, we do not know the HLA determinants of the C
locus.
The probability that a non-T cell was the cytotoxic cell in our system is
supported in several ways. First, fractionation of human PBL localized the
cytolytic activity in the non-T-cell population. Second, removal of Fc receptor-
bearing cells from PBL, T-cell, or T-depleted cell populations abolished cytolytic
activity. Third, T cells alone could not lyse vaccinia-infected target cells even
after the removal of putative T-suppressor cells. If present, blastlike cytotoxic T
cells are likely in the T-enriched population, as T blasts rosette with SRBC (40).
While removal of lymphocytes bearing Fc receptors abolished the lytic activity,
any Fc receptor-bearing T cells by analogy with the murine T cells, are probably
not cytotoxic T cells (41).
964 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
Two points clearly emphasize both the specificity of the lysis for vaccinia-
infected target cells and the development of an active immune response. First,
immune PBL induced lysis of vaccinia-infected target cells only 5-7 days after
vaccination. Second, cytotoxic activity was increased against vaccinia-infected
cells, but not against measles-infected cells, by PBL harvested at 7 days after
vaccination as compared to PBL harvested at the day before vaccination (day 0).
Similar specificity was observed when PBL obtained 7 days after vaccination
with measles virus, significantly enhanced killing of measles virus but not
vaccinia virus-infected target cells (L. Perrin, D. Reynolds, and M. B. A.
Oldstone, unpublished observations). In contrast, others showed that nonim-
mune PBL naturally lyse human fibroblasts infected with cytomegalovirus (42)
and postulated that this cytolysis could be directed against an early alteration of
cell membranes commonly found on several types of human-transformed cells or
cells infected with herpes virus (43-45).
The specificity of the lytic process in our system probably emanated from an
ADCC process. The effector cell seemed to be a K cell, based on three findings.
First, lytic activity was associated with the non-T-cell subpopulation; second,
lysis was abolished by removal of Fc receptor-bearing cells from either PBL or
non-T cells; and third, Fab'2 fraction of rabbit anti-human IgG selectively
inhibited the lysis of human fibroblasts infected with vaccinia virus by immune
PBL. Such inhibition has been demonstrated in other K-cell systems (46, 47),
probably because the Fc sites of the bound anti-viral antibody were covered or
altered by anti-Fc antibodies.
The anti-viral antibodies needed for lysis in this system could have been
carried on the surfaces of the lymphocytes. Alternatively, a more likely hypoth-
esis is that these antibodies could have been formed and released in culture by
antibody-producing cells, since trypsin treatment of the immune lymphocytes to
remove IgG from their surfaces did not reproducibly suppress cytolysis. If
plasma cells secreting specific antibodies are generated after vaccination, this
phenomenon would be also transient and could explain the course of the cyto-
lytic activity detected (peak at day 7 and marked decrease at day 11). Moreover,
Fc-positive cells without added antibodies showed less activity than the non-T-
cell population, suggesting that a second factor was involved in this reaction.
Alternatively, the activity of Fc-positive cells could have been blocked by
immune complexes (rabbit anti-ORBC-ORBC). Experiments are in progress to
clarify these points.
That ADCC could be an efficient mechanism for in vitro lysis of vaccinia-
infected cells was shown by incubating target cells infected with vaccinia virus
with human anti-vaccinia antibodies, then adding PBL from eight individuals
who had not been revaccinated. None of these PBL lysed more vaccinia-infected
target cells than uninfected target cells unless anti-vaccinia antibodies were
added to the reaction. Furthermore, the activity of the immune IgG preparation
could be absorbed with vaccinia-infected but not with uninfected L 929 cells.
Why are we unable to demonstrate cytotoxic T cells in humans after vaccinia
virus inoculation, whereas this virus easily raises cytotoxic T cells in mice? The
existence of a K-cell-like mechanism need not exclude T-cell killing although
antibody may block T-cell killing in the mouse model (48-50). However, since
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 965
vaccinia virus produced only low antibody titers in our system, this is an
unlikely explanation. Could the secondary response we are studying favor
ADCC or complement-mediated antibody lysis of infected cells instead of the
expected T-cell-mediated lysis?Again, this isunlikely, since in mice the second-
ary response against vaccinia virus raises a good T-cellresponse (L. Perrin and
R. M. Zinkernagel, unpublished observations) (25). Perhaps only immature
cytotoxic T cells are present in human PBL and prolonged contact with the
infected cells is required to assure their maturation and transformation into
cytotoxic T cells.This explanation also seems improbable since vaccinia virus
replicates in lymphocytes, fulfillingthe requirement for contact during their
stay in lymph nodes or spleen. Moreover, ifthis hypothesis is true, cytotoxic T
cellswould not limit the spread of vaccinia virus infectionsince during the 18 h
or more of contact (duration of the 51Cr test)with the infected cellsto develop a
lyricpotential,the infected cellswould have already generated infectiousvirus
and their destruction would be without biological significance. Perhaps cyto-
toxic T cells are trapped in the lesion containing infected cells expressing
vaccinia virus antigen and, therefore, are barely detectable in peripheral blood.
However, we recently found that peripheral lymphocytes of mice infected with
vaccinia virus are as efficientas spleen cellsin killingvaccinia-infectedtarget
cells,that T cellsare involved in this cytotoxic process and that they are H-2
restricted.3
Perhaps the most reasonable explanation isthat humans are vaccinated with
less than 102 PFU, whereas mice are injected with 10~ PFU. Furthermore, the
routes of immunization are different: scarificationvs. intravenous injection.
Humans undergo only a local reaction such as adenopathy, but mice, due to
their size and the route of immunization, usually experience general involve-
ment of the immune system. Whether or not a low antigenic stimulus and a
compartmentalization of the immune response in man could lead to a modula-
tion of the immune response and preferential production of specificantibodies
instead of generation of cytetoxic T lymphocytes remains to be determined. In
order to testthis hypothesis we plan to test immune lymphocytes from humans
with systemic virus infection. Alternatively, Fc-bearing killer cellsmay be a
subpopulation of T cellsor man may respond in a way differentthan the mouse.
Regardless of the explanation, our data clearly show that aider humans are
vaccinated with vaccinia virus, "classic"cytotoxic T cellsare not readily found
in the peripheral blood and that effectiveand efficientkilling of virus-infected
targets occurs by PBL bearing Fc receptors, probably in the presence ofplasma
cellsreleasing anti-viralantibodies.
Again our data raisethe question ofthe respective importance ofhumoral and
cellularimmunity in protection and the recovery from viralinfectionin vivo. In
vaccinia-infectedmice either the injectionof immune antibodies or the transfer
of immune spleen T cellsprotect nonimmune mice from a lethal challenge with
vaccinia virus (22, 23, 51).Also, in mice, neutralizing antibody and cytotoxic T
cellsappear at a similar time afterinfection.However, cytotoxic T cellsappear
to peak earlierand have been shown to possess anti-viralactivity(21,27, 52, 53).
Perrin, L., and M. B. A, Oldstone, Manuscript in preparation.
966 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
These adoptive transfer models may not adequately reflect events occurring
during a primary or secondary vaccinia infection. The available data for murine
vaccinia and ectromelia infections is compatible with the interpretation that
cytotoxic T cells are likely mainly involved in the early stages of primary
infection whereas antibodies function later and in protection against secondary
infections. In man, ADCC is demonstrated in many viral and tumoral systems;
however, it has been difficult to find it in similar systems in mice. In contrast,
the reverse has been observed for cytotoxic T cells. Whether or not this is related
to the experimental conditions used or to the respective importance of these
different effector mechanisms in man and in mice remains to be determined.
One of the major biological functions attributed to cytotoxic T cells is the lysis of
the virus-infected cells before virus assembly of the virus progeny; such an effect
has been demonstrated in mice (52, 53) for specific cytotoxic T cells. Similarly, in
humans, PBL in the presence of specific antibodies can lyse herpes virus-
infected target cells before assembly of viral progeny (54). We have recently
made similar observations using measles virus and have further shown that
ADCC was efficient long before antibody-mediated complement-dependent lysis
of the infected target cells occurred. 3 Therefore, ADCC may be an efficient
mechanism in humans in restricting the spread of virus infection, and we
suggest that ADCC probably plays an important role in virus infections of
humans.
Summary
After vaccinia virus vaccination of human volunteers, local indurations devel-
oped within 10 days, and regional adenopathy was detected in half of the
individuals. Their peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) harvested at different
days after vaccination showed specific activity against target cells infected with
vaccinia virus with a peak activity at day 7. The specificity of the cytotoxic
activity was not related to HLA markers, since autologous, homologous, and
heterologous infected target cells were lysed with the same efficiency. The
cytotoxic activity was caused by PBL that did not rosette with sheep erythro-
cytes and could be depleted by more than 90% by removing Fc receptor-bearing
cells. T-cell-depleted PBL showed a one-half to two times greater cytotoxicity
than intact PBL. The cytotoxic activity could also be abrogated by more than
95% by rabbit Fab's anti-human IgG. On the other hand, nonimmune PBL lysed
vaccinia-infected target cells in the presence of specific antibodies against
vaccinia virus, thus demonstrating that ADCC could be efficient in lysing
vaccinia-infected target cells. We conclude that after vaccination, antibody-
forming cells arise and provide specific anti-viral antibody and that the cytotoxic
cells detected in this reaction are K cells. These experiments suggest that
antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity may be of major importance in the recovery
of man to virus infections.
The authors thank the volunteers who made thisinvestigationpossible;Dr. Paul Terasaki (UCLA
Medical School, Los Angeles, Calif.)and Michele Pellegrino,Scripps Clinicand Research Founda-
tion,La Jolla,Calif.,who determined the HLA specificitiesofthe donors; J. M. Hull for excellent
technical assistance;and Ms. Minick and Ms. Hendrix forassistance in preparing the manuscript.
Received for publication 31 May 1977.
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL, AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 967
References
1. Fenner, F., B. R. McAulan, C. A. Mires, J. Sambrook, and D. O. White. 1974. The
Biology of Animal Viruses. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
2. Mims, C. A. 1964. Aspects of the pathogenesis ofvirus diseases. Bacteriol. Rev. 28:30.
3. Oldstone, M. B. A., and F. J. Dixon. 1976. Immunopathology of viral infections. In
Textbook ofImmunopathology. P. Miescher and H. Mfiller-Eberhard, editors. Grune
& Stratton, Inc., New York. 303.
4. McLaren, L. C., J. J. Holland, and J. T. Syverton. 1959. The mammalian cell-virus
relationship. I. Attachment of peliovirus to cultivated cells of primate and non
primate origin. J. Exp. Med. 109:475.
5. Lennette, E. 1964. Diagnostic procedures for viral and rickettsial diseases. Am.
Public Health Assoc. Yearb. 43.
6. Svehag, S. E. 1968. Formation and dissociation of virus antibody complexes with
special reference to the neutralisation process. Prog. Med. Virol. 10:1.
7. Murphy, B. R., and L. A. Glascow. 1968. Factors modifying host resistance to viral
infection. III. Effect of whole body X-irradiation on experimental encephalomyocardi-
tis virus infection in mice. J. Exp. Med. 127:1035.
8. Oldstone, M. B. A. 1975. Virus neutralization and virus induced immune complex
disease. Prog. Med. Virol. 19:84.
9. Rawles, W., and W. A. Tomkins. 1975. Destruction of virus infected cells by antibody
and complement. In Viral Immunology and Immunopathology. A. Notkins, editor.
Academic Press, Inc., New York. 99.
10. Perrin, L. H., B. S. Joseph, N. R. Cooper, and M. B. A. Oldstone. 1976. Mechanism of
injury of virus-infected cells by antiviral antibody and complement: participation of
IgG, F(ab')~, and the alternative complement pathway. J. Exp. Med. 143:1027.
11. Shore, S. L., C. M. Black, F. M. Melewicz, P. A. Wood, and A. J. Nahmias. 1976.
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity to target cells infected with type I and
type 2 herpes simplex virus. J. Immunol. 116:194.
12. Andersson, T., V. Stejskal, and B. Hiirfast. 1975. An in vitro method for study of
human lymphocyte cytotoxicity against mumps infected target cells. J. Immunol.
114:237.
13. Perrin, L. H., A. Tishon, and M. B. A. Oldstone. 1977. Immunologic injury in measles
virus infection. III. Presence and characterization of human cytotoxic lymphocytes.
J. Irnmunol. 118:282.
14. Kreth, H. W., and V. ter Meulen. 1977. Cell mediated cytotoxicity against measles
virus in SSPE. I. Enhancement by antibody. J. Immunol. 118:1291.
15. Jenner, E. 1798. An enquiry into the causes and effects of the variolae vacciniae.
Sampson-Low, London. 13.
16. Allison, C. A. 1974. Interaction of antibodies, complement components and various
cell types in immunity against viruses and pyogeneic bacteria. Transplant. Rev.
19:5.
17. Allison, A. C., and W. H. Burns. 1968. Immunogenicity. F. Brock, editor. North-
Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam.
18. Lipsey, A. I., M. J. Kahn, and R. P. Boland. 1967. Pathologic variants of congenital
hypogammaglobulinemia: an analysis of 3 patients dying of measles. Pediatrics.
39:659.
19. Cooper, M. D., H. P. Chase, J. T. Lowthan, W. Krivit, and R. A. Good. 1968.
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: an immunologic deficiency involving the afferent limb in
immunity. Am. J. Med. 44:499.
20. Good, R. A., W. D. Kelly, J. Rotstein, and R. L. Varco. 1962. Immunological
deficiency diseases: agammaglobulinemia, hypegammaglobulinemia, Hodgkin's dis-
ease and sarcordosis. Prog. Allergy. 6:187.
968 IMMUNE LYSIS OF VACCINIA-INFECTED TARGETS IN MAN
21. Hathaway, W. E., J. H. Githers, W. R. Blackburn, V. Fulginiti, and C. H. Kempe.
1965. Aplastic anemia histiocytosis and erythrodermia in immunologically deficient
children. N. Engl. J. Med. 273:953.
22. Blanden, R. V. 1974. T cell response to viral and bacterial infection. Transplant. Rev.
19:56.
23. Blanden, R. V. 1971. Mechanisms of recovery from a generalized viral infection:
mousepox. II. Passive transfer of recovery mechanisms with immune lymphoid cells.
J. Exp. Med. 133:1074.
24. Gilden, D. H., G. A. Cole, and N. Nathanson. 1972. Immunopathogenesis of acute
central nervous system disease produced by lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. II.
Adoptive immunization of virus carriers. J. Exp. Med. 135:874.
25. Gardner, I. D., and R. V. Blanden. 1976. The cell mediated immune response to
ectromelia virus infection. II. Secondary response in vitro and kinetics of memory T
cell production in vivo. Cell. Immunol. 22:283.
26. Zinkernagel, R. M., and P. C. Doherty. 1974. Restriction of in vitro T cell mediated
cytotoxicity in lymphocytic choriomeningitis within a syngeneic or semiallogeneic
system. Nature (Lond.). 24:701.
27. Doherty, P. C., R. V. Blanden, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1976. Specificity of virns-
immune effector T cells for H-2K or H-2D compatible interactions: implications for H-
antigen diversity. Transplant. Rev. 29:89.
28. Mendelsohn, J., A. Skinner, and S. Kornfeld. 1971. The rapid induction by phytohe-
magglutinin of increased a-aminoisobutyric acid uptake by lymphocytes. J. Clin.
Invest. 50:818.
29. Gilbertsen, R. B., and R. S. Metzgar. 1976. Human T and B lymphocyte rosette tests:
effect of enzymatic modification of sheep erythrocytes (E) and the specificity of
neuraminidase-treated E. Cell. Immunol. 24:97.
30. Ferrarini, M., L. Moretta, R. Abrile, and M. L. Durante. 1975. Expression of a
receptor for IgM by human T cells in vitro. Eur. J. Immunol. 5:70.
31. Zwartow, H. T., J. C. N. Westwood, and G. Appleyard. 1962. Purification of poxvi-
ruses by density gradient centrifugation. J. Gen. Microbiol. 29:523.
32. Early, E., P. H. Peralter, and K. M. Johnson. 1967. A plaque neutralization method
for arboviruses. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 125:741.
33. Joseph, B. S., and M. B. A. Oldstone. 1975. Immunologic injury in measles virus
infection. II. Suppression of immune injury through antigenic modulation. J. Exp.
Med. 142:864.
34. Cuatrecasas, P. 1970. Protein purification by affinity chromatography. J. Biol.
Chem. 245:3059.
35. Brunner, K. T., J. Mauel, J. C. Cerottini, and B. Chapuins. 1968. Quantitative assay
of the lytic action of immune lymphoid cells on 51Crlabeled aUogeneic target cells in
vitro; inhibition by isoantibedy and by drugs. Immunology. 14:181.
36. Liburd, E. M., V. Pazderka, A. S. Rnssel, and J. B. Doosetor. 1976. Fibroblast lysis
by lymphocytes from normal persons and SLE patients on short-term culture. Immu-
nology. 31:767.
37. Parkman, R., and F. S. Rosen. 1976. Identification ofa subpopulation of lymphocytes
in human peripheral blood cytotoxic to autologous fibroblasts. J. Exp. Med. 144:1520.
38. Moretta, L., S. R. Webb, C. E. Grossi, P. M. Lydyard, and M. D. Cooper. 1977.
Functional analysis of two human T-cell subpopulations: help and suppression of B-
cell responses by T cells bearing receptors for IgM or IgG. J. Exp. Med. 146:184.
39. Dupont, B., J. A. Hanson, and E. J. Yunis. 1976. Human mixed lymphocyte culture
reaction: genetics, specificity and biological implications. Adv. Immunol. 23:108.
40. Politis, G., H. G. Plassara, and H. Thomou-Politi. 1975. DNA present in multilayer
L. H. PERRIN, R. M. ZINKERNAGEL~ AND M. B. A. OLDSTONE 969
rosette formed by lymphocytes stimulated by phytohaemagglutinin. Nature (Lond.).
257:485.
41. Pang, T., I. F. C. McKenzie, and R. V. Blanden. 1976. Cooperation between mouse T-
cell subpopulations in the cell mediated response to a natural poxvirus pathogen.
Cell. lmmunol. 26:153.
42. Diamond, R. D., R. Keller, L. Gerald, and D. Finkel. 1977. Lysis ofcytomegalovirus-
infected human fibroblast and transformed human cells by peripheral blood lymph-
oid cells from normal human donors (39650). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 154:259.
43. De Vries, J. E., S. Cornain, and Ph. Rfimke. 1974. Cytotexicity of non-T-versus T-
lymphocytes from melanoma patients and healthy donors on short and long-term
cultured melanoma cells. Int. J. Cancer. 14:427.
44. Peter, H. H., J. Pavie-Fischer, W. H. Fridman, C. Aubert, J. P. Cesarini, R. Rombu,
and F. M. Kourilsky. 1975. Cell mediated cytotexicity in vitro of human lymphocytes
against a tissue culture melanoma cell line (IGR3). J. Immunol. 115:539.
45. De Vries, J. E., M. Meyering, A. van Dongen, and Ph. Rfirnke. 1975. The influence of
different isolation procedures and the use oftarget cells from melanoma cell lines and
short term cultures of the nonspecific cytotoxic effects of lymphocytes from healthy
donors. Int. J. Cancer. 15:391.
46. Austin, R. M., and C. A. Daniels. 1976. Inhibition by rheumatoid factor, anti Fc and
staphylococcal protein A of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytolysis against
herpes simplex infected cells. J. Immunol. 117:602.
47. Trinchieri, G., P. Bauman, M. de Marchi, and Z. Tokes. 1975. Antibody dependent
cell mediated cytotoxicity in humans. I. Characterization of the effecter cell. J.
Immunol. 115:249.
48. Welsh, R. M., and M. B. A. Oldstone. 1977. Inhibition of immunologic injury of
cultured cells infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus: role of defective
interfering virus in regulating viral antigenic expression. J. Exp. Med. 145:1449.
49. Germain, R. N., M. E. Doff, and B. Benacerraf. 1975. Inhibition of T-lymphocyte-
mediated tumor-specific lysis by alloantisera directed against the H-2 serological
specificities of the tumor. J. Exp. Med. 142:1023.
50. R~jan, T. V., B. R. Bloom, and S. G. Nathenson. 1976. Regulatory variants for the
expression of H-2 antigens. II. Level of discrimination of cell-mediated cytolysis. J.
Natl. Cancer Inst. 56:1229.
51. Worthington, M. 1973. Mechanism of recovery from systemic infection with vaccinia
virus. II. Effect of x-irradiation and neonatal thymectomy. J. Infect. Dis. 127:512.
52. Zinkernagel, R. M., and A. Althage. 1977. Antiviral protection by virus-immune
cytotoxic T cells: infected target cells are lysed before infectious virus progeny is
assembled. J. Exp. Med. 145:644.
53. Jackson, D. C., G. L. Ada, and R. Tha Hla. 1976. Cytotoxic T cells recognize very
early minor changes in ectromelia virus infected target cells. Aust. J. Exp. Biol.
Med. Sci. 54:349.
54. Shore, S. L., T. L. Cromeans, and T. J. Romano. 1962. Immune destruction of virus
infected cells early in the infectious cycle. Nature (Lond.). 262:695.
