© The Rockefeller University Press, 0021-9525/2000/05/983/11 $5.00
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, Number 4, May 15, 2000 983–993
http://www.jcb.org 983
Growth Plate Compressions and Altered Hematopoiesis in Collagen X
Null Mice
Catherine J. Gress and Olena Jacenko
University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Animal Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6046
Abstract. A variable skeleto-hematopoietic phenotype
was observed in collagen X null mice which mirrored
the defects in transgenic (Tg) mice with dominant inter-
ference collagen X mutations (Jacenko, O., P. LuValle,
and B.R. Olsen. 1993. Nature. 365:56–61). Speciﬁcally,
perinatal lethality was seen in ‫ف‬10.8% of null mutants
at week three after birth, and in another subset by 12
wk. In perinatal lethal mutants, growth plates were
compressed, trabecular bone reduced, and hematopoi-
etic aplasia and erythrocyte-ﬁlled vascular sinusoids
were apparent in marrows. Lymphatic organs, reduced
to ‫ف‬80% that of controls,displayed altered architecture
and lymphocyte content. In thymuses, a paucity of cor-
tical CD3ϩ
/CD4ϩ
/CD8ϩ
lymphocytes was consistent
with the marrow’s inability to replenish maturing
T cells. In spleens, an unaltered T cell distribution was
coupled with diffuse staining for IgDϩ
/B220ϩ
B cells,
whose reduction was prominent in poorly organized
lymphatic nodules. Disorderly arrays of splenic mac-
rophages surrounding periarteriolar lymphatic sheaths
and a red pulp depletion further complemented the Tg
perinatal lethal phenotype. Moreover, subtle growth
plate compressions and hematopoietic changes were
seen in all null mice. Data from Tg and null mice impli-
cate the disruption of collagen X function in the ob-
served skeleto-hematopoietic defects, and suggest that
hypertrophic cartilage and endochondral skeletogene-
sis may contribute to the marrow microenvironment
prerequisite for blood cell differentiation.
Key words: endochondral ossiﬁcation • hypertrophic
cartilage • skeletogenesis • marrow • lymphopenia
Introduction
Hypertrophic cartilage defines each skeletal element where
bone marrow formation would ensue (Chan and Jacenko,
1998). Through endochondral ossification (EO)1
, the carti-
laginous blueprint of the axial and appendicular skeleton,
as well as of certain cranial bones, is replaced by trabecu-
lar bone and marrow. Specifically, EO represents a substi-
tution process where longitudinal skeletal growth involves
deposition of a bone matrix upon preexisting hypertrophic
cartilage, as well as replacement of the hypertrophic ma-
trix by that of the marrow stroma. Thus, if the intricately
orchestrated processes of EO do not proceed appropri-
ately, then the marrow microenvironment, which is re-
quired for hematopoiesis, may not form adequately.
Despite a wealth of morphologic data on EO, the molec-
ular mechanisms driving this morphogenetic process are
just beginning to be defined. One distinctive feature of EO
involves the short chain collagen X, a matrix molecule ex-
pressed primarily and predominantly by hypertrophic car-
tilage (Chan and Jacenko, 1998). Due to its spatio-tempo-
ral association with EO, collagen X has been linked to
processes such as mineralization, matrix stabilization or
remodeling, and vascular invasion. The role of collagen X
in EO has remained largely undefined partly due to the
disparate phenotypes seen in three independently gener-
ated murine models with disrupted collagen X function, as
well as in two human diseases resulting from collagen X
mutations (Jacenko et al., 1993a; Rosati et al., 1994; McIn-
tosh et al., 1995; Kwan et al., 1997; Chan and Jacenko,
1998; Ikegawa et al., 1998; Jacenko and Chan, 1998).
The first murine model represented the transgenic (Tg)
mice with dominant interference collagen X mutations
(Jacenko et al., 1993a,b). Specifically, transgenes encoded
defective chicken collagen X variants with deletions in the
central, triple-helical domain. Since homotrimeric col-
lagen X subunits assemble through associations at the
Address correspondence to Olena Jacenko, Ph.D., University of Pennsyl-
vania, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Animal Biology,
Rosenthal Rm. 152, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6046.
Tel.: (215) 573-9447. Fax: (215) 573-5188. E-mail: jacenko@vet.upenn.edu
1
Abbreviations used in this paper: EO, endochondral ossification; H&E
staining, Harris hematoxylin and eosin Y staining; KO, knockout; PE,
phycoerythrin; PI, propidium iodide; SMCD, Schmid metaphyseal chon-
drodysplasia; SMD, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia; Tg, transgenic; TPE,
thymic pan epithelium; WT, wild-type controls.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, 2000 984
COOH terminus, followed by their trimerization along the
triple-helix towards the NH2 domain, the truncated mole-
cules were proposed to compete with endogenous chains
for association. Multiple independent Tg lines expressing
transgenes in hypertrophic cartilage exhibited similar skel-
eto-hematopoietic phenotypes. Perinatal lethality ensued
in Ͼ25% of mice week three after birth, and was hall-
marked by acute marrow aplasia and hematopoietic de-
fects. Survivors (‫ف‬75%) exhibited variable dwarfism and
subtle hematopoietic changes (Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress,
M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W. Roberts, manuscript
submitted for publication).
Based partly on the predominant dwarfism and skeletal
phenotypes of the Tg mice, mutations in collagen X were
identified in patients with Schmid metaphyseal chondro-
dysplasia (SMCD; Warman et al., 1993; Jacenko et al.,
1994), and with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia (SMD;
Ikegawa et al., 1998). To date, from Ͼ30 collagen X muta-
tions, all but two localized to microdomains within the
COOH terminus (Chan and Jacenko, 1998; Chan et al.,
1999; Jacenko and Chan, 1998); the remaining two muta-
tions involved the NH2 domain (Ikegawa et al., 1997). Hap-
loinsufficiency (50% reduction; Warman et al., 1993; Chan
et al., 1995, 1996, 1998) was suggested as a possible disease
mechanism for SMCD, although alternate possibilities are
likely for specific mutations (Chan and Jacenko, 1998;
McLaughlin et al., 1999). Both SMCD and SMD disease
phenotypes are mild compared with the acute skeleto-
hematopoietic defects in the Tg mice. SMCD manifests as
dwarfism with involvement of skeletal elements that are
under the greatest mechanical stress (e.g., spine, pelvis, and
long bones); disease onset correlates with weight-bearing,
and patients exhibit coxa vara and a waddling gait due to
growth plate abnormalities (Lachman et al., 1988). SMD
comprises seven disease sub-types ranging in severities
from mild to lethal (Diren et al., 1992; Peeden et al., 1992),
and shares multiple characteristics with SMCD. To date,
no triple-helical collagen X mutations have been found.
The second and third murine models involved inactiva-
tion of collagen X by gene targeting and homologous re-
combination (Chan and Jacenko, 1998). Rosati et al.
(1994) reported that collagen X null or knockout (KO)
mice developed no gross phenotypic changes. This implied
that only the presence of abnormal collagen X could mod-
ify bone growth in Tg mice and humans. In contrast, Kwan
et al. (1997) described a mild skeletal phenotype involving
the chondro–osseous junction in their KO mice; this dis-
ease resembled SMCD, as well as certain Tg mouse fea-
tures. Moreover, their data implied that collagen X may
compartmentalize proteoglycans and matrix vesicles within
hypertrophic cartilage during EO (Kwan et al., 1997; Chan
and Jacenko, 1998).
To begin resolving these phenotypic disparities in the
collagen X mice, the KO mice exhibiting no obvious dis-
ease phenotype (Rosati et al., 1994) were generously pro-
vided by Drs. de Crombrugghe and Behringer (M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston,
TX). While expanding the colony, we detected an acute
perinatal lethal phenotype in ‫ف‬10.8% of the null mice at
week three after birth, which mirrored that seen in a sub-
set of the Tg mice. Moreover, we observed subtle growth
plate compressions primarily within the proliferative zone
of the null mice, as well as hematopoietic changes. These
data firstly underscore the phenotypic differences and sim-
ilarities between the collagen X Tg and KO mice which
may arise through different disease mechanisms, and sec-
ondly imply an intimate link between EO and marrow es-
tablishment.
Materials and Methods
Maintenance and Breeding of Mice
The collagen X null mice were bred one generation into the C57Bl/6 strain
since the initial publication (Rosati et al., 1994), and generously provided
along with C57Bl/6 wild-type controls (WT) by Drs. de Crombrugghe and
Behringer (M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston,
TX). These mice were housed in a virus-free barrier facility in a room sep-
arate from that of the collagen X Tg mice (Jacenko et al., 1993b). Mainte-
nance was in microisolators containing autoclaved Pine Driwood chips,
and mice were fed Purina autoclaved mouse chow and water ad lib. From
birth, mice were observed daily for phenotypic changes and manifestations
of skeleto-hematopoietic problems, such as: decrease in size; lethargy; de-
crease or change in mobility; skeletal abnormalities including hunching of
the back, sloping of the buttocks, and hydrocephaly; wasting; skin ulcer-
ations; tumors; tooth overgrowth; and micropthalmia. Upon day 21, mice
were weaned and genotyped (Jacenko et al., 1993a). Specifically, after
DNA isolation from tail biopsy (Laird et al., 1991) and purification by
phenol/chloroform, EcoRV digested DNA was analyzed by hybridizing
Southern blots with a 32
P random prime-labeled 1.0-kb HindIII–KpnI 5Ј
internal mouse collagen X probe (Rosati et al., 1994). Mice were killed
with methoxyflurane (Mallinckrodt Veterinary). Weights of whole body,
spleen, thymus, and right kidney were typically recorded.
Histology
For paraffin histology and growth plate histomorphometry, right tibia/
femur hind limbs were dissected from WT, phenotypically normal col-
lagen X null mice (KO), null mice exhibiting perinatal lethality (KO mu-
tants), collagen X Tg mice with mild phenotypes (Tg), and Tg perinatal le-
thal mutants (Tg mutants). Hind limbs, spleens, and thymuses were fixed
in 4% formaldehyde/PBS, pH 7.4, at 4ЊC for a 1-wk minimum. After rinses
in distilled water, hind limbs were decalcified (4% formalin, 1% sodium
acetate, and 10% EDTA) overnight, and all samples were dehydrated in
ascending ethanol series (70, 80, 95% ethanol, 30 min; 100% ethanol 60
min ϫ 2). Clearing with Propar (Anatech Ltd.) was followed by perfusion
and embedding in paraffin. 6-␮m serial longitudinal sections through the
center of the tibial and femoral metaphyseal regions were heat-fixed onto
Superfrost/Plus slides (Fisher Scientific). Staining for morphology
involved Harris hematoxylin and eosin Y (H&E; Sigma Chemical Co.).
Giemsa (Sigma Chemical Co.) was used to stain hematopoietic cells. His-
tomorphometric measurements were obtained with a stage micrometer
and Olympus BX60 microscope; widths of overall tibial growth plate, pro-
liferative, and hypertrophic cartilage zones were recorded.
For immunohistochemistry, spleens and thymuses were embedded in
Tissue Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetek), and 6–8-␮m longitudinal
cryosections were acetone-fixed (1 min), rinsed in PBS (8 min, 2 changes),
and incubated in 0.3% H2O2/PBS (10 min for spleen; 5 min for thymus) to
quench endogenous peroxidase. After rinsing in PBS (4 min, 2 changes)
and 4% heat-inactivated newborn calf serum in PBS (NCS/PBS, 4 min, 2
changes; Sigma Chemical Co.), sections were pre-incubated in NCS/PBS
(30 min) to block nonspecific binding, and reacted with anti-mouse pri-
mary antibodies (10 ␮g/ml) in NCS/PBS (60 min, 23ЊC). Primary antibod-
ies from BD PharMingen included: thymic pan epithelium (TPE; Rat IgM,
for thymic architecture); CD4/L3T4 (Rat IgG2a,␬; thymocytes and T
helper cells); CD8a/Ly-2 (Rat IgG2a,␬; thymocytes and T suppresser/cyto-
toxic cells); CD45R/B220 (Rat IgG2a,␬; all stages of B cells); Ter 119 (Rat
IgG2b,␬; erythroid lineage); and purified rat IgG2a,␬, IgG2b,␬, or IgM
isotype controls. MOMA-1 antibodies (supernatant; 1:25 dilution; Rat
IgG2a; macrophage subpopulations, which in spleen surround the periar-
teriolar lymphatic sheath) were from Serotec Ltd. After rinses with NCS/
PBS (8 min, 4 changes), sections were reacted with biotinylated anti-rat
IgG (5 ␮g/ml) secondary antibodies (Vector Laboratories, Inc.) in NCS/
PBS (30 min, 23ЊC), then incubated in Vectastain ABC Reagent (Vector
Gress and Jacenko Skeleto-Hematopoietic Defects in Collagen X KO Mice 985
Laboratories, Inc.; 30 min, 23ЊC) containing avidin and biotinylated HRP,
and rinsed in PBS (8 min, 4 changes). Incubation in diamino-benzidine
tetrahydrochloride solution (Pierce Chemical Co.; ‫ف‬5 min) visualized the
reaction. Sections were rinsed in distilled water, air dried, and mounted
with Aqua-mount (Lerber Laboratories).
Sections were viewed with an Olympus BX60 light microscope with an
Automated Photomicrographic System PM20.
Flow Cytometry
Spleens and thymuses were cut in 2 to 3 ‫ف‬50-mm pieces, and placed into 2
ml Tenbroeck Tissue Grinders (Wheaton) containing Ca/Mg-free HBSS
(GIBCO BRL). Thymuses were homogenized by 2 rotating plunges, and
spleens were homogenized by 3. After removing released cells from ho-
mogenate, tissue particles were resuspended in HBSS and subjected to a
second homogenization. Next, cell suspensions were gently vortexed and
settled on ice (5 min). Cells were separated from tissue fragments and pel-
leted by centrifugation (1,500 rpm, 10 min, 4ЊC) twice. A hemacytometer
was used to determine cell concentration.
Cells (106
/100 ␮l HBSS) were single-labeled with primary antibodies
(10 ␮g/␮l; listed previously) in FACS buffer (0.4% BSA/PBS; 30 min,
4ЊC). After washing with FACS buffer, pelleting (1,500 rpm, 5 min, 4ЊC),
and resuspension in 100 ␮l FACS buffer, cells were incubated with 20 ␮l
of FITC polyclonal anti-rat IgG secondary antibodies (5 ␮g/␮l, 30 min,
4ЊC, covered; listed previously). For double-labeling, 20 ␮l (10 ␮g/␮l) of
directly labeled PE-CD8a (BD PharMingen) or its isotype control, PE-rat
IgG2a␬ (BD PharMingen) were added at this step as well. Cells were pel-
leted as above, and resuspended in 0.5 ml FACS buffer. Before sorting,
propidium iodide (PI; 0.5 ␮g/␮l; BD PharMingen) was added to distin-
guish dead cells.
The FACSCalibur was used in conjunction with CELL Quest version
3.1 software (Becton Dickinson) to acquire and analyze data. For single-
labeling, fluorescence was detected on FL1 (FITC) and FL 3 (PI) without
compensation. Cells were visualized on dot plots where X ϭ FSC and Y ϭ
PI fluorescence in log. Lymphocytes were gated based on their distinct
distribution (low SSC and increasing FSC), and 10,000 PI negative events
per sample were acquired. Percent lymphocytes out of total live cells were
recorded based on gated region statistics, and histogram plots were cre-
ated to analyze the FITC positive cells in relation to both the total live cell
and live lymphocyte population. Positive peaks ranged from 102
–103
for
CD4, CD8, and B220, and at ‫ف‬101
for B220. Erythroblasts were calculated
within the live cell distribution firstly as percent lymphocytes, multiplied
by percent Terϩ live lymphocytes, and divided by 100. For double-label-
ing, compensation between FITC, PI, and PE was required to eliminate
spectral overlap. Percent double-positive cells were distinguished from
single-positive cells by visualization on dot plots where X ϭ FITC and
Y ϭ PE, and recorded in relation to total live lymphocytes.
Results
Phenotypic Variability in the Collagen X Null Mice
While expanding a homozygous collagen X KO mouse
colony (Rosati et al., 1994) bred one generation into the
C57Bl/6 strain, previously undetected phenotypic abnor-
malities were observed. Specifically, perinatal lethality en-
sued approximately three weeks after birth in 10.8% of the
pups (103 mutants/943 mice); this manifested as dwarfism
with mutant weight of ‫ف‬1/3 that of controls, lethargy, tho-
racolumbar kyphosis, neck lordosis, wasting, and death en-
suing within 24 h. Outwardly, this acute phenotype mir-
rored that seen in Ͼ25% (1,220 mutants/4,428 mice; 5
lines) of the Tg mice (Fig. 1 A; Jacenko et al., 1993a;
Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W.
Roberts, manuscript submitted for publication). Upon dis-
section, thymuses and spleens of perinatal lethal KO and
Tg mutants were reduced, spleens were discolored (Fig. 1
B), and lymph nodes undetectable. Whereas the kidney-
to-body weight ratios remained consistent in all mice, that
of thymus and spleen versus kidney or body weight of
perinatal lethal mutants decreased compared with controls
(0.21–0.32% for thymus; 0.12–0.16% for spleen; data not
shown). These ratios transcended to the number of thymic
or splenic cells isolated from these organs (see below),
mirrored those seen in Tg mice with perinatal lethality
(Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W.
Roberts, manuscript submitted for publication), and un-
derscored the disease phenotype specificity to lymphatic
organs. Lastly, in perinatal lethal mutants, bright red,
erythrocyte-filled marrows were readily discernible (Fig. 1
C) and highlighted this most acute phenotype.
Of the surviving KO mice, about two percent underwent
a similar demise at two to four months, and a few at later
stages. Among the survivors, a subset of mice appeared le-
thargic and slightly dwarfed upon weaning, however re-
covered; in these mice, no gross changes were detected in
lymphatic organs other than a subtle decrease in spleen
weight (not shown). Abnormalities in an additional ap-
proximate one to two percent of survivors included hydro-
cephaly and tooth overgrowth, each of which eventually
resulted in death. No tumors or skin ulcerations were de-
tected in older KO mice, as in the Tg animals. Overall, the
percentage of KO mice undergoing lethality approached
‫ف‬14%.
Skeletal and Marrow Defects
Histomorphometry confirmed the subtle growth plate
Figure 1. Phenotypic variability in the collagen X KO mice. A,
Homozygous KO mice (top and center) with no disease pheno-
type (top) and exhibiting perinatal lethality (center), compared
with a perinatal lethal collagen X Tg mutant (bottom). Note size
reduction and hunching of backs in the mutants. B, Thymuses
(top) and spleens (bottom) from KO mice with either no disease
phenotype (left) or with perinatal lethality (center), compared
with those from a perinatal lethal Tg mutant (right). Note size re-
duction of both organs, as well as a depletion of red pulp in the
spleens of mutants. C, Tibia-femur hind limbs from a wild-type
(WT) control, a KO perinatal lethal mutant (KO), and a Tg mu-
tant (Tg). Note prominent red marrows in limbs from mutants.
Bar, 1 mm.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, 2000 986
compressions in KO mice as reported by Kwan et al.
(1997), as well as revealed differences between the Tg and
KO skeletal defects. Specifically, there was an ‫ف‬14%
overall decrease in growth plate width in day 21 KO mice
compared with control, compared with Ͼ18% decrease in
normal Tg mice (Fig. 2, A and B). Furthermore, increased
waviness was seen in many KO growth plates (Fig. 2 A).
In KO mice with perinatal lethality, the compressions
were more pronounced and somewhat variable, and ap-
proached those seen in perinatal lethal Tg mice (Fig. 2 A).
Overall, when compared with controls, the proliferative
zone in all KO mice was more compressed than the hyper-
trophic, which was opposite that seen in the Tg mice (Fig.
2 B). Moreover, in all KO mice, trabecular bony spicules
were slightly decreased in size and number, with the least
amount seen in the most severe mutants, as in the Tg mice
(Figs. 2 A and 3 A). Likewise, most dramatic changes were
seen in marrows of KO mice with perinatal lethality,
where an erythrocyte predominance and leukocyte deple-
tion were characteristic of marrow aplasia (Fig. 3). In Tg
mice, the temporal onset of marrow aplasia correlated
with the metaphyseal skeletal defects seen approximately
two to three weeks after birth, and was proposed to under-
lie all the hematopoietic abnormalities (Jacenko, O., C.J.
Gress, M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W. Roberts, manu-
script submitted for publication).
Lymphatic Organ Defects
Thymus. In KO week three perinatal lethal mutants, re-
duced thymuses revealed altered architecture. Specifically,
the thymic cortex was diminished and virtually depleted of
cells (Fig. 4, H&E) when compared with the densely popu-
lated thymic cortex in control mice. This was confirmed by
immunostaining for TPE, where the diminished cortex was
localized as a narrow strip, compared with the wide zone
comprising the majority of the thymus in controls (Fig. 4,
TPE). The thymic cortex houses marrow-derived imma-
ture T cells, which after acquiring lineage identity in the
marrow, migrate to the cortex, mature, and progress to
the medulla (Shortman and Wu, 1996). A depletion in
the overall number of the immature cortical thymocytes was
indicated by a paucity of double-positive CD4 and CD8
cells, whereas the medullar lymphocyte population com-
prised of single-positive CD4 or CD8 cells appeared virtu-
ally unaffected (Fig. 4, CD4 and CD8). In surviving KO
mice, no visible differences in thymic size or architecture
were detected.
FACS of thymic cells confirmed a decrease in the CD4ϩ
and CD8ϩ lymphocytes in week three KO mice with peri-
natal lethality by single- (Fig. 5 A) and double- (Fig. 5 B)
labeling. Moreover, double-labeling revealed a decrease in
CD4ϩ/CD8ϩ cells, but an increase in single-positive T
lymphocytes as well as in double-negative cells (Fig. 5 B);
Figure 2. Tibial growth plate histomorphometry of collagen X Tg
and KO mice. A, H&E sections of day 21 tibial metaphyses of
wild-type (control), and collagen X KO and Tg mice with mild
(KO, TG) and acute (KO MUT, TG MUT) phenotypes. GP,
Growth plate; PC, proliferating cartilage; HC, hypertrophic carti-
lage; T, trabecular bone; M, marrow. Note: less pronounced over-
all compression of growth plates in KO mice as that in TG mice;
trabecular reduction in both KO and TG mice; more severe
growth plate compressions and trabecular reductions in both KO
MUT and TG MUT; and erythrocyte predominance and leuko-
cyte depletion in marrows of both KO MUT and TG MUT mice.
Bar, 100 ␮m. B, Histomorphometric analysis of growth plate
zones including overall growth plate width (overall), and widths
of proliferative and hypertrophic cartilages. Note greater compressions of the proliferative zone in KO mice, and greater compressions
of the hypertrophic zone in Tg mice. n, Sample number; error bars ϭ standard error.
Gress and Jacenko Skeleto-Hematopoietic Defects in Collagen X KO Mice 987
the latter is characteristic of autoimmune diseases. Fur-
thermore, the lymphocyte profiles reflected those seen for
Tg mice with perinatal lethality (Fig. 5). No significant dif-
ferences were detected between thymic T cells from KO
and Tg mice with no acute phenotype, and WT (Fig. 5),
nor in KO or Tg mice at younger or older ages (data not
shown). Lastly, cell isolation studies revealed a 3.5-fold re-
duction in cell number from thymuses of KO perinatal le-
thal mice when compared with controls and KO mice with
no acute phenotype (data not shown). Taken together,
these data suggested that, in mice exhibiting perinatal le-
thality, thymic cortical T cells were likely not replenished
by marrow-derived immature T cells due to marrow apla-
sia. Alternatively, the more mature medullar T cells, in ad-
dition to those circulating in the blood, have likely escaped
the effects of marrow aplasia. TUNEL assay for apoptosis
and acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining for necro-
sis confirmed that thymic reduction in perinatal lethal mu-
tants did not result from increased cell death (data not
shown; Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao,
and D.W. Roberts, manuscript submitted for publication),
but likely from lack of lymphocytes emigrating from the
marrow.
Spleen. In week three KO mice with perinatal lethality,
altered splenic architecture was discernible as poorly de-
fined lymphatic nodules and a severely reduced red pulp
(Fig. 6 A, H&E). MOMA-1 stained a subpopulation of
splenic macrophages surrounding periarteriolar lymphatic
sheaths, which revealed smaller and less-organized lym-
phatic nodules, with decreased internodular space (Fig. 6
Figure 3. Giemsa staining of tibial longitudinal sections from control and collagen X null mice with no outward defects (KO), or with
perinatal lethality (KO MUT) at week three after birth. A, Low magnification of tibiae reveals a reduction of leukocytes (blue) and a
predominance of erythrocytes (red) in the KO mutant. B, Higher magnification of bone marrow from A reveals marrow aplasia in the
KO mutant, manifested as a depleting hematopoietic compartment (blue). Bars, 100 ␮m.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, 2000 988
A, MOMA). Ter 119 staining of the erythrocytic lineage
underscored the disorganized splenic architecture that was
highlighted by a diminished red pulp; the latter likely ac-
counted for the reduced internodular distances (Fig. 6 A,
TER). Furthermore, many erythrocytes appeared lysed.
The splenic T cell population comprises the mature, cir-
culating T lymphocytes, which would likely not be affected
by marrow aplasia. Thus, staining for CD4 and CD8 cell
surface markers did not detect an altered T cell distribu-
tion or their deficiency in spleens of KO perinatal lethal
mice (Fig. 6). Moreover, it appeared that the density of
CD4ϩ and CD8ϩ cells was increased, perhaps reflecting
the reduced red pulp. Alternatively, the B cell population,
which is dependent on the marrow for maturation before
emergence into the circulation (Takatsu, 1997), was al-
tered in the KO perinatal lethal mice. This was evidenced
by more diffuse staining of lymphatic nodules than in the
WT. Labeling with IgM and IgD (not shown) confirmed
that, although the B cell number may be reduced, the cells
appeared mature and functional, as seen in the Tg mice
(Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R. Campbell, Z. Tao, and
D.W. Roberts, manuscript submitted for publication).
Single-label FACS confirmed the histological observa-
tions by revealing an elevated splenic CD4ϩ T cell pop-
ulation in all KO mice (Fig. 7 A); this implied firstly that
these cells were the least affected by marrow aplasia in
mice with perinatal lethality, and second, that all KO
and Tg mice had altered T lymphocyte populations. Per-
cent CD8ϩ T cells remained relatively constant or
slightly elevated in the KO’s (Fig. 7 A), suggesting their
concomitant decrease along with that of other splenic
cells. These data were corroborated by double-label
FACS (Fig. 7 B), which again demonstrated similar
lymphocyte population changes in both the collagen X
KO and Tg mice, as well as a decrease in CD4/CD8 dou-
ble-negative splenic cells. Similar trends were seen in
Figure 4. Histology and im-
munohistochemistry of longi-
tudinal sections of thymus
showing the cortex (C)/me-
dulla (M) junction from week
three wild-type (control) and
collagen X KO mice with
perinatal lethality (KO MUT).
In the KO MUT, H&E stain-
ing reveals reduction of cor-
tex and a paucity of cortical T
cells, whereas TPE antibod-
ies localize the cortex as a
narrow strip compared with
the extensive matrix in the
control. Likewise, CD4 and
CD8 T cell surface mark-
ers confirm a depletion of
CD4ϩ/CD8ϩ immature cor-
tical lymphocytes in the
KO MUT. Bar, 100 ␮m.
Gress and Jacenko Skeleto-Hematopoietic Defects in Collagen X KO Mice 989
spleens from KO and Tg mice at both younger and older
ages (preliminary data).
B cell levels (Fig. 7 C) in KO perinatal lethal mutants
were decreased by ‫ف‬45% of the control values, similar to
what was seen in all Tg mice. One difference involved the
subset of KO mice without an acute phenotype, where the
percent B cells appeared unaltered, and even elevated in
certain animals. Preliminary data indicated elevated B cell
levels in KO mice at two weeks of age, followed by a slight
decrease at older ages. This differed from the significant
decrease in B cell levels in Tg mice, which were decreased
throughout life (Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R. Campbell,
Z. Tao, and D.W. Roberts, manuscript submitted for pub-
lication). Likewise, significant changes in Ter 119ϩ eryth-
roblasts were detected only in the subset of perinatal le-
thal KO mutants, where erythroblasts were decreased to
‫ف‬50% that of controls (Fig. 7 D). In the Tg mice with
no acute phenotype, elevated erythroblast levels implied
splenic erythropoiesis; in mice, myelopoiesis persists in
both spleens and marrows throughout life, whereas in hu-
mans, hematopoiesis is confined to bone marrows after
their establishment. Elevated levels of Ter 119ϩ erythro-
blasts were seen in a subset of the healthy KO mice, al-
though the overall changes were not significant. Complete
blood count (CBC) analysis of marrow, spleens, and pe-
ripheral blood at different developmental stages would
provide the definitive characterization of alterations in
blood cell lineages. Moreover, marrow transplantations
should establish whether these defects arise as a response
to an altered marrow microenvironment.
Lastly, in KO perinatal lethal mutants, an ‫ف‬7.7-fold de-
crease was observed in splenocytes from KO perinatal le-
thal mutants, compared with that of splenic cells from con-
trol and KO mice with mild phenotypes (data not shown).
This was comparable to the data for splenocytes from Tg
perinatal lethal mutants (Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R.
Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W. Roberts, manuscript submit-
ted for publication). Likewise, the percentage of live
splenic lymphocytes was reduced, which is particularly
pronounced in light of red pulp reduction. Due to the lat-
ter, one would expect to see an overall increase in lympho-
cytes if these cells were not affected; in the KO mice, this
population was significantly reduced, and supported the
FACS data (Fig. 7, A–C).
Discussion
The data presented here demonstrate that mice with inac-
tivated collagen X manifest a variable, previously unde-
scribed phenotype that reflects certain skeleto-hematopoi-
etic defects seen in Tg mice with dominant interference
mutations for collagen X. Specifically, a subset of the KO
mice develop perinatal lethality at week three after birth,
which is distinguished by erythrocyte predominance and
depletion of the hematopoietic compartment in marrows,
and altered hematopoiesis and hypoplasia of the second-
ary lymphatic organs, such as the thymus, spleen, and
lymph nodes. This most acute phenotype is seen in
‫ف‬10.8% of the KO mice, as opposed to Ͼ25% of the Tg
mice; however, the defects in these severely affected ani-
mals appear indistinguishable. Among survivors, both KO
and Tg mice continue to exhibit phenotypic variability,
Figure 5. FACS analysis of thymic lymphocytes from week three
wild-type (WT) and collagen X KO and Tg mice with mild (KO
or Tg) or perinatal lethal (KO Mut or TG Mut) phenotypes. A,
Single-label FACS reveals a reduction of CD4ϩ/CD8ϩ cells in
KO and Tg mice with perinatal lethality. B, Double-label FACS
with FITC-conjugated antibodies labeling CD4ϩ lymphocytes
(lower right quadrant), and PE-conjugated antibodies labeling
CD8ϩ lymphocytes (upper left quadrant). Note depletion of cor-
tical double-positive cells (upper right quadrant) in KO and Tg
mice with perinatal lethality, with a concomitant increase in dou-
ble-negative (lower left quadrant) cells, and single-positive CD4
or CD8. n, Animal number; error bars ϭ standard error.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, 2000 990
with milder, more subtle defects observed in the KO sub-
set. Specifically, whereas many Tg survivors exhibit vari-
able dwarfism during the rapid skeletal growth phase at
weeks two to six, and aggressive lymphosarcomas with ag-
ing, only a small fraction of dwarfed KO mice were no-
ticed, and no increased incidence of tumors has been
detected. Alternatively, both sets of mice occasionally ex-
hibit tooth overgrowth or hydrocephaly. However, in
Figure 6. Histology and im-
munohistochemistry of longi-
tudinal spleen sections from
week three wild-type (con-
trol) and collagen X KO mice
with perinatal lethality (KO
MUT). A, Altered splenic ar-
chitecture in the KO mutant
is revealed by H&E as
poorly distinguishable lym-
phatic nodules and red pulp
reduction, by MOMA stain-
ing for splenic macrophages
surrounding periarteriolar
sheaths as decreased and dis-
orderly nodules with de-
creased internodular dis-
tance, and by TER 119
staining of erythroid cells as a
depleted red pulp. B, Immu-
nohistochemical localization
of T and B lymphocytes re-
veals in the KO mutant: unal-
tered distribution of CD4ϩ
and CD8ϩ T cells, but a re-
duction in nodular size and
internodular space, and more
diffuse B220 staining for B
cells. Bars, 100 ␮m.
Gress and Jacenko Skeleto-Hematopoietic Defects in Collagen X KO Mice 991
every mouse with altered collagen X, hematopoiesis is
affected, and is manifested by altered B and T lymphocyte
development (Fig. 7 A; Jacenko, O., C.J. Gress, M.R.
Campbell, Z. Tao, and D.W. Roberts, manuscript submit-
ted for publication). Although dwarfed, runted or sickly
pups are occasionally observed among WT, not one of
these animals has exhibited red marrows, lymphatic organ
atrophy, and similar hematopoietic changes as those in the
collagen X mice. In the Tg mice, the same disease pheno-
type was seen in multiple lines with independent transgene
insertion sites, implicating the collagen X transgene as the
cause of the skeleto-hematopoietic defects (Jacenko et al.,
1993a). The comparable phenotypic changes reported
here for the collagen X KO mice thus indicate that skel-
eto-hematopoietic defects in both murine sets are likely
the direct and specific consequences of collagen X disrup-
tion. Moreover, these skeleto-hematopoietic defects un-
derscore an interdependence between EO and establish-
ment of a marrow environment required for blood cell
differentiation.
Although phenotypic similarities exist between the KO
and Tg mice, certain discrepancies may provide insights
into the underlying pathogenic mechanisms. First, it is not
unexpected for the dominant interference collagen X mu-
tation to yield a stronger disease phenotype than one re-
sulting from gene inactivation. The dominant interference
transgene construct was designed to encode partially func-
tional collagen X alpha chains that would compete for
association with other chains at the COOH domain;
however, after associations, the mutant chains would not
trimerize properly due to an altered triple-helical domain.
This scenario was confirmed in a cell-free translation sys-
tem where the COOH domain was shown to be required
for associations, and where collagen X alpha chains with
triple-helical deletions were unable to trimerize with full-
length chains (Chan et al., 1996; Chan and Jacenko, 1998).
The likely consequence of this scenario is either a deple-
tion of hybrid trimers through a protein suicide mecha-
nism leading to a loss-of-function, and/or persistence of
these abnormal molecules leading to an impairment of col-
lagen X structure and interactions (e.g., gain-of-function).
We speculate that both loss-of-function and gain-of-func-
tion mechanisms are involved in the phenotype seen in the
Tg mice. Specifically, subtle growth plate changes in the
Figure 7. FACS of splenic lymphocytes and erythroblasts from week three wild-type (WT) and collagen X KO and Tg mice with mild
(KO or Tg) or perinatal lethal (KO Mut or TG Mut) phenotypes. A, Single-label FACS reveals an increase in CD4ϩ and CD8ϩ lym-
phocytes in all KO and Tg mice, with the largest increases in perinatal lethal mutants. B, Double-label FACS with FITC-conjugated an-
tibodies staining CD4ϩ T cells (lower right quadrant), and PE-conjugated antibodies labeling CD8ϩ lymphocytes (upper left quad-
rant). Note an increase in single- and double-positive cells (upper right, left, lower right quadrants) in mutants, with a concomitant
decrease in double-negative (lower left quadrant) cells. C, Single-label FACS of B220ϩ B cells. Note B cell reduction in perinatal lethal
mutants, as well as in all Tg mice, but lack of reduction in the KO samples. D, Single-label FACS for Terϩ erythroblasts depicts an in-
crease in KO and Tg mice with mild phenotypes, but a decrease approaching WT levels in mice with perinatal lethality. n, animal num-
ber; error bars ϭ standard error.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 149, 2000 992
KO predominately involve the proliferating chondrocytes,
whereas in the Tg mice, the most affected zone is hyper-
trophic cartilage. This implies that the consequences from
a loss-of-function collagen X mutation may primarily
affect the proliferative zone, as described by Kwan et
al. (1997) in their collagen X KO mice, whereas a gain-
of-function mutation that might generate a defective mol-
ecule in hypertrophic cartilage (e.g., either a mouse–chick
heterotrimer and/or a chick homotrimer, as may be the
case in the Tg mice), may affect the latter. Likewise, re-
garding hematopoiesis, B lymphocyte reduction is not ob-
served in spleens from the surviving KO mice as it is in the
surviving Tg animals. On the contrary, B cells appear to be
slightly elevated in many KO mice, suggesting that these
animals may be fighting infections. Again, these differ-
ences may reflect the consequences of a loss-of-function
versus a dominant interference phenotype that may com-
prise both loss- and gain-of-function defects. Interbreed-
ing the KO and Tg mice would ascertain the Tg contribu-
tions on a null background in contributing to the more
acute Tg murine defects.
One unresolved issue involves the phenotypic variability
in the KO and Tg mice, which are both homozygous at ei-
ther the inactivated collagen X or at the transgene locus.
Several scenarios can contribute towards such variability.
The first possibility involves the presence of a strain-spe-
cific modifier, or an allelic variant at a locus other than the
one being modified (Erickson, 1996), whose actions may
be linked to those of collagen X. In this situation, back-
crossing the mice ‫21ف‬ generations into an inbred genetic
background may resolve this issue, provided that these
genes aren’t closely linked. Both the KO and the Tg mice
have been backcrossed about five generations into two
strains, and continue to display phenotypic variability (our
unpublished observations). A second possibility involves
exposure of animals to opportunistic bacterial or fungal in-
fections before weaning. This is supported by elevated B
cells in KO mice (Fig. 7 C), as well as elevated cytokines in
all mice with altered collagen X (our unpublished observa-
tions). Likewise, the significant B lymphocyte decrease in
the Tg mice (Fig. 7 C) supports the more acute phenotype
and a greater ratio of perinatal lethality in this murine sub-
set. The third possibility may again reflect genetic variabil-
ity due to initial crossing of two (for KO mice; Rosati et
al., 1994) or three (for Tg mice; Chan and Jacenko, 1998)
strains while establishing these mouse lines. Variations in
each mouse may involve skeletal growth, mineralization,
and mobility; since mechanical stress has been linked with
skeletal defects in patients with SMCD (Wasylenko et al.,
1980), it is conceivable that increased stress on a weakened
skeleton may yield greater perturbations of the growth
plate, leading to more acute alterations in the skeleto-
hematopoietic interface.
A provocative conclusion from this study is that all mice
with altered collagen X, generated either through gene
targeting or by transgenesis, to some extent have altered
skeleto-hematopoietic differentiation. This in turn high-
lights a previously unforeseen yet intimate link between
hypertrophic cartilage and EO, and marrow establishment.
An interdependence between endochondrally derived
bones and hematopoiesis has long been apparent (Taich-
man and Emerson, 1994), however, it has not included hy-
pertrophic cartilage as a potential contributor in hemato-
poietic interactions. It is conceivable that hematopoietic
niches in the marrow may be compartmentalized both spa-
tially (via trabecular bone projections or matrix compo-
nents) and chemically (via bioactive molecules such as
growth factors and cytokines). Defects in hypertrophic
cartilage may thus contribute either alone or in concert to-
wards skeletal defects and marrow alteration. Specifically,
growth plate decompartmentalization has been reported
in the KO mice (Kwan et al., 1997), and disruption of a
hexagonal network in the pericellular matrix of hyper-
trophic chondrocytes was observed in the Tg mice (Chan
and Jacenko, 1998). It is speculated that collagen X may
comprise the hexagonal network (Kwan et al., 1991; Chan
and Jacenko, 1998), and may even persist in the marrow
stroma (our unpublished observations). Thus, disruption
of collagen X may redistribute matrix components, such as
glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans, which have been
implicated in hematopoiesis (Bruno et al., 1995; Gupta et
al., 1996), or may disrupt specific hypertrophic cartilage
matrix/cell interactions. Alternatively, trabecular bone re-
ductions may directly alter both the spatial and chemical
compartmentalization of the marrow; the trabecular sur-
faces may be essential for stem cell interactions (Taichman
and Emerson, 1994; Taichman et al., 1996) as well as in se-
questering/synthesis of hematopoietic cytokines and growth
factors involved in hematopoiesis (Bruno et al., 1995;
Gupta et al., 1996).
Interestingly, skeleto-hematopoietic defects have been
reported in animal models (Fletch et al., 1975; Tepper et
al., 1990; Shull et al., 1992; Kulkarni and Karlsson, 1993;
Lewis et al., 1993; Jacenko, 1995; Iotsova et al., 1997) as
well as in a number of human disorders (Burke et al., 1967;
Polmar and Pierce, 1986; Guba et al., 1994; Turnpenny et
al., 1995; Winter, 1995; Young, 1996), although they have
not generally been viewed as being related. Our data im-
ply that defects in hypertrophic cartilage may lead to he-
matopoietic disorders, including aplastic anemia, impaired
immunity, and malignancies. It is noteworthy that to date
Ͼ30 collagen X mutations have been implicated in causing
either SMCD (Chan and Jacenko, 1998) or SMD (Ikegawa
et al., 1998), neither of these disorders is associated with
hematopoietic abnormalities. Moreover, no mutations in
the triple-helical domain of collagen X have yet been iden-
tified. It is likely that a phenotypic spectrum of disease se-
verities may ensue from mutations in different collagen X
domains, as seen in the collagen I and Osteogenesis imper-
fecta (Ikegawa et al., 1998). Furthermore, it is conceivable
that pathogenic mechanisms involving dominant interfer-
ence and gain-of-function (as is the likely mechanism of
transgene action in the collagen X Tg mice) versus haplo-
insufficiency (as in humans with SMCD) or complete loss-
of-function (as in the collagen X KO mice), would yield
the most acute skeleto-hematopoietic disease phenotypes.
We are extremely grateful to Drs. Benoit de Crombrugghe and Richard
Behringer (M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas) for gen-
erously providing the collagen X null mice and for critical review of the
manuscript. We also greatly appreciate the help of Drs. Merle Elloso and
Jorge Caamano (University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medi-
cine) in FACS data analysis; Dr. Chris Hunter (University of Pennsylva-
nia School of Veterinary Medicine) for antibody-related suggestions; and
Mrs. Michelle Campbell and Mr. Douglas Roberts for outstanding techni-
Gress and Jacenko Skeleto-Hematopoietic Defects in Collagen X KO Mice 993
cal support and assistance with FACS analysis.
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(AR43362), an Arthritis Foundation Biomedical Research Grant, and the
University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation Award to O. Jacenko.
Submitted: 24 November 1999
Revised: 9 March 2000
Accepted: 28 March 2000
References
Bruno, E., S.D. Luikart, M.W. Long, and R. Hoffman. 1995. Marrow-derived
heparan sulfate proteoglycan mediates the adhesion of hematopoietic pro-
genitor cells to cytokines. Exp. Hematol. 23:1212–1217.
Burke, V., J.H. Colebatch, C.M. Anderson, and M.J. Simmons. 1967. Associa-
tion of pancreatic insufficiency and chronic neutropenia in childhood. Arch.
Dis. Child. 42:147–157.
Chan, D., W.G. Cole, J.G. Rogers, and J.F. Bateman. 1995. Type X collagen
multimer assembly in vitro is prevented by a Gly 618 to Val mutation in the
alpha 1(X) NC1 domain resulting in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
J. Biol. Chem. 270:4558–4562.
Chan, D., and O. Jacenko. 1998. Phenotypic and biochemical consequences of
collagen X mutations in mice and humans. Matrix Biol. 17:1169–1184.
Chan, D., Y.M. Weng, A.M. Hocking, S. Golub, D.J. McQuillan, and J.F. Bate-
man. 1996. Site-directed mutagenesis of human type X collagen. Expression
of alpha 1(X) NC1, NC2, and triple-helical mutations in vitro and in trans-
fected cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271:13566–13572.
Chan, D., Y.M. Weng, H.K. Graham, D.O. Sillence, and J.F. Bateman. 1998. A
nonsense mutation in the carboxyl-terminal domain of the type X collagen
causes haploinsufficiency in schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. J. Clin.
Invest. 101:1490–1499.
Chan, D., S. Freddi, Y.M. Wang, and J.F. Bateman. 1999. Interaction of col-
lagen alpha 1(x) containing engineered NCl mutations with normal alpha
1(x) in vitro. Implications for the molecular basis of schmid metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia. J. Biol. Chem. 274:13091–13097.
Diren, H.B., A. Buyukgebiz, and T. Pirnar. 1992. Spondylometaphyseal dyspla-
sia, type VII. Pediatr. Radiol. 22:87–89.
Erickson, R.P. 1996. Mouse models of human genetic disease: which mouse is
more like a man? BioEssays. 18:993–998.
Fletch, S.M., P.H. Pinkerton, and P.J. Brueckner. 1975. The Alaskan Malamute
chondrodysplasia (dwarfism-anemia) syndrome: in review. J. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 11:353–361.
Guba, S.C., C.A. Sartor, R. Hutchinson, L.A. Boxer, and S.G. Emerson. 1994.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) production and G-CSF re-
ceptor structure in patients with congenital neutropenia. Blood. 83:1486–
1492.
Gupta, P., J.B. McCarthy, and C.M. Verafaillie. 1996. Stromal fibroblasts hepa-
ran sulfate is required for cytokine-mediated ex vivo maintenance of human
long-term culture-initiating cells. Blood. 87:3229–3236.
Ikegawa, S., K. Nakamura, A. Nagano, N. Haga, and Y. Nakamura. 1997. Muta-
tions in the N-terminal globular domain of collagen X gene (Col10A1) in pa-
tients with Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. Human Mutation. 9:131–
135.
Ikegawa, S., G. Nishimura, T. Nagai, T. Hasegawa, H. Ohashi, and Y. Naka-
mura. 1998. Mutation in the type X collagen gene (COL10A1) causes
spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:1659–1662.
Iotsova, V., J. Caamano, J. Loy, Y. Yang, A. Lewin, and R. Bravo. 1997. Osteo-
petrosis in mice lacking NF-␬B1 and NF-␬B2. Nature Med. 3:1285–1289.
Jacenko, O. 1995. c-fos and bone loss: a regulator of osteoclast lineage determi-
nation. BioEssays. 17:277–281.
Jacenko, O., and D. Chan. 1998. Unraveling the consequences of collagen X
mutations. J. Cell Materials. 8:123–134.
Jacenko, O., P. LuValle, and B.R. Olsen. 1993a. Spondlylometaphyseal dyspla-
sia in mice carrying a dominant negative mutation in a matrix protein spe-
cific for cartilage-to-bone transition. Nature. 365:56–61.
Jacenko, O., P. LuValle, K. Solum, and B.R. Olsen. 1993b. A dominant nega-
tive mutation in the ␣1(X) collagen gene produces spondylometaphyseal de-
fects in mice. In Progress in Clinical and Biological Research: Limb Devel-
opment and Regeneration. Vol. 383B. Wiley-Liss, NY. 427–436.
Jacenko, O., B.R. Olsen, and M.L. Warman. 1994. Of mice and men: heritable
skeletal disorders. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54:163–168.
Kulkarni, A.B., and S. Karlsson. 1993. Transforming growth factor B-1 knock-
out mice. A mutation in one cytokine gene causes a dramatic inflammatory
disease. Am. J. Path. 143:3–9.
Kwan, A.P.L., C.E. Cummings, J.A. Chapman, and M.E. Grant. 1991. Macro-
molecular organization of chicken type X collagen in vitro. J. Cell Biol. 114:
597–604.
Kwan, K.M., M.K. Pang, S. Zhou, S.K. Cowen, R.Y. Kong, T. Pfordte, B.R.
Olsen, D.O. Sillence, P.P. Tam, and K.S. Cheah. 1997. Abnormal compart-
mentalization of cartilage matrix components in mice lacking collagen X: im-
plications for function. J. Cell Biol. 136:459–471.
Lachman, R.S., D.L. Rimoin, and J. Spranger. 1988. Metaphyseal chondrodys-
plasia, Schmid type. Clinical and radiographic delineation with a review of
the literature. Pediat. Radiol. 18:93–102.
Laird, P.W., A. Zijderveld, K. Linders, M.A. Rudnicki, R. Jaenisch, and A.
Berns. 1991. Simplified mammalian DNA isolation procedure. Nucleic Acids
Res. 19:4293.
Lewis, D.B., H.D. Leggitt, E.L. Effman, S.T. Motley, S.L. Teitelbaum, K.J.
Jepsen, S.A. Goldstein, J. Bonadio, J. Carpenter, and R.M. Perlmutter. 1993.
Osteoporosis induced in mice by overproduction of interleukin 4. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 90:11618–11622.
McIntosh, I., M.H. Abbott, and C.A. Francomano. 1995. Concentration of mu-
tations causing Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia in the C-terminal
noncollagenous domain of type X collagen. Hum. Mutat. 5:121–125.
McLaughlin, S.H., S.N. Conn, and N.J. Bulleid. 1999. Folding and assembly of
type X collagen mutations that cause metaphyseal chondrodysplasia-type
Schmid. Evidence for coassembly of the mutant and wild-type chains and
binding to molecular chaperones. J. Biol. Chem. 274:7570–7575.
Peeden, J.N.J., D.L. Rimoin, R.S. Lachman, M.L. Dyer, D. Gerard, and H.E.
Gruber. 1992. Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Sedaghatian. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 44:651–656.
Polmar, S.H., and G.F. Pierce. 1986. Cartilage hair hypoplasia: immunological
aspects and their clinical implications. Clin. Immunol. Immunopath. 40:87–
93.
Rosati, R., G.S. Horan, G.J. Pinero, S. Garofalo, D.R. Keene, W.A. Horton, E.
Vuorio, B. de Crombrugghe, and R.R. Behringer. 1994. Normal long bone
growth and development in type X collagen null mice. Nature Gen. 8:129–
135.
Shortman, K., and L. Wu. 1996. Early T lymphocyte progenitors. Ann. Rev. Im-
munol. 14:29–47.
Shull, M.M., I. Ormsby, A.B. Kier, S. Pawlowski, R.J. Diebold, M. Yin, R.
Allen, C. Sidman, G. Proetzel, D. Calvin, et al. 1992. Targeted disruption of
mouse transforming growth factor-B1 gene results in multifocal inflamma-
tory disease. Nature. 359:693–699.
Taichman, R.S., and S.G. Emerson. 1994. Human osteoblasts support hemato-
poiesis through the production of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J.
Exp. Med. 179:1677–1682.
Taichman, R.S., M.J. Reilly, and S.G. Emerson. 1996. Human osteoblasts sup-
port human hematopoietic progenitor cells in in vitro bone marrow cultures.
Blood. 87:518–524.
Takatsu, K. 1997. Cytokines involved in B-cell differentiation and their sites of
action. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 215:121–133.
Tepper, R.I., D.A. Levinson, B.Z. Stanger, J. Campos-Torres, A.K. Abbas, and
P. Leder. 1990. IL-4 induces allergic-like inflammatory disease and alters T
cell development in transgenic mice. Cell. 62:457–467.
Turnpenny, P.D., R.A. Dakwar, and F.N. Boulos. 1995. Kyphomelic dysplasia.
In Congenital Malformation Syndromes. D. Donnai and R.M. Winter, edi-
tors. Chapman & Hall, London. 199–205.
Warman, M.L., M.H. Abbott, S.S. Apte, T. Heffron, I. McIntosh, D.H. Cohn,
J.T. Hecht, B.R. Olsen, and C.A. Francomano. 1993. A type X collagen mu-
tation causes Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. Nature Genet. 5:79–82.
Wasylenko, M.J., J.H. Wedge, and C.S. Houston. 1980. Metaphyseal chondro-
dysplasia, Schmid type. J. Bone Joint Surg. 62A:660–663.
Winter, R.M. 1995. Dubowitz syndrome. In Congenital Malformation Syn-
dromes. D. Donnai and R.M. Winter, editors. Chapman & Hall, London.
133–136.
Young, N.S. 1996. Immune pathophysiology of acquired aplastic anemia. Eur.
J. Haematol. 60:55–59.
