Primary research
Autologous stem-cell transplantation in refractory autoimmune
diseases after in vivo immunoablation and ex vivo depletion of
mononuclear cells
Oliver Rosen, Andreas Thiel*, Gero Massenkeil, Falk Hiepe, Thomas Häupl,
Hartmut Radtke, Gerd R Burmester, Erika Gromnica-Ihle†, Andreas Radbruch*
and Renate Arnold
University Hospital Charité (Campus Mitte), *German Research Center for Rheumatology,
and †Rheumaklinik Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany
Statement of findings
Autoimmune diseases that are resistant to conventional treatment cause severe morbidity
and even mortality. In the present study we demonstrate that complete remissions can be
achieved in refractory polychondritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), even at
advanced stage, with the use of autologous stem-cell transplantation (SCT). Remissions
persisted after reconstitution of the immune system. In the treatment of advanced systemic
sclerosis (SSc), stable disease may be achieved with autologous SCT.
Keywords: autologous stem-cell transplantation, polychondritis, refractory autoimmune disease, systemic lupus
erythematosus, systemic sclerosis
Synopsis
Received: 4 February 2000
Revisions requested: 17 March 2000
Revisions received: 26 April 2000
Accepted: 18 May 2000
Published: 8 June 2000
Arthritis Res 2000, 2:327–336
The electronic version of this article can be found online at
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
© Current Science Ltd
ANA = antinuclear antibody; ATG = antithymocyte globulin; EBMT = European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation; ECLAM = European
Consensus on Lupus Activity measurement; EULAR = European League Against Rheumatism; G-CSF = granulocyte colony-stimulating factor;
HRCT = high-resolution computed tomography; LFT = lung function test; SB = single breath; SCT = stem-cell transplantation; SLE = systemic
lupus erythematosus; SS = steady state; SSc = systemic sclerosis; TLC = total lung capacity; TLCO = transfer factor for carbon monoxide.
Introduction: Patients with persistently active autoimmune
diseases are considered to be candidates for autologous SCT.
We performed a phase 1/2 study in a limited number of
patients who were refractory to conventional immuno-
suppressive treatment. Following a period of uncontrolled
disease activity for at least 6 months, autologous SCT was
performed, after in vivo immunoablation and ex vivo depletion
of mononuclear cells.
Aims: To investigate feasibility, toxicity and efficacy of the
treatment, and the incidence of emergent infections.
Methods: Seven patients (aged between 23 and 48 years)
were included in the single-centre trial: one had relapsing
polychondritis, three had treatment-refractory SLE and three
patients had SSc. Stem-cell mobilization was achieved by
treatment with moderate-dose cyclophosphamide (2g/m2; in
terms of myelotoxic side effects or myelosuppression) and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). CD34– cells of
the leukapheresis products were removed by high-gradient
magnetic cell sorting. After stem-cell collection, immunoablation
was performed with high-dose cyclophosphamide (200mg/kg
body weight) and antithymocyte globulin (ATG; 90mg/kg body
weight). Autologous SCT was followed by reconstitution of the
immune system, which was monitored by six-parameter flow
cytometry and standard serology. The trial fulfilled the European
League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and the European Group
for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) guidelines for
blood and bone marrow stem-cell transplants in autoimmune
disease.
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
Arthritis Research Vol 2 No 4 Rosen et al
Introduction
Refractory autoimmune diseases cause a high degree of
morbidity and even mortality, although they are not consid-
ered to be malignant diseases. During treatment with con-
ventional and experimental immunosuppression, patients
can experience treatment-related morbidity without signifi-
cant gain in quality of life. Autologous SCT is a novel experi-
mental approach for treating patients with refractory
autoimmune diseases [1]. Worldwide, 74 patients with
severe autoimmune disease have thus far been treated in
22 centres [2]. Of these 74 patients, 38 received autolo-
gous SCT for treatment of rheumatic autoimmune diseases.
In the present study one patient with therapy-resistent
polychondritis, three patients with advanced SLE and
three patients with SSc qualified for an aggressive experi-
mental therapy. After stem-cell mobilization all patients
were treated with a rigorous immunosuppressive regimen
including cyclophosphamide and ATG to achieve in vivo
depletion of T cells and other mononuclear cells. The
preparative regimen was followed by autologous SCT of
CD34+ cells after an effective ex vivo depletion of
mononuclear cells by high-gradient magnetic cell sorting
in order to exclude contamination of the transplant with
CD34– cells. The present phase 1/2 trial was aimed at
investigating the toxicity of this protocol and the incidence
of infections. In addition, the efficacy of autologous SCT
with respect to clinical and serological remissions and
their duration was evaluated.
Patients and methods
Patients
All patients had long-lasting histories of severe and
progressive disease without any signs of improvement
under conventional immunosuppressive treatment. Inclu-
sion criteria were defined as persistently active disease
with poor prognosis and inadequate response to standard
protocols (glucocorticoids and at least two different regi-
mens of immunosuppressive drugs, such as intravenous
cyclophosphamide 800–1000mg/application). Further-
more, the patients needed to have adequate function of all
major organs in order to tolerate conditioning and trans-
plantation. The exclusion criteria were infections and
uncontrolled arrhythmia or congestive heart failure. Further
exclusion criteria were as follows: ejection fraction below
50% determined by echocardiogram; lung function test
(LFT; transfer factor for carbon monoxide [TLCO] <45%);
glomerular filtration rate below 40ml/min or serum creati-
nine greater than 2.0mg/dl; hyperalimentation; and age
greater than 59 years. The patients were included in the
Full article
Results: Among the seven patients studied, the patient with
relapsing polychondritis and the patients with SLE were
successfully treated and remained in complete remission during
a follow up of 10–21 months. Remission persisted despite
reconstitution of the immune system, resulting in high numbers
of effector-/memory-type T-helper lymphocytes and increasing
populations in the naïve T-cell compartment. Before autologous
SCT, one of the patients with SLE had a long-lasting secondary
antiphospholipid syndrome, with high anticardiolipin antibodies
and thromboembolic events. After autologous SCT the
antiphospholipid antibodies became negative, and no
thrombosis occurred during follow up. Two of the patients with
SSc were unaffected by treatment with autologous SCT for 6 or
13 months. The other patient with SSc died 2 days after
autologous SCT because of cardiac failure.
During stem-cell mobilization with G-CSF, flares of autoimmune
disease were seen in the patient with polychondritis and in one
patient with SLE. The strategy utilized for depletion of CD34–
cells led to a reduction by 4.5–5 log of contaminating CD3+ cells
in the transplant. T-cell add-back was required in the patient with
polychondritis and in one patient with SLE to provide a dose of
1×104 CD3+ cells/kg body weight for the transplant.
Discussion: In vivo immunoablation in combination with
autologous SCT after ex vivo depletion of CD34– cells can
block the autoimmune process in relapsing polychondritis or
SLE without incidence of severe infections. The remissions
were achieved in patients with advanced disease that was
refractory to previous intensive immunosuppressive therapy.
The present results do not indicate that large-scale
contamination of the stem-cell transplant with autoreactive cells
after selection for CD34+ cells occurred. After the preparative
regimen, the application of G-CSF was avoided, because
induction of flares of the autoimmune disease were noticed
during the mobilization of stem cells. In SSc patients, distinct
remissions were not observable after autologous SCT; the
serological and clinical status did not improve. Follow-up
periods of more than 12 months may be required to identify
successful treatment with autologous SCT in SSc patients.
Among the various autoimmune diseases the efficacy of
autologous SCT appears to be dependent on the underlying
pathophysiology. The results of the present phase 1/2 study
suggest that patients with advanced stage SSc should not be
treated with autologous SCT, until the reasons for the lack of
response and the possible mortality due to cardiac
complications are identified. The observation of flares of
autoimmune disease after application of G-CSF emphasizes
the need for critical evaluation of the role of G-CSF in
immunoablative regimens.
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
trial only after written consent had been obtained. The
present study on autologous SCT for refractory autoimmune
diseases was approved by the state ethics committee.
Patient 1
A 41-year-old female was admitted with relapsing poly-
chondritis, which was first diagnosed in 1985. The disease
was manifested by severe arthralgias, costosternal pain,
vasculitis, scleritis, saddle nose and tracheal involvement;
the patient had also sustained a life-threatening episode of
pyoderma gangrenosum. Despite continuous and intensive
conventional therapy for several years, no remission was
achieved. During disease progression there was a risk of
developing a tracheo-oesophageal fistula. The previous
therapy regimens had included intravenous Ig, high-dose
methylprednisolone, methotrexate, anti-CD4 antibody and
intravenous cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose 6.0g/m2
per month) with concomitant application of steroids. At
admission, the daily dose of methylprednisolone was
30mg. Her Karnofsky score was 60%.
Patient 2
A 27-year-old female was diagnosed as having severe
SLE at the age of 16 years. During the course of disease,
erythema, arthralgia, myalgia, abdominal vasculitis, poly-
serositis, nephrotic syndrome and pericardial effusions
had been observed. Despite consecutive treatments with
high-dose methylprednisolone, hydroxychloroquine, aza-
thioprine, intravenous cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose
2.8g/m2 per month), cyclosporine A, mycophenolate
mofetile and daily doses of prednisolone of at least 30mg,
the disease activity remained uncontrolled for 1.5 years
before stem-cell therapy. The patient had been hospital-
ized for the 15 months before autologous SCT. Her
Karnofsky score was 40% and her European Consensus
on Lupus Activity measurement (ECLAM) score was 6.5.
This patient had serum antibodies against double-
stranded DNA (Table 1); she fulfilled the classification cri-
teria of the American College of Rheumatology [3].
Patient 3
A 48-year-old female had had severe SLE since 1993.
The disease manifested as polyserositis, arthralgias,
peripheral neuropathy, nephrotic syndrome, pericardial
effusions and ventricular tachycardia (the latter was
treated with propanolol). Treatment had included high-
dose methylprednisolone, hydroxychloroquine, azathio-
prine, methotrexate, intravenous Ig, monthly intravenous
cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose 2.7g/m2 per month)
and mycophenolate mofetile. At admission, the patient
was under treatment with prednisolone (20mg/day) and
oral morphium sulphate (120mg/day). Her Karnofsky
score was 60% and her ECLAM score was 6. This patient
had serum antibodies against double-stranded DNA
(Table 1); she fulfilled the classification criteria of the
American College of Rheumatology [3].
Patient 4
A 37-year-old male had been diagnosed with SLE in
1989, with a nephrotic syndrome and oral lesions, ery-
thema, arthralgias, and cardiac and pulmonary involve-
ment. Despite treatment with prednisolone, azathioprine,
intravenous cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose 7.3g/m2)
and high-dose methylprednisolone, the nephrotic syn-
drome (histology indicated lupus nephritis of World Health
Organization grade IV) and other manifestations had not
improved, and the ventricular arrhythmia (multiple cou-
plets, one triplet, multiple bigemini) remained uncontrolled.
At admission, the dose of prednisolone was 100mg/day.
His Karnofsky score was 70% and his ECLAM score was
10. This patient had serum antibodies against double-
stranded DNA (Table 1); he fulfilled the classification crite-
ria of the American College of Rheumatology [3].
Patient 5
A 23-year-old female was first diagnosed as having diffuse
SSc at age 12 years. During the course of disease,
microstomia, xerostomia, arthralgias, dysphagia, cuta-
neous necrosis with Raynaud’s phenomenon and the
onset of lung fibrosis (by high-resolution computed tomog-
raphy [HRCT] scan; LFTs – total lung capacity [TLC]
72.6%, residual volume [as percentage of TLC] 127%,
single breath (SB) TLCO 61.8%) had occurred. Progression
of disease was observed under consecutive treatment
periods with D-penicillamine, prednisolone, azathioprine,
cyclosporine A, oral cyclophosphamide for 12 months
(cumulative dose 3.8g/m2) and dapsone. Treatment at
admission was only symptomatic and without steroids.
Her Karnofsky score was 60% and her skin score was 19.
Patient 6
A 25-year-old male was diagnosed with diffuse SSc in
1995 with microstomia, arthralgias, dysphagia, cutaneous
necrosis with Raynaud’s phenomenon, and onset of lung
fibrosis (by HRCT scan; LFTs – TLC 93.2%, residual
volume [in percentage of TLC] 159%, TLCO-SB 86.2 %).
His finger mobility was severely limited, and he had lost
10kg in weight since 1997. Treatment had included pred-
nisolone, azathioprine and symptomatic therapy. At admis-
sion, the daily dose of prednisolone was 5mg. His
Karnofsky score was 60%, and his skin score was 30. In
this patient steroids were applied due to the rapid pro-
gression of the disease.
Patient 7
A 45-year-old female had diffuse SSc that was first diag-
nosed in 1996. During the preceding 6 months she had
lost 13kg in weight, presumably due to oesophageal inv-
olement. Further manifestations were microstomia, xeros-
tomia, arthralgias, Raynaud’s phenomenon, cutaneous
necrosis, intermittent tachyarrhythmia and the onset of
lung fibrosis (by HRCT scan; LFT – TLC 71.1%, residual
volume [in percentage of TLC] 182%, steady-state (SS)
Arthritis Research Vol 2 No 4 Rosen et al
Table1
Clinicaloutcomeandtreatment-relatedmorbidityofpatientswithpolychondritisorSLEincompleteremission
Anti-double-
strandedDNA†Cardiolipin†§Complement†Steroid
FollowupELISA‡(U/ml)(U/ml)(md/dl)dosageKarnofskyECLAMSideeffectsduring
Patient*(months)ANA†CL-IFIgG/IgMOtherparameters†C3/C4(mg/day)†¶score(%)†score†immunoablation
121NoNoNoTrachealNo62.560NoSIRS**:WHOgradeIV
PC/female/relevancerelevancerelevanceinvolvement,relevance↓↓relevanceLocalinfection
41years/1985costosternal3100Interstitialpneumoniaand
pain,arthralgiascapillaryleakage
↓DIC
CompleteReactivationofgastrointestinal
resolutionulcer
2191:5120518/1:6438/54∅82/1035406.5SIRS**:WHOgradeIV
SLE/female/↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓Septicaemiaandpneumoniain
27years/1987Negligible<cut-off∅<31<311402251002aplasia:WHOgradeI
Flaresofdisease(abdominal
vasculitis,arthralgias,
serositis)
3161:51205040/1:12888/379α-Ro+122/1420606SIRS**:WHOgradeIV
SLE/female/↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓↓Septicaemia
48years/19931:80<cut-off∅<31<31∅1642741002Localinfection
Liverhaematoma:
WHOgradeII
4101:2560976/1:12833/56α-Ro/Proteinuria<44/<51007010SIRS**:WHOgradeIV
SLE/male/↓↓↓↓↓α-La+8.8g/day↓↓↓↓↓
37years/19891:160<cut-off∅<31<31↓↓1202251002
∅0.8g/day
*Characteristics:number/disease/sex/age/yearofdiagnosis.†Valuesabovethearrowrepresenttheadmissionvaluesandthosebelowthearrowrepresentthepresentstatus.‡ELISAcut-off
was118iU/ml.§Thecut-offsforIgGandIgManticardiolipinwere48and44U/ml,respectively.¶Dosescorrespondingtoprednisoloneequivalents.**SIRSduetoapplicationof
cyclophosphamideandATG.CL-IF,Crithidialuciliaeimmunofluorescence;PC,relapsingpolychondritis;DIC,disseminatedintravascularcoagulation;ELISA,enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent
assay;SIRS,systemicinflammatoryresponsesyndrome;WHO,WorldHealthOrganization.
TLCO 47.3%), but she had normal echocardiography
(ejection fraction 60%). Despite pretreatment with pred-
nisolone, methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetile, azathio-
prine and one course of intravenous cyclophosphamide
(cumulative dose 0.7g/m2), progression of disease contin-
ued. During hospitalization before autologous SCT, the
patient was treated with prednisolone 30mg/day. Her
Karnofsky score was 40% and her skin score was 32. In
this patient steroids were applied due to the rapid pro-
gression of the disease.
Specific antibodies and cytometry
Disease-related autoantibodies in SLE and SSc were ana-
lyzed at admission and regularly during follow up. Mono-
layers of Hep-2 cells (Bios GmbH, Gräfelfing/Munich,
Germany) were used to detect antinuclear antibodies
(ANAs) by indirect immunofluorescence. Anti-double-
stranded DNA antibodies were identified by indirect
immunofluorescence on Crithidia luciliae and by enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay as previously described [4].
Autoantibodies against extractable nuclear antigens (Sm,
U1RNP, Ro/SS-A, La/SS-B, Scl-70, Jo-1, centromere)
and anticardiolipin antibodies were analyzed using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (IMTEC Immundiag-
nostika GmbH, Zepernick, Germany).
Antibodies conjugated to phycoerythrin, fluorescein or
biotin, and conjugated to peridinin-chlorophyll protein
were obtained from Becton Dickinson (Heidelberg,
Germany) and Pharmingen (Hamburg, Germany). For
cytometry, anti-CD45RO (clone UCHL-1) was coupled to
Cy5 (Amersham, Braunschweig, Germany), according to
the manufacturer‘s instructions. Cell staining and flow
cytometry were performed using standard protocols on
freshly prepared peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The
cells were analyzed using a dual-laser, six-parameter
FACSCalibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Heidel-
berg, Germany); the data were evaluated using commer-
cial software (Becton Dickinson). UCHL-1 (anti-CD45RO)
was a generous gift from Imperial Cancer Research Tech-
nology (London, UK).
Stem-cell mobilization and collection
In all patients mobilization of stem cells was achieved with
cyclophosphamide at 2g/m2. After 5 days, G-CSF
(10µg/kg body weight) was administered daily, until
harvest of CD34+ cells. Leukapheresis was performed
when the leucocyte numbers had reached 4.0×109/l. If
required, leukapheresis (Cobe Spectra; Cobe BCT, Lake-
wood, CO, USA) was repeated until a minimum number of
4×106 CD34+ cells/kg body weight had been collected
for the transplants.
Engineering of transplants
Removal of CD34– leucocytes from the stem-cell trans-
plant was performed by selection for CD34+ cells through
high-gradient magnetic cell sorting, using a CliniMacs™
device (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach,
Germany) [5–7]. If required, CD3+ cells from the CD34–
fraction were additionally supplied to the purified CD34+
cells to transplant a minimum of 1.0×104/kg body weight
CD3+ cells. Until transplantation the CD34+ cell suspen-
sions were cryopreserved with 5 vol% dimethyl sulphoxide.
Preparative regimen and autologous stem-cell
transplantation
The preparative regimen consisted of 200mg cyclophos-
phamide/kg body weight (days –5 to –2) and ATG (rabbit;
obtained from Fresenius, Bad Homburg, Germany)
90mg/kg body weight (days –4 to –2) [8]. During ATG
treatment 500mg methylprednisone was administered
twice a day. The median time interval between cyclophos-
phamide for mobilization of stem cells and autologous
SCT was 38 days (range 29–61 days). Supportive care
was provided, according to standard protocols for allo-
geneic bone marrow transplantation, including isolation of
the patient and prophylaxis against infection. Substitution
of Igs (10g every other week) was applied to avoid
hypoimmunoglobinaemia, and was ended in all patients
after 6 months.
Evaluation of response
The function of the organs involved was monitored by
technical examinations. Apart from the the clinical course,
serological parameters were evaluated (ie ANAs, anti-
double-stranded DNA, Scl-70 and other extractable
nuclear antigens). Activity of SLE was determined by the
ECLAM score [9]. For SSc the skin score was used [10].
Therapeutic response was defined as 50% improvement
in clinical and serological parameters. Complete remission
was defined as normalization without clinical symptoms of
disease. The trial fulfilled the EBMT/EULAR guidelines for
blood and bone marrow stem-cell transplants in auto-
immune diseases [11].
Results
Preparation of stem cells
For mobilization of stem cells one leukapheresis was suffi-
cient in five out of seven patients; only patients 2 and 3,
both with SLE, needed two procedures to collect the
number of CD34+ cells required for transplant engineer-
ing. The median number of CD34+ cells collected was
14.1×106 CD34+ cells/kg body weight (range
4.7–70.0×106 CD34+ cells/kg body weight). After
enrichment for CD34+ cells by using the CliniMacs™
device, the transplants contained a median of 6.1×106
CD34+ cells/kg body weight (range 2.4–7.3×106 CD34+
cells/kg body weight). The ex vivo purging procedure led
to a reduction in contaminating mononuclear cells by
4.5–5 log, resulting in 1.0×104 CD3+ cells/kg body
weight (range 0.3–1.6×104 CD3+ cells/kg body weight).
Due to this effective strategy, patients 1 and 4 needed a
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
T-cell add-back to provide a dose of 1×104 CD3+
cells/kg body weight in the transplant.
One day after the first application of G-CSF for stem-cell
mobilization, severe arthralgias were observed in patient 1
(with polychondritis), suggesting a flare of the autoimmune
disease. Patient 3 with SLE showed Raynaud’s phenome-
non and athralgias after the first day of G-CSF treatment.
On day 7, she developed pericardial and pleural effusions,
followed by ventricular arrhythmia with atrial fibrillation on
day 10 of G-CSF application, presumably related to acti-
vation of the autoimmune process. The cardiac condition
disappeared under digoxin. Patient 7 with SSc had a reac-
tivation of haemorrhagic oesophagitis, which vanished
upon specific treatment. Febrile periods of unknown origin
were observed in patients 1 and 7. The symptoms disap-
peared after the application of high-dose steroids, which
could be reduced gradually.
Immunoablation and reconstitution of the immune system
During the immunoablative regimen, autologous SCT and
haematological reconstitution the median period of hospi-
talization of the patients was 34 days (range 30–71 days).
Reconstitution of granulocytes and platelets occurred
rapidly within 2 weeks in all patients. After autologous
SCT, the absolute number of nucleated cells reached
1.0×109/l on median day +14 (range day +12 to day
+16). The platelet count was 50×109/l on median day
+12 (range day +9 to day +15). At day +20 after autolo-
gous SCT, patients 5 and 6 (with SSc) showed rapid
recovery of up to approximately 0.8×109/l T lymphocytes
or natural killer cells in the peripheral blood. The median
number of platelet transfusions applied during bone
marrow aplasia was 5 units (range 2–10). A median of 10
units (range 6–17) of red blood cells were administered.
In the immunoablative phase, systemic inflammatory
response syndrome occurred in patients 1–6 during the
first infusion of ATG. Severe athralgias and pleural effusion
were observed in patient 2; during septicaemia, although
she was still in aplasia after autologous SCT, arthritis and
abdominal vasculitis were noted. The side effects were
interpreted as flares of the autoimmune disease (Table 1).
Remission was achieved by high-dose steroids. For up to 2
months after autologous SCT, the absolute counts of
CD4+ cells remained below the limit of detection in all
patients, and reached pretransplantation levels 4–6
months later (data not shown). Almost all CD4+ cells
detectable during the second phase of reconstitution (2–5
months after autologous SCT) were CD45RA–/CD45RO+
memory/effector cells (Table 2). The activation marker
HLA-DR was expressed on up to 50% of these cells in
patient 1, and approximately 20% in patient 2 (data not
shown). The transient appearence of activated memory/
effector cells was in concurrence with viral or bacterial
infections (interstitial pneumonia, localized infections of the
perianal region and of the urinary tract in patient 1, and a
Streptococcus mitis pneumonia in patient 2). Naïve
CD4+/CD45RA+/CD45RO– cells were nearly undetectable
in patients 1–4 until 6 months after autologous SCT.
For CD8+ lymphocytes, an early transient rapid expansion
was observed in patients 2 and 3 within 2 months after
autologous SCT. During the follow up of 10 and 6
months, respectively, the absolute numbers of CD8+ cells
declined in these patients, but recovered later and
remained at levels fourfold to 10-fold higher than before
autologous SCT (Table 2). In patient 1 the absolute
number of CD8+ cells was low during the first 7 months,
but had increased fivefold at 1 year after autologous SCT
in comparison with the status at admission.
Clinical outcome after autologous stem-cell transplantation
With a follow up between 6 and 21 months, the four
patients with polychondritis or SLE were in remission, as
defined by the disappearance of any clinical symptoms of
disease. The physical ability of these patients had
improved continuously, as shown by the Karnofsky index
and the ECLAM scores (Table 1). In the SLE patients, the
disease-related autoantibody titres (ANAs, anti-double-
stranded DNA, cardiolipin) declined to within the normal
range. In patient 3 the increased cardiolipin antibody titre
was reduced to normal for the first time since August
1996 and remained low to the last date of follow up (Feb-
ruary 2000). Despite the withdrawal of propanolol and the
reduction in prednisolone dose, ventricular arrythmias
were no longer observed. In patient 4, who was suffering
from nephrotic syndrome when admitted, the proteinuria
improved dramatically after autologous SCT. In addition,
patient 4 had a fresh deep venous thrombosis of the leg
combined with symptomatic pulmonary embolism at
admission, which improved after autologous SCT; anti-
coagulation therapy has been continued for safety
reasons. It was possible to reduce the application of corti-
costeroids gradually in all patients.
Patients 5 and 6 (with SSc) had neither clinical nor sero-
logical improvement (Table 3), although progression of the
disease was not observable. In the LFT no major alter-
ations were detectable, and the skin score remained
stable. In both patients, Raynaud’s phenomenon improved
after autologous SCT only in warm climates. Against
medical advice patient 5 became pregnant during recon-
stitution of the immune system and gave birth to a healthy
child 14 months after autologous SCT. In patient 7 (with
SSc), clinical and serological progression (weight loss of
2kg or 5% of body weight and a fourfold increase in ANA
titres) was observed after moderate-dose cyclophos-
phamide and G-CSF for stem-cell mobilization. During
immunoablation, fluid retention led to a weight gain of 7kg
within 1 week and to the occurrence of plural effusions.
Transiently, she was stablilized at a significantly reduced
Arthritis Research Vol 2 No 4 Rosen et al
level of performance status before the onset of ventricular
tachycardia and subsequent electromechanical uncou-
pling. She died on day +2 after autologous SCT due to
cardiac failure, although no signs of cyclophosphamide-
induced cardiotoxicity were observed during autopsy. The
postmortem histology revealed an advanced stage of pul-
monary fibrosis, with all the signs of cor pulmonale.
Discussion
The present study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy
of autologous SCT in treatment-refractory autoimmune
disease. After a median follow up of 14 months (range
10–21 months) four patients with polychondritis or SLE
are in clinical remission. Following the immunoablative
regimen, including cyclophosphamide, ATG and steroids,
the disease-specific titres of autoantibodies became nega-
tive in patients 2–4, who had SLE. No symptoms of recur-
rent autoimmune reactivity have been detected in these
patients. Obviously, the rigorous regimen of immuno-
ablation, consisting of high-dose cyclophosphamide in
combination with ATG, was successful in achieving rather
complete aplasia. This combination increased the efficacy
of immunoablation in comparison with that achieved by
other studies [12,13], by grossly reducing the number of
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
Table 2
Reconstitution of the immune system
T-cell populations† CD4+ cell subpopulations (%)
Time course
Patient* (months after admission) CD4+ CD8+ CD45RA–/CD45RO+ CD45RA+/CD45RO–
1 Admission 308 91 68 15
Polychondritis/female/ 5 4 2 98 0
41 years/1985 7 300 11 70 15
12 392 470 40 50
2 Admission 130 17 40 50
SLE/female/27 years/ 5 71 551 95 3
1987 7 149 427 93 4
10 227 239 60 20
3 Admission 30 42 68 18
SLE/female/48 years/ 3 30 129 99 0
1993 4 86 346 89 7
6 265 179 62 25
4 Admission 73 98 52 27
SLE/male/37 years/ 2 76 600 95 0
1989 3 19 118 88 0
*Characteristics: disease/sex/age/year of diagnosis. †T-cell populations determined by flow cytometry; number of cells/µl blood.
Table 3
Clinical course and treatment-related morbidity in patients with SSc not responding to autologous SCT
Anti-double- Steroid Karnofsky Side effects
Follow-up stranded DNA: dosage score during
Patient* (months) ANA† ELISA†‡ (iU/ml) Scl 70† (mg/day)†§ (%)† Skin score† immunoablation
5 13 5120 2.8 + Refused 60 19 SIRS¶: WHO grade II
Female/23 years/ ↓ ↓ ↓ steroids ↓ ↓ Isolated reduction of
1987 2560 None + 60 19 F VII to 3% (Q 21%)
6 6 5120 None + 20 70 30 SIRS¶: WHO grade II
Male/25 years/ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
1995 2560 None + 20 70 30
7 None 2560 None + 30 40 32 Fluid retention during
Female/45 years/ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ preparative regimen
1996 NE NE NE NE NE NE
*Characteristics: sex/age/year of diagnosis. †Values above the arrow represent the admission values and those below the arrow represent the
present status. ‡ELISA cut-off was 118 iU/ml. §Doses corresponding to prednisolone equivalents. ¶SIRS due to application of cyclophosphamide
and ATG. ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; F VII, blood clotting factor VII; NE, not evaluable; Q, Quick’s value (reciprocal value of
prothrombin time of the test sample compared with that of normal plasma as percentage); SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome; WHO,
World Health Organization.
autoreactive immune cells. Plasma cells can be found
resting in bone marrow for more than 90 days [14], and
apparently were eliminated in the patients with SLE in the
present study under treatment with ATG, presumably by
the recognition of specific surface antigens by immuno-
globulins of the ATG.
Side effects during immunoablation may be severe, and
flares of the autoimmune disease are particularly detrimen-
tal to the patient’s condition. Comparable with a previously
reported observation of the induction of flares by G-CSF
in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis [15], in the present
trial flares of SLE were diagnosed in patient 2 who was in
aplasia after the immunoablative regimen (Table 1). Flares
may be attributed to ‘cytokine-primed’ clinical situations in
which G-CSF is released from macrophages and residual
lymphocytes during bone marrow aplasia. Flares can be
controlled by high-dose steroids. After gradual reduction
in the dose of steroids and without further treatment of
patients 1–4, recurrence of the flares was not observed
during the follow up of more than 12 months. The flares
that occurred in patient 2, in aplasia and during septi-
caemia, may represent a ‘burn-out’ of autoreactivity in
terms of an exhaustion of mediators participating in
autoimmunity. In order to avoid the induction of flares,
G-CSF was not applied after termination of the
immunoablative regimen and during the phase of haema-
tological reconstitution.
In a previous study in five patients with haematological
malignancies or solid tumours and concomitant refractory
autoimmune disease, who were treated by autologous SCT
[13], the disease persisted or relapsed within 3 months. In
that investigation the transplantations were performed
without in vivo/ex vivo depletion of T cells, emphasizing the
importance of effective immunoablation. Successful
immunoablation in vivo, combined with less intensive
purging of the transplant (2–3 log depletion of CD3+ cells)
was reported to halt disease progression in patients with
multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis or SLE [16]. The
further reduction in CD3+ cells, as applied in the present
study, but not in the previous investigation [16], did not
lead to a higher incidence of severe infections. Thus, it is
tempting to speculate that in future studies even lower
amounts than 1×104 CD3+ cells/kg body weight, as
applied in the present study, may be tolerated.
In the present trial, preparations with greatly reduced
numbers of CD3+ cells were used for autologous SCT. By
application of the recently developed CliniMACS™ device
[7], a highly efficient technology was introduced for the
selection of haematopoietic stem cells. High-gradient mag-
netic cell sorting was able to purify CD34+ cells effectively
from G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood, resulting in 4.5–5
log depletions of CD3+ T cells, thus minimizing the risk of
retransplantation of autoreactive T cells. In fact, after
autologous SCT no relapse of autoreactivity was observed
in the patients with polychondritis or those with SLE, even
though the absolute counts of CD4+, CD8+ and all other
leucocytes had reached pretreatment levels. On the other
hand, the large-scale depletion of T cells from the trans-
plants did not provoke life-threatening infections before
and during immunological reconstitution. The relevance of
the in vivo/ex vivo depletion procedure used in our investi-
gation may be confirmed by controlled studies.
Stem-cell support is essential in shortening the duration of
aplasia and in the reconstitution of haemopoiesis after
immunoablation by a regimen of cyclophosphamide and
ATG. Any immunoablative treatment without subsequent
autologous SCT is associated with the risk of severe
infections during neutropenia and thrombopenic bleeding.
This appears to be in contrast to the results of a recent
approach with high-dose cyclophosphamide followed by
G-CSF but without autologous SCT [12], in which two
patients with SLE had follow-up periods of 12 or 14
months with complete or partial remission. The results
appear to be due to the G-CSF-induced priming after
high-dose cyclophosphamide. In patients with aplastic
anaemia treated with allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion the advantage of a combined immunosuppression
with cyclophosphamide and ATG was emphasized by a
significant reduction in graft rejections [8]. The present
data on patients with polychondritis or SLE are in accord
with the recent results achieved by high-stringency
immunoablation followed by autologous SCT in a panel of
10 patients suffering from multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid
arthritis or SLE [16]. With follow-up periods of 6 and 12
months in that study the two patients with SLE were in
remission at the time of publication.
In the present investigation, a rapid decrease in levels of
pathological autoantibodies to normal values was
observed in the SLE patients responding to autologous
SCT. The early phase in the reconstitution of the immune
system was marked by rapid recovery of granulocytes and
platelets in all patients. During the second phase of recon-
stitution CD4+ cells, exclusively of the antigen-experi-
enced memory/effector type, were observed 2–5 months
after autologous SCT (CD45RO+, CD45RA–; Table 2).
Similar kinetics of reconstitution were described in
patients after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for
haematological malignancies [17]. In the patients we
studied, the activated T-helper cells may reflect the clonal
expansion of persisting cells after the preparative regimen,
which might have been stimulated by minor infections
during reconstitution [18].
During the second phase of reconstitution, patient 2 in the
present study suffered an episode of varizella-zoster infec-
tion. After in vitro incubation of mononuclear cells of that
patient with varizella-zoster virus antigen, the secretion of
Arthritis Research Vol 2 No 4 Rosen et al
IFN-γ by a subpopulation of T cells was observed (data not
shown). This may exclude a persisting general deficiency of
the immune system due to the aggressive immunoablation.
Deficiency of the immune system was considered as a
basic reason for self-tolerance in autoimmune disease after
immunosuppression followed by autologous SCT [16].
The two patients with SSc who were evaluable for follow
up showed no clinical and serological responses at 6 or
13 months after autologous SCT. We presume that insuf-
ficient immunoablation may have a role in the treatment
failures. This is supported by the persistance of Scl-70
autoantibody, and by the early recovery of lymphocytes
(patient 5) and natural killer cell reconstitution (patient 6).
In SSc no correlation between the activity of the disease
and the presence of autoantibodies has been shown,
although serum Scl-70 is associated with poor prognosis
with regard to pulmonary or cardiac involvement [19].
Patients 5 and 6 were still positive for Scl-70 after autolo-
gous SCT, suggesting a need for intensification of treat-
ment. However, the reason for insufficient immunoablation
in the SSc patients is not clear, and may be related to the
underlying pathophysiology that is different from that in
SLE. SSc appears to be less responsive, at least at the
advanced stage of tissue destruction, due to fibrotic
processes that are not present in SLE.
The present results are in contrast to those of a previous
report of a significant decline in ANAs in a SSc patient
within 6 months after autologous SCT [20]. The stable
disease in patient 5 in the present study was accompa-
nied by a pregnancy during the follow-up period. Preg-
nancy in patients with autoimmune disease has been
postulated to be a reason for stability in SSc and multiple
sclerosis [21,22]. Patient 7 of the present trial, who had a
brief history of SSc, died 2 days after autologous SCT
from cardiac failure due to massive pulmonary fibrosis.
After 2g/m2 cyclophosphamide was administered for
stem-cell mobilization, she developed clinical and serologi-
cal progress until autologous SCT. In hindsight, the
advanced stage of pulmonary fibrosis was not foresee-
able, and is to be considered the cause for the treatment-
associated mortality.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that the
induction of immune tolerance for disease-related antigens
is feasible and can be achieved with immunoablation and
subsequent autologous SCT in the case of refractory poly-
chondritis and SLE. Effective ex vivo depletion of CD34–
cells can be achieved with state-of-the-art technologies,
and appears to be essential for sustained tolerance after
immunological reconstitution. These results show unam-
biguously that a ‘reset’ of the immune system was brought
about, which was able to deal successfully with
pathogens. The treatment consisted of one admission into
hospital for stem-cell mobilization, and another one for
immunoablation and autologous SCT, with median dura-
tions of hospitalization of 20 and 34 days, respectively.
The high costs of the complex and intensive therapy per-
formed in the present study may be acceptable when
compared with those of disease-related long-term hospi-
talization and invalidity.
Acknowledgements
Drs Rosen and Thiel contributed equally to the present study. The authors
are grateful to the nurses and the staff of the BMT Unit of the University
Hospital Charité for the excellent care provided to our patients. We wish to
thank Professor Dr Fritz Hölzel, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Hamburg Medical School, for stimulating discussions on the subject matter,
Sonja Kimmig for expert technical assistance and Imperial Cancer Research
Technology (London, UK) for reagents.
References
1. Krance R, Brenner M: BMT beats autoimmune disease. Nature Med
1998, 4:153–155.
2. Tyndall A, Fassas A, Passweg J, et al: Autologous haematopoietic
stem cell transplants for autoimmune disease: feasibility and
transplant-related mortality. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999, 24:
729–734.
3. American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus: Guidelines for referral and management of
systemic lupus erythematosus in adults. Arthritis Rheum 1999, 42:
1785–1796.
4. Hiepe F, Kiessig ST, Jahn S, et al: A sensitive and class specific
solid phase enzyme immunoassay for anti-DNA autoantibodies in
supernatants of lymphocyte cultures and human hybridomas.
Biomed Biochim Acta 1986, 45:K29–K35.
5. Miltenyi S, Müller W, Welchel W, Radbruch A: High gradient mag-
netic cell separation with MACS. Cytometry 1990, 11:231–238.
6. Kato K, Radbruch A: Isolation and characterization of CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells from human peripheral blood by high-
gradient magnetic cell sorting. Cytometry 1993, 14:384–392.
7. McNiece I, Briddel R, Stoney G, et al: Large-scale isolation of
CD34+ cells using the Amgen cell selection device results in high
levels of purity and recovery. J Hematother 1997, 6:5–11.
8. Storb R, Etzioni R, Anasetti C, et al: Cyclophosphamide combined
with antithymocyte globulin in preparation for allogenic marrow
transplants in patients with aplastic anemia. Blood 1994, 84:
941–949.
9. Vitali C, Bencivelli W, Isenberg DA, et al: Disease activity in systemic
lupus erythematosus: report of the Consensus Study Group of
the European Workshop for Rheumatology Research. II. Identifica-
tion of the variables indicative of disease activity and their use in
the development of an activity score. The European Consensus
Study Group for Disease Activity in SLE. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1992,
10:541–547.
10. Clements PJ, Lachenbruch PA, Seibold JR, et al: Skin thickness
score in systemic sclerosis: an assessment of interobserver vari-
ability in 3 independent studies. J Rheumatol 1993, 20:1892–1896.
11. Tyndall A, Gratwohl A: Blood and marrow stem cell transplants in
autoimmune disease. A consensus report written on behalf of the
European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and the Euro-
pean Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT). Br J
Rheumatol 1997, 36:390–392.
12. Brodsky RA, Petri M, Smith BD, et al: Immunoablative high-dose
cyclophosphamide without stem-cell rescue for refractory, severe
autoimmune disease. Ann Intern Med 1998, 129:1031–1035.
13. Euler HH, Marmont AM, Bacigalupo A, et al: Early recurrence or per-
sistence of autoimmune diseases after unmanipulated autolo-
gous stem cell transplantation. Blood 1996, 88:3621–3625.
14. Manz RA, Thiel A, Radbruch A: Lifetime of plasma cells in the bone
marrow. Nature 1997, 388:133–134.
15. Vidarsson B, Gersson AJ, Onundarson PJ: Reactivation of rheuma-
toid arthritis and develepment of leukocytoclastic vasculitis in a
patient receiving granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for Felty’s
syndrome. Am J Med 1995, 98:589–591.
http://arthritis-research.com/content/2/4/327
16. Burt RK, Traynor AE, Pope R, et al: Treatment of autoimmune
disease by intense immunosuppressive conditioning and autolo-
gous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Blood 1998, 92:
3505–3514.
17. Small TN, Papadopoulos EB, Boulad F, et al: Comparison of immune
reconstitution after unrelated and related T-cell-depleted bone
marrow transplantation: effect of age and donor leukocyte infu-
sions. Blood 1999; 93:467–480.
18. Ko HS, Fu SM, Winchester RJ, et al: Ia determinants on stimulated
human T lymphocytes. Occurrence on mitogen- and antigen-acti-
vated T cells. J Exp Med 1979, 150:246–255.
19. von Mühlen CA, Tan EM: Autoantibodies in the diagnosis of sys-
temic rheumatic diseases. Semin Arthritis Rheum 1995, 24:323–
358.
20. Tyndall A, Black C, Finke J, et al: Treatment of systemic sclerosis
with autologous hemopoietic stem cell transplantation [letter].
Lancet 1997; 349:254.
21. Steen VD: Scleroderma and pregnancy. Rheum Dis Clin North Am
1997, 23:133–47.
22. Sandyk R: Estrogen’s impact on cognitive functions in multiple
sclerosis. Int J Neurosci 1996, 86:23–23.
Authors’ affiliations: Oliver Rosen, Gero Massenkeil and Renate Arnold
(Department of Oncology/Haematology, University Hospital Charité
[Campus Mitte], Berlin, Germany), Falk Hiepe, Thomas Häupl and Gerd
R Burmester (Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Charité
[Campus Mitte], Berlin, Germany), Hartmut Radtke (Department of
Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital Charité [Campus Mitte], Berlin,
Germany), Andreas Thiel and Andreas Radbruch (German Research
Center for Rheumatology, Berlin, Germany), and Erika Gromnica-Ihle
(Rheumaklinik Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany)
Correspondence: Oliver Rosen, MD, Department of
Oncology/Hematology, University Hospital Charité (Campus Mitte),
Schumannstr 20/21, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: + 49 30 2802 8712; fax: +49 30 2802 1486;
e-mail: oliver.rosen@rz.hu-berlin.de
Arthritis Research Vol 2 No 4 Rosen et al
