Page 1 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Abstract
Rheumatic diseases in women of childbearing years may necessitate
drug treatment during a pregnancy, to control maternal disease
activity and to ensure a successful pregnancy outcome. This
survey is based on a consensus workshop of international experts
discussing effects of anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive and
biological drugs during pregnancy and lactation. In addition, effects
of these drugs on male and female fertility and possible long-term
effects on infants exposed to drugs antenatally are discussed
where data were available. Recommendations for drug treatment
during pregnancy and lactation are given.
Review
Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs and reproduction
Monika Østensen1, Munther Khamashta2, Michael Lockshin3, Ann Parke4, Antonio Brucato5,
Howard Carp6, Andrea Doria7, Raj Rai8, Pierluigi Meroni9, Irene Cetin10, Ronald Derksen11,
Ware Branch12, Mario Motta13, Caroline Gordon14, Guillermo Ruiz-Irastorza15, Arsenio Spinillo16,
Deborah Friedman17, Rolando Cimaz18, Andrew Czeizel19, Jean Charles Piette20,
Ricard Cervera21, Roger A Levy22, Maurizio Clementi23, Sara De Carolis23, Michelle Petri24,
Yehuda Shoenfeld25, David Faden26*, Guido Valesini27 and Angela Tincani28
1Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology/Allergology, University Hospital of Bern, Switzerland
2Lupus Research Unit, The Rayne Institute, St Thomas’ Hospital, London, UK
3Joan and Sanford Weill College of Medicine of Cornell University, Barbara Volcker Center for Women and Rheumatic Disease, Hospital for Special
Surgery, New York, USA
4Division of Rheumatic Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, USA
5Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, Niguarda Hospital, Milano, Italy
6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, and Tel Aviv University, Israel
7Division of Rheumatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Padova, Italy
8Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Imperial College School of Medicine, London, UK
9Cattedra di Medicina Interna, University of Milano, Italy
10Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, L Mangiagalli, University of Milano, Italy
11Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands
12Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
13Neonatology and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy
14Centre for Immune Regulation, Division of Immunity and Infection, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
15Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital de Cruces, University of The Basque Country, Bizkaia, Spain
16Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pavia, Italy
17University of Texas, Health Science Center, Houston, USA
18Pediatrics, Fondazione Policlinico Mangiagalli, Milano, Italy
19Foundation for the Community Control of Hereditary Diseases, Budapest, Hungary
20Service de Médecine Interne, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France
21Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
22Discipline of Rheumatology, Faculdades de Ciencias Medicas, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
23Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy
24Lupus Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Baltimore, USA
25Department of Medicine and Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Hashomer, Israel
26Obstetric and Gynecology Department, University and Hospital of Brescia, Italy
27Cattedra di Reumatologia, Università ‘La Sapienza’, Roma, Italy
28Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University and Hospital of Brescia, Italy
*Deceased in 2005.
Corresponding author: Monika Østensen, monika.oestensen@insel.ch
Published: 11 May 2006 Arthritis Research & Therapy 2006, 8:209 (doi:10.1186/ar1957)
This article is online at http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
© 2006 BioMed Central Ltd
6-MP = 6-mercaptopurine; AAP = American Academy of Pediatrics; CI = confidence interval; COX = cyclo-oxygenase; CQ = chloroquine; CsA =
cyclosporin A; CYC = cyclophosphamide; FDA = United States Food and Drug Administration; HCQ = hydroxychloroquine; IBD = inflammatory
bowel disease; LDA = low-dose aspirin; MMF = mycophenolate mofetil; MTX = methotrexate; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; OR =
odds ratio; RR = relative risk; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; SSZ = sulphasalazine.
Page 2 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Introduction
The pregnancy categories of the United States Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) in their present form are often not
helpful for the clinician treating patients with active chronic
disease during pregnancy and lactation. They combine risk
assessment and benefit, and are for most products based on
animal data. There is no requirement to update categories
with human experience. Drug trials in pregnant or lactating
mothers are not performed with new drugs. Therefore the
only information on the safety of drugs during pregnancy and
lactation is derived from experimental and preclinical animal
studies. Human experience accumulates in most cases from
inadvertent drug exposure during pregnancy and lactation.
Because only drugs considered safe can be studied in
pregnant or lactating women, the number of controlled
studies is small. In the absence of controlled studies,
reporting bias favours the reporting of negative experiences,
particularly in case reports and small case series.
An important aspect of exposure in utero to drugs is possible
long-term effects that will become manifest later in life.
Because a follow-up several decades after antenatal
exposure is not easily performed, information on late harmful
effects in offspring is not available for most drugs. However,
as a result of increasing awareness, studies are planned or in
progress addressing these important questions.
Gonadotoxic effects of anti-inflammatory and immuno-
suppressive drugs have only seldom been studied except for
cytotoxic drugs and, in men, salazopyrine. However, there is
an increasing awareness among patients that drugs may
impair fertility or be mutagenic. Again, available information
concerns mostly experimental and preclinical animal studies.
Information on the excretion of drugs into breast milk is based
mostly on single-dose or short-term treatment. Studies
enrolling a large number of lactating women have not been
performed. The effect of the drug on the nursing infant has in
many cases not been studied. Investigations studying an
influence of chronic drug ingestion on child behaviour and
development are also lacking. In general, drug concentrations
in breast milk that expose the suckling infant to 0.1% of the
maternal dose are regarded as fairly safe, whereas an
ingestion of about 10% of the mother’s dose requires
caution. Recommendations given for drugs for which no
reports or only single case reports exist are based on
theoretical considerations. This is the case for many
immunosuppressive drugs and the biologicals. In view of the
substantial benefits of breastfeeding, denying it unnecessarily
is a serious concern.
Recommendations on prescribing during pregnancy differ,
sometimes considerably, in articles and textbooks. Even the
recommendations given by the producer of a given drug can
vary in different countries. This situation is unsatisfying for
both the patient and the treating physician.
For this reason an international workshop of experts with
experience in drug therapy of pregnant and lactating women
was arranged. The aim was to reach a consensus on anti-
inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs during
pregnancy and lactation with a focus on patients with
rheumatic disease.
Methods
A panel of 29 international experts including 17 specialists of
internal medicine and rheumatology, 8 obstetricians, 3
paediatricians and 1 specialist in genetics agreed to
participate in a consensus workshop on antirheumatic drugs
during pregnancy and lactation held in connection with the
4th International Conference on Sex Hormones, Pregnancy
and Rheumatic Diseases, held in Stresa, Italy, on 20 to 22
September 2004. Four categories of drugs were discussed
in separate working groups: anti-inflammatory drugs,
corticosteroids, immunosuppressive drugs and biological
agents. Current practice of prescribing during pregnancy and
lactation was evaluated by questionnaires for the four drug
categories under discussion. The results of these
questionnaires revealed which issues needed special
attention because of diverging practice of the specialists.
Before the workshop, members of the four working groups
searched the databases Medline and Cochrane for the period
1960 to 2004 under the following terms: each drug, fertility,
gonadal toxicity, pregnancy, teratogenicity, lactation, and
children of mothers treated during pregnancy. Because of the
scarcity of data, all types of original observations in humans
were accepted provided they were published in English,
Italian, French, German or Spanish. It was acknowledged that
causality between observed fetal or neonatal effects and a
given drug was often not documented, and that the possibility
for chromosomal aberrations or effects of the underlying
maternal disease were frequently not taken into account in
published experience.
The data from the available scientific literature were
summarized in the form of surveys, which were sent to the
participants before the workshop. The data were then
presented and discussed in workshops devoted to the
above-mentioned groups of drugs. Finally the conclusions
and recommendations of the working groups were discussed
by all participants in a plenary session.
If no consensus could be reached for a given drug, the
reason for diverging opinions is stated in the
recommendations. Consensus was reached for most drugs.
When clinical evidence was lacking, consideration of legal
issues has necessitated recommendations based on
theoretical risks for several drugs. The level of evidence for
the recommendations are presented in accordance with the
classification by Miyakis and colleagues [1], as follows: Class
I is a prospective study in a broad spectrum of the
representative population or meta-analysis of randomized
Page 3 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
controlled trials; Class II is a prospective study in a narrow
spectrum of the representative population or well-designed
cohort or case-control analytic study or retrospective study in
a broad spectrum of the representative population; Class III is
a retrospective study in a narrow spectrum of the
representative population; and Class IV is a study design in
which predictor is not applied in a blinded fashion or a
descriptive case series or an expert opinion. The application
of this classification has its problems because, in the field of
drugs during pregnancy and lactation, randomized controlled
studies are simply a minority. As a result the level of evidence
for the teratogenicity of methotrexate and cyclophosphamide
is only III. The low level of evidence for drugs during
breastfeeding is likewise due to the scanty documentation
and total absence of controlled studies. In contrast, the
classification reveals the low level of evidence on which many
of the recommendations are based. This opens for clinical
decisions weighing risk and benefit of therapy in the
individual patient.
Note
Data on breastfeeding or fertility are presented in the text only
when studied in humans. Otherwise the information is given
exclusively in the tables. With regard to biological drugs,
sufficient data on which to base recommendations exist only
for etanercept and infliximab. Other biological drugs are
therefore not included in this survey.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID)
NSAID and outcome of pregnancy
A Danish case-control study showed a link between the use
of NSAID during pregnancy and miscarriage [2]. Odds ratios
ranged from 1.3 for NSAID use 10 to 12 weeks before
miscarriage to 7.0 for use 1 week before miscarriage.
Potential bias and confounders of the study were the validity
of the registry variables, confounding by indication for
treatment, and the fact that prescription and not drug
consumption had been recorded [3]. A second population-
based cohort study including 1,063 women confirmed an
increased risk of miscarriage for the use of NSAID (including
aspirin) but not of paracetamol during pregnancy [4]. The
odds ratio (OR) was 1.8, but increased to 5.6 when taken
around conception and to 8.1 when used for more than
1 week. Interference of NSAID with implantation and
placental circulation was suspected as the explanation for the
findings. By contrast, a meta-analysis of low-dose aspirin
during the first trimester did not find an increase in
miscarriage [5]. The risk for miscarriage did not differ
between women treated with aspirin or placebo (relative risk
(RR) 0.92; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.71 to 119).
By stimulating uterine contractions and enhancing cervical
ripening, prostaglandins are important mediators in
parturition. Inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenases (COX) can prolong
gestation and labour. Indomethacin, aspirin, ibuprofen,
sulindac, diclofenac and ketoprofen [6-8] as well as the
preferential COX-2 inhibitors nimesulide and meloxicam [8,9]
have been used successfully for the inhibition of premature
labour. Similarly, celecoxib has been found to be as effective
as indomethacin as a tocolytic agent [10].
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effects
Animal studies
In rats and rabbits, the incidence of diaphragmatic hernia,
ventricular septum defect and gastroschisis/midline defects
is increased in fetuses exposed to NSAID when compared
with non-exposed controls [11,12]. The incidences of the
three defects are higher in aspirin-treated animals than in
non-aspirin NSAID-treated animals. This indicates that
irreversible inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2 is more toxic than
reversible inhibition. It was also shown that inhibition of COX-
1 mediates these developmental anomalies [12].
Human studies
Several population-based cohort and case-control studies
have assessed the teratogenic risks of first-trimester use of
non-selective COX inhibitors, including aspirin. Neither the
American Collaborative Perinatal Project [13,14], the
Michigan Medicaid surveillance study [15], the Swedish
National Project [16], nor the recent Danish population-based
study [3] together comprising several hundred thousand
pregnancies have found an increased risk of congenital
malformations. First-trimester use of selective COX-2
inhibitors has not been reported in human pregnancy.
A meta-analysis of published reports on use of aspirin (doses
not specified) during the first trimester found no increased
risk for congenital anomalies including renal anomalies and
congenital heart defects. However, a significantly higher risk
of gastroschisis was detected in infants born to women using
aspirin in the first trimester compared with non-aspirin users
(OR 2.37; 95% CI 1.44 to 3.88) [17]. The Spanish
Collaborative study of Congenital Malformations confirmed
an increased risk of gastroschisis at first-trimester prenatal
exposure to salicylates (OR 3.47, p = 0.015) after controlling
for maternal age and maternal smoking in a case-control
study [18].
Effects on the ductus arteriosus
Both COX-1 and COX-2 are expressed in endothelial and
smooth muscle cells of the ductus arteriosus [19] and hence
the constriction or premature closure of the ductus is a risk
with all NSAID. No constriction of the ductus arteriosus
occurred in the only human study of 12 pregnancies exposed
to celecoxib [10]. Effects on ductal blood flow have been
shown for most of the non-selective COX inhibitors occurring
as early as 4 hours after administration of the drug [20,21].
Several studies with fetal echocardiography found an
increasing rate of constriction of the ductus arteriosus from 0
before gestational week 27 to 43% in the period 27 to
30 weeks of gestation and 61% between 31 to 34 weeks of
gestation during treatment with indomethacin independently
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
of the fetal serum concentration [22-24]. The constriction
frequently reversed within 24 to 48 hours after the cessation
of therapy. However, several studies have shown a significant
association between pulmonary hypertension in newborn
infants and antenatal exposure to aspirin, naproxen or
ibuprofen in the third trimester. The severity of pulmonary
hypertension was dose related [24,25].
Effects on fetal and neonatal renal function
COX-1 is expressed in renal tubuli and COX-2 in renal
medulla [19]. The blockade of prostaglandin synthesis by
NSAID and the decreased activation of prostaglandin
receptors cause reduced renal perfusion and oligo-
hydramnios. Adverse effects on fetal renal function have been
reported for non-selective and selective COX inhibitors
[24,26-28]. A marked decline in fetal urine output has been
observed within 5 hours of indomethacin ingestion, and
oligohydramnios developed in 70 to 82% of pregnancies
during the first week of treatment, but disappeared after
discontinuation of the drug. Development of oligohydramnios
has been shown to be dose dependent [26]. Short-term
treatment with celecoxib reduced fetal urine production, but
less than indomethacin [10]. Transient anuria, but also fatal
persistent anuria and irreversible end-stage renal failure, has
been reported in newborn infants exposed to indomethacin or
nimesulide [27-29].
Other fetal/neonatal effects
High-dose aspirin and indomethacin given close to delivery
have been shown to cause bleeding tendencies and
haemorrhage in the central nervous system in the newborn
infant [24,30]. Clotting abnormalities have also been
detected in newborn infants exposed to 325 to 650 mg of
aspirin within 1 week before delivery [15].
Low-dose aspirin (LDA)
Adverse effects of LDA (less than 325 mg/day) on pregnancy
outcome were studied in a meta-analysis [5]. Women who
took aspirin had a significantly lower risk of preterm delivery
than did those treated with placebo (RR 0.92; 95% CI 0.86
to 0.98). There was no significant difference in perinatal
mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI 0.81 to 1.05) and in the rate of
small-for-gestational-age infants (12 studies; RR 0.96; 95%
CI 0.87 to 1.07) among offspring of mothers treated with
aspirin and those of mothers treated with a placebo [5]. More
than 10,000 pregnancies exposed to aspirin at 60 to
80 mg/day during the second and third trimester up to term
have been reported without any increase in impaired renal
function, pulmonary hypertension or clotting ability of the
newborn infant [31]. Doppler investigation of fetuses aged 15
to 40 weeks exposed to 60 mg of aspirin daily during the
second and third trimesters did not reveal any effect on the
ductus arteriosus [32]. One study found that LDA (less than
100 mg) given to the mother could suppress platelet
thromboxane A2 formation in the newborn infant that
recovered within 2 days after discontinuation of the drug [33].
There are some reports on epidural haematoma in patients
who, while on LDA, underwent epidural anaesthesia;
however, prospective studies have not found an increased
risk for this complication [34].
Effects of NSAID on fertility
COX-1 and COX-2 are involved in ovulation and implantation
[34,35]. Several case reports and small series have
described transient infertility after treatment with non-aspirin
NSAIDs such as indomethacin, diclofenac, piroxicam and
naproxen [36-38]. Studies in animals and humans have
shown that NSAID can inhibit the rupture of the luteinized
follicle and thereby cause transient infertility. A prospective,
randomized trial of ibuprofen in 12 women detected a delay
of 2 days or more in follicle rupture in a small number of
treated women [38]. However, no alterations of serum
progesterone or luteinizing hormone levels were observed. In
a study of 13 healthy women, 6 of whom were given the
selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib, delayed follicle rupture
was observed in 4 of them [39].
A study of men attending an infertility clinic found a decrease
in sperm count and quality in non-prescription, chronic users
of NSAID (mostly aspirin) at low or moderate doses [40].
Breastfeeding
Most NSAID are excreted in very small quantities into human
breast milk [41,42]. The American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) considers flufenamic acid, ibuprofen, indomethacin,
diclofenac, mefenamic acid, naproxen, piroxicam and tolmetin
to be compatible with breastfeeding [43]. Aspirin at more
than 100 mg/day should be used cautiously because of
potential adverse effects in the nursing infant [43]. Feeding
immediately before a dose can help to minimize infant
exposure to NSAID.
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 1 and 2)
• Non-selective and selective COX inhibitors can prevent or
retard ovulation. The frequency of ovulation inhibition is
unknown (evidence level IV).
• Non-selective COX inhibitors are not teratogenic and can
be continued during the first and second trimester
(evidence level I).
• At present there are no reliable data on selective COX-2
inhibitors; they should therefore be avoided during
pregnancy (evidence level IV).
• After gestational week 20, all NSAID (except aspirin at
less than 100 mg/day) can cause constriction of the
ductus arteriosus and impair fetal renal function (evidence
level I).
• All NSAID except LDA should be withdrawn at gestational
week 32 (evidence level IV).
• There is no consensus on when to stop LDA before
delivery. Some advise cessation of LDA treatment 1 week
before a planned delivery with epidural anaesthesia
(evidence level IV). Other experts do not stop LDA in
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 4 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
pregnant patients with antiphospholipid syndrome,
regarding the benefit of LDA as being greater than the
small risk of haematoma connected with epidural
anaesthesia (evidence level II).
• Breastfeeding immediately before a dose can help to
minimize infant exposure to NSAID (evidence level IV).
New anticoagulant drugs
Currently, the most widely used drugs for treatment and
secondary prevention of thromboembolic manifestations and
pregnancy morbidity caused by antiphospholipid syndrome
are LDA, heparin (unfractionated or of low molecular mass)
and oral anticoagulants. Their optimal use in pregnant
patients with APS has been described [44,45].
Current developments target potent drugs with a predictable
mode of action, easy mode of administration and minimal
requirements for blood control. For platelet inhibition, effective
oral preparations that directly block the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
receptor on platelets (the binding site for fibrinogen) are to be
expected on the market soon [46]. Pentasaccharides, which
are molecules that induce a conformational change in the
antithrombin molecule so that this can bind and inactivate
activated coagulation factor X, are logical alternatives for low-
molecular-mass heparin. The pentasaccharide fondoparinux
can be administered once daily subcutaneously in a fixed
dose and has proven efficacy for the treatment and
prophylaxis of venous thromboembolic manifestations
[47,48]. Fondoparinux crosses the placenta, and cord blood
samples contain levels about one-tenth of those in maternal
blood [49]. Ximegalatran is a derivate from hirudin, a direct
thrombin inhibitor, that can be given orally in two fixed daily
doses, does not need monitoring and is at least as effective
as conventional treatment in non-valvular atrial fibrillation [50]
and for the treatment and prophylaxis of venous thrombo-
embolic events [51,52]. Its effect is not influenced by food,
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 5 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Table 1
Effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, glucocorticosteroids and bisphosphonates on human pregnancy and fertility
Long-term Impairment
FDA Transplacental Human effects in of
Drug riska passage teratogenicity Fetal/neonatal adverse effects offspring fertility
Non-steroidal B/D Yes No In late pregnancy, constriction of the ductus Not studied Cases of
anti-inflammatory arteriosus, reduction of renal blood flow inhibition of
drugs follicle rupture
Prednisone B Limited Increase in Rare (cataract, adrenal insufficiency, infection) Not studied Not studied
oral clefts
Dexamethasone C Yes Not reportedb Neurodevelopmental abnormalities Not studied Not studied
Betamethasone C Yes Not reportedb Neurodevelopmental abnormalities ? Not studied Not studied
Bisphosphonates C Not Not reported Two cases of hypocalcaemia in the
studied newborn infant Not studied Not studied
Details and references are given in the text. aThe United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) pregnancy risk categories are as follows: A,
no risk in controlled clinical studies in humans; B, human data reassuring or when absent, animal studies show no risk; C, human data are lacking;
animal studies show risk or are not done; D, positive evidence of risk, benefit may outweigh; X, contraindicated during pregnancy. bNo indication for
maternal use in the first trimester.
Table 2
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids and bisphosphonates during lactation
Drug Secretion into breast milk Effect on nursing infant Breastfeeding allowed
Non-steroidal In low concentrations No adverse effects Diclofenac, flufenamic acid, ibuprofen,
anti-inflammatory drugs indomethacin, ketorolac, mefenamic
acid, naproxen and piroxicam are
compatible with breastfeeding [41-43]
Prednisone 0.025% of maternal dose No adverse effects Compatible with breastfeeding [84,85]
Dexamethasone Not studied Not known Avoid
Betamethasone Not studied Not known Avoid
Bisphosphonates Pamidronate not detected, no No adverse effect in one case [91] Insufficient data. Risk-benefit must be
reports on other bisphosphonates weighed before breastfeeding
drugs or P450 enzymes. Because of hepatic toxicity,
however, it has not been approved by the FDA. Currently,
little is known about the safety of the new anticoagulants
during pregnancy and lactation.
Conclusion and recommendation
• At the present state of knowledge, the new antiplatelet
and anticoagulant drugs cannot be recommended for use
in pregnant or lactating women. The pentasaccharide
fondoparinux can cross the placenta, suggesting that it is
less safe than heparin or low-molecular-mass heparin
during pregnancy (evidence level IV).
Corticosteroids
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the placenta converts
cortisol and corticosterone to the relatively inactive 11-keto
forms, leaving no more than 10% of the active drug to reach
the fetus [53]. Glucocorticoids with fluorine at the 9α
position, like betamethasone and dexamethasone, are
considerably less well metabolized by the placenta.
Side effects with special relevance to pregnancy
Corticosteroid side effects in pregnant women include all that
are present in non-pregnant subjects taking corticosteroids.
Side effects such as increased blood pressure, osteopenia,
osteonecrosis and susceptibility to infection are of special
relevance in pregnancy. Pregnancy induces insulin resistance
at later stages, and the resulting glucose intolerance is further
enhanced by exogenous glucocorticoids with an increased
risk of gestational diabetes. Pregnancy-specific complications
are premature rupture of the membranes, frequently reported
in corticosteroid-treated patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and in one controlled study comparing
treatment with corticosteroids with treatment with heparin in
pregnant antiphospholipid-antibody-positive patients [54].
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effects
Hydrocortisone produces dose-related teratogenic and toxic
effects in genetically susceptible experimental animals, with
increased rates of cleft palate, cataract, fetal loss and fetal
growth restriction [55,56].
In the human, results from case-control and prospective
studies indicate that exposure to hydrocortisone and
prednisone during the first trimester can lead to a small
increase in oral clefts [57-61]. A meta-analysis found a 3.3-
fold increased OR of oral clefts after first-trimester exposure
to corticosteroids [62]. Similar results were reported by the
Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations
[57] and by two additional studies [59,61], but a reporting
bias might exist because several large studies found no
statistically increased rate of oral clefts [60,63]. Available
data do not allow a conclusion to be drawn about the specific
oral cleft phenotype associated with glucocorticoid exposure
in humans (cleft lip, cleft palate or both). Since oral clefts
occur at about 1:1,000 births in the general population, the
possible increase to 3 or 4 for every 1,000 births after
embryonic exposure to corticosteroids is minimal [62]. On the
whole, corticosteroids do not seem to increase the risk of
congenital abnormalities noticeably in humans.
The influence of corticosteroids on intrauterine growth has
been controversial. Some authors have demonstrated an
increased incidence of low-birthweight babies in mothers on
corticosteroids [56,64], whereas others have not [65].
Infections in newborn infants after antepartum exposure to
corticosteroids occur rather infrequently [66] and maternal
corticosteroid therapy does not induce general immuno-
suppression in the newborn infant [67]. The possible
induction of hypertension in adult life by antenatal exposure to
corticosteroids has not been proven in humans [68]. Other
rare adverse events reported for antenatal exposure to
corticosteroids are neonatal cataract [69] and adrenal
suppression in children born to women taking high doses of
steroids during pregnancy [70,71].
Antenatal exposure to synthetic fluorinated
corticosteroids betamethasone and dexamethasone
A single course of fluorinated corticosteroids (betamethasone
or dexamethasone, 24 mg) to pregnant women at risk for
preterm delivery, between 24 and 34 weeks of gestational
age, clearly reduced the risk of death, respiratory distress
syndrome and cerebral haemorrhage in their preterm infants
[72]. In the meantime, however, evidence has accumulated
on the potential harm of repeated courses of steroids for the
mother and the fetus. Findings in animals widely suggest that
repeated antenatal steroid doses can interfere with the
growth and development of the immature brain [73,74], and
observations on humans suggest that antenatal and postnatal
dexamethasone may negatively affect the child’s neuro-
psychological development [75-78]. In view of this concern, a
further NIH consensus conference in 2000 confirmed the
previous statement of the advantages of one course of
antenatal corticosteroids but also made it clear that, in view
of their potential hazard, repeated courses should not be
given routinely but be reserved for patients in randomized
controlled clinical trials [79].
The possible negative effects seem linked more to
dexamethasone than to betamethasone [80]. In addition, a
separate meta-analysis of the data in the Cochrane review
showed that only betamethasone, and not dexamethasone,
significantly reduces neonatal mortality [81]. For these two
reasons it has been suggested that betamethasone should
be preferred when available [82]. Adverse effects on
neuropsychological development in children have not been
observed after exposure to steroids that are inactivated by
placental enzymes [83].
Breastfeeding
Only trace amounts of hydrocortisone are excreted into
human breast milk [84]. In six lactating women, prednisolone
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 6 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
doses of 10 to 80 mg/day resulted in milk concentrations
ranging from 5% to 25% of maternal serum levels [85]. Even
at a maternal dose of 80 mg/day, the nursing infant would
ingest only 10 µg/kg which corresponds to <10% of the
infant’s endogenous cortisol production. No data are
available for dexamethasone or betamethasone in lactating
women [43].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 1 and 2)
• Maternal indications: prednisone, prednisolone and
methyl prednisolone.
• Fluorinated corticosteroids for antenatal treatment:
betamethasone should be preferred when available rather
than dexamethasone (evidence level II).
• Stress doses of hydrocortisone at delivery are recommen-
ded in patients on long-term therapy (evidence level IV).
• Corticosteroids do not seem to increase the risk of
congenital abnormalities noticeably in humans (evidence
level II).
• In case of in utero exposure to fluorinated steroids,
consider postnatal steroids for the baby only if adrenal
insufficiency is documented (neonatologist advice is
warranted) (evidence level IV).
• Breastfeeding is allowed with moderate doses of steroids
(evidence level II). At doses >40 mg consider
breastfeeding timing 4 hours after the dose (evidence
level IV).
Osteoporosis prevention
For women treated either with corticosteroids or with heparin
throughout pregnancy, prevention of osteoporosis is
important [86]. Bisphosphonates accumulate in bone for long
periods. In mice and rats, gestational exposure to
bisphosphonates was associated with decreased fetal bone
growth and decreased fetal weight [87]. Three case reports
have described the use of bisphosphonates in pregnant
women. Two of the children born had transient hypo-
calcaemia, the third had normal laboratory values and
developed normally to 1 year of age [88-91].
• Because of insufficient data, pregnancy should be
postponed for 6 months after withdrawal of bisphospho-
nates (evidence level IV).
• The routine use of oral calcium and vitamin D
supplements is recommended in pregnancy and lactation
(evidence level IV).
Antimalarial drugs chloroquine (CQ) and
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effects
CQ was embryotoxic and fetotoxic in high doses (250 to
1,500 mg/kg) in experimental animals. Eye malformations
occurred in 45% of animals at 1,000 mg/kg [92]. CQ
accumulated preferentially in melanin-containing structures in
the fetal uveal tract and inner ear when given during
pregnancy [92].
CQ and HCQ cross the placenta with no significant
difference in the mean concentration in maternal and cord
blood [93]. Weekly malaria prophylaxis with 300 mg of CQ
throughout gestation did not increase the congenital
malformation rate [94]. In the rheumatism literature, reports
on several hundred pregnancies exposed to CQ 250 mg
daily or HCQ 200 to 400 mg daily during the first trimester
did not find an increase in congenital malformations or
cardiac conduction disturbances in children exposed
antenatally to antimalarials [88,95-100]. Malformations of the
inner ear and other abnormalities after treatment with higher
than the recommended dose of CQ throughout pregnancy
were reported after intrauterine exposure to 500 mg daily of
CQ in three siblings born to a mother with SLE [101]. HCQ
has not been associated with congenital malformations.
Breastfeeding
Three studies examined the presence of CQ after the
administration of single doses (5 mg/kg and 600 mg) in
lactating women [100,102]. Daily ingestion of CQ by a
nursing child was calculated as 2.2 to 4.2% of the maternal
dose. Two case reports measured the secretion of HCQ
during lactation and found 0.35% and 0.0005% of the
maternal dose in human breast milk [103,104].
Long-term effects in children
Several studies have investigated long-term effects in
children exposed in utero or during lactation to HCQ. No
decrease in visual acuity, visual field or colour vision, or
alterations in electroretinogram and electro-oculogram or
hearing impairment, were detected in children studied during
the first year of life or up to 4 years of age [105-108]. A case-
control study of 133 pregnancies exposed to HCQ found no
visual, hearing, growth or developmental abnormalities in
children followed up for 108 months. Electrocardiograms of
exposed children were normal [99].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• When indicated, continue antimalarials during pregnancy
and lactation (evidence level II).
• HCQ is the antimalarial of choice in fertile women in need
of treatment (evidence level IV).
• CQ and HCQ are compatible with breastfeeding
(evidence level IV).
Sulphasalazine (SSZ)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effects
Reproduction studies with SSZ in rats and rabbits at doses
up to six times the human dose have not shown impaired
female fertility or harm to the fetus.
A population-based case-control study demonstrated no
significant increase in selected congenital abnormalities in
the children of women treated with SSZ during pregnancy
[109]. A national survey evaluated the outcome of
pregnancies associated with inflammatory bowel disease
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 7 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
(IBD). In 186 pregnancies of women treated with SSZ alone
or with concomitant steroid therapy, the incidence of fetal
morbidity and mortality was comparable both with that of 245
untreated IBD pregnancies and with pregnancies in the
general population [110]. Additional studies of pregnancies
in women with IBD confirmed these results [111-114]. There
have been isolated reports on children born with congenital
malformations to mothers treated with SSZ during pregnancy
[115]. A study comparing fertility rates and fetal abnormalities
of patients with IBD with the general population found a
higher rate of malformations among offspring (particularly of
men) in patients treated with SSZ [115]. Because SSZ
inhibits the gastrointestinal and cellular uptake of folate, a
possible role of folate deficiency cannot be ruled out [116].
Some experts have advised the cessation of SSZ in the last
trimester, fearing it could displace bilirubin from albumin and
thus induce neonatal pathological jaundice. Yet the bilirubin-
displacing capacity of sulphapyridine and SSZ at the low
concentrations measured in cord blood is negligible [117].
Kernicterus in the newborn infant after exposure to SSZ in
utero has not been reported. Aplastic anaemia was found in
an aborted fetus exposed during the first trimester to SSZ
[118], and another case reported congenital severe
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 8 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Table 3
Effect of immunosuppressive, cytotoxic and biological drugs on human pregnancy and reproduction
Long-term Impairment
FDA Transplacental Human effects in of
Drug riska passage teratogenicity Fetal/neonatal adverse effects offspring fertility
Chloroquine/ C/C Yes No Not at recommended doses No impairment Not studied
hydroxychloroquine of vision or hearing
Sulphasalazine B Fetal like No Case reports of aplastic anaemia and Not studied In men:
maternal serum neutropenia at >2g maternal dose oligospermia,
concentration decreased
sperm motility,
abnormal forms
Leflunomide X No data Data not None published Not studied Not studied
conclusive
Azathioprine Db Yes No Sporadic congenital anomalies. Transient Normal immune No
Mercaptopurine immune alterations in newborn infants responses in
childhood. One
case report of late
development of
autoimmunity.
Methotrexate X Methotrexate + Yes Cytopenia None reported Oligospermia
polyglutamates at high doses
Cyclophosphamide D Yes – animal data Yes Chromosomal abnormalities. Cytopenia Anecdotal In males
and females
Cyclosporine C 10–50% of No Transient immune alterations None reported No
maternal plasma
concentration
Tacrolimus C Yes Not reported Hyperkalaemia, renal impairment Not studied Not studied
Mycophenolate C Yes 3 reports of Not reported Not studied Not studied
mofetil congenital
abnormalities
Intravenous C Yes No No fetal effects reported Not studied Not studied
immunoglobulin
Etanercept B Yes Not reported Not reported Not studied Not studied
Infliximab B Not Not reported Not reported Not studied Data not
reported conclusive
Details and references are given in the text. aThe United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) pregnancy risk categories are as follows: A,
no risk in controlled clinical studies in humans; B, human data reassuring or when absent, animal studies show no risk; C, human data are lacking;
animal studies show risk or are not done; D, positive evidence of risk, benefit may outweigh; X, contraindicated during pregnancy. bAccumulated
experience indicates that azathioprine can be used throughout pregnancy without increase in congenital abnormalities.
neutropenia in an infant whose mother was taking 3 g of SSZ
daily throughout pregnancy [119].
Breastfeeding
Insignificant amounts of uncleaved SSZ have been found in
milk, whereas the sulphapyridine levels in milk were about 30
to 60% of those in maternal serum [120]. Diarrhoea and rash
were reported in a breastfed infant whose mother was
receiving SSZ [121]. Exposure to sulphonamides through
breast milk apparently does not pose a significant risk for the
healthy, full-term newborn infant, but it should be avoided in
ill, stressed or premature infants and in infants with hyper-
bilirubinaemia or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency [43].
Fertility
SSZ does not impair fertility in women. Treatment with SSZ
leads to oligospermia, reduced sperm motility, an increased
proportion of abnormal forms, and infertility in men and rats
[122]. The effect is due to sulphapyridine and cannot be
abrogated by folate supplementation. Spermatogenesis
recovers at about 2 months after withdrawal of the drug [122].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• Continuation of SSZ during pregnancy is unlikely to cause
fetal harm (evidence level II).
• Folate supplementation is necessary before and through-
out pregnancy (evidence level I).
• To prevent neutropenia in the newborn infant, maternal
doses of SSZ should not exceed 2 g daily (evidence level
IV).
• Male infertility caused by SSZ recovers after dis-
continuation of the drug. Men should stop SSZ 3 months
before attempting to father a child (evidence level IV).
• Breastfeeding is allowed in the healthy, full-term infant
(evidence level IV).
Leflunomide
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
Leflunomide given to pregnant rats and rabbits in doses
equivalent to human doses induced malformations of the
skeleton and central nervous system in the offspring. Prenatal
exposure to about 1% of the human dose resulted in
decreased birthweight and increased perinatal mortality in the
offspring [123].
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 9 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Table 4
Immunosuppressive, cytotoxic and biological drugs during lactation
Drug Secretion into breast milk Effect on nursing infant Breastfeeding allowed
Chloroquine 0.55% of maternal dose [100,102] No adverse effects Compatible with breastfeeding
Hydroxychloroquine 0.35% of maternal dose [103,104] No adverse effects Compatible with breastfeeding
Sulphasalazine Sulphasalazine and sulphapyridine Well tolerated, 1 case of bloody Allowed in the healthy full-term infant
secreted at 5.9% of maternal diarrhoea [121]
dose [120]
Leflunomide No data published No data published Avoid because of theoretical risk
Azathioprine (AZA)/ AZA and its metabolites detected 9 children nursed (AZA) without Avoid because of theoretical risk
6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) in milk [135] adverse effects, 1 child (6-MP) well
Methotrexate Excreted in low concentrations. Not known Avoid because of theoretical risk
Milk:plasma ratio of 0.08 [155]
Cyclophosphamide Secreted (amount unknown) [172] Suppression of haematopoiesis Contraindicated during lactation
reported in one nursing child [169]
Cyclosporine Milk:plasma concentration < 1; No adverse effects observed in No consensus, weigh risk/benefit
wide variability in drug 9 breastfed children [188]
disposition [188]
Tacrolimus Minute amounts secreted, 1 child nursed without side Breastfeeding probably possible
nursing infant exposed to 0.06% effects [197]
of mother’s dose [197]
Mycophenolate mofetil No human studies Not known Avoid because of theoretical risk
Intravenous No data published Not known Breastfeeding probably possible
immunoglobulin
Etanercept Secreted at 0.04% of maternal Not known Data inconclusive, weigh risk/benefit
dose [207]
Infliximab Secreted in small amount [211] Not known Avoid because of theoretical risk
In a retrospective study, 10 pregnancies occurred in RA
patients treated with leflunomide. No congenital malformation
occurred in the five pregnancies with known outcome [124].
An unpublished safety update of the manufacturer in
September 2004 reported 428 exposures during pregnancy,
with known outcome for 165 pregnancies. Twenty-one
pregnancies occurred while the male partner was receiving
leflunomide. Termination was performed in 44 cases,
miscarriage occurred in 36 cases and 85 pregnancies went
to term. Congenital malformations occurred in seven children.
A Canadian prospective cohort study is currently in progress
to investigate possible fetal and neonatal side effects of
leflunomide exposure during pregnancy. At present, the study
includes a total of 246 pregnancies with known outcome. No
significant differences between exposed and non-exposed
pregnancies were noted with regard to spontaneous abortion
or major structural defects in newborn infants.
Conclusions and recommendations (Tables 3 and 4)
• Leflunomide is contraindicated during pregnancy. Safe
contraception during therapy in both women and men is
recommended by the manufacturer (evidence level IV).
• When a pregnancy is being planned, leflunomide must be
withdrawn. Because the active metabolite of leflunomide
is detectable in plasma until 2 years after discontinuation
of the drug, cholestyramine must be given to enhance
elimination from the body until plasma levels of lefluno-
mide are undetectable (evidence level IV).
• No data exist on excretion into breast milk; breastfeeding
is therefore not recommended (evidence level IV).
Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP)
Azathioprine is a prodrug that after absorption is cleaved to
6-MP, its active metabolite.
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
The fetal liver lacks the enzyme inosinatopyrophosphorylase,
which converts azathioprine to its active form and therefore
should be theoretically protected from azathioprine crossing
the placenta [125].
Azathioprine injected intraperitoneally in doses equivalent to
4 to 13 times the therapeutic human dose caused skeletal
defects and multiple malformations in mice and rabbits
exposed during gestation [125]. In rodents exposed in utero
to 1 to 62.5 times the human dose of 6-MP, cleft palate,
dilatation of cerebral ventricles and hydrocephalus were
observed. Female and male offspring of mice receiving 6-MP
in pregnancy had a decreased number of germ cells in the
gonads, with resulting decreased fertility [126].
Studies in pregnant transplant recipients receiving
azathioprine and prednisone and in pregnant patients treated
for IBD with azathioprine or 6MP showed no increase in
pregnancy complications or congenital malformations [127-
129]. Intrauterine growth restriction has been reported in
40% of renal graft recipient mothers taking both cortico-
steroids and azathioprine [64]. Anecdotal experience has
associated prenatal exposure to azathioprine with different
congenital anomalies, but none of them were clearly linked to
the drug. Other reported events after antenatal exposure to
azathioprine were transient chromosomal anomalies in
clinically normal infants [130], transient lymphopenia
[130,131], severe immune deficiency and cytomegalovirus
infection [131], and depressed haematopoiesis in infants
whose mothers were treated with more than 2 mg/kg
azathioprine daily [132].
One group reported an increased incidence of spontaneous
abortions and congenital malformations in pregnancies
fathered by 13 men treated with 6-MP for IBD at conception
or in the 3 months previously [133]. However, it is uncertain
whether the control group of untreated IBD male patients
was comparable. In addition the overall rate of congenital
malformations was within the baseline incidence. Another
study did not find any increase in adverse outcomes in men
and women treated for IBD with 6-MP before or during the
first trimester [134].
Breastfeeding
Azathioprine and its metabolites were found in milk, exposing
the child to 0.1% of the maternal dose [135]. Nine children
were nursed without side effects.
Fertility
Azathioprine does not adversely affect the fertility of women.
A recent study in men found semen quality and quantity to be
normal despite long-term treatment with azathioprine [136].
Long-term effects in offspring
Postnatal enhancement of T cell maturation, but otherwise
normal immunological development, was detected in
children exposed to azathioprine in utero [137]. A recent
case report found the development of autoimmunity in a
daughter of a patient with SLE who had received
azathioprine during pregnancy and regarded this as a
possible long-term effect of exposure in utero [138].
However, a genetic predisposition as the cause of the
daughter’s SLE cannot be ruled out.
Conclusion and recommendations (Tables 3 and 4)
• When indicated, azathioprine can be used during
pregnancy at a daily dose not exceeding 2 mg/kg per day
(evidence level II).
• There is no consensus on the use of 6-MP, the active
metabolite of azathioprine during pregnancy. Some
experts recommend the avoidance of its use during
pregnancy (evidence level IV).
• No consensus on nursing exists among experts. The AAP
does not recommend breastfeeding because of the
theoretical risk of immunosuppression, carcinogenesis
and growth restriction in the child (evidence level IV).
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 10 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Methotrexate (MTX)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
MTX is a methyl derivative of the folate antagonist
aminopterin. Active metabolites of MTX remain in cells or
tissues for several months after the cessation of therapy
[139]. Closure of the neural tube takes place during week 5;
the embryo is therefore probably most vulnerable to anti-
folate drugs at this time. The congenital anomalies observed
in animals and humans exposed to MTX in utero usually
involved the central nervous system, cranial ossification, the
limbs and the palate and growth retardation [140-142].
Experience with MTX in human pregnancy has been derived
mainly from patients treated for cancer with multiagent
therapy or when MTX or aminopterin was used unsuccess-
fully as an abortifacient to terminate a pregnancy [143,144].
In most of these reports, doses of MTX exceeded the low-
dose weekly pulses (5 to 20 mg) applied in rheumatology.
Three infants exposed to MTX during the first trimester had
multiple cranial anomalies [143-145]. Chromosomal aberra-
tions were detected in a healthy newborn infant exposed to
MTX and other cytotoxic drugs during pregnancy [144]. In
seven cases, MTX had been given during the second and
third trimester; six normal children were born and one child
had pancytopenia [145].
Reviewing the rheumatology literature of first-trimester
exposure to once-weekly doses of 20 mg of MTX or less,
disclosed 63 pregnancies [124,146-151]. In the pregnancies
not terminated electively, 11 (17%) ended in miscarriage, and
of the 33 that proceeded to delivery, four children (12%) had
congenital anomalies, including one child with multiple
skeletal abnormalities [149]. Birthweights of the full-term
infants were within normal range. Previous treatment of
women with MTX has no harmful effect on subsequent
pregnancy outcomes [152,153]. So far there are no reports
of adverse pregnancy outcomes among men exposed to MTX
before conception [154].
Breastfeeding
MTX is excreted into breast milk in low concentrations, with a
milk:plasma ratio of 0.08 [155]. The significance of this small
amount for the nursing child is unknown.
Fertility
MTX does not impair female fertility. There is no indication
that monotherapy with MTX induces infertility in men [156],
although a case report has described oligospermia in a male
patient treated with MTX for psoriasis [157].
Long-term effects in children
A follow-up study of children exposed antenatally to cytotoxic
drugs including MTX showed physical, neurological,
psychological, haematological, immune function and
cytogenetics to be normal after 3 to 19 years [158]. A follow-
up ranging from 0.1 to 16.7 years of an additional seven
children revealed no developmental or other serious health
problems [146].
Conclusions and recommendations (Tables 3 and 4)
• MTX is contraindicated during pregnancy and should be
prescribed to fertile women only under the cover of safe
contraception (evidence level III).
• MTX must be withdrawn prophylactically 3 months before
a planned pregnancy (evidence level IV).
• Folate supplementation should be continued antenatally
and throughout pregnancy (evidence level I).
• It is not known whether once-weekly administration of
MTX has any significance for the nursing child, given the
minute amounts excreted into breast milk. The AAP does
not recommend breastfeeding because of theoretical
risks (evidence level IV).
Cyclophosphamide (CYC)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
CYC is teratogenic in all animal species studied, including
mice, rats, rabbits and monkeys [159]. Abnormalities induced
in animals by specific dose ranges and at specific periods of
gestation showed a rather consistent pattern of brain
malformation, defective limbs and facial abnormalities.
CYC has an unpredictable effect on the human fetus
because it does not always cause malformations when given
during the first trimester [160-163]. CYC embryopathy has
been reported in nine cases, including defects of the calvaria,
anomalies of craniofacial structures, ears and limbs, visceral
organs, growth retardation and developmental delay during
childhood [160-168]. CYC given in the second and third
trimester does not result in structural abnormalities but it may
cause growth restriction, impair neurological development
and suppress haematopoiesis in the infant [164,169].
Therapy with CYC completed before pregnancy does not
increase the rate of miscarriage or congenital abnormalities in
offspring [170].
Little information is available about the outcome of children
born to men taking CYC. Isolated reports of congenital
abnormalities have been associated with paternal use of
CYC, but a direct relationship is difficult to prove [171].
Breastfeeding
CYC is excreted into human breast milk [172]. Suppression
of haematopoiesis has been reported in a breastfed infant
nursed by a mother who received CYC [169].
Fertility
CYC is gonadotoxic in both women and men, depending on
the cumulative dose and the age of the patient. Impairment of
fertility follows both daily oral and intermittent pulse therapy
[173]. In women, sustained amenorrhoea after a total dose of
3.5 to 7 g of CYC was rare under the age of 25 years,
increased to 12% for patients aged 26 to 30 years and to
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 11 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
25% for patients aged 31 years or older [174]. Women older
than 32 years have a substantial risk for amenorrhoea at
8 g/m2, which increases to sustained amenorrhoea for 90%
of women at 12 g/m2 [175]. In men, gonadotoxicity of CYC is
present even before puberty [176]. There is no safe threshold
of the cumulative dose, and it is not possible to predict which
patients will become sterile and which will recover testicular
function [177].
Preservation of gonadal function during CYC therapy in
women is best done by concomitant treatment with a
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist, as a case-control
study has shown [178]. Cryopreservation of sperm and
sperm banking is the method of choice in men who have no
children or have not completed their families.
Long-term effects in children
A case of a papillary thyroid cancer at the age of 11 years
and a neuroblastoma at age 14 years in a male twin exposed
to CYC in utero has been reported. The female twin was
unaffected [164]. A population-based study did not find any
increase in chromosomal abnormalities in offspring of
childhood cancer survivors in Denmark treated with cytotoxic
drugs including CYC, nor an increase in Down syndrome or
Turner syndrome [179].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• CYC is a human teratogen (evidence level III).
• CYC is gonadotoxic in men and women (II).
• Intravenous CYC therapy should be started only after a
negative pregnancy test (evidence level IV).
• Measures for preservation of fertility must be taken
(evidence level IV).
• Safe contraception is necessary when fertile women are
treated with CYC (evidence level IV).
• Attempts at conception should be delayed until 3 months
after the cessation of therapy (evidence level IV).
• Breastfeeding is not recommended (evidence level IV).
Cyclosporin A (CsA)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
CsA was not toxic to the exposed fetuses at the maternal
dosage of 10 mg/kg per day, whereas it was embryotoxic at
dosages of 25 to 100 mg/kg per day [180].
More than 800 pregnancies receiving CsA have been
reported, mainly in transplant recipients [181-185]. The
observed rate of 3% of congenital malformations has not
exceeded the rate reported in the general population, nor has
any particular pattern of abnormalities emerged. Renal and
liver function were normal in 166 newborn infants exposed to
CsA in utero [186]. A meta-analysis evaluated the risk of
congenital malformations, preterm delivery or low birthweight
from CsA treatment during pregnancy [187]. The calculated
OR of 3.83 for malformations did not achieve statistical
significance. The overall prevalence of 4.1% of malformations
in the study population did not vary substantially from that
reported in the general population. The OR for prematurity
did not reach statistical significance, although the overall
prevalence rate was 56.3%. It is not clear whether maternal
therapy with CsA or the underlying maternal disease was
associated with increased rates of prematurity and low
birthweight (less than 2,500 g).
Breastfeeding
Small amounts of CsA are excreted in breast milk. Successful
breastfeeding without side effects has been reported in 15
children [188].
Long-term follow-up of children
Follow-up for 1 to 12 years of 175 children registered in the
National Transplantation Pregnancy Register (USA) found
normal development in 84% of offspring exposed to CsA in
utero [189]. The high incidence of prematurity was
suspected to be involved in the mental developmental delay
observed in 16% of the children. Because CsA can induce
autoimmunity in rodents after exposure in utero, several
studies have addressed this issue in children of transplant
recipients. The maturation and development of T cells, B cells
and NK cells can be impaired during the first year of life
[137], and transient B cell depletion has been described in
several infants [190]. A case-control study of the immune
function of children born to mothers with connective tissue
diseases found normal blood cell counts, immunoglobulin
levels and lymphocyte subpopulations in offspring of mothers
treated with immunosuppressive drugs (including CsA)
[191]. All children responded satisfactorily to hepatitis B
vaccination. A paediatric follow-up ranging from 3 months to
11 years of age found three cases with long-term develop-
mental difficulties, but no learning disability (mental
retardation) among 31 children exposed to CsA during
pregnancy [192].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• CsA can be maintained in pregnancy at the lowest
effective dose (evidence level I).
• Control maternal blood pressure and renal function during
therapy (evidence level II).
• There is no consensus among experts on nursing. Safety
during breastfeeding is not proven (evidence level IV). The
AAP does not recommend breastfeeding because of
theoretical risks.
Tacrolimus
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
Tacrolimus is fetotoxic in animals, causing increased late fetal
loss and decreased live birth rate.
No controlled human studies are available. Two studies from
the same centre, one retrospective, the other prospective,
examined the outcome of a total of 70 pregnancies under
tacrolimus after kidney transplantation, simultaneous kidney–
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 12 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
pancreas transplantation, or liver transplantation [193,194].
About 50% of the babies were either preterm or premature;
one was born with congenital anomalies [194].
A retrospective analysis recorded 100 pregnancies in 84
mothers treated with a mean daily dose of tacrolimus of
12 mg/day during 1992 to 1998 [195]. Of the pregnancies
with known outcome, 71 progressed to delivery (68 live
births, 2 neonatal deaths and 1 stillbirth) and 24 were
terminated (12 spontaneous and 12 induced). The mean
duration of gestation was 35 weeks, with 59% of deliveries
being premature, but with appropriate birthweight in 90% of
cases. The most common complications in the newborn
infant were transient hypoxia, hyperkalaemia and renal
dysfunction. Four newborn infants presented with malforma-
tions, without any consistent pattern of affected organs. An
additional study found no increase in congenital anomalies in
newborn infants born to tacrolimus-treated kidney recipients
[196].
Breastfeeding
According to one case report, only 0.02% of the mother’s
dose of tacrolimus is transmitted to the breastfed baby [197].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• Tacrolimus may be maintained during pregnancy at the
lowest possible dose (evidence level III).
• Breastfeeding is possible (evidence level IV).
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
Treatment of pregnant rats and rabbits with 30 to 50% of the
human dose has resulted in birth defects in the offspring,
comprising the central nervous system, cardiovascular and
renal system [198].
No controlled studies on pregnancy during treatment with
MMF are available, but data exist in drug company files
(Roche Pharma, safety update). By April 2005, 119
pregnancies under maternal treatment with MMF had been
reported; however, the outcome is known for only 76 of
these. Twenty miscarriages and 13 terminations of pregnancy
were reported. Twenty-two deliveries resulted in healthy
newborn infants. Abnormalities at birth were observed in 10
newborn infants, yet a causative role for MMF could not be
established. Sixty-nine pregnancies occurred after paternal
exposure, with a known outcome for 45 of these. Six
congenital anomalies such as foot malformation, hand
malformation, bladder anomaly and chromosomal abnormality
were reported; 36 newborn infants were healthy.
Two newborn infants with structural congenital anomalies
were reported from the National Transplantation Pregnancy
Registry after in utero exposure to MMF [199,200]. One child
had hypoplastic nails and short fifth fingers, normal
chromosomes, and normal growth and development [199]. A
terminated pregnancy of a patient treated with MMF before
conception and during the first trimester of pregnancy
disclosed multiple fetal malformations, specifically facial
dysmorphology and midline anomalies, including agenesis of
the corpus callosum [198].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• MMF is contraindicated during pregnancy and should be
given to women of fertile years only under cover of reliable
contraception (evidence level III).
• Because of enterohepatic recirculation and a long half-
life, treatment with MMF should be stopped at least
6 weeks before a planned pregnancy (evidence level IV).
• No data exist on excretion into breast milk; breastfeeding
is therefore not recommended (evidence level IV).
Intravenous immunoglobulin
Placental transfer of IgG is dependent on the dose and
gestational age. It crosses the placenta in significant
amounts after 32 weeks of gestation. Studies on pregnant
patients with haematological and autoimmune diseases have
focused on fetal survival but not on neonatal health. No fetal
adverse effects of intravenous immunoglobulin have been
reported. Randomized trials with regard to immune function
in the newborn infant or in response to vaccination in
childhood have not been performed. Normal percentages of
T cells, B cells, NK cells and monocytes were found in 20
infants born after maternal immunoglobulin treatment for fetal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia [201]. No data are available
with regard to fertility or breastfeeding, but harmful effects
seem unlikely.
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• Intravenous immunoglobulin can be used in pregnancy
(evidence level II).
• Breastfeeding is allowed (evidence level IV).
Biological drugs
At the present stage of knowledge, there is no evidence
implicating tumour necrosis factor-α antagonists with
embryotoxicity, teratogenicity or increased pregnancy loss
(Table 3). Except for a few case reports on successful
pregnancies [202-205], no data on fertility or breastfeeding
are available for adalimumab (human monoclonal antibody
against TNF-α), anakinra (the interleukin-1 receptor antago-
nist) or rituximab (the monoclonal antibody against CD20).
For the latter drugs no recommendations with regard to
reproduction are given.
Etanercept
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
Soluble TNF-R crosses the placenta and gains access to the
fetal circulation in mice but does not interrupt pregnancy or
impair fetal development. Pregnancy studies in rats and
rabbits using 60 to 100 times the human dose of etanercept
did not show any teratogenicity or fetotoxicity [206].
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 13 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
Experience from 32 pregnancies treated with etanercept has
been reported without an increased risk of congenital
abnormalities or other adverse effects [124,207].
Breastfeeding
A case report showed that etanercept is excreted into human
breast milk. The effect on the nursing child is not known
[208].
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• Etanercept should not be continued during pregnancy
because of a lack of much information (evidence level IV).
• Because the effect on the nursing child is not known,
breastfeeding is not recommended (evidence level IV).
Infliximab
Potential mutagenic and teratogenic effect
A developmental toxicity study conducted in mice using an
analogous murine anti-TNF-α antibody showed no evidence
of maternal toxicity, embryotoxicity, or teratogenicity [209].
Several case reports and small series have reported an
absence of adverse fetal or maternal outcomes after
treatment with infliximab during pregnancy [124,207,210].
Data from the infliximab safety database, including 146
pregnancies of women affected by Crohn’s disease and
rheumatoid arthritis collected from October 1998 to April
2003, found that 131 pregnant women were exposed directly
to the drug, 15 indirectly through their partners [211].
Outcome data were available for 106 of these patients. Live
births occurred in 67% (64 of 96), miscarriages in 15% (14
of 96), and therapeutic termination in 19% (18 of 96) of the
pregnancies. The study suggests that infliximab exposure
during pregnancy results in outcomes that do not differ from
those in the United States population of pregnant women
with or without Crohn’s disease not exposed to the drug.
Breastfeeding
Passage of infliximab into human breast milk in one patient
with RA was demonstrated [212].
Fertility
Semen quality was studied in eight men receiving infliximab
for IBD [213]. Semen samples showed no statistical
difference between pre-infusion and post-infusion values.
Motility and the percentage of normal oval forms were below
normal both before and after infusion, probably reflecting the
underlying disease process or previous therapy. The results
of the study suggest that semen quality is not seriously
affected by infliximab treatment.
Conclusion and recommendation (Tables 3 and 4)
• The safety of infliximab during pregnancy has not been
sufficiently documented (evidence level III). It should
therefore be stopped when pregnancy is recognized
(evidence level IV).
• Because the effect on the nursing child is not known,
breastfeeding is not recommended (evidence level IV).
Conclusion
In an area in which controlled studies are lacking for the most
part, uncertainty about the magnitude of risk demands a
cautious approach to the therapy of pregnant and lactating
women. Data accumulate slowly and in an uncontrolled way
regarding immunosuppressive drugs and pregnancy.
Information continues to be insufficient with regard to
lactation, to gonadotoxic effects, and to long-term effects in
children exposed to immunosuppressive drugs in utero or by
breastfeeding. Studies of these issues are urgently needed.
The updating of available information at regular intervals and
adjustment of recommendations on the use of drugs during
pregnancy and lactation is warranted.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank the Italian Society of Rheumatology for funding the
Workshop on Antirheumatic Drugs during Pregnancy, which was held
in connection with the 4th International Conference on Sex Hormones,
Pregnancy and Rheumatic Diseases on 20 to 22 September 2004 in
Stresa, Italy.
References
1. Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, Branch DW, Brey RL, Cervera
R, Derksen RH, DE Groot PG, Koike T, Meroni PL, Reber G:
International consensus statement on an update of the classi-
fication criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome (APS).
J Thromb Haemost 2006, 4:295-306.
2. Nielsen GL, Sorensen HT, Larsen H, Pedersen L: Risk of
adverse birth outcome and miscarriage in pregnant users of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: population based
observational study and case-control study. Br Med J 2001,
322:266-270.
3. Chan LY, Yuen PM: Risk of miscarriage in pregnant users of
NSAIDs. More information is needed to be able to interpret
study’s results. Br Med J 2001, 322:1365-1366.
4. Li DK, Liu L, Odouli R: Exposure to non-steroidal anti-inflam-
matory drugs during pregnancy and risk of miscarriage: popu-
lation based cohort study. Br Med J 2003, 327:368-373.
5. Kozer E, Moldovan Costei A, Boskovic R, Nulman I, Nikfar S,
Koren G: Effects of aspirin consumption during pregnancy on
pregnancy outcomes: meta-analysis. Birth Defects Res B Dev
Reprod Toxicol 2003, 68:70-84.
6. Yussoff Dawood M: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and
reproduction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993, 169:1255-1265.
7. Lewis RB, Schulman JD: Influence of acetylicsalicylic acid, an
inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis, on the duration of human
gestation and labour. Lancet 1973, ii:1159-1161.
8. Sawdy RJ, Lye S, Fisk NM, Bennett PR: A double-blind ran-
domised study of fetal side effects during and after short-
term maternal administration of indomethacin, sulindac, and
nimesulide for therapy of preterm labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2003, 188:1046-1051.
9. Locatelli A, Vergani P, Bellini P, Strobelt N, Ghidini A: Can a
cyclooxygenase type-2 selective tocolytic agent avoid the
fetal side effects of indomethacin? BJOG 2001, 108:325-326.
10. Stika CS, Gross GA, Leguizamon G, Gerber S, Levy R, Mathur A,
Bernhard LM, Nelson DM, Sadovsky Y: A prospective random-
ized safety trial of celecoxib for treatment of preterm labor.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002, 187:653-660.
11. Cook JC, Jacobson CF, Gao F, Tassinari MS, Hurtt ME, DeSesso
JM: Analysis of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug litera-
ture for potential developmental toxicity in rats and rabbits.
Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol 2003, 68:5-26.
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 14 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
12. Cappon GD, Cook JC, Hurtt ME: Relationship between
cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 selective inhibitors and fetal develop-
ment when administered to rats and rabbits during the sensi-
tive periods for heart development and midline closure. Birth
Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol 2003, 68:47-56.
13. Heinonen OP, Slone D, Shapiro S: Birth Defects and Drugs in
Pregnancy. Littleton, MA: Littleton Publishing Sciences Group;
1977:286-295.
14. Slone D, Heinonen OP, Kaufman DW, Siskind V, Monson RR,
Shapiro S: Aspirin and congenital malformations. Lancet 1976,
ii:1373-1375.
15. Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaffe SJ (eds) Drugs in Pregnancy and
Lactation. 6th edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2002.
16. Källèn B: The teratogenicity of antirheumatic drugs – what is the
evidence? Scand J Rheumatol 1998, 27(Suppl 107):119-124.
17. Kozer E, Shekoufeh N, Costei A, Boskovic R, Nulman I, Koren G:
Aspirin consumption during the first trimester of pregnancy
and congenital anomalies: a meta-analysis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2002, 187:1623-1630.
18. Martinez-Frias ML, Rodriguez-Pinilla E, Prieto L: Prenatal expo-
sure to salicylates and gastroschisis: a case-control study.
Teratology 1997, 56:241-243.
19. Stanfield KM, Bell RR, Lisowski AR, English ML, Saldeen SS,
Khan KN: Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in embryonic and
fetal tissues during organogenesis and late pregnancy. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2003, 67:54-58.
20. Momma K, Takeuchi H: Constriction of the ductus arteriosus by
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Prostaglandins 1983,
26:631-643.
21. Norton ME, Merril J, Cooper BAB, Kuller JA, Clyman RI: Neonatal
complications after the administration of indomethacin for
preterm labor. N Engl J Med 1993, 329:1602-1607.
22. Vermillion ST, Scardo JA, Lashus AG, Wiles HB: The effect of
indomethacin tocolysis on fetal ductus arteriosus constriction
with advancing gestational age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997,
177:256-261.
23. Van den Veyver IB, Moise KJ Jr, Ou CN, Carpenter RJ Jr: The
effect of gestational age and fetal indomethacin levels on the
incidence of constriction of the fetal ductus arteriosus. Obstet
Gynecol 1993, 82:500-503.
24. Norton ME: Fetal effects of indomethacin administration
during pregnancy. Teratology 1997, 56:282-292.
25. Alano MA, Ngougmna E, Ostrea EM Jr, Konduri GG: Analysis of
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs in meconium and its
relation to persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.
Pediatrics 2001, 107:519-513.
26. Hickok DE, Hollenbach KA, Reilley SF, Nyberg DA: The associa-
tion between decreased amniotic fluid volume and treatment
with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents for preterm labor.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989, 160:1525-1531.
27. van der Heijden B, Gubler MC: Renal failure in the neonate
associated with in utero exposure to non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents. Pediatr Nephrol 1995, 9:675.
28. Llanas B, Cavert MH, Apere H, Demarquez JL: Les effets sec-
ondaires du ketoprofène après exposition intra-utérine.
Intérêt du dosage plasmatique. Arch Pediatr 1996, 3:248-253.
29. Peruzzi L, Gianooglio B, Porcellini G, Conti G, Amoro A, Coppo
R: Neonatal chronic kidney failure associated with cyclooxy-
genase-2 inhibitors administered during pregnancy. Minerva
Uro Nefrol 2001, 53:113-116.
30. Stuart MJ, Gross SJ, Elrad H, Graeber JE: Effects of acetylsali-
cylic-acid ingestion on maternal and neonatal hemostasis. N
Engl J Med 1982, 307:909-912.
31. Hertz-Picciotto I, Hopenhayn-Rich C, Golub M, Hooper K: The
risks and benefit of taking aspirin during pregnancy. Epidemiol
Rev 1990, 12:108-148.
32. Di Sessa TG, Moretti ML, Khoury A, Pulliam DA, Arheart KL, Sibai
BM: Cardiac function in fetuses and newborns exposed to
low-dose aspirin during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1994, 171:892-900.
33. Leonhardt A, Bernert S, Watzer B, Schmitz-Ziegler G, Seyberth
HW: Low-dose aspirin in pregnancy: maternal and neonatal
aspirin concentrations and neonatal prostanoid formation.
Pediatrics 2003, 111: e77-e81.
34. Horlocker TT, Bajwa ZH, Ashraf Z, Khan S, Wilson JL, Sami N,
Peeters-Asdourian C, Powers CA, Schroeder DR, Decker PA, et
al.: Risk assessment of hemorrhagic complications associ-
ated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications in
ambulatory pain clinic patients undergoing epidural steroid
injection. Anesth Analg 2002, 95:1691-1697.
35. Reese J, Zhao X, Ma WG, Brown N, Maziasz TJ, Dey SK: Com-
parative analysis of pharmacologic and/or genetic disruption
of cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 function in female
reproduction in mice. Endocrinology 2001, 142:3198-3206.
36. Sookvanichsilp N, Pulbutr P: Anti-implantation effects of
indomethacin and celecoxib in rats. Contraception 2002, 65:
373-378.
37. Mendonca LLF, Khamashta MA, Nelson-Piercy C, Hughes GRV:
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as a possible cause for
reversible infertility. Rheumatology 2000, 39:880-882.
38. Uhler ML, Hsu JW, Fisher SG, Zinaman MJ: The effect of nons-
teroidal antiinflammatory drugs on ovulation: a prospective,
randomized clinical trial. Fertil Steril 2001, 76:957-961.
39. Pall M, Friden BE, Brannstrom M: Induction of delayed follicular
rupture in the human by the selective COX-2 inhibitor rofe-
coxib: a randomized double blind study. Hum Reprod 2001,
16:1323-1328.
40. Martini AC, Molina RI, Tissera AD, Ruiz RD, De Cuneo MF: Analy-
sis of semen from patients chronically treated with low or
moderate doses of aspirin like drugs. Fertil Steril 2003, 80:
221-222.
41. Østensen M: Safety of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
during pregnancy and lactation. Inflammopharmacology 1996,
4:31-41.
42. Spigset O, Hägg S: Analgesics and breast-feeding. Safety
considerations. Paediatr Drugs 2000, 2:223-238.
43. Committee on Drugs. American Academy of Pediatrics: The
transfer of drugs and other chemicals into human milk. Pedi-
atrics 2001, 108:776-789.
44. Derksen RHW, Khamashta MA, Branch DW: Management of the
obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 2004,
50:1028-1039.
45. Empson M, Lassere M, Craig J, Scott J: Prevention of recurrent
miscarriage for women with antiphospholipid antibody or
lupus anticoagulant [review]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2005, 2:CD002859.
46. Nguyen CM, Harrington RA: Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonists: a comparative review of their use in percuta-
neous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs 2003, 3:
23.
47. The Matisse Investigators: Subcutaneous Fondoparinux versus
intravenous unfractioned heparin in the initial treatment of
pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 2003, 349:1695-1702.
48. Turpie AG, Eriksson BI, Bauer KA, Lassen MR: New pentasac-
charides for the prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism.
Chest 2003, 124:371S-378S.
49. Dempfle CEH: Minor transplacental passage of fondoparinux
in vivo. N Engl J Med 2004, 350:1914-1915.
50. Olsson SB Executive Steering Committee on behalf of the
SPORTIF III investigators: Stroke prevention with the oral direct
thrombion inhibitor ximelagatran compared with warfarin in
patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (SPORTIF III): ran-
domized controlled trial. Lancet 2003, 362:1691-1698.
51. Fiessinger JN, Huisman MV, Davidson BL, Bounameaux H,
Francis CW, Eriksson H, and THRIVE Treatment Study Investiga-
tors: Ximelagatran vs low-molecular-weight heparin and war-
farin for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis: a randomized
trial. JAMA 2005, 293:681-689.
52. Francis CW, Berkowitz SD, Comp PC, Lieberman JR, Ginsberg
JS, Paiement G, and EXULT A Study Group: Comparison of
ximelagatran with warfarin for the prevention of venous
thromboembolism after total knee replacement. N Engl J Med
2003, 349:1703-1712.
53. Benediktsson R, Calder AA, Edwards CRW, Seckl JR: Placental
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: a key regulator of fetal
glucocorticoid exposure. Clin Endocrinol 1997, 46:161-166.
54. Cowchock FS, Reece EA, Balaban D, Branch DW, Plouffe L:
Repeated fetal losses associated with antiphospholipid anti-
bodies; a collaborative randomized trial comparing pred-
nisone with low-dose heparin treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1992, 166:1318-1323.
55. Pinsky L, DiGeorge AM: Cleft palate in the mouse: a teratogenic
index of glucocorticoid potency. Science 1965, 147:402-403.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 15 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
56. Reinisch JM, Simon NG: Prenatal exposure to prednisone in
humans and animals retards intrauterine growth. Science
1978, 202:436-438.
57. Rodriguez-Pinilla E, Martinez-Frias ML: Corticosteroids during
pregnancy and oral clefts: a case-control study. Teratology
1998, 58:2-5.
58. Carmichael SL, Shaw GM: Maternal corticosteroid use and risk
of selected congenital anomalies. Teratology 1999, 86:242-244.
59. Pradat P, Robert-Gnansia E, Di Tanna GL , Rosano A, Lisi A,
Mastroiacovo P, Contributors to the MADRE database: First
trimester exposure to corticosteroids and oral clefts. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2003, 67:968-970.
60. Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M: Population-based case-control
study of teratogenic potential of corticosteroids. Teratology
1997, 56:335-340.
61. Fraser FC, Sajoo A: Teratogenic potential of corticosteroids in
humans. Teratology 1995, 51:45-46.
62. Park-Wyllie L, Mazzotta P, Pastuszak A, Moretti ME, Beique L,
Hunnisett L, Friesen MH, Jacobson S, Kasapinovic S, Chang D, et
al.: Birth defects after maternal exposure to corticosteroids:
prospective cohort study and meta-analysis of epidemiologi-
cal studies. Teratology 2000, 62:385-392.
63. Källén B: Maternal drug use and infant cleft lip/palate with
special reference to corticoids. Cleft Pal Craniofacial J 2003,
40:624-628.
64. Scott JR: Fetal growth retardation associated with maternal
administration of immunosuppressives. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1977, 128:668-676.
65. Czeizel AE, Toth M: Birth weight, gestational age and medica-
tions during pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1998, 60:245-
249.
66. Schmidt PL, Sims ME, Strassner HT, Paul RH, Mueller E, McCart
D: Effect of antepartum glucorticoid administration upon
neonatal respiratory distress syndrome and perinatal infec-
tion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984, 178:178-186.
67. Cederqvist LL, Merkatz IR, Litwin SD: Fetal immunoglobin syn-
thesis following maternal immunosuppression. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1977, 129:687-690.
68. Benediktsson R, Lindsay RS, Noble J, Seckl JR, Edwards CRW:
Glucocorticoid exposure in utero: new model for adult hyper-
tension. Lancet 1993, 341:339-341.
69. Kraus AM: Congenital cataract and maternal steroid injection.
J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus 1975, 12:107-108.
70. Coté CJ, Meuwissen HG, Pickering RJ: Effects on the neonate
of prednisone and azathioprine administered to the mother
during pregnancy. J Pediatrics 1974, 85:324-328.
71. Price HV, Salaman JR, Laurence KM, Langmaid H: Immunusup-
pressive drugs and the fetus. Transplantation 1976, 21:294-
298.
72. National Institutes of Health: Report of the Consensus Develop-
ment Conference on the Effect of Corticosteroids for Fetal Matu-
ration on Perinatal Outcome. NIH Publication no. 95-3784.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development; 1994.
73. Huang WL, Haper CG, Evans SF, Newnham JP, Dunlop SA:
Repeated prenatal corticosteroid administration delays astro-
cyte and capillary tight junction maturation in fetal sheep. Int J
Dev Neurosci 2000, 19:487-493.
74. Matthews SG: Antenatal glucocorticoids and programming of
the developing CNS. Pediatr Res 2000, 47:291-300.
75. Jobe AH, Wada N, Berry LM, Ikegami M, Ervin MG: Single and
repetitive maternal glucocorticoid exposures reduce fetal
growth in sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998, 178:880-885.
76. French NP, Hagan R, Evans SF, Godfrey M, Newnham JP:
Repeated antenatal corticosteroids: size at birth and subse-
quent development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999, 180:114-121.
77. Abbasi S, Hirsch D, Davis J, Stouffer N, Debbs R, Gerdes JS:
Effect of single versus multiple courses of antenatal corticos-
teroids on maternal and neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2000, 182:1243-1249.
78. Spinillo A, Viazzo F, Colleoni R, Chiara A, Cerbo RA, Fazzi E:
Two-year infant neurodevelopmental outcome after single or
multiple antenatal courses of corticosteroids to prevent com-
plications of prematurity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004, 191:217-
224.
79. National Institutes of Health: Antenatal corticosteroid revisited:
repeat courses. NIH Consensus Statement 2000, 17:1-18.
80. Urban R, Lemancewicz A, Przepiesc J, Urban J, Kretowska M:
Antenatal corticosteroid therapy: a comparative study of dex-
amethasone and betamethasone effects on fetal Doppler flow
velocity waveforms. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2005,
120:170-174.
81. Crowley P: Prophylactic corticosteroids for preterm delivery.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000, 2:CD000065.
82. Jobe AH, Soll RF: Choice and dose of corticosteroid for ante-
natal treatments. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004, 190:871-885.
83. Lodygensky GA, Rademaker K, Zimine S, Gex-Fabry M, Lieftink
AF, Lazeyras F, Groenendaal F, de Vries LS, Huppi PS: Structural
and functional brain development after hydrocortisone treat-
ment for neonatal chronic lung disease. Pediatrics 2005, 116:
1-7.
84. Katz FH, Duncan BR: Entry of prednisone into human milk. N
Engl J Med 1975, 293:1154.
85. Öst L, Wettrell G, Bjorkhem I, Rane A: Prednisolone excretion in
human milk. J Pediatrics 1985, 106:1008-1011.
86. Ruiz-Irastorza G, Khamashta MA, Hughes GR: Heparin and
osteoporosis during pregnancy: 2002 update. Lupus 2002, 11:
680-682.
87. Patlas N, Golomb G, Yaffe P, Pinto T, Breuer E, Ornoy A:
Transplacental effcts of bisphosphonates on fetal skeletal
ossification and mineralization in rats. Teratology 1999, 60:68-
73.
88. Dunlop DJ, Soukop M, McEwan HP: Antenatal administration of
aminopropylidene diphosphonate. Ann Rheum Dis 1990, 49:
955.
89. Illidge TM, Hussey M, Godden CW: Malignant hypercalciaemia
in pregnancy and antenatal administration of intravenous
pamidronate. Clin Oncol 1996, 8:257-258.
90. Rutgers-Verhage AR, de Vries TW, Torringa MJL: No effects of
bisphosphonates on the human fetus. Birth Defects Res A
2003, 67:203-204.
91. Siminoski K, Fitzgerald AA, Flesch G, Gross MS: Intravenous
pamidronate for treatment of reflex sympathetic dystrophy
during breast feeding. J Bone Miner Res 2000, 15:2052-2055.
92. Phillips-Howard PA, Wood D: The safety of antimalarial drugs
in pregnancy. Drug Safety 1996, 14:131-145.
93. Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Amoura Z, Aymard G, Huong DLT,
Wechsler B, Vauthier D, Dermer ME, Darbois Y, Piette JC: Evi-
dence of transplacental passage of hydroxychloroquine in
humans. Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:1123-1124.
94. Wolfe MS, Cordero J: Safety of chloroquine in chemosuppres-
sion of malaria during pregnancy. Br Med J 1985, 290:1466-
1467.
95. Levy M, Buskila D, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, Koren G: Preg-
nancy outcome following first trimester exposure to chloro-
quine. Am J Perinatol 1991, 8:174-178.
96. Parke AL: Antimalarial drugs, systemic lupus erythematosus
and pregnancy. J Rheumatol 1988, 15:607-610.
97. Parke AL, West B: Hydoxychloroquine in pregnant patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol 1996, 23:
1715-1718.
98. Buchanan NMM, Toubi E, Khamashta KE, Lima F, Kerslake S,
Hughes GRV: Hydoxychloroquine and lupus pregnancy: review
of a series of 36 cases. Ann Rheum Dis 1996, 55:486-488.
99. Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Amoura Z, Duhaut P, Huong DLT, Seb-
bough D, Wechsler B, Vauthier D, Denjoy I Lupoglazoff JM, Piette
JC: Safety of hydroxychloroquine in pregnant patients with
connective tissue diseases: a study of one hundred thirty-
three cases compared with a control group. Arthritis Rheum
2003, 48:3207-3211.
100.Borden MB, Parke AL: Antimalarial drugs in systemic lupus
erythematosus. Use in pregnancy. Drug Safety 2001, 24:1055-
1063.
101.Hart CN, Naunton RF: The ototoxicity of chloroquine phos-
phate. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1964, 80:407-412.
102.Akintonwa A, Gbajumo SA, Mabadeje AFB: Placental and milk
transfer of chloroquine in humans. Ther Drug Monit 1988, 10:
147-149.
103.Nation RL, Hackett LP, Dusci LJ, Ilett KF: Excretion of hydroxy-
chloroquine in human milk. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1984, 17:368-
369.
104.Østensen M, Brown ND, Chiang PK, Aarbakke J: Hydroxychloro-
quine in human breast milk. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1985, 28:
357.
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 16 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
105.Klinger G, Morad Y, Westall CA, Laskin C, Spitzer KA, Koren G,
Ito S, Buncic RJ: Ocular toxicity and antenatal exposure to
chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine for rheumatic diseases.
Lancet 2001, 358:813-814.
106.Motta M, Tincani A, Faden D, Zinzini E, Lojacono A, Marchesi A,
Frassi M, Biasini C, Zatti S, Chirico G: Follow-up of infants
exposed to hydroxychloroquine given to mothers during preg-
nancy and lactation. J Perinatol 2005, 25:86-89.
107.Cimaz R, Brucato A, Meregalli E, Muscarà M, Sergi P: Elec-
troretinograms of children born to mothers treated with
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) during pregnancy and breast-
feeding. Arthritis Rheum 2004, 50:3056-3057.
108.Borba EF, Turrini-Filho JR, Kuruma KA, Bertola C, Pedalini ME,
Lorenzi MC, Bonfa E: Chloroquine gestational use in systemic
lupus erythematosus: assessing the risk of child ototoxicity
by pure tone audiometry. Lupus 2004, 13:223-227.
109.Norgard B, Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M, Olsen J, Sorensen HT:
Population based case control study of the safety of sul-
phasalazine used during pregnancy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2001, 15:483-486.
110.Mogadam M, Dobbins WO, Korelitz BI, Ahmed SW: Pregnancy
in inflammatory bowel disease: effect of sulfasalazine and
corticosteroids on fetal outcome. Gastroenterology 1981, 80:
72-76.
111.Järnerot G: Fertility, sterility and pregnancy in chronic inflam-
matory bowel disease. Scand J Gastroenterol 1982, 17:1-4.
112.Nielsen OH, Andreasson B, Bondesen S, Jarnum S: Pregnancy
in ulcerative colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1993, 18:735-742.
113.Baocco PJ, Korelitz BI: The influence of inflammatory bowel
disease and its treatment on pregnancy and on fetal outcome.
J Clin Gastroenterol 1984, 6:211-216.
114.Willoughby CP, Truelobe SC: Ulcerative colitis and pregnancy.
Gut 1980, 21:469-474.
115.Moody GA, Probert C, Jayanthi V, Mayberry JF: The effects of
chronic ill health and treatment with sulphasalazine on fertility
amongst men and women with inflammatory bowel disease in
Leicestershire. Int J Colorect Dis 1997, 12:220-224.
116.Hernandez-Diaz S, Werler MM, Walker AM, Mitchell AA: Folic
acid antagonists during pregnancy and the risk of birth
defects. N Engl J Med 2000, 343:1608-1614.
117.Järnerot G, Anderson S, Esbjörner E, Sandström B, Brodersen R:
Albumin reserve for binding of bilirubin in maternal and cord
serum under treatment with sulphasalazine. Scand J Gas-
troenterol 1981, 16:1049-1055.
118.Zwi LJ, Becroft DM: Intrauterine aplastic anemia and fetal
hydrops: a case report. Pediatr Pathol 1986, 5:199-205.
119.Levi S, Libermann M, Levi AJ, Bjarnason I: Reversible congenital
neutropenia associated with maternal sulphasalazine therapy.
Eur J Pediat 1988, 148:174-175.
120.Esbjörner E, Järnerot G, Wranne L: Sulphasalazine and sul-
phapyridine serum levels in children to mothers treated with
sulphasalazine during pregnancy and lactation. Acta Paediatr
Scand 1987, 76:137-142.
121.Branski D, Kerem E, Gross-Kieselstein E, Hurvitz H, Litt R, Abrah-
mav A: Bloody diarrhoea – a possible complication of sul-
phasalazine transferred through human breast milk. J Pediat
Gastroenterol Nutr 1986, 5:316-317.
122.O’Morain C, Smethurst P, Doré CJ, Levi AJ: Reversible male
infertility due to sulphasalazine: studies in man and rat. Gut
1984, 25:1078-1084.
123.Brent RL: Teratogen update: reproductive risks of leflunomide
(Arava). A pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor: counseling women
taking leflunomide before or during pregnancy and men
taking leflunomide who are contemplating fathering a child.
Teratology 2001, 63:106-112.
124.Chakravarty EF, Sanchez-Yamamoto D, Bush TM: The use of
disease modifying antirheumatic drugs in women with
rheumatoid arthritis of childbearing age: a survey of practice
patterns and pregnancy outcome. J Rheumatol 2003, 30:241-
246.
125.Polifka JE, Friedman JM: Teratogen update: azathioprine and 6-
mercaptopurine. Teratology 2002, 65:240-261.
126.Reimers TJ, Sluss PM: 6-Mercaptopurine treatment of pregnant
mice: effect on second and third generation. Science 1978,
201:65-67.
127.The Registration Committee of the European Dialysis and Trans-
plant Association: Successful pregnancies in women treated
by dialysis and kidney transplantation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1980, 87:839-845.
128.Alstead EM, Ritchie JK, Leonard-Jones JE, Farthing MJG: Safety
of azathioprine in pregnancy in inflammatory bowel disease.
Gastroenterology 1990, 99:443-446.
129.Moskovitz DN, Bodian C, Chapman ML, Marion JF, Rubin PH,
Scherl E, Present DH: The effect on the fetus of medications
used to treat pregnant inflammatory bowel-disease patients.
Am J Gastroenterol 2004, 99:656-661.
130.Price HV, Salaman JR, Laurence KM, Langmaid H: Immunusup-
pressive drugs and the fetus. Transplantation 1976, 21:294-
298.
131.Coté CJ, Meuwissen HG, Pickering RJ: Effects on the neonate
of prednisone and azathioprine administered to the mother
during pregnancy. J Pediatrics 1974, 85:324-328.
132.Davison JM, Dellagrammatikas H, Parkin JM: Maternal azathio-
prine therapy and depressed haemopoiesis in the babies of
renal allograft patients. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985, 92:233-
239.
133.Rajapakse RO, Korelitz BI, Zlatank I, Baiocco PJ, Gleim GW:
Outcome of pregnancies when fathers are treated with 6-
mercaptopurine for inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gas-
troenterol 2000, 95:684-688.
134.Francella A, Dyan A, Bodian C, Rubin P, Chapman M, Present
DH: The safety of 6-mercaptopurine for childbearing patients
with inflammatory bowel disease: a retrospective cohort
study. Gastroenterology 2003, 124:9-17.
135.Bennett PN: Azathioprine. In Drugs and Human Lactation. Edited
by Bennett PN. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1988:286-287.
136.Dejaco C, Mittermaier C, Reinisch W, Gasche C, Waldhoer T,
Moser H Stroemer G: Azathioprine treatment and male infertil-
ity in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 2001,
121:1048-1053.
137.Pilarski LM, Yacyshyn BR, Lazarovits AI: Analysis of peripheral
blood lymphocyte populations and immune function from
children exposed to cyclosporine or to azathioprine in utero.
Transplantation 1994, 57:133-144.
138.Scott JR, Branch WD, Holman J: Autoimmune and pregnancy
complications in the daughter of a kidney transplant patient.
Transplantation 2002, 73:815-816.
139. Schröder H, Fogh K: Methotrexate and its polyglutamate
derivates in erythrocytes during and after weekly low-dose
oral methotrexate therapy of children with acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1988, 21:145-149.
140.Wilson JG, Scott WJ, Ritter EJ, Fradkin R: Comparative distribu-
tion and embryo toxicity of methotrexate in pregnant rats and
rhesus monkeys. Teratology 1979, 19:71-98.
141.Milunsky A, Graef JW, Gaynor MF: Methotrexate-induced con-
genital malformations. J Pediatrics 1968, 72:790-795.
142.Chapa JB, Hibbard JU, Weber EM, Abramowicz JS, Verp MS:
Prenatal diagnosis of methotrexate embryopathy. Obstet
Gynecol 2003, 101:1104-1107.
143.Powell HR, Eckert H: Methotrexate-induced congenital malfor-
mations. Med J Aust 1971, 2:1076-1077.
144.Schleuning M, Clemm C: Chromosomal aberrations in a
newborn whose mother received cytotoxic treatment during
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1987, 317:1666-1667.
145.Pizzuto J, Aviles A, Noriega L, Niz J, Morales M, Romero F: Treat-
ment of acute leukemia during pregnancy: presentation of
nine cases. Cancer Treat Rep 1980, 64:679-683.
146.Kozlowski RD, Steinbrunner JV, MacKenzie AH, Clough JD, Wilke
WS, Segal AM: Outcome of first-trimester exposure to low-
dose methotrexate in eight patients with rheumatic disease.
Am J Med 1990, 88:589-592.
147.Feldkamp M, Carey JC: Clinical teratology counseling and con-
sultation case report: low dose methotrexate exposure in
early weeks of pregnancy. Teratology 1993, 47:533-539.
148.Donnenfeld AE, Pastuszak A, Salkoff Noah J, Schick B, Rose NC,
Koren G: Methotrexate exposure prior to and during preg-
nancy. Teratology 1994, 49:79-81.
149.Buckley LM, Bullaboy CA, Leichtman L, Marquez M: Multiple con-
genital anomalies associated with weekly low-dose
methotrexate treatment of the mother. Arthritis Rheum 1997,
40:971-973.
150.Østensen M, Hartmann H, Salvesen K: Low dose weekly
methotrexate in early pregnancy. A case series and review of
the literature. J Rheumatol 2000, 27:1872-1875.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 17 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
151.Krähenmann F, Østensen M, Stallmach Th, Huch A, Chaoui R: In
utero first trimester exposure to low-dose methotrexate with
increased fetal nuchal translucency and associated malfor-
mations. Prenat Diagn 2002, 22:489-490.
152.Rustin GJS, Booth M, Dent J, Salt S, Rustin F, Bagshawe KD:
Pregnancy after cytotoxic chemotherapy for gestational tro-
phoblastic tumours. Br Med J 1984, 288:103-106.
153.Gervaise A, Masson L, de Tayrac R, Frydman R, Fernandez H:
Reproductive outcome after methotrexate treatment of tubal
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2005, 60:175-176.
154.Green DM, Zevon MA, Lowrie G, Seigelstein N, Hall B: Congeni-
tal anomalies in children of patients who received chemother-
apy for cancer in childhood and adolescence. N Engl J Med
1991, 325:141-146.
155.Johns DG, Rutherford LD, Keighton PC, Vogel CL: Secretion of
methotrexate into human milk. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1972,
112:978-980.
156.Morris LF, Harrod MJ, Menter MA, Silverman AK: Methotrexate
and reproduction in men: Case report and recommendations.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1993, 29:913-916.
157.Sussman A, Leonard JM: Psoriasis, methotrexate, and
oligospermia. Arch Dermatol 1980, 116:215-217.
158.Aviles A, Diaz-Maqueo JC, Talavera A, Guzman R, Garcia EL:
Growth and development of children of mothers treated with
chemotherapy during pregnancy: current status of 43 chil-
dren. Am J Hematol 1991, 36:243-248.
159.Mirkes PE: Cyclophosphamide teratogenesis. A review. Terato-
gen Carcinogen Mutagen 1985, 5:75-88.
160.Greenberg LH, Tanaka KR: Congenital anomalies probably
induced by cyclophosphamide. JAMA 1964, 188:423-426.
161.ToledoTM, Harper RC, Moser RH: Fetal effects during
cyclophosphamide and irradiation therapy. Ann Intern Med
1971, 74:87-91.
162.Murray CL, Reichert JA, Anderson J, Twiggs LB: Multimodal
cancer therapy for breast cancer in the first trimester of preg-
nancy. A case report. JAMA 1984, 252:2607-2608.
163.Kirshon B, Wasserstrum N, Willis R, Herman GE, McCabe ER:
Teratogenic effects of first-trimester cyclophosphamide
therapy. Obstet Gynecol 1988, 72:462-464.
164.Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Erlich R, Koren G: Teratogenicity and
carcinogenicity in a twin exposed in utero to cyclophos-
phamide. Teratogen Carcinogen Mutagen 1993, 13:139-143.
165.Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, Panzarella T, Sutcliffe SB,
Koren G: Fetal outcome after in utero exposure to cancer
chemotherapy. Arch Intern Med 1992, 152:573-576.
166.Enns GM, Roeder E, Chan RT, Ali-Khan Catts Z, Cox VA, Golabi
M: Apparent cyclophosphamide (cytoxan) embryopathy: a dis-
tinct phenotype? Am J Med Genet 1999, 86:237-241.
167.Paladini D, Vassallo M, D’Armiento MR, Cianciaruso B, Martinelli
P: Prenatal detection of multiple fetal anomalies following
inadvertent exposure to cyclophosphamide in the first
trimester of pregnancy. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
2004, 70:99-100.
168. Vaux KK, Kahole NC, Jones KL: Cyclophosphamide, methotrex-
ate, and cytarabine embropathy: is apoptosis the common
pathway? Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2003, 67:403-408.
169.Durodola JI: Administration of cyclophosphamide during late
pregnancy and early lactation: a case report. J Nat Med Ass
1979, 71:165-166.
170.Gershenson DM: Menstrual and reproductive function after
treatment with combination chemotherapy for malignant
ovarian germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1988, 6:270-275.
171.Green DM, Whitton JA, Stovall M, Mertens AC, Donaldson SS,
Ruymann FB, Pendergrass TW, Robison LL: Pregnancy outcome
of partners of male survivors of childhood cancer: a report
from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin Oncol.
2003, 21:716-721.
172.Wiernik PH, Duncan JH: Cyclophosphamide in human milk.
Lancet 1971, i:912.
173.Waxman J: Chemotherapy and the adult gonad: a review. J R
Soc Med 1983, 76:144-148.
174.Boumpas DT, Austin HA, Vaughan EM, Yarboro CH, Klippel JH,
Balow JE: Risk of sustained amenorrhea in patients with sys-
temic lupus erythematosus receiving intermittent pulse cyl-
cophosphamide therapy. Ann Intern Med 1993, 119:366-369.
175.Huong DLT, Amoura Z, Duhaut P, Sbai A, Costedoat N, Wechsler
B, Piette JC: Risk of ovarian failure and fertility after intra-
venous cyclophosphamide. A study in 84 patients. J Rheuma-
tol 2002 ;29:2571-2576.
176.Silva CAA, Hallak J, Pasqualotto FF, Barba MF, Saito MI, Kiss
MHB: Gonadal function in male adolescents and young males
with juvenile onset systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheuma-
tol 2002, 29:2000-2005.
177.Kenney LB, Laufer MR, Grant FD, Grier H, Diller L: High risk of
infertility and long term gonadal damage in males treated
with high dose cyclophosphamide for sarcoma during child-
hood. Cancer 2001, 91:613-621.
178.Somers EC, Marder W, Christman GM, Ognenovski V, McCune
WJ: Use of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog against
premature ovarian failure during cyclophosphamide therapy
in women with severe lupus. Arthritis Rheum 2005, 52:2761-
2767.
179.Winter JF, Boice JD, Mulvihill JJ, Stovall M, Frederiksen K, Tawn
EJ, Olsen JH: Chromosomal abnormalities among offspring of
child-cancer survivors in Denmark: a population based study.
Am J Hum Genet 2004, 74:1282-1285.
180.Mason RJ, Thomson AW, Whiting PH, Gray ES, Brown PA, Catto
GRD, Simpson JG: Cyclosporine-induced fetotoxicity in the rat.
Transplantation 1985, 39:9-12.
181.Cockburn I, Krupp P, Monka C: Present experience of Sandim-
mun in pregnancy. Transplant Proc 1989, 21:3730-3732.
182.Hussein MM, Mooij JMV, Roujouleh H: Cyclosporine in the treat-
ment of lupus nephritis including 2 patients treated during
pregnancy. Clin Nephrol 1993, 40:160-163.
183.Armenti VT, Ahlswede KM, Ahlswede BA, Jarrell BE, Moritz MJ,
Burke JF: National transplantation pregnancy registry: out-
comes of 154 pregnancies in cyclosporine-treated female
kidney transplant recipients. Transplantation 1994, 57:502-506.
184.Lamarque V, Leleu MF, Monka C, Krupp P: Analysis of 629 preg-
nancy outcomes in transplant recipients treated with Sandim-
mun. Transplant Proc 1997, 29:2480.
185.Barrou BM, Gruessner AC, Sutherland DE, Gruessner RW: Preg-
nancy after pancreas transplantation in the cyclosporin era:
report from the International Pancreas Transplant Registry.
Transplantation 1998, 65:524-527.
186.Shaheen FAM, AI-Sulaiman MH, AI-Khader AA: Long-term
nephrotoxicity after exposure to CsA in utero. Transplantation
1993, 56:224-225.
187.Bar Oz B, Hackman R, Einarson T, Koren G: Pregnancy outcome
after CsA therapy during pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Trans-
plantation 2001, 71:1051-1055.
188.Moretti ME, Sgro M, Johnson DW, Sauve RS, Woolgar MJ,
Taddio A, Verjee Z, Giesbrecht E, Koren G, Ito S: Cyclosporine
excretion into breast milk. Transplantation 2003, 75:2144-
2146.
189.Stanley CW, Gottlieb R, Zager R Eisenberg J, Richmond R, Moritz
MJ, Armenti VT: Developmental well-being in offspring of
women receiving post-renal transplant. Transplant Proc 1999,
31:241-242.
190.Di Paolo S, Schena A, Morrone LF, Manfredi G, Stallone G,
Derosa C, Procino A, Schena FP: Immunologic evaluation
during the first year of life of infants born to cyclosporine
treated female kidney transplant recipients. Transplantation
2000, 69:2049-2054.
191.Cimaz R, Meregalli E, Biggioggero M, Borghi O, Tincani A, Motta
M, Airo P, Meroni PL: Alterations in the immune system of chil-
dren from mothers treated with immunosuppressive agents
during pregnancy. Toxicol Lett 2004, 149:155-162.
192.Sgro MD, Barrozino T, Mirghani HM, Sermer M, Moscato L,
Akoury H, Koren G, Chitayat D: Pregnancy outcome post renal
transplantation. Teratology 2002, 65:5-9.
193.Jain AB, Shapiro R, Scantlebury VP, Potdar S, Jordan ML, Flohr J,
Marcos A, Fung JJ: Pregnancy after kidney and kidney-pan-
creas transplantation under tacrolimus: a single center’s
experience. Transplantation 2004, 77:897-902.
194.Jain AB, Reyes J, Marcos A, Mazariegos G, Eghtesad B, Fontes
PA, Cacciarelli TV, Marsh JW, de Vera ME, Rafail A, et al.: Preg-
nancy after liver transplantation with tacrolimus immunosup-
pression: a single center’s experience update at 13 years.
Transplantation 2003, 76:827-832.
195.Kainz A, Harabacz I, Cowlrick IS, Gadgil SD, Hagiwara D:
Review of the course and outcome of 100 pregnancies in 84
women treated with tacrolimus. Transplantation 2000, 70:
1718-1721.
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 8 No 3 Østensen et al.
Page 18 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
196.Miniero R, Tardivo I, Curtoni ES, Segoloni GP, La Rocca E, Nino
A, Todeschini P, Tregnaghi C, Rosati A, Zanelli P, Dall’Omo AM:
Pregnancy after renal transplantation in Italian patients: focus
on fetal outcome. J Nephrol 2002, 15:626-632.
197.French AE, Soldin SJ, Soldin OP, Koren G: Milk transfer and
neonatal safety of tacrolimus. Ann Pharmacother 2003, 37:
815-818.
198.Le Ray C, Coulomb A, Elefant E, Frydman R, Audibert F: Myco-
phenolate mofetil in pregnancy after renal transplantation: a
case of major foetal malformations. Obstet Gynecol 2004,
103:1091-1094.
199.Pergola PE, Kancharla A, Riley DJ: Kidney transplantation
during the first trimester of pregnancy: immunosuppression
with mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, and prednisone.
Transplantation 2001, 71:994-997.
200.Armenti VT, Radomski JS, Gaughan WJ, Philips LZ, McGrory CH,
Coscia LA; National Transplantation Registry: Report from the
National Transplantation Pregnancy Registry (NTPR): out-
comes of pregnancy after transplantation. Clin Transpl 2003,
17:131-141.
201.Radder CM, Roelen DL, van de Meer-Prins, Claas FH, Kanhai HH,
Brand A: The immunologic profile of infants born after mater-
nal immunoglobulin treatment and intrauterine platelet trans-
fusions for fetal/neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 2004, 191:815-820.
202.Vesga L, Terdiman JP, Mahadevan U: Adalimumab use in preg-
nancy. Gut 2005, 54:890.
203.Sanchez Munoz D, Hoyas Pablos E, Ramirez Martin Del Campo
M, Nunez Hospital D, Guerrero Jimenez P: Term pregnancy in a
patient with Crohn’s disease under treatment with adali-
mumab. Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005, 28:435.
204.Herold M, Schnohr S, Bittrich H: Efficacy and safety of a com-
bined rituximab chemotherapy during pregnancy. J Clin
Oncol. 2001, 19:3439.
205.Kimby E, Sverrisdottir A, Elinder G: Safety of rituximab therapy
during the first trimester of pregnancy: a case history. Eur J
Haematol 2004, 72:292-295.
206.Goroir BP, Peppel K, Silva M, Beutler B: The biosynthesis of
tumor necrosis factor during pregnancy: studies with a CAT
reporter transgene and TNF inhibitors. Eur Cytokine Netw
1992, 3:533-537.
207.Hyrich K, Symmons D, Watson K, Silman A: Pregnancy outcome
in women who were exposed to anti-TNF agents: Results
from a national population register. Arthritis Rheum, in press.
208.Østensen M, Eigenmann GO: Etanercept in breast milk. J
Rheumatol 2004, 31:1017-1018.
209.Treacy G: Using an analogous monoclonal antibody to evalu-
ate the reproductive and chronic toxicity potential for a
humanized anti-TNF-αα monoclonal antibody. Hum Exp Toxicol
2000, 19:226-228.
210.Mahadevan U, Kane S, Sandborn WJ, Cohen RD, Hanson K, Ter-
diman JP, Binion DG: Intentional infliximab use during preg-
nancy for induction or maintenance of remission in Crohn’s
disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2005, 21:733-738.
211.Katz JA, Antoni C, Keenan GF, Smith DE, Jacobs SJ, Lichtenstein
GR: Outcome of pregnancy in women receiving infliximab for
the treatment of Crohn’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Am
J Gastroenterol 2004, 99:2385-2392.
212.Förger F, Matthias T, Oppermann M, Østensen M, Helmke K:
Infliximab in breast milk. Lupus 2004, 13:753.
213.Mahadevan U, Terdiman JP, Aron J, Jacobsohn S, Turek P: Inflix-
imab and semen quality in men with inflammatory bowel
disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2005, 11:395-399.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/8/3/209
Page 19 of 19
(page number not for citation purposes)
