Page 1 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
Abstract
Immunoablative therapy and hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation (HSCT) is an intensive treatment modality aimed at
‘resetting’ the dysregulated immune system of a patient with
immunoablative therapy and allow outgrowth of a nonautogressive
immune system from reinfused hematopoietic stem cells, either
from the patient (autologous HSCT) or a healthy donor (allogeneic
HSCT). HSCT has been shown to induce profound alterations of
the immune system affecting B and T cells, monocytes, and natural
killer and dendritic cells, resulting in elimination of autoantibody-
producing plasma cells and in induction of regulatory T cells. Most
of the available data have been collected through retrospective
cohort analyses of autologous HSCT, case series, and translational
studies in patients with refractory autoimmune diseases. Long-term
and marked improvements of disease activity have been observed,
notably in systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and treatment-related morbidity and
mortality have improved due to better patient selection and
modifications of transplant regimens. Treatment-related mortality
has decreased to approximately 7%. Prospective, randomised,
controlled clinical trials are ongoing or planned in systemic
sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and several nonrheuma-
tological conditions.
Introduction
Data from nearly 1,000 patients with refractory autoimmune
disease (AD) treated with hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation (HSCT) have been collected by the European
Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation/European
League Against Rheumatism (EBMT/EULAR) Working Party
for Autoimmune Diseases in the past 10 years (Tables 1 and
2; Riccardo Saccardi, chair of the EBMT/EULAR Working
Party, personal communication) [1-4]. The advent of this
multistep treatment modality (Figure 1) followed clinical
observations of remissions of AD in patients who were trans-
planted for concomitant hemato-oncological conditions [5].
The immunological principles were subsequently confirmed
through mechanistic studies in animal models of AD [6].
HSCT in AD was widely pioneered in the 1990s at a time
when few biologicals were available to treat AD and when
refractory progressive disease posed a major challenge. The
introduction of effective biologicals for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA),
ankylosing spondylitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) has reduced the demand for intensive and toxic
treatments such as HSCT. Nevertheless, clinicians still face
cases of severe and life-threatening AD such as progressive
systemic sclerosis (SSc), vasculitis, or SLE, refractory to
conventional medication and biologicals, for whom HSCT
may be a therapeutic option. Whereas biologics target one
cell type or soluble cytokine only, HSCT affects all immune
effector cells involved in AD, notably B and T lymphocytes,
monocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, and dendritic cells (DCs).
In contrast to conventional immunosuppressive medication
and biologicals, HSCT offers the prospect of a long-term
remission of AD, but its attendant risks preclude routine use.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are progenitor cells of
platelets, erythrocytes, granulocytes, B and T lymphocytes,
monocytes, tissue macrophages, and DCs. Animal studies
have demonstrated that HSCs play an important role in the
pathogenesis of AD. Adoptive transfer of HSCs after immuno-
ablative therapy caused, prevented, or cured AD [7,8]. It was
therefore postulated that underlying defects predisposing for
Review
Stem cell transplantation for rheumatic autoimmune diseases
Thomas Hügle1 and Jacob M van Laar2
1Department of Rheumatology, University of Basel, Felix Platter Spital, Burgfelderstrasse 101, 4012 Basel, Switzerland
2Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, The Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
NE2 4HH, UK
Corresponding author: Jacob M van Laar, j.m.van-laar@ncl.ac.uk
Published: 10 October 2008 Arthritis Research & Therapy 2008, 10:217 (doi:10.1186/ar2486)
This article is online at http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
© 2008 BioMed Central Ltd
AD = autoimmune disease; ANA = antinuclear antibody; ASSIST = American Scleroderma Stem Cell versus Immune Suppression Trial; ASTIS =
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation International Scleroderma; ATG = antithymocyte globuline; BM = bone marrow; DC = dendritic cell; DMARD =
disease-modifying antirheumatic drug; EAE = experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis; EBMT/EULAR = European Group for Blood and Marrow
Transplantation/European League Against Rheumatism; GVHD = graft-versus-host disease; HSC = hematopoietic stem cell; HSCT = hematopoi-
etic stem cell transplantation; IL = interleukin; JIA = juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MS = multiple sclerosis; NK = natural killer; PBSC = peripheral
blood stem cell; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SCOT = Scleroderma: Cyclophosphamide or Transplantation Trial; SLE = systemic lupus erythemato-
sus; SLEDAI = Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index; SSc = systemic sclerosis; TBI = total body irradiation; TRM = treatment-
related mortality.
Page 2 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 10 No 5 Hügle and van Laar
AD may reside in the HSCs and that HSCT could be an
effective treatment of AD. The aim of allogeneic HSCT is to
replace host autoaggressive immune effector cells with
donor-derived nonautoaggressive cells as a means of
inducing tolerance and sustained remission of AD. Allogeneic
HSCT, however, can result in graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD), a potentially severe and life-threatening complica-
tion, thus making it less attractive as a treatment for AD. The
observation that transplantation of syngeneic (genetically
identical) HSCs works in experimental models of AD raised
the prospect that autologous HSCT might be an equally
effective treatment for human AD. Recent translational
studies have shown that immunoablative therapy and autolo-
gous HSCT result in not only suppression and/or eradication
of autoaggressive lymphocytes but also induction of
regulatory T cells, thus ‘resetting’ the immunological clock
(Figure 2). Both autologous and allogeneic HSCTs are used
in conjunction with immunoablative conditioning, typically
with high doses of cyclophosphamide, combined with anti-
thymocyte globuline (ATG) and/or total body irradiation (TBI).
The use of classical myeloablative regimens with busulfan and
TBI is less attractive in AD because of the high treatment-
related mortality (TRM). The reinfusion of autologous HSCs
after conditioning serves mainly to shorten aplasia and reduce
the risk of bleeding and infection, although there is evidence
that the transplanted graft can have an immunomodulatory
effect on its own [9]. Important lessons have been learned
from clinical and translational studies in patients treated with
HSCT, which will be discussed in this review.
Preclinical data
Transplant studies in animals with AD are divided in
genetically determined and inducible models. Mice or rats
with lupus-like syndrome, transgenic HLA-B27 expression,
nonobese diabetes, and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
(IL-1Ra) deficiency belong to the first category, whereas
those with collagen-induced arthritis or experimental auto-
immune encephalomyelitis (EAE) as models of RA and
multiple sclerosis (MS), respectively, belong to the second
category. Different results were obtained in these models [6].
Conditioning followed by syngeneic (that is, pseudoautolo-
gous) HSCT resulted in the cure of induced AD, but not of
genetically determined AD [10-12]. In autologous HSCT, and
to a lesser extent in allogeneic HSCT, the outcome depended
on the stage of the disease at the time of transplant [13,14].
In inducible disease models, protective as well as therapeutic
effects of HSCT were observed: both syngeneic and
allogeneic HSCTs in EAE-susceptible mice protected
animals from disease when performed close to immunisation,
but only allogeneic HSCT with high-grade chimerism was
effective in protection against EAE when the time lag was
longer. In another EAE study, HSCT prevented glial scarring
and ameliorated disease severity after immunisation but was
ineffective as a treatment of established disease [13,14]. In
established genetic AD such as in lupus-prone mice,
allogeneic, but not syngeneic, HSCT reversed both acute
and chronic symptoms [12].
In the early animal HSCT studies, myeloablative conditioning
was employed prior to allogeneic HSCT to achieve full donor
chimerism and eradicate autoreactive lymphocytes. More
recent studies, however, have shown that nonmyeloablative
conditioning is equally effective in inducing stable chimerism,
while maintaining efficacy [12,15]. Of note, no GVHD was
observed, indicating that the putative graft-versus-
autoimmunity effect and GVHD are dissociated. Whereas full
donor chimerism was needed in the SLE and EAE models,
the induction of mixed chimerism was sufficient to ameliorate
chronic inflammatory arthritis in IL-1Ra-deficient mice
[11,12,16]. In the latter, no significant relationship between
the arthritis score and the ratio of donor to recipient cell
populations in mice with mixed chimerism could be found
after allogeneic HSCT.
Other strategies to induce donor chimerism have been
pursued as well. Costimulatory blockade without cytoreduc-
tive treatment proved sufficient to induce mixed chimerism in
another murine model [17]. HSCs home to specialised
niches [18]. If occupied by host stem cells that escaped the
conditioning, a donor HSC cannot enter these niches.
Administration of ACK2, an antibody that blocks c-kit function
in HSCs, led to a transient depletion of greater than 98% of
endogenous HSCs in immunodeficient mice. C-kit is a proto-
oncogene encoding a tyrosine kinase that (together with its
ligand) is important for the maintenance of hemopoietic
progenitor cells [19]. Subsequent transplantation of these
mice with donor HSCs and without conditioning led to
chimerism levels of up to 90%.
In collagen-induced arthritis, nonmyeloablative conditioning
followed by both syngeneic and allogeneic HSCT (the latter
Table 1
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in autoimmune
disease
Patients 993
Male/Female, percentage 36/64
Centres/Countries 185/27
Transplant procedures 1,015
Autografts Allografts
n = 950 n = 65
First transplant 941 47
Second transplant 9 14
Third transplant 4
Age at transplant, years 36 (2.7 to 76) 14 (0.4 to 57)
Pooled data from the EBMT/EULAR (European Group for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation/European League Against Rheumatism)
Registry, August 2008.
Page 3 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
yielding a stable donor chimerism over 95%) had a significant
therapeutic effect compared with conditioning alone [15]. In
this study, allogeneic HSCT was more effective than
syngeneic HSCT in suppressing pathogenic autoantibodies.
In HLA-B27 transgenic rats, TBI followed by HSCT from
nontransgenic mice led to a prompt and sustained remission
of symptoms. In contrast, all rats who received a syngeneic
transplant died from exacerbation of colitis [20].
In a recent study in lupus-prone New Zealand black/New
Zealand white mice, it was shown that nonmyeloablative
conditioning followed by infusion of highly purified allogeneic
HSCs from a major histocompatibility complex-mismatched
donor successfully induced durable mixed chimerism which
was sufficient to treat established AD [12]. This treatment
prolonged survival and reduced proteinuria, immune complex
formation, and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs).
While the aforementioned preclinical studies have been
instrumental in demonstrating basic principles of HSCT in
experimental AD, the heterogeneity of results obtained in
different transplant settings and disease models implies that
extrapolation to the clinical setting in human AD is difficult.
Nevertheless, the data suggest that HSCT may be more
effective (and probably less toxic) in patients with active
progressive disease rather than end-stage advanced disease,
a point that will be investigated in ongoing clinical trials.
Clinical data
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Autologous HSCT is the most widely used form of HSCT. In
hemato-oncological conditions, it is a relatively safe proce-
dure with a TRM typically below 3%. Toxicities and trans-
plant-related causes of death include sepsis, cytomegalovirus
infection, and haemorrhage. The overall TRM for autologous
HSCT in AD now is approximately 7%, although it was as
high as 23% in one of the first pilot studies [21]. In AD, diag-
nosis and extent of organ involvement, age, and comorbidity
are patient-related determinants of toxicity and TRM
(Figure 3). TRM and toxicity also depend on the conditioning
regimen and whether or not TBI is performed [22]. With
adaptation of eligibility criteria (for example, exclusion of
patients with severe pulmonary hypertension) and modifica-
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
Table 2
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in autoimmune disease per disease category
Rheumatological 500 Neurological 387
Multiple sclerosis 368
Connective tissue disease 308 Myasthenia gravis 3
Systemic sclerosis 190 Other/Unknown 16
Systemic lupus erythematosus 86
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis 14 Inflammatory bowel 24
Sjögren 3 Crohn disease 21
Other/Unknown 15 Ulcerative colitis 3
Arthritis 161 Hematological 67
Rheumatoid arthritis 86 ITP 22
Juvenile arthritis Evans syndrome 13
Systemic JIA 41 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia 13
Other JIA 18 Pure red cell aplasia 7
Polyarticular JIA 10 Pure white cell aplasia 2
Psoriatic arthritis 3 Other 10
Other 3
Other/Unknown/Missing 15
Vasculitis 31
Wegener 7
Behçet 6
Takayasu 2
Microscopic polyarteritis nodosa 3
Classical polyarteritis nodosa 1
Churg-Strauss syndrome 2
Other/Unknown 10
Data from the EBMT/EULAR (European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation/European League Against Rheumatism) Registry, August
2008. ITP, immune thrombocytopenic purpura; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
tions of transplant regimens (for example, lung shielding with
TBI), complications from HSCT can usually be managed in
experienced hands, and TRM has dropped as a con-
sequence. It was less than 1% for non-TBI nonmyeloablative,
less than 2% for low-intensity myeloablative, and 13% for
high-intensity myeloablative regimens [23]. Compared with
TRM, efficacy seems less influenced by intensity and type of
conditioning, although this may be confounded by the
severity of underlying disease. In SLE patients, nonmyelo-
ablative conditioning had an efficacy comparable to that of
myeloablative conditioning with a markedly lower TRM of 2%
versus 13% [1,24]. A similar observation was made for SSc
where nonmyeloablative regimens had a TRM of less than 4%
in contrast to 23% for myeloablative conditioning with TBI,
with similar efficacy [21,25,26]. Such comparisons, however,
are not based on prospective controlled trials and must
therefore be interpreted with caution.
Nonmyeloablative autologous HSCT in SLE patients resulted
in a disease-free 5-year survival of 50% and an overall 5-year
survival of 84% with improvements of SLEDAI (Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index) scores and
ANA, anti-double-stranded DNA, and complement levels, as
shown in a single-centre study [24]. A retrospective multi-
centre analysis of 53 patients of the EULAR/EBMT registry
showed an improvement of SLEDAI scores in 66%, but one
third relapsed subsequently (after 3 to 40 months) [1].
Autologous HSCT also proved effective in antiphospholipid
syndrome: 10 of 22 patients discontinued anticoagulation
therapy, 78% of whom remained without further thrombotic
events [27]. Interestingly, soft tissue calcifications resolved
after autologous HSCT [28].
In patients with SSc, the 5-year event-free survival after
HSCT in the North American and European studies was 64%
[21,26]. Autologous HSCT resulted in a remarkable reversal
of skin thickening, quality of life, and stabilisation of organ
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 10 No 5 Hügle and van Laar
Page 4 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
Figure 1
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a complex multistep
procedure involving mobilisation and harvesting of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) from blood or bone marrow, immunoablative therapy,
followed by administration of HSCs. HSCs can be obtained from the
patient (autologous), an identical twin (syngeneic), or an HLA-matched
donor (allogeneic). The procedure of autologous HSCT starts with
stem cell mobilisation from the peripheral blood, typically with
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and cyclophosphamide.
Stem cells are collected by plasmapheresis and selection for CD34+
cells. Conditioning with 200 mg/kg cyclophosphamide with or without
antithymocyte globuline (ATG) is then performed, followed by
reinfusion of peripheral HSCs. Cyclophosphamide with or without ATG
is considered as nonmyeloablative, whereas the combination of
cyclophosphamide with total body irradiation or busulfan is considered
as myeloablative conditioning. i.v., intravenous; s.c., subcutaneous.
Figure 2
Resetting of the immunological clock following hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
function [25,26]. A significant decrease in the modified
Rodnan skin score was achieved in 73% of 26 patients after
1 year and in 94% after 5 years. Relapses of SSc occurred in
a third of the cases after 2 to 4 years [3,26]. Stabilisation of
heart, lung, and kidney function was seen after autologous
HSCT. Persistent changes in capillary structure have been
described recently after autologous HSCT in seven patients
[29,30]. A comprehensive study on vascular markers in skin
biopsies before and after transplant suggested that HSCT
induces neoangiogenesis [31].
Three prospective studies are ongoing to investigate the
safety and efficacy of nonmyeloablative conditioning followed
by autologous HSCT compared with monthly intravenous
pulse cyclophosphamide in SSc patients: the Autologous
Stem Cell Transplantation International Scleroderma (ASTIS)
trial in Europe and the American Scleroderma Stem Cell versus
Immune Suppression Trial (ASSIST) and the Scleroderma:
Cyclophosphamide or Transplantation Trial (SCOT) in North
America. In the SCOT trial, a TBI-based myeloablative
approach is used whereas ASTIS and ASSIST use a lympho-
depleting regimen with ATG. At the time of this writing, 124
patients have been randomly assigned in the first of these
trials (ASTIS trial). Long-term follow-up will be needed in all
trials to evaluate durability of responses and late toxicities.
In RA, autologous HSCT was analysed in several studies. A
registry analysis of 76 cases showed an American College of
Rheumatology 50% improvement in 67% of patients and a
significant reduction in the level of disability [32,33].
However, the relapse rate was high and disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) had to be reintroduced in
most of the patients. Interestingly, sensitivity to DMARDs
seemed restored after HSCT. The availability of effective
biologicals to treat severe RA has led to a reduced demand
for intensive therapies such as (autologous) HSCT. Similar to
RA, autologous HSCT showed a response rate of 68% in
severe JIA. However, 5 of 20 responding patients relapsed,
and a significant TRM including some cases of macrophage
activation syndrome was reported [34]. Two case series
showed positive effects of autologous HSCT in systemic
vasculitis. Four patients were treated with nonmyeloablative
stem cell transplantation (two with neurovascular Behçet
disease, one with neurovascular Sjögren syndrome, and one
with Wegener granulomatosis), and three remained in
complete remission after 2 years [35]. One patient with Behçet
disease did not improve. A further study reported an 86%
response in 14 patients with different types of vasculitis. The
median duration of response was 45 months. Two of the
patients relapsed; no TRM in these patients was reported [36].
High-dose cyclophosphamide conditioning without stem cell
rescue has been tested in SLE and scleroderma patients
[37-39]. The rationale for that procedure is a rapid
eradication of autoreactive effector cells while sparing stem
cells because their high content of aldehyde dehydrogenase
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
Page 5 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
Figure 3
Outcome of patients with autologous hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation for severe autoimmune disease. (a) Probability of survival
(n = 414). The 3-year probabilities of survival were 99% ± 3% in 70
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, 92% ± 5% in 150 multiple sclerosis
(MS) patients, 84% ± 11% in 51 juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
patients, 79% ± 27% in 10 immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) patients,
72% ± 13% in 71 systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients, and 78% ± 13%
in 62 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients. P = 0.0004 for a
global log-rank test. (b) Probability of treatment-related mortality
(TRM). The 3-year probabilities of TRM were 2% ± 5% in RA patients,
5% ± 5% in MS patients, 11% ± 10% in JIA patients, 20% ± 25% in
ITP patients, 9% ± 7% in SSc patients, and 14% ± 9% in SLE
patients. P = 0.24 for a global log-rank test. (c) Probability of death
from disease progression. The 3-year probabilities were 20% ± 13%
in SSc patients, 0% in RA patients, 7% ± 9% in JIA patients,
16% ± 17% in SLE patients, 2% ± 3% in MS patients, and 0% in ITP
patients. P = 0.005 for a global log-rank test. Reprinted with
permission from [22]. Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group.
inactivates cyclophosphamide metabolic products. In SLE, 5
of 14 patients had a complete response, 6 had a partial
response, and no TRM was reported. In 6 SSc patients, 1
patient died of TRM and 2 relapsed, whereas 3 had a
sustained response after 12 to 24 months. These obser-
vations suggest that the key therapeutic effect from autolo-
gous HSCT is achieved by high-dose cyclophosphamide but
do not exclude a role for HSCT as the long-term effects of this
regimen are unknown. In addition, due to safety concerns, this
variant protocol has not been adopted in other centres.
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
In allogeneic HSCT, HSCs are collected from related (HLA-
matched) siblings or matched unrelated donors. Different
conditioning regimens are employed, usually involving two
cytotoxic agents (for example, fludarabin + busulphan), and
ATG with or without TBI. Post-transplant immunosuppression
is given to prevent GVHD, typically with cyclosporin or
methotrexate. Allogeneic HSCT is the only therapy that offers
the prospect of a cure for AD, due to its ability to induce a
graft-versus-autoimmunity effect, but its attendant risk of
GVHD precludes its routine use in AD. Long-term remissions
have been observed in several patients with AD as well as in
patients with concomitant hematologic malignancy who
relapsed or did not respond to autologous HSCT [40]. In 23
patients with aplastic anemia and concomitant AD, the
survival after allogeneic HSCT in complete remission of AD
was 64% at 13 years; TRM was 21.7%. In two patients with
concomitant organ-specific autoimmunity (one with auto-
immune thyroiditis and one with type 1 diabetes), AD did not
resolve but favourable responses were seen in 21 patients
suffering from RA, SLE, discoid lupus, eosinophilic fasciitis,
and psoriasis. The studies suggest that allogeneic HSCT
leads to a high relapse-free survival in patients with AD and
concomitant hematologic disease. Two SSc patients treated
with allogeneic HSCT showed improvement of skin
thickening and resolution of abnormalities on high-resolution
computed tomography and/or bronchoalveolar lavage [41].
Both received myeloablative conditioning and developed full
donor chimerism. One patient developed chronic GVHD
necessitating immunosuppression and died after 18 months
due to pseudomonas sepsis. In two other SSc patients, a
chimerism of 10% to 15% after nonmyeloablative condition-
ing was associated with a sustained complete remission for
over 3 years without GVHD [42,43]. In the only reported case
of nonmyeloablative conditioning plus allogeneic HSCT in
RA, mixed chimerism resulted in marked amelioration of RA,
without GVHD. The patient underwent HSCT from her HLA-
matched sister and went into complete remission with 55%
donor T (CD3) cells and 70% donor myeloid (CD33) cells
[44]. Remissions lasting 2 to 13 years have been reported in
three RA patients who received myeloablative conditioning
and allogeneic HSCT for concomitant hematologic malignant
disease [45]. Remissions lasting several years have also
been seen in vasculitis due to Behçet’s and Wegener’s
disease [36,46].
In a recent retrospective analysis of the European EBMT
(ProMISe) database, the outcome of 38 allogeneic HSCTs in
35 patients was analysed (T. Daikeler, T. Hügle, D. Farge, M.
Andolina, F. Gualandi, H. Baldomero, C. Bocelli-Tyndall, M.
Brune, J.H. Dalle, G. Ehninger, B.E. Gibson, B. Linder, B.
Lioure, A.M. Marmont, S. Matthes-Martin, D. Nachbaur, P.
Schuetz, A. Tyndall, J.M. van Laar, P. Veys, R. Saccardi, A.
Gratwohl, submitted for publication). In that study, 55% of the
patients showed a complete clinical response of their
refractory disease and a total of 79% of patients responded at
least partially. TRM at 2 years was 22.1%, in line with results
in conventional hematologic diseases [40]. The probability of
survival at 2 years was 70%. TBI-containing conditioning was
associated with a higher mortality and responses tended to be
better when conditioning included cyclophosphamide.
Safety of allogeneic HSCT has improved by employing
reduced-intensity regimens, graft manipulation like T-cell
depletion, and new methods to prevent GVHD such as
administration of mesenchymal stem cells or T-regulatory
cells [47]. In a recent prospective clinical trial, 56 patients
with severe acute GVHD were treated with mesenchymal
stem cells obtained from HLA-identical siblings or
haploidentical or HLA-mismatched donors: 30 of 56 patients
had a complete response, and 9 had a partial response. No
side effects were reported. Interestingly, patients with a
complete response had lower TRM compared with those with
partial or no response and they had a higher overall survival
2 years after HSCT [48]. Conditioning with alemtuzumab, a
monoclonal anti-CD52 antibody targeting B cells, T cells, and
DCs, is increasingly used for nonmyeloablative regimens. In
another recent study, GVHD was significantly reduced in
patients with aplastic anemia albeit at the expense of a higher
rate of cytomegalovirus reactivation [49].
Mechanisms of action of hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation in autoimmune disease
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
In autologous HSCT, conditioning with high-dose cyclophos-
phamide, ATG, and/or TBI deletes the majority of auto-
reactive effector cells of the host. Both adaptive and innate
immune cells, including B and T lymphocytes, monocytes, NK
cells, and DCs, are affected. This intensive immuno-
suppressive effect is considered to be the key effect of
HSCT on AD, at least in the short term. The infusion of
autologous HSCs serves to shorten aplasia but is probably
not essential for the direct anti-autoimmune effect [38]. In
animal models, better response rates are seen in early inflam-
matory disease than in chronic longstanding AD [11]. The
latter may be due to a more important role of the stromal cell
compartment, difficulties in disentangling disease activity
from damage, or reduced sensitivity of the immune system to
tolerance induction in longstanding disease [50].
Survival of autoreactive host lymphocytes with persistence of
autoantibody titres after autologous HSCT has been
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 10 No 5 Hügle and van Laar
Page 6 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
described after both myeloablative and nonmyeloablative
conditioning. Such cells may contribute to relapses. This
implies that, in those patients without relapses, there must be
factors that either inhibit proliferation of autoreactive clones
or render the host anergic. These may include nonspecific
effects of immunoablative therapy, such as post-transplant
lymphopenia and reduced levels of pathogenic autoanti-
bodies, and more specific effects, such as the induction of
regulatory T cells. In the proteoglycan-induced arthritis mouse
model, the initial improvement after autologous HSCT corres-
ponded to an increase in CD4+CD25+ cells [51]. Initially,
these T-regulatory cells did not express FoxP3. Subsequent
FoxP3 expression, however, was associated with a further
stabilisation of AD. Similar results have been found in patients
with juvenile chronic arthritis [52]. After autologous HSCT,
autoreactive T cells changed from a proinflammatory pheno-
type (mRNA interferon-gamma, T-bet high) before HSCT
toward a tolerant phenotype (IL-10 and GATA-3 high).
T-regulatory cells markedly increased after autologous HSCT.
In the first period, they reconstitute through homeostatic
clonal expansion; after several months, a thymic-dependent
naïve CD4+CD25+ T-regulatory cell regeneration is seen
[52]. Interestingly, most of the relapses after autologous
HSCT occurred within the first 9 months after HSCT, before
the thymus-dependent recovery of naïve T-regulatory cells.
Therefore, it is postulated that a well-functioning thymus is
needed to generate a functionally active CD4+CD25+
population. Evidence for thymic reactivation after autologous
HSCT has been obtained from studies showing increases in
T-cell receptor excision circles and CD31+ T cells and
normalisation of new T-cell receptor repertoires [53,54].
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
The interaction of two different immune systems in one
individual makes the pathogenetic mechanisms more complex
in the allogeneic situation. When first performed in patients
with AD, myeloablative chemo(radio)therapy was performed in
conjunction with allogeneic HSCT, in analogy to hemato-
logical diseases, in order to eradicate the host immune system
[41]. However, as shown in both animal models and several
patients, nonmyelablative conditioning equally yielded stable
mixed chimerism, resulted in less GVHD, and had the same
efficacy in AD as myeloablative conditioning [12,43].
After allogeneic HSCT, immune reconstitution depends on
different factors such as stem cell source (peripheral blood
versus bone marrow [BM], syngeneic versus allogeneic, and
HLA-matched versus -mismatched), graft manipulation
(mainly T-cell depletion), and age of the patient. Recovery of
innate immunity (NK cells, monocytes, and granulocytes)
occurs rapidly following transplantation whereas that of
adaptive immunity is delayed and mostly incomplete [55].
Especially after T-cell depletion of the donor graft, persistent
low CD4+ T-cell numbers are observed [56,57]. Recon-
stitution of CD4+ T cells is more dependent on thymic
function than CD8 cells. The grade of immunosuppression
also depends on the type of graft source: unmanipulated
peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) grafts contain more T cells
than BM grafts with a preserved CD4/CD8 ratio and a less
activated immunophenotype [58]. Recovery is significantly
faster for CD4 cells, circulating monocytes, and NK cells after
HSCT from peripheral blood versus BM [59]. Cytokine
profiles of PBSC-harvested T cells are polarised toward type
II responses and these T cells exhibit a reduced ability to
respond to allo- or autoantigens [58]. BM, in contrast,
contains more T-regulatory cells and mesenchymal stem cells
than PBSCs. Both of them possess strong immuno-
suppressive effects, which may explain why more infections are
observed after BM transplantation compared with PBSCs [60].
The role of T-regulatory cells after allogeneic HSCT has been
analysed in chronic GVHD. The deficiency of T-regulatory
cells due to consumption during acute GVHD probably
contributes to chronic GVHD [61]. On the other hand, in the
absence of GVHD, an increase of the anti-inflammatory IL-10
is described which may promote the formation of T-regulatory
cells. Apart from the increase of IL-10 serum levels, reduced
levels of interferon, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, and IL-17
from stimulated T cells of mice with chronic inflammatory
arthritis were described after allogeneic HSCT [17]. More
specifically, autoantigen-presenting cells are postulated to be
attacked and eliminated by the allograft [62]. Donor
precursor T or NK cells are attracted by host antigen-present-
ing cells, presenting so-called host minor histocompability
antigens. DCs, specialised in presenting antigens to donor
effector cells, are mainly involved in this setting and probably
also in autoantigen (cross)presentation in AD. In most
tissues, recipient DCs are replaced after transplantation due
to rapid turnover of BM-derived precursors [63]. However, in
a number of sites, notably the skin, recipient DCs may persist
and even self-renew for many months after transplantation.
In collagen-induced arthritis, donor NK cells specifically
eradicated autoantibody-producing plasma cells whereas
other plasma cells remained unaffected [64]. In lupus-prone
mice, a significant decrease of ANAs was observed after
allogeneic and, to a lesser extent, after syngeneic HSCT [12].
The decrease of pathogenic autoantibodies and switch of
subclass toward IgG1 may also be relevant [17]. The total
immunoglobulin levels after allogeneic HSCT decrease early
after transplantation. Meanwhile, there are several reports of
resolution of fibrosis after allogeneic HSCT. In this context,
two patients who received allogeneic HSCT for scleroderma
showed a resolution of collagenous deposits in the dermis
[41]. So far, however, the mechanism of this remains unclear.
Summary and outlook
Immunoablative therapy followed by HSCT has evolved from
an experimental treatment to a salvage therapy for patients
with severe AD not responding to proven conventional
therapy and/or biologicals. While safety of transplant
procedures in AD in general has markedly improved through
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
Page 7 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
better patient selection and modifications of transplant
protocols, patients with organ involvement from connective
tissue disease in particular are at risk of serious adverse
events and TRM. On the other hand, HSCT has the potential
to induce a sustained remission and this has been consis-
tently observed in SSc and SLE. Prospective randomised
controlled trials are in progress to evaluate risks and benefits
of HSCT versus conventional therapies and investigate
predictive factors of responsiveness. Both autologous and
allogeneic HSCT induce profound alterations of the immune
system, including restoratorion of regulatory mechanisms, but
their relationship with clinical effects merits further studies.
Immunoablative therapy and HSCT (autologous and
allogeneic) in AD is a highly complex procedure that should
be done only in specialised centres in the context of
approved study protocols in accordance with established
guidelines [65].
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Riccardo Saccardi, chair of the
EBMT/EULAR Working Party Autoimmune Diseases, for providing per-
mission to incorporate registry data from the Autoimmune Disease
Database.
References
1. Jayne D, Passweg J, Marmont A, Farge D, Zhao X, Arnold R,
Hiepe F, Lisukov I, Musso M, Ou-Yang J, Marsh J, Wulffraat N,
Besalduch J, Bingham SJ, Emery P, Brune M, Fassas A, Faulkner
L, Ferster A, Fiehn C, Fouillard L, Geromin A, Greinix H, Rabusin
M, Saccardi R, Schneider P, Zintl F, Gratwohl A, Tyndall A; Euro-
pean Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation, et al.: Autolo-
gous stem cell transplantation for systemic lupus
erythematosus. Lupus 2004, 13:168-176.
2. Saccardi R, Kozak T, Bocelli-Tyndall C, Fassas A, Kazis A, Havr-
dova E, Carreras E, Saiz A, Löwenberg B, te Boekhorst PA, Gua-
landio F, Openshaw H, Longo G, Pagliai F, Massacesi L,
Deconink E, Ouyang J, Nagore FJ, Besalduch J, Lisukov IA, Bonini
A, Merelli E, Slavino S, Gratwohl A, Passweg J, Tyndall A, Steck
AJ, Andolina M, Capobianco M, Martin JL, et al.: Autologous
stem cell transplantation for progressive multiple sclerosis:
update of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Trans-
plantation autoimmune diseases working party database.
Mult Scler 2006, 12:814-823.
3. Farge D, Passweg J, van Laar JM, Marjanovic Z, Besenthal C,
Finke J, Peter HH, Breedveld FC, Fibbe WE, Black C, Denton C,
Koetter I, Locatelli F, Martini A, Schattenberg AV, van den Hoogen
F, van de Putte L, Lanza F, Arnold R, Bacon PA, Bingham S,
Ciceri F, Didier B, Diez-Martin JL, Emery P, Feremans W, Herten-
stein B, Hiepe F, Luosujärvi R, Leon Lara A, et al.: Autologous
stem cell transplantation in the treatment of systemic sclero-
sis: report from the EBMT/EULAR Registry. Ann Rheum Dis
2004, 63:974-981.
4. Tyndall A, Saccardi R: Haematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion in the treatment of severe autoimmune disease: results
from phase I/II studies, prospective randomized trials and
future directions. Clin Exp Immunol 2005, 141:1-9.
5. Nelson JL, Torrez R, Louie FM, Choe OS, Storb R, Sullivan KM:
Pre-existing autoimmune disease in patients with long-term
survival after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J
Rheumatol 1997, 48:23-29.
6. van Bekkum DW: Stem cell transplantation in experimental
models of autoimmune disease. J Clin Immunol 2000, 20:10-
16.
7. Morton JI, Siegel BV: Transplantation of Autoimmune Potential.
I. Development of Antinuclear Antibodies in H-2 Histocompat-
ible Recipients of Bone Marrow from New Zealand Black
Mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1974, 71:2162-2165.
8. Ikehara S, Kawamura M, Takao F, Inaba M, Yasumizu R, Than S,
Hisha H, Sugiura K, Koide Y, Yoshida TO, Ida T, Imura H, Good
RA: Organ-specific and systemic autoimmune diseases origi-
nate from defects in hematopoietic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1990, 87:8341-8344.
9. van Laar JM: Immune ablation and stem-cell therapy in auto-
immune disease. Immunological reconstitution after high-
dose immunosuppression and haematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation. Arthritis Res 2000, 2:270-275.
10. van Gelder M, van Bekkum DW: Effective treatment of relaps-
ing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis with
pseudoautologous bone marrow transplantation. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1996, 18:1029-1034.
11. Van Wijmeersch B, Sprangers B, Rutgeerts O, Lenaerts C,
Landuyt W, Waer M, Billiau AD, Dubois B: Allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation in models of experimental autoim-
mune encephalomyelitis: evidence for a graft-versus-autoim-
munity effect. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2007, 13:627-637.
12. Smith-Berdan S, Gille D, Weissman IL, Christensen JL: Reversal
of autoimmune disease in lupus-prone New Zealand
black/New Zealand white mice by nonmyeloablative trans-
plantation of purified allogeneic hematopoietic stem cells.
Blood 2007, 15:110.
13. Burt RK, Padilla J, Begolka WS, Canto MC, Miller SD: Effect of
disease stage on clinical outcome after syngeneic bone
marrow transplantation for relapsing experimental autoim-
mune encephalomyelitis. Blood 1998, 91:2609-2616.
14. Herrmann MM, Gaertner S, Stadelmann C, van den Brandt J,
Böscke R, Budach W, Reichardt HM, Weissert R: Tolerance
induction by bone marrow transplantation in a multiple sclero-
sis model. Blood 2005, 106:1875-1883.
15. Flierman R, Witteveen HJ, van der Voort EI, Huizinga TW, de Vries
RR, Fibbe WE, Toes RE, van Laar JM: Control of systemic B
cell-mediated autoimmune disease by nonmyeloablative con-
ditioning and major histocompatibility complex-mismatched
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 2005, 105:
2991-2994.
16. Cho SG, Min SY, Park MJ, Lee KW, Cho YG, Cho ML, Chang
HS, Park SH, Lee JW, Min WS, Kim CC, Kim HY: Immunoregu-
latory effects of allogeneic mixed chimerism induced by non-
myeloablative bone marrow transplantation on chronic
inflammatory arthritis and autoimmunity in interleukin-1
receptor antagonist-deficient mice. Arthritis Rheum 2006, 54:
1878-1887.
17. Wekerle T, Kurtz J, Ito H, Ronquillo JV, Dong V, Zhao G, Shaffer J,
Sayegh MH, Sykes M: Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
with co-stimulatory blockade induces macrochimerism and
tolerance without cytoreductive host treatment. Nat Med
2000, 6:464-469.
18. Czechowicz A, Kraft D, Weissman IL, Bhattacharya D: Efficient
transplantation via antibody-based clearance of hematopoi-
etic stem cell niches. Science 2007, 318:1296-1299.
19. Ogawa M, Matsuzaki Y, Nishikawa S, Hayashi S, Kunisada T,
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 10 No 5 Hügle and van Laar
Page 8 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
This article is part of a special collection of reviews, The
Scientific Basis of Rheumatology: A Decade of
Progress, published to mark Arthritis Research &
Therapy’s 10th anniversary.
Other articles in this series can be found at:
http://arthritis-research.com/sbr
The Scientific Basis
of Rheumatology:
A Decade of Progress
Sudo T, Kina T, Nakauchi H, Nishikawa S: Expression and func-
tion of c-kit in hemopoietic progenitor cells. J Exp Med 1991,
174:63-71.
20. Breban M, Hammer RE, Richardson JA, Taurog JD: Transfer of
the inflammatory disease of HLA-B27 transgenic rats by bone
marrow engraftment. J Exp Med 1993, 178:1607-1616.
21. Nash RA, McSweeney PA, Crofford LJ, Abidi M, Chen CS,
Godwin JD, Gooley TA, Holmberg L, Henstorf G, LeMaistre CF,
Mayes MD, McDonagh KT, McLaughlin B, Molitor JA, Nelson JL,
Shulman H, Storb R, Viganego F, Wener MH, Seibold JR, Sullivan
KM, Furst DE: High-dose immunosuppressive therapy and
autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation for severe sys-
temic sclerosis: long-term follow-up of the US multicenter
pilot study. Blood 2007, 110:1388-1396.
22. Gratwohl A, Passweg J, Bocelli-Tyndall C, Fassas A, van Laar JM,
Farge D, Andolina M, Arnold R, Carreras E, Finke J, Kötter I, Kozak
T, Lisukov I, Löwenberg B, Marmont A, Moore J, Saccardi R,
Snowden JA, van den Hoogen F, Wulffraat NM, Zhao XW, Tyndall
A; Autoimmune Diseases Working Party of the European Group
for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT): Autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for autoimmune dis-
eases. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005, 35:869-879.
23. Burt RK, Loh Y, Pearce W, Beohar N, Barr WG, Craig R, Wen Y,
Rapp JA, Kessler J: Clinical applications of blood-derived and
marrow-derived stem cells for nonmalignant diseases. JAMA
2008, 299:925-936.
24. Burt RK, Traynor A, Statkute L, Barr WG, Rosa R, Schroeder J,
Verda L, Krosnjar N, Quigley K, Yaung K, Villa Bs M, Takahashi M,
Jovanovic B, Oyama Y: Nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation for systemic lupus erythematosus. JAMA
2006, 295:527-535.
25. Oyama Y, Barr WG, Statkute L, Corbridge T, Gonda EA,
Jovanovic B, Testori A, Burt RK: Autologous non-myeloablative
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with sys-
temic sclerosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 2007, 40:549-555.
26. Vonk MC, Marjanovic Z, van den Hoogen FH, Zohar S, Schatten-
berg AV, Fibbe WE, Larghero J, Gluckman E, Preijers FW, van
Dijk AP, Bax JJ, Roblot P, van Riel PL, van Laar JM, Farge D:
Long-term follow-up results after autologous haematopoietic
stem cell transplantation for severe systemic sclerosis. Ann
Rheum Dis 2008, 67:98-104.
27. Statkute L, Traynor A, Oyama Y, Yaung K, Verda L, Krosnjar N,
Burt RK: Antiphospholipid syndrome in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus treated by autologous hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Blood 2005, 106:2700-2709.
28. Mandelbrot DA, Santos PW, Burt RK, Oyama Y, Block GA, Ahya
SN, Rosa RM, Traynor AE: Resolution of SLE-related soft-
tissue calcification following haematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008, 23:2679-2684.
29. Aschwanden M, Daikeler T, Jaeger KA, Thalhammer C, Gratwohl
A, Matucci-Cerinic M, Tyndall A: Rapid improvement of nailfold
capillaroscopy after intense immunosuppression for systemic
sclerosis and mixed connective tissue disease. Ann Rheum
Dis 2008, 67:1057-1059.
30. Miniati I, Guiducci S, Conforti ML, Rogai V, Fiori G, Cinelli M, Sac-
cardi R, Guidi S, Bosi A, Tyndall A, Matucci Cerinic M: Autolo-
gous stem cell transplantation improves microcirculation in
systemic sclerosis. Ann Rheum Dis 2008, May 26. [Epub ahead
of print].
31. Fleming JN, Nash RA, McLeod DO, Fiorentino DF, Shulman HM,
Connolly MK, Molitor JA, Henstorf G, Lafyatis R, Pritchard DK,
Adams LD, Furst DE, Schwartz SM: Capillary regeneration in
scleroderma: stem cell therapy reverses phenotype? PLoS
ONE 2008, 16:e1452.
32. Snowden JA, Passweg J, Moore JJ, Milliken S, Cannell P, Van Laar
J, Verburg R, Szer J, Taylor K, Joske D, Rule S, Bingham SJ, Emery
P, Burt RK, Lowenthal RM, Durez P, McKendry RJ, Pavletic SZ,
Espigado I, Jantunen E, Kashyap A, Rabusin M, Brooks P, Bre-
deson C, Tyndall A: Autologous hemopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation in severe rheumatoid arthritis: a report from the
EBMT and ABMTR. J Rheumatol 2004, 31:482-488.
33. Verburg RJ, Kruize AA, van den Hoogen FH, Fibbe WE, Petersen
EJ, Preijers F, Sont JK, Barge RM, Bijlsma JW, van de Putte LB,
Breedveld FC, van Laar JM: High-dose chemotherapy and
autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results of an open study to
assess feasibility, safety, and efficacy. Arthritis Rheum 2001,
44:754-760.
34. Brinkman DM, de Kleer IM, ten Cate R, van Rossum MA, Bekker-
ing WP, Fasth A, van Tol MJ, Kuis W, Wulffraat NM, Vossen JM:
Autologous stem cell transplantation in children with severe
progressive systemic or polyarticular juvenile idiopathic
arthritis: long-term follow-up of a prospective clinical trial.
Arthritis Rheum 2007, 56:2410-2421.
35. Statkute L, Oyama Y, Barr WG, Sufit R, Ho S, Verda L, Loh Y,
Yaung K, Quigley K, Burt RK: Autologous non-myeloablative
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for refractory sys-
temic vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis 2008, 67:991-997.
36. Daikeler T, Kötter I, Bocelli Tyndall C, Apperley J, Attarbaschi A,
Guardiola P, Gratwohl A, Jantunen E, Marmont A, Porretto F,
Musso M, Maurer B, Rinaldi N, Saccardi R, Tyndall A; EBMT
Autoimmune Diseases Working Party: Haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for vasculitis including Behcet’s disease and
polychondritis: a retrospective analysis of patients recorded
in the European Bone Marrow Transplantation and European
League Against Rheumatism databases and a review of the
literature. Ann Rheum Dis 2007, 66:202-207.
37. Petri M, Jones RJ, Brodsky RA: High-dose cyclophosphamide
without stem cell transplantation in systemic lupus erythe-
matosus. Arthritis Rheum 2003, 48:166-173.
38. Tehlirian CV, Hummers LK, White B, Brodsky RA, Wigley FM:
High-dose cyclophosphamide without stem cell rescue in
scleroderma. Ann Rheum Dis 2008, 67:775-781.
39. Brodsky RA, Sensenbrenner LL, Jones RJ: Complete remission
in severe aplastic anemia after high-dose cyclophosphamide
without bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996, 87:491-
494.
40. Hinterberger W, Hinterberger-Fischer M, Marmont A: Clinically
demonstrable anti-autoimmunity mediated by allogeneic
immune cells favorably affects outcome after stem cell trans-
plantation in human autoimmune diseases. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2002, 30:753-759.
41. Nash RA, McSweeney PA, Nelson JL, Wener M, Georges GE,
Langston AA, Shulman H, Sullivan KM, Lee J, Henstorf G, Storb
R, Furst DE: Allogeneic marrow transplantation in patients
with severe systemic sclerosis: resolution of dermal fibrosis.
Arthritis Rheum 2006, 54:1982-1986.
42. Khorshid O, Hosing C, Bibawi S, Ueno N, Reveille J, Mayes MD,
Champlin RE: Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplant in a
patient with advanced systemic sclerosis and systemic lupus
erythematosus. J Rheumatol 2004, 31:2513-2516.
43. Loh Y, Oyama Y, Statkute L, Verda L, Quigley K, Yaung K, Barr W,
Jovanovic B, Burt RK: Non-myeloablative allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for severe systemic
sclerosis: graft-versus-autoimmunity without graft-versus-
host disease? Bone Marrow Transplant 2007, 39:435-437.
44. Burt RK, Oyama Y, Verda L, Quigley K, Brush M, Yaung K,
Statkute L, Traynor A, Barr WG: Induction of remission of
severe and refractory rheumatoid arthritis by allogeneic
mixed chimerism. Arthritis Rheum 2004, 50:2466-2470.
45. Snowden JA, Kearney P, Kearney A, Cooley HM, Grigg A, Jacobs
P, Bergman J, Brooks PM, Biggs JC: Long-term outcome of
autoimmune disease following allogeneic bone marrow trans-
plantation. Arthritis Rheum 1998, 41:453-459.
46. Marmont AM, Gualandi F, Piaggio G, Podestà M, Teresa van Lint
M, Bacigalupo A, Nobili F: Allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion (BMT) for refractory Behçet’s disease with severe CNS
involvement. Bone Marrow Transplant 2006, 37:1061-1063.
47. Hoffmann P, Edinger M: CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells and
graft-versus-host disease. Semin Hematol 2006, 43:62-69.
48. Le Blanc K, Frassoni F, Ball L, Locatelli F, Roelofs H, Lewis I,
Lanino E, Sundberg B, Bernardo ME, Remberger M, Dini G,
Egeler RM, Bacigalupo A, Fibbe W, Ringdén O; Developmental
Committee of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Trans-
plantation: Mesenchymal stem cells for treatment of steroid-
resistant, severe, acute graft-versus-host disease: a phase II
study. Lancet 2008, 10:1579-1586.
49. Siegal D, Xu W, Sutherland R, Kamel-Reid S, Kuruvilla J, Lipton
JH, Minden M, Messner H, Gupta V: Graft-versus-host disease
following marrow transplantation for aplastic anemia: differ-
ent impact of two GVHD prevention strategies. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2008, 42:51-56.
50. Burnet FM: A modification of Jerne’s theory of antibody pro-
duction using the concept of clonal selection. CA Cancer J
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/10/5/217
Page 9 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
Clin 1976, 26:119-121.
51. Roord STA, de Jager W, Boon L, Wulffraat N, Martens A, Prakken
B, van Wijk F: Autologous bone marrow transplantation in
autoimmune arthritis restores immune homeostasis through
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. Blood 2008, 111:5233-
5241.
52. de Kleer I, Vastert B, Klein M, Teklenburg G, Arkesteijn G, Yung
GP, Albani S, Kuis W, Wulffraat N, Prakken B: Autologous stem
cell transplantation for autoimmunity induces immunologic
self-tolerance by reprogramming autoreactive T cells and
restoring the CD4+CD25+ immune regulatory network. Blood
2006, 107:1696-1702.
53. Muraro PA, Douek DC, Packer A, Chung K, Guenaga FJ, Cas-
siani-Ingoni R, Campbell C, Memon S, Nagle JW, Hakim FT,
Gress RE, McFarland HF, Burt RK, Martin R: Thymic output gen-
erates a new and diverse TCR repertoire after autologous
stem cell transplantation in multiple sclerosis patients. J Exp
Med 2005, 201:805-816.
54. Thiel A, Alexander T, Schmidt CA, Przybylski GK, Kimmig S,
Kohler S, Radtke H, Gromnica-Ihle E, Massenkeil G, Radbruch A,
Arnold R, Hiepe F: Direct assessment of thymic reactivation
after autologous stem cell transplantation. Acta Haematol
2008, 119:22-27.
55. Peggs KS: Reconstitution of adaptive and innate immunity fol-
lowing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
humans. Cytotherapy 2006, 8:427-436.
56. Hakim FT, Cepeda R, Kaimei S, Mackall CL, McAtee N, Zujewski
J, Cowan K, Gress RE: Constraints on CD4 recovery post-
chemotherapy in adults: thymic insufficiency and apoptotic
decline of expanded peripheral CD4 cells. Blood 1997, 90:
3789-3798.
57. Mackall CL, Fleisher TA, Brown MR, Andrich MP, Chen CC,
Feuerstein IM, Magrath IT, Wexler LH, Dimitrov DS, Gress RE:
Distinctions between CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell regenerative
pathways result in prolonged T-cell subset imbalance after
intensive chemotherapy. Blood 1997, 89:3700-3707.
58. Tayebi H, Kuttler F, Saas P, Lienard A, Petracca B, Lapierre V,
Ferrand C, Fest T, Cahn J, Blaise D, Kuentz M, Hervé P,
Tiberghien P, Robinet E: Effect of granulocyte colony-stimulat-
ing factor mobilization on phenotypical and functional proper-
ties of immune cells. Exp Hematol 2001, 29:458-470.
59. Talmadge JE, Reed E, Ino K, Kessinger A, Kuszynski C, Heimann
D, Varney M, Jackson J, Vose JM, Bierman PJ: Rapid immuno-
logic reconstitution following transplantation with mobilized
peripheral blood stem cells as compared to bone marrow.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1997, 19:161-172.
60. Storek J, Dawson MA, Storer B, Stevens-Ayers T, Maloney DG,
Marr KA, Witherspoon RP, Bensinger W, Flowers ME, Martin P,
Storb R, Appelbaum FR, Boeckh M: Immune reconstitution
after allogeneic marrow transplantation compared with blood
stem cell transplantation. Blood 2001, 97:3380-3389.
61. Chen X, Vodanovic-Jankovic S, Johnson B, Keller M, Komorowski
R, Drobyski WR: Absence of regulatory T-cell control of TH1
and TH17 cells is responsible for the autoimmune-mediated
pathology in chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 2007,
110:3804-3813.
62. Ruggeri L, Capanni M, Urbani E, Perruccio K, Shlomchik WD,
Tosti A, Posati S, Rogaia D, Frassoni F, Aversa F, Martelli MF,
Velardi A: Effectiveness of donor natural killer cell alloreactiv-
ity in mismatched hematopoietic transplants. Science 2002,
295:2097-2100.
63. Kamath AT, Henri S, Battye F, Tough DF, Shortman K: Develop-
mental kinetics and lifespan of dendritic cells in mouse lym-
phoid organs. Blood 2002, 100:1734-1741.
64. Flierman R, Westerhuis G, Hameetman M, van Duivenvoorde LM,
van Hall T, van Laar JM, Fibbe WE, Toes RE: Targeting host B-
cell immune responses by persistent donor NK-cell alloreac-
tivity following nonmyeloablative allogeneic stem cell
transplantation. Blood 2007, 109:5524-5525.
65. Tyndall A, Gratwohl A: Blood and marrow stem cell transplants
in autoimmune disease. A consensus report written on behalf
of the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and
the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation
(EBMT). Br J Rheum 1997, 36:390-392.
Arthritis Research & Therapy Vol 10 No 5 Hügle and van Laar
Page 10 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
