commentaryreviewreportsresearcharticle
1
ACR = American College of Rheumatology; ARE = AU-rich element; IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; MAP = mitogen-activated protein; MRI =
magnetic resonance imaging; MS = multiple sclerosis; NF = nuclear factor; OPG = osteoprotegrin; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; Tbc = tubercle
bacilli; Th1 = T helper type 1; TLR = Toll-like receptor; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/3/5/E005
Setting the stage
We are all excited over the continued and strengthened
evidence of success for the inhibition of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
However, much remains to be learnt about mechanisms
and potential risks of this approach. George Kollias
(Athens, Greece) started the meeting by reporting on his
new data pertaining to control of TNF synthesis. As he and
his colleagues showed in 1999 [1], the AU-rich element in
the TNF gene controls mRNA stability for TNF, and dele-
tion of this element leads to prolonged persistence of TNF
after, for example, stimulation with lipopolysaccharide.
Tristetraprolin, a product of an immediate-early response
gene, binds to the AU-rich element on the TNF gene and
helps to destabilize mRNA. Consequently, mutations of
the genes for either tristetraprolin or the AU-rich elements
leads to impaired abrogation of the TNF formation after,
for example, lipopolysaccharide stimulation, resulting in
disease such as arthritis or colitis. IL-10 is protective in
these models, and the protection is mediated through
influence on the AU-rich element via the p38 mitogen-acti-
vated protein (MAP) kinase pathway. These results are
interesting also because they point to potential new thera-
peutic targets.
Matthew Fenton (Boston, MA, USA) then talked on the
newly identified Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which we inher-
ited from Drosophila and which share intracellular
sequences with the IL-1 and IL-18 receptors. Dimerization is
needed for receptor signaling, and stress or tissue damage
leads to dimerization. Lipopolysaccharide also probably
targets TLRs. NF-κB is involved downstream. Knockout
experiments have shown that tubercle bacilli (Tbc) signal
through TLR2 and TLR4. TLR4-deficient mice are highly
susceptible to tuberculosis, showing the protective impor-
tance of this receptor. The intracellular events lead to an
Meeting report
Advances in Targeted Therapies III, Nassau, Bahamas,
27 April–1 May 2001
Frank A Wollheim
Department of Rheumatology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden
Correspondence: Frank A Wollheim, Department of Rheumatology, Lund University Hospital, S-221 85 Lund, Sweden. Tel +46 46 172280;
fax +46 46 128468; e-mail: frank.wollheim@reum.lu.se
Abstract
This conference was the third in a series focusing on developments in the therapy of rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) and other rheumatic conditions with biologicals; in many ways, it was perhaps the best
one so far. One strength of the meeting was the mix of scientists from academia and from industry, and
of workers in basic science as well as clinical investigators. The risks of inhibition of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) were covered in depth for the first time. A number of putative and actual new targets were
presented. An updated consensus document on the use of TNF inhibitors will appear in the near future
in the Annals of Rheumatic Diseases, authored by Dan Furst et al.
Keywords: cytokine biology, cytokine blockade, joint damage, regulatory agents, rheumatic diseases
Received: 9 July 2001
Accepted: 12 July 2001
Published: 6 August 2001
Arthritis Res 2001, 3:E005
© 2001 BioMed Central Ltd
(Print ISSN 1465-9905; Online ISSN 1465-9913)
2
Arthritis Research Vol 3 No 5 Wollheim
inhibition of NF-κB like that of lipopolysaccharide, but cellu-
lar responses are different. TLR proteins mediate the pro-
duction of Tbc-induced TNF but not of NO [2].
Endpoints – do we need new ones?
This evening discussion was opened by Claire Bom-
bardier (Toronto, Canada), who stressed the need to learn
more about relations between radiographic signs and
functional outcome and impairment of quality of life. Ted
Pincus (Nashville, TN, USA) stressed the need to charac-
terize (and target) nonresponders, regardless of disease
duration, and indicated that he was involved in such a
study. Désirée van der Heijde (Maastricht, the Nether-
lands) emphasized that the OMERACT (outcome mea-
sures in rheumatology) core set of variables perform well
but that we need measures of the quality of life. She
pointed out that the DAS disease activity index is better
than the American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
response criteria, because it is an index of absolute activ-
ity whereas the ACR response measures before/after
changes. Lee Simon (Boston, MA, USA) defended the
ACR response criteria by pointing out that they were
specifically constructed to be useful in trials, which they
have proven to be. Responding to Désirée van der Hei-
jde’s comment, Marc Hochberg (Baltimore, MD, USA)
was of the opinion that the EURO QUAL instrument per-
forms well and is sensitive to change.
New targets for intervention
IL-18 was the theme of the talk by Charles Dinarello
(Denver, CO, USA). This cytokine was cloned in 1995 and
shown to be a strong inducer of IFN-γ in Th1 lymphocytes.
In contrast to IL-1β, pro-IL-18 shows constitutive expres-
sion. The two cytokines share several biologic effects, but
IL-18, in contrast to IL-1 (and TNF), does not activate
cyclo-oxygenase 2. Knockout experiments have shown
that, like IL-1β, IL-18 needs to be activated through split-
ting by caspase-1. It also needs to act in concert with IL-
12 on Th1 cells for production of IFN-γ. Pro-IL-1β and
pro-IL-18 are cleaved at amino acids 116 and 37, respec-
tively. The receptors for IL-18 and IL-1 are also homolo-
gous, and consist of an α and a β chain, which form a
high-affinity signaling heterodimer. An IL-18-binding
protein has also been isolated, using similar techniques to
those involved in the discovery of TNF-binding proteins. It
is a decoy receptor that is typically induced by virus infec-
tion and inhibits T-cell activation. The normal ratio is 34
molecules of binding protein for each molecule of IL-18
[3]. IL-18 has other actions besides inducing IFN-γ, as has
been shown in IFN-γ-null mice. IL-18 causes disease
similar to TNF and IL-1, which can be inhibited by IL-18-
binding protein.
Ischemia and reperfusion causes upregulation of IL-18
and distorts the balance between IL-18 and its binding
protein. All these interesting data point to a possible new
therapeutic approach to anti-inflammatory therapy, involv-
ing, for example, caspase-1 inhibition or administration of
IL-18-binding protein.
Sander van Deventer (Amsterdam, The Netherlands)
reported on developments regarding inhibition of p38
MAP kinase, in particular using the compound named
SB203580. The desired effect is diminished synthesis
and release of TNF and related cytokines. One caveat,
however, is that not all cells react by reduced output;
macrophages in one study actually increased their release
of TNF [4]. The mice studied also showed lowered resis-
tance to tuberculosis and worsened inflammatory bowel
disease. However there are other inhibitors of MAP kinase,
including one from Boehringer Ingelheim (Ingelheim,
Germany) that prevents phosphorylation and inhibits TNF
release in all cells. Another interesting compound is CNI
1493, which inhibits stress-activated protein kinase and
reduces TNF release. This compound is only available for
intravenous administration, however. In preliminary tests in
patients whose Crohn’s disease does not respond to
infliximab, it showed efficacy lasting several months. Liver
toxicity is reported, and this seems to be a class effect.
TNF-α-converting enzyme is a member of the ADAM (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family (ADAM 17) and
converts 26-kDa pro-TNF to soluble, 17-kDa active TNF. It
is another promising target for inhibition, that was
addressed by Robert Newton of Dupont (Wilmington, DE,
USA). He mentioned that the inhibitor can be administered
orally and can inhibit lipopolysaccharide-stimulated TNF
production in human monocytes by 95%. Apparently, pro-
cessing of TNF-α-converting enzyme is mainly intracellular.
In animal models of TNF-induced arthritis, the enzyme’s
inhibitor was more potent than etanercept, probably due
to better cell penetration.
Peter Krammer (Heidelberg Germany) delivered an
overview of the two different types of apoptosis and their
essential role in the maintenance of health, in tumor
growth, in sepsis, and in stroke as studied in a rodent
model. This presentation was a real tour de force, deliv-
ered at express speed by a man who has initiated and
been in the forefront of CD95-related research throughout
its life. Interested readers are referred to a recent review
by his hand [5]. Sentrin expression may lead to impaired
apoptosis in RA synovium, and stimulation of apoptosis
may therefore be a possible therapeutic target [6].
Lionel Ivashkiv (New York, NY, USA) reviewed cytokine
signaling via the Jak/STAT pathways and not only indi-
cated their central role in inflammation and its control but
also hinted at possible targets for intervention. One inter-
esting observation was evidence that IL-6 and IL-10 fail to
function in macrophages in RA synovitis but not in reactive
synovitis. The inhibition is apparently mediated through
commentaryreviewreportsresearcharticle
3
MKK/p38 kinases and occurs upstream of STAT. Dis-
turbed regulation of cytokine signaling in RA is clearly
another possible target for future interventions.
Inhibition of tumor necrosis factor in
conditions other than rheumatoid arthritis
Eric Veys (Ghent, Belgium) presented good results in 21
patients in an open study with infliximab confirmed by a
12-week placebo-controlled study on 40 patients. The
three adverse reactions consisted of one case of tubercu-
losis, one of pyelonephritis, and one of otitis and tooth
abscess. Histology for eight patients showed diminished
synovial proliferation and vascularity and lower staining for
vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1, neutrophils,
and macrophages (CD68). On the other hand, CD20,
plasma cells, and IgG increased.
Philip Mease (Seattle, WA, USA) presented a single-
center, placebo-controlled study of etanercept in psoriatic
arthritis and psoriasis [7]. Radiographic data were not
available, but clinical efficacy was evident.
Peter Greenberg (Stanford, CA, USA) reported experi-
ences in an open phase I/II study of patients suffering from
fairly advanced myelodysplastic syndromes, using etaner-
cept (25 mg twice weekly). This was based on observa-
tions of increased serum levels of TNF in such patients.
Some hematological improvement was likely in five of the
patients, whereas four developed infections. The number
of blast cells in bone marrow remained unchanged.
Christian Antony (Erlangen, Germany) reported on infliximab
treatment of six cases of Still’s disease in adults. The obser-
vation time was between 3 and 30 months and the clinical
impression very favorable: after five infusions of 5 mg/kg,
most of the systemic manifestations had disappeared. This
is a condition that is difficult to control with conventional
treatment. One patient developed a serious infection.
Jochen Sieper (Berlin, Germany) reported on 12 patients
with ankylosing spondylitis treated with infliximab without
methotrexate and monitored by MRI. The clinical response
appeared promising, but he encountered one case of Tbc.
Subsequently, a placebo-controlled trial was performed on
70 patients, using the Bath ankylosing spondylitis disease
activity index (BASDAI) 50% improvement as endpoint.
The outcome showed that 53% of patients on infliximab
reached the endpoint, versus only 6% of the patients
given the placebo.
Muhamad Hussein (Cleveland, OH, USA) had given
etanercept to nine male and five female patients with
amyloidosis of the light chain related type, assuming a
possible role of TNF in this severe condition. Of the ten
patients with heart involvement, two died early in the trial.
The only therapy besides etanercept was directed against
heart failure. The median follow-up was 14 months. The
study is still not completed, but the open study indicated
clear improvement in, e.g., macroglossia and gastrointesti-
nal symptoms in some patients.
Update on safety of cytokine-blocking agents
This session was of special interest, since one criticism of
last year’s meeting was lack of information on risks
involved in connection with TNF inhibition. Martin Rölling-
hoff (Erlangen, Germany) had previously reported that a
leishmaniasis-resistant BALB/c mouse strain lacking both
TNF receptor genes was still resistant to infection. The
new data with this strain (C57BL/6TNF mutation) showed
unexpected fatal disease. This seemed related to uncon-
trolled dissemination from the primary site of inoculation,
which seemed related to an altered microarchitecture in
secondary lymphoid organs, with an absence of germinal
centers. Interestingly, the animals could be rescued by
transplantation with TNF-producing bone marrow cells [8].
It is not clear how these results can be extrapolated to the
human situation.
Gregory Harriman (Centocor; Malvern, PA, USA) surveyed
serious adverse events from analysis of 1900 infliximab
patients and some 200 controls. Three cases of Tbc, eight
of sepsis, and one of transient pancytopenia, but no
instance of aplastic anemia, had been identified. Other
hematological changes were benign neutropenia and
lymphocytosis; this is related to altered trafficking and
considered to be part of the drug’s pharmacodynamic
effect. Two patients with pre-existing multiple sclerosis
showed worsening of lesions detected by MRI; in one
patient treated for Crohn’s disease, multiple sclerosis
developed de novo; and one patient with RA developed
Guillain–Barré syndrome. Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs)
arose in 16% of the patients, and three cases of transient
systemic lupus erythematosus are on file. Malignancies
were, if anything, less prevalent than expected. ‘Serious’
infusion reactions were rare. This account of patients
included in trials did not address the several-fold-larger
number of patients treated since the drug was licensed
and must still be considered to represent a fairly short
term. In postmarketing analysis, 55 cases of Tbc have
been noted, 11 in North America and 44 in Europe. Of
these, 17 were severe – that is, disseminating – and 7
were fatal. The onset was usually after three or fewer infu-
sions, which makes drug causation more likely, but also
easier to monitor. Other infections included 10 cases of
histoplasmosis, 6 of Pneumocystis carinii infection, 6 of
listeriosis, and 5 of aspergillosis. Infliximab antibodies
developed in 7–8% of the patients, and this immunization
doubled the risk of infusion reactions. However, it did not
impair clinical effects or radiographic progression.
Wayne Wallis (Immunex; Seattle, WA, USA) presented
data from 2500 trial patients and more than 100,000
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/3/5/E005
4
postmarketing exposures to etanercept. In these patients,
eight cases of Tbc (= expected US rate) were observed.
Of these, two developed the miliary form. Mortality-related
infections accounted for 18% of fatalities, the expected
US rate being 15%. Malignancies occurred in 9 patients;
the expected rate was 12.7. Definite multiple sclerosis
developed in one patient and four further patients showed
probable multiple sclerosis. Aplastic anemia had occurred
in three patients; the ‘expected’ prevalence was quoted as
two cases. The figure was based on a 5.8- to 7.6-fold
increased relative risk in RA.
Immunogenicity to etanercept was observed only in RA
patients, and the antibodies were not neutralizing in nature.
Steven Fishkoff (Abbott; Mount Olive, NJ, USA) reported
experience from some 2000 patients exposed to adali-
mumab (= D2E7), corresponding to more than 2,800
patient years. The cases of Tbc observed with this all-
human anti-TNF antibody have with one exception
occurred between 3 and 8 months. All but one case
occurred at doses given in earlier studies, which were dis-
tinctly higher than those that are used in ongoing studies.
Only one case was observed among 1800 recent
patients, 11 of whom were treated with the proposed
‘market’ dose of 0.25 mg/kg/week. Furthermore, all
patients seem to have recovered. Most cases have
occurred in endemic areas such as Mexico and Germany.
This fairly encouraging presentation was criticized by
Charles Dinarello for not providing raw data – “propa-
ganda rather than data”.
Carl Edwards (Amgen; Thousand Oaks, CA, USA)
recalled a recent experimental study showing that IL-1RA
mutation in BALB/c mice caused spontaneous arthritis.
Close to 3000 patients have now been exposed within
randomized controlled trials. The safety record is said to
be better than that for TNF inhibitors. Effects of combined
therapy with IL-1 receptor antagonist and a PEGylated
TNF-receptor-type-I compound were at least additive in a
recent study [9]. Data from human studies with this com-
bined therapy are eagerly awaited. The primary outcome is
set at the ambitious level of ACR50 response.
Dr Z Swieterman, FDA (Rockville, MD, USA), could not
attend but joined the conference by telephone link. He
stressed that safety data for TNF inhibition still are based
on short-term exposure. Tbc has now been observed in 70
patients exposed to infliximab and 3 patients on etaner-
cept. Many cases have been extrapulmonary and three
were fatal. Demyelinating conditions have been reported in
17 patients, 15 of whom had been exposed to etanercept.
It has previously been reported that lernercept also causes
worsening of multiple sclerosis [10]. All events were tem-
porally related to exposure, and symptoms resolved partly
or completely after the drug was stopped. Two cases of
aplastic anemia and seven of pancytopenia had occurred
during treatment with etanercept. The denominator for all
these cases was, however, not well defined.
Radiography as outcome measure in
rheumatoid arthritis
Désirée van der Heijde (Maastricht, the Netherlands)
talked on radiography as an outcome measure and
stressed the difficulties of group analysis in a disease as
heterogeneous and irregular as RA. Nevertheless, in most
therapeutic studies, one finds a correlation between
disease activity function and, in most recent studies using
validated techniques, between effects on disease activity
and on radiographic progression. Correlation between
radiographic damage and disability becomes stronger
with time. Also, van der Heijde and others find a strong
correlation between local activity and local radiographic
progression. Therefore, despite its limitations, radiography
is still far from obsolete as an outcome measure.
New approaches
Fionula Brennan (London, UK) had posed the question
whether it was possible to suppress pathologic TNF
selectively. Support for such a possibility was provided
from cell-to-cell experiments with glutaraldehyde-treated
T-lymphocyte membranes and macrophages, using a
method described by J-M Dayer’s laboratory in Geneva
[11]. Using T-cells, obtained from normal peripheral blood
and stimulated with CD3, the macrophages secreted both
TNF-α and IL-10. In contrast, T cells recovered from RA
synovium, without further stimulation, only induced secre-
tion of TRNF-α and not IL-10. This clearly indicates a new
role for pathological T cells to support persistent inflam-
mation. Such T cells perhaps would be an important can-
didate to be targeted in order to abrogate rheumatoid
inflammation upstream from macrophage effector cells.
Satwant Narula (Schering-Plough, Kenilworth, NJ, USA)
highlighted efforts in progress to find a suitable chemokine
target among the 40 chemokines and 20 chemokine
receptors. Cell activation, growth, and development; angio-
genesis; and in particular cell trafficking are controlled by
chemokines and chemokine receptors. The phenotype of
the CCR6-null model [12] shows impaired mucosal immu-
nity. This is characterized by lack of myeloid dendritic cells
in the Peyer’s patches. Work is now in progress with a
specific CCR5 inhibitor (Sh-c) that is in clinical develop-
ment. CCR5 is a coreceptor for HIV, and individuals
homozygous for nonfunctional CCR5∆32 are highly resis-
tant to AIDS, and RA is also probably rare and/or benign in
such individuals. Apparent redundancy is intriguingly promi-
nent in the chemokine system, perhaps pointing to recent
phylogenetic development [13]. Among the ligands of
CCR5 are RANTES, MIP-1α, and MCP-1, and their activity
is abolished by the Schering compound. CCR5 is upregu-
lated on T lymphocytes in RA synovium. Lack of penetra-
Arthritis Research Vol 3 No 5 Wollheim
5
tions into CNS and oral administration (T1/2 20 hours) are
other attractive features. One problem is that Sh-c is
specific for man and rhesus monkeys. Experiments with
monkeys in Rijswik, the Netherlands, showed resistance to
collagen-induced arthritis in five treated animals, whereas
four of five untreated control animals developed arthritis.
David Close (Roche; Welwyn Garden City, UK)
addressed the question of whether there is any future for
protease inhibitors. This question is indeed relevant after
the many failures in this field, the most recent one being
that of Trocade, from the company Dr Close works for.
Perhaps the goal of finding the right degree of specificity
or potency of inhibition is unattainable. Licensing authori-
ties may offer another obstacle. Even if one could docu-
ment damage protection, one needs proof that this also is
of benefit to patients. This seems to be a field for brave
and incurably optimistic investors and investigators.
Dennis Carson (La Jolla, CA, USA) reminded the meeting
of DNA’s capability as an immune stimulator. It accounts
for 50% of the effect in Freund’s adjuvant, judging from
experiments with DNAase-treated adjuvant and IFN-γ for-
mation as read out. The immune stimulatory effect can be
linked to specific immune stimulatory sequences. These
are believed to play a role in innate immunity. DNA vacci-
nation shows promise in cancer immunotherapy, allergy,
and infectious diseases, and perhaps should not be
excluded from the minds of rheumatologists.
Alexandra Kiemer (Munich, Germany) focused on another
player, atrial natriuretic peptide, and its potency to inhibit
formation of lipopolysaccharide-stimulated inducible NO
synthase (iNOS). This is mediated through destabilization
of mRNA for iNOS, and the reduced expression of tran-
scription factors NF-κB and activator protein 1. This
author also has interesting evidence that TNF-α and IL-1β
are inhibited by a similar mechanism [14]. Importantly, IL-
10 formation is not affected. One additional effect was
reduced expression of cytochrome-c oxidase 2, in both
murine and human cells. Atrial natriuretic peptide may
become of rheumatologic interest as yet another new way
of reducing TNF production.
Synovial tissue is rich in angiogenic factors, and inhibition
of angiogenesis as a therapeutic principle was the subject
of Paul Brenchley (Manchester, UK). Vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) was proposed as a putative target,
in combination with anti-TNF therapy. VEGF-A, as it is now
termed, is formed in neutrophils, and synovial fluid levels
correlate with neutrophil counts. TNF-α can induce VEGF
formation in mononuclear cells, but on the other hand TNF
downregulates VEGF receptors, so its influence on angio-
genesis is a double-edged sword [15]. VEGF is geneti-
cally polymorphic and the genes are located close to HLA
on chromosome 6. Recent work indicates an association
of 1 of some 15 polymorphic variants with RA [15].
Heparanase, which is found in rheumatoid synovium, liber-
ates VEGF from extracellular matrix. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, bucillamine, and dexamethasone have
been shown to inhibit VEGF. Anti-VEGF drugs developed
for use in oncology may prove useful in RA.
Alan Wahl (Seattle Genetics, Bothell, WA, USA) presented
oncostatin M as a putative therapeutic agent in RA. This
proposal is based on evidence that this member of the IL-6
superfamily interacts with various cytokines; the results can
be summarized as inducing net anti-inflammatory effects
without immune suppression. TIMP (tissue inhibitor of met-
alloproteinases) is upregulated by oncostatin M. Survival of
lethal stimulation with lipopolysaccharide is improved and
radiation resistance is augmented in experimental animals.
Oncostatin M was also beneficial in experimental allergic
encephalitis, a model related to multiple sclerosis.
Ulrich Feige (Amgen; Thousand Oaks, CA, USA) dis-
cussed osteoprotegrin (OPG). This is an inhibitor of
osteoclast activation and acts antagonistically to its ligand
(OPGL, or RANKL). OPG-null mice, not surprisingly, suffer
from brittle bones. OPG treatment reduces bone erosions
in adjuvant arthritis without influencing inflammation. The
literature contains reports of beneficial effects of this
inhibitor on osteolytic metastases, and the prospect for
rheumatology is that OPG may be an agent that inhibits
damage without affecting inflammation.
The final talk, entitled ‘Can a pill compete with anticytokine
therapy?’, was given by Richard Griffiths (Pfizer; Groton,
CT, USA). He envisaged three ways in which this could be
possible: ease of administration, efficacy–safety profile, and
cost. This talk covered a number of issues and develop-
ments in several companies, demonstrating the profound
impact that the success of TNF inhibition has had on indus-
trial research. Attempts to construct smaller peptides that
could replace etanercept or IL-1 receptor antagonist have
so far not been successful, although some results have
been seen with constructs 16 amino acids in length. TNF-α-
converting enzyme is a possible target, and inhibitors of this
enzyme, Ro-32-7315 and Gl 5402, are in phase I develop-
ment. A problem with this method of inhibiting the availabil-
ity of circulating TNF is that the factor will still be present on
cell membranes. Also the enzyme may have other functions
than releasing TNF, and inhibition could lead to unexpected
toxicity. However, beneficial effects have been seen in a
model of arthritis in the rat streptococcal cell wall. Gl 5402
also inhibited the rise in circulating TNF after injection of
lipopolysaccharide into healthy volunteers.
Caspase-1 is a cysteine protease that cleaves pro-IL-1β
and pro-IL-18, and Vertex (Cambridge, MA, USA) has an
inhibitor, VX-740, in phase II development. It has a good
effect on collagen-induced arthritis. A final example was
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/3/5/E005
commentaryreviewreportsresearcharticle
6
inhibition of p38 MAP kinase. This enzyme has important
functions both in embryonic development and in adult life,
and mutation of the gene is lethal. Nevertheless, several
companies have explored p38 inhibitors, and at least one
inhibitor, VX-745, is in phase II clinical development. Thus,
it can be concluded that several approaches are in
progress in an attempt to find small molecules that are
competitive with etanercept and infliximab.
Final comment
The organizing committee – Ferdinand Breedveld,
Joachim Kalden, and Josef Smolen – are to be congratu-
lated on creating and maintaining this forum for unre-
stricted discussions and presentations of cutting-edge
science in a dynamically developing field. There is plenty
of potential for another meeting on Advances in Targeted
Therapies. I would be surprised if ATT IV is not already in
advanced planning by the troika Breedveld–Kalden–
Smolen. Those participating in developing and following
this dynamic field are very grateful for their initiative.
References
1. Kontoyiannis D, Pasparakis M, Pizarro TT, Cominelli F, Kollias G:
Impaired on/off regulation of TNF biosynthesis in mice
lacking TNF AU-rich elements: implications for joint and gut-
associated immunopathologies. Immunity 1999, 10:387-398.
2. Jones BW, Means TK, Heldwein KA, Keen MA, Hill PJ, Belisle JT,
Fenton MJ: Different Toll-like receptor agonists induce distinct
macrophage responses. J Leukoc Biol 2001, 69:1036-1044.
3. Novick D, Kim SH, Fantuzzi G, Reznikov LL, Dinarello CA, Rubin-
stein M: Interleukin-18 binding protein: a novel modulator of
the Th1 cytokine response. Immunity 1999, 10:127-136.
4. van den Blink B, Juffermans NP, ten Hove T, Schultz MJ, van
Deventer SJ, van der Poll T, Peppelenbosch MP: p38 mitogen-
activated protein kinase inhibition increases cytokine release
by macrophages in vitro and during infection in vivo. J
Immunol 2001, 166:582-587.
5. Krammer PH: CD95’s deadly mission in the immune system
[review]. Nature 2000, 407:789-795.
6. Franz JK, Pap T, Hummel KM, Nawrath M, Aicher WK, Shigeyama
Y, Muller-Ladner U, Gay RE, Gay S: Expression of sentrin, a
novel antiapoptotic molecule, at sites of synovial invasion in
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2000, 43:599-607.
7. Mease PJ, Goffe BS, Metz J, VanderStoep A, Finck B, Burge DJ:
Etanercept in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis:
a randomised trial. Lancet 2000, 356:385-390.
8. Wilhelm P, Ritter U, Labbow S, Donhauser N, Röllinghoff M,
Bogdan C, Korner H: Rapidly fatal leishmaniasis in resistant
C57BL/6 mice lacking TNF. J Immunol 2001, 166:4012-4019
9. Bendele AM, Chlipala ES, Scherrer J, Frazier J, Sennello G, Rich
WJ, Edwards CK III: Combination benefit of treatment with the
cytokine inhibitors interleukin-1 receptor antagonist and
PEGylated soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor type I in
animal models of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2000,
43:2648-2659.
10. Anon: TNF neutralization in MS: results of a randomized,
placebo-controlled multicenter study. The Lenercept Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group and The University of British Columbia
MS/MRI Analysis Group. Neurology 1999, 53:457-465.
11. Vey E, Zhang JH, Dayer J-M: IFN-gamma and 1,25(OH)2D3
induce on THP-1 cells distinct patterns of cell surface antigen
expression, cytokine production, and responsiveness to contact
with activated T cells. J Immunol 1992, 149:2040–2046.
12. Cook DN, Prosser DM, Forster R, Zhang J, Kuklin NA, Abbon-
danzo SJ, Niu XD, Chen SC, Manfra DJ, Wiekowski MT, Sullivan
LM, Smith SR, Greenberg HB, Narula SK, Lipp M, Lira SA: CCR6
mediates dendritic cell localization, lymphocyte homeostasis,
and immune responses in mucosal tissue. Immunity 2000,
12:495-503.
13. Blanpain C, Buser R, Power CA, Edgerton M, Buchanan C, Mack
M, Simmons G, Clapham PR, Parmentier M, Proudfoot AE: A
chimeric MIP-1alpha/RANTES protein demonstrates the use
of different regions of the RANTES protein to bind and acti-
vate its receptors. J Leukoc Biol 2001, 69:977-985.
14. Kiemer AK, Vollmar AM, Bilzer M, Gerwig T, Gerbes AL: Atrial
natriuretic peptide reduces expression of TNF-alpha mRNA
during reperfusion of the rat liver upon decreased activation
of NF-kappaB and AP-1. J Hepatol 2000, 33:236-246.
15. Brenchley PE: Angiogenesis in inflammatory joint disease: a
target for therapeutic intervention. Clin Exp Immunol 2000,
121:426-429.
Arthritis Research Vol 3 No 5 Wollheim
