307
ANA = antinuclear antibody; AS = ankylosing spondylitis; ATTRACT = Anti-TNF Trial in Rheumatoid Arthritis with Comcomitant Therapy; BASDAI =
Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index; BASFI = Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index; BASGI = Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis
Disease Global Index; BASMI = Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Metrology Index; DMARD = disease-modifying antirheumatic drug; FDA = [US] Food
and Drug Administration; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; NSAID = nons-
teroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PsA = psoriatic arthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SpA = spondyloarthritis; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
Introduction
The spondyloarthritides (SpAs) comprise five subtypes:
ankylosing spondylitis (AS), reactive arthritis, major parts
of the arthritis/spondylitis spectrum associated with psori-
asis (psoriatic arthritis; PsA) and inflammatory bowel
disease associated with arthritis/spondylitis and undiffer-
entiated SpA. AS is the most frequent subtype of SpA,
being more prevalent than the undifferentiated type, but
PsA, based on the high prevalence of psoriasis, is also
quite frequent [1,2], while reactive arthritis and inflamma-
tory bowel disease associated with arthritis/spondylitis are
relatively rare. The prevalence of the whole group of SpAs
has been recently estimated to be between 0.6 and 1.9%,
with a prevalence of AS between 0.1 and 1.1% [1–4].
Thus, taken together, the SpAs have a prevalence that is
not much different from that of rheumatoid arthritis (RA),
which has been estimated as about 0.8%.
Of the SpAs, AS is the subset that has the most severe
course. Researchers have only recently started to investi-
gate the burden of this disease, both personal and eco-
nomic, in patients who have it. It is difficult to compare RA
and AS directly, not only because there are far more
studies in RA, but for a number of other reasons — one
being that AS usually starts considerably earlier in life, in
the third decade, which means that the burden of disease
lasts longer. However, some comparisons have been
made using large data sets from databases. When age-
Therapeutic options for patients with more severe forms of spondyloarthritis (SpA) have been rather
limited in recent decades. There is accumulating evidence that anti-tumor-necrosis-factor (anti-TNF)
therapy is highly effective in SpA, especially in ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis. The major
anti-TNF-α agents currently available, infliximab (Remicade®) and etanercept (Enbrel®), are approved
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in many countries. In ankylosing spondylitis there is an
unmet medical need, since there are almost no disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
available for severely affected patients, especially those with spinal manifestations. Judging from recent
data from more than 300 patients with SpA, anti-TNF therapy seems to be even more effective in SpA
than in rheumatoid arthritis. However, it remains to be shown whether patients benefit from long-term
treatment, whether radiological progression and ankylosis can be stopped and whether long-term
biologic therapy is safe.
Keywords: ankylosing spondylitis, anti-TNF-α therapy, conventional and innovative treatment, psoriatic arthritis
Review
Therapy of ankylosing spondylitis and other spondyloarthritides:
established medical treatment, anti-TNF-αα therapy and other
novel approaches
Juergen Braun1 and Joachim Sieper2
1Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet, Herne, Germany
2Department of Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, Hospital Benjamin Franklin, Free University, Berlin, Germany
Corresponding author: Juergen Braun (e-mail: J.Braun@Rheumazentrum-Ruhrgebiet.de)
Received: 14 May 2002 Accepted: 17 June 2002 Published: 6 August 2002
Arthritis Res 2002, 4:307-321
© 2002 BioMed Central Ltd (Print ISSN 1465-9905; Online ISSN 1465-9913)
Abstract
308
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
and sex-matched AS patients with severe disease were
compared with RA patients with severe disease, the
grades of pain and disability were similar [5]. Furthermore,
absence from work and work disability is clearly greater in
patients with AS than in individuals without the disease
[6–8]. In a recent survey in the USA [9], the most preva-
lent quality-of-life concerns of patients with AS included
stiffness (90.2%), pain (83.1%), fatigue (62.4%), poor
sleep (54.1%), concerns about appearance (50.6%),
worry about the future (50.3%) and side effects of med-
ication (41%). Indeed, fatigue has been identified as a
major problem in AS — closely associated with pain and
stiffness [10]. However, many AS patients cope better
with their disease than RA patients, possibly because of
the earlier onset of AS and the somewhat better education
in AS patients. In recent decades, patients, general practi-
tioners and rheumatologists have arranged themselves a
lot with the situation in AS, because that is what happens
when there is no treatment available.
Thus, SpA in general and AS especially are more prevalent
than was previously thought and have a clear socioeco-
nomic impact on society. Against this background, it is
becoming increasingly clear that more effective therapies
are needed. Although there is a role for intensive physiother-
apy, as was recently shown [11,12], this review concen-
trates on the drug therapy of AS — the most prevalent
subtype of SpA, and the one with the most severe outcome.
Treatment of ankylosing spondylitis with
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and intra-
articular coriticosteroids are accepted, often-used treat-
ments for AS [13]. NSAIDs are taken, with varying
efficacy, by about 70–80% of AS patients. A good
response to NSAID treatment has even been suggested
as a criterion for the diagnosis of inflammatory back pain
and SpA [14]. A poor response or none to NSAIDs has
been identified as a poor prognostic sign in AS [15,16].
Patients’ responses to NSAIDs are broadly similar but nev-
ertheless often differ markedly from one person to another.
Several NSAIDs may therefore need to be tried to identify
the best one for a particular patient, and high doses are
often required in severe cases [16]. Indomethacin,
naproxen and diclofenac are among those most frequently
used in AS, but others clearly work also [17]. Finally, an
almost historical but very effective agent, phenylbutazone
(not available in the USA), may be tried by experienced
rheumatologists for patients with severe AS [15,18].
There is evidence that the new, more COX-2 selective
drugs meloxicam and celecoxib [19,20] are no less effec-
tive in treating back pain of AS patients than conventional
NSAIDs such as piroxicam and ketoprofen. The effective-
ness of these newer drugs may be associated with the
advantage of less serious gastrointestinal events.
However, as in other rheumatic diseases, NSAIDs are
valuable only to improve the symptoms of spinal inflamm-
tion, and there is no evidence that long-term antiphlogistic
treatment affects the radiologic outcome or function. It is
widely believed that relief from pain is associated with an
improved ability to exercise daily — which, over time, sup-
ports the maintenance of function and helps to prevent the
joints from stiffening in a handicapping position.
Other painkillers besides NSAIDs, including opioids [21]
and depression-directed drug regimens [22], can be used.
There seems to be only a limited potential for addiction.
Treatment of ankylosing spondylitis with
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
There are no established disease-modifying antirheumatic
drugs (DMARDs) for AS as there are for RA. The best-
investigated DMARD for the treatment of AS is sulfa-
salazine. In the two largest placebo-controlled studies,
efficacy for peripheral arthritis but no clear effects on axial
symptoms was reported [23,24]. However, mostly
patients with long-standing disease (of more than
14 years’ duration) were treated in these studies. In an
earlier placebo-controlled trial with 85 patients, 60% of
whom had peripheral arthritis [25], sulfasalazine had some
effect also on the spinal symptoms of AS patients who
had a relatively short disease duration, of less than
6 years. The peripheral arthritis of patients with AS
[23,24], as in other SpA, improved on treatment with sul-
fasalazine also in PsA [26]. There is also some evidence
that sulfasalazine prevents attacks of AS-associated
uveitis [23,27].
On the whole, sulfasalazine is effective for peripheral
arthritis in SpA, but there is no clear option for the axial
manifestations. However, in early and active disease there
is reason to try sulfasalazine, in the absence of useful
alternatives. We are performing a placebo-controlled
study in which 200 patients with early AS (duration of
symptoms less than 5 years) are treated with sulfasalazine
or placebo for 6 months. We hope the findings will allow
further, evidence-based conclusions about the efficacy of
sulfasalazine in early AS and undifferentiated SpA.
Much less information is available about the efficacy of
other DMARDs in AS. Since very early occasional reports
[28], there have been a few small, open studies using
methotrexate, which reported a potential effect in AS
[29–31]. In a retrospective study, no effect was seen [32].
Only one placebo-controlled study, with a total of 30
active AS patients who were treated with an oral dose of
10 mg methotrexate weekly, has been published in
abstract form [33]. The authors of that investigator-driven
study did not see significant benefits of this treatment,
either for AS or for peripheral arthritis. Pharmaceutical
companies have little interest in carrying out clinical trials
309
to test the efficacy of methotrexate in AS, since this drug
is already used by many rheumatologists [34] — in the
absence of proven efficacy.
There are no studies beyond case reports on the treat-
ment of AS patients with other DMARDs that are effective
in the treatment of RA, such as gold, azathioprine,
cyclosporin A or leflunomide. An intensive regimen with
intravenously administered azathioprine was recently used
with some success in single cases [35]. Similarly anecdo-
tal are the data on antimalarial agents, gold or cyclosporin
A in AS, while there is some very recent evidence that the
latter compound works in psoriatic arthritis [36].
Treatment of ankylosing spondylitis with
corticosteroids
AS has been generally neglected in past studies to iden-
tify effective agents. As an example, there has not been
even one controlled study to test the efficacy of systemic
corticosteroids in AS or other SpAs.
Although there is little doubt that both AS and RA are
inflammatory rheumatic diseases, there is a lot of evidence
that the pathogenesis differs, in the same way as the
genetic background clearly does [37]. Another fascinating
difference is that patients with AS are generally less
responsive to corticosteroid therapy. This may be explained
in the future by differences in the membrane expression of
glucocorticoid receptors in the two diseases [38,39].
Surprisingly, aside from single observations and open
studies with high doses in a few patients [40–42], only
very limited data on steroid treatment for AS and SpA are
available. Personal, uncontrolled clinical experience sug-
gests that, in contrast to what happens with RA and other
inflammatory rheumatic diseases, systemic glucocorti-
coids in general do not work very well in AS, at least when
given in low and moderate dosages. However, there are
probably subgroups of patients who respond better than
others: those with peripheral arthritis, those with anterior
uveitis, those with concurrent inflammatory bowel disease,
those with elevated concentrations of C-reactive protein,
those who are negative for human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) B27 [43,44] and females (Braun J, unpublished).
Clearly, these proposals are interesting enough to justify
further study. There is little doubt that intra-articular corti-
costeroids work quite well for short-term improvement in
peripheral arthritis, including disease of the hips [45] and
sacroiliitis [46,47]. In the sacroiliac joints, the effect of
computed-tomography-guided injections seems to last
longer than that of the blind injection technique, which is
also feasible [48].
Radiation and immunosuppressive therapy
Radiation therapy for AS has successfully relieved spinal
pain in the past, but the associated risk of malignancy
turned out to be too great [49,50]. Refractory heel pain in
SpA can still be treated by radiation [51].
A rather pure application of radium chloride Ra 224 with a
cumulative dose of 10 MBq given intravenously in 10 por-
tions over 10 weeks has recently been approved for the
treatment of severe AS in Germany, mainly on the basis of
older, successful open studies [52]. With the higher
doses of 224Ra used formerly, the risk of chronic myeloid
leukemia was slightly increased [53]. There is a need for
controlled trials [54]. Radium chloride is not available in
other countries.
More therapies targeting the immune system, including
lymphocyte-oriented apheresis [55], have been tried in
AS, with some positive effect. Stem cell transplantation
because of lymphoma in a patient who also happened to
have AS has been reported [56]; in another patient, SpA-
like symptoms developed [57].
Use of bisphosphonates for the treatment of
ankylosing spondylitis
The efficacy of bisphosphonates in metastatic bone
disease is well established [58]. There have been two
positive reports from small, open studies in the treatment
of AS with pamidronate. Both spinal and peripheral
disease, including enthesitis, were successfully treated by
this intravenously applied bisphosphonate [59,60], which
is active against osteoclasts and is occasionally used for
the treatment of osteoporosis. A gain in bone mass could
be a desirabe side effect in AS, in which osteoporosis is
associated with an increased risk of fractures [61]. Recent
results from a Canadian controlled study, in which a 60-
mg dose of pamidronate was compared with a 10-mg
dose, suggest that the larger dose is significantly more
effective [62]. In this study, in 84 patients with AS (67
male and 17 females; mean age 40 years; mean disease
duration 14 years), significantly greater reductions at 6
months were noted in the 60-mg than in the 10-mg group,
according to scores on the BASDAI (Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Disease Activity Index) (–2.2 ± 2 vs
–0.9 ± 1.7; P = 0.002), the BASFI (Bath AS Functional
Index) (1.7 ± 2.1 vs –0.2 ± 1.6; P < 0.001), the BASGI
(Bath AS Global Index) and the BASMI (Bath AS Metrol-
ogy Index). Significantly more patients in the 60-mg group
than in the 10-mg group achieved a >25% reduction in
their BASDAI score (63.4% vs 30.2%, respectively;
P = 0.004), while the reductions in the erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate and in C-reactive protein were not signifi-
cantly different in the two groups. Adverse events were
frequent, consisting mainly of transient arthralgias or myal-
gias after the first intravenous infusion (in 68.3% and
46.5% of patients in the 60- and 10-mg groups, respec-
tively). Of clinical significance is the sometimes rather
acute reaction, with pain, fever and leukopenia, in relatively
young AS patients, which is rarely observed in older
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
310
women with osteoporosis. This impressive reaction may
be very suggestive to patients, who feel that there is really
something going on. Our own experience with 12 patients
suggests that the overall efficacy is not enormous, but
there are individual patients who seem to benefit in terms
of reduced pain and disease activity. A positive effect on
reduced bone mineral density can also be expected.
Thalidomide for severe ankylosing
spondylitis
Thalidomide (α-N-phthalimidoglutarimide) is a synthetic
derivative of glutamic acid, which was put on the market
as a sedative in 1956. After removal from the market
because it caused congenital malformations, it has now
undergone a revival, and it was approved for the treatment
of erythema nodosum leprosum by the Food and Drug
Administration in the USA in 1998. Thalidomide is increas-
ingly used for the treatment of malignancies [63], on the
basis of its potential for blocking tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) [see below; 64]. Thalidomide has now been tried in
AS; in an open study with 12 patients in France [65], 5 of
12 patients stopped taking thalidomide before 6 months
because of side effects. The most consistent efficacy was
on the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and/or C-reative
protein. In a Chinese open study with 30 male patients
affected with severe, active, refractory AS [66], 80% of
the 26 patients who completed the study had a positive
clinical response. Decreased expression of several proin-
flammatory genes, including TNF-α and IL-1, in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from AS patients after thalido-
mide treatment was reported [67]. Thalidomide has also
been effective in refractory Crohn’s disease [68], whereas
in RA, the response to similar doses was rather poor [69].
The toxicity and the side effect of fatigue might prevent
extensive use of thalidomide.
TNF-αα blockade in the treatment of
ankylosing spondylitis
Today there are two main biologic agents targeting TNF-α:
the chimeric monoclonal IgG1 antibody infliximab (Remi-
cade) with human constant and murine variable regions
and the recombinant 75-kD TNF receptor IgG1 fusion
protein etanercept (Enbrel). Both capture soluble TNF-α in
the plasma; etanercept also captures TNF-β. Infliximab also
binds to cell-membrane-bound TNF-α, possibly leading to
cell lysis. These differences may account for the somewhat
different clinical efficacies of the two compounds. The elim-
ination half-life is 210 hours for infliximab and 115 hours for
etanercept. The manufacturers estimate that the numbers
of patients treated with these compounds worldwide are,
respectively 200,000 and 150,000.
Both agents clearly work in RA [70–75]. Infliximab is
approved for use in RA in combination with methotrexate,
because fewer antibodies against infliximab and somewhat
fewer adverse events were found with this regimen [71],
while etanercept is approved as a monotherapy for the
disease. Methotrexate has not been given additionally in AS
studies because, as discussed above, its efficacy in this
disease is doubtful and many patients need to be treated to
prevent rather mild side effects of infliximab therapy.
The sacroiliac joint and the entheses are the most charac-
teristic, and almost pathognomonic, sites involved in SpA
[76]. Inflammation at the interface of cartilage and bone
has been convincingly shown by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) [77,78] and immunohistological investiga-
tions on biopsies [79,80]. Especially in early cases of AS,
dense mononuclear infiltrates that invade the cartilage can
be seen [81,82]. These infiltrates contain T cells and
macrophages, which secrete TNF-α [83]. In the light of
the early, successful trials of infliximab in RA [70–72], the
decision to investigate the efficacy of the TNF-α-blocking
monoclonal antibody infliximab in patients with AS was the
logical next step, although it must be stressed that RA is
pathogenetically clearly different from AS. Further support
for a possible efficacy of infliximab in AS came from two
other sets of data. Firstly, AS and the whole group of
SpAs are associated with chronic inflammatory bowel dis-
eases [84]: patients with inflammatory bowel disease may
develop AS and more than 50% of patients with primary
AS have histological gut lesions similar to Crohn’s disease
[85]. Furthermore, TNF-α is strongly expressed in the
inflamed gut of patients with inflammatory bowel disease,
and anti-TNF-α therapy with infliximab is effective and
approved for Crohn’s disease [86]. It might be similarly
effective in ulcerative colitis, but further study is needed
[87,88]. Etanercept seems not to be effective in Crohn’s
disease, at least in the usual dosage [89] — a finding that
may offer clues to the pathogenesis of the disease. Impor-
tantly, in patients with Crohn’s disease treated with inflix-
imab, joint symptoms improved [90]. Another body of data
supporting the hypothesis that infliximab’s efficacy might
extend to AS is the observation that anti-TNF-α therapy is
effective in other SpA-related inflammatory rheumatic dis-
eases such as psoriatic arthritis [91,92] and severe psori-
atic skin lesions [93,94]. As already mentioned, other
inflammatory rheumatic diseases such as RA respond
favorably to anti-TNF strategies [70–75]. In the case of
infliximab, it was even found that the radiographic progres-
sion of the disease could be stopped [75].
Effect of anti-TNF therapy in
spondyloarthritides
In the open pilot study performed in Berlin, infliximab ame-
liorated the disease activity in patients with severe AS with
a mean disease duration of 5 years [95], as measured by
the BASDAI [96]. Eleven patients received three infusions
of infliximab (5 mg/kg body weight at weeks 0, 2 and 6).
Significant efficacy was already noted on the first day of
therapy. Spinal pain, fatigue and morning stiffness in par-
ticular were ameliorated, and so was peripheral arthritis.
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
311
Nine of ten patients showed an improvement of >50% on
the BASDAI; the median improvement of the BASDAI
after 4 weeks was 70%. Importantly, quality of life, as mea-
sured by the ‘short form’ 36-item instrument (including only
12 questions instead of 36), significantly improved after
4 weeks. In comparison with an age- and sex-matched
normal, healthy German population, the AS patients
studied had clearly impaired initial assessments; in particu-
lar, their level of physical functioning was very low. This
level was significantly increased by anti-TNF-α therapy
within 4 weeks. One patient has remained in remission for
at least 18 months after only the initial three infusions of
infliximab. As major side effects, three patients developed
allergic reactions and could not receive further treatment.
The patients in this study were followed up for another
9 months. The next infusion of infliximab was not given
until after a relapse, which was defined as at least 80% of
the initial activity [97]. The first symptoms came back after
a mean of 6 weeks and a relapse occurred after a mean of
12 weeks. These patients were treated three more times.
Although all responded again, they did less well than at
the start of the study, probably because there was no
initial saturation phase in the repeat treatments.
In the meantime, there have now been several open-label
studies on infliximab in AS [98–102]. In a Belgian study,
21 SpA patients, including 11 with AS, were treated with
infliximab with a dose regimen similar to that in the study
just discussed, but the patients had a longer disease dura-
tion (15 years) and the intervals between the infusions
were longer (14 weeks). The spinal and peripheral symp-
toms of all these patients with SpA improved significantly
[98]. There have been other studies — two in Canada, one
with 24 [99] and one with 21 AS patients [100]; one in
France, with 50 AS patients [101]; and one in Spain, with
42 SpA patients [102] — in which treatment with infliximab
was successful, all with a similarly good response in about
80% of the patients. In one Canadian study [99] and the
Spanish study [102], patients with disease of long duration
and with advanced radiographic disease/ankylosis appar-
ently benefited less from the therapy. In the other Canadian
study [100], a relatively small dose, 3 mg/kg every
8 weeks, was sufficient to cause significant improvement.
In a French study, the bone mineral density of 31 patients
(26 men and 5 women, mean age 40 years, mean disease
duration 18 years) increased by 3.3 ± 5.5% at the lumbar
spine (P < 0.002), and 1.9 ± 3.1% at the femoral neck
(P < 0.008) after 6 months of infliximab therapy [103].
A recent randomized, double-blind, controlled trial in
Germany has provided class-B evidence (according to
‘evidence based medicine’ criteria) that infliximab is effec-
tive against AS [104]. This placebo-controlled, multicenter
study conducted over 12 weeks included 70 AS patients
with a BASDAI >4 and spinal pain on a visual analogue
scale >4. A highly significant effect of infliximab treatment
(5 mg/kg body weight given at weeks 0, 2 and 6), with the
primary outcome parameter of a 50% improvement of
disease activity (BASDAI), was achieved in the treated
group in comparison with the placebo group. Again, other
parameters such as BASFI, BASMI and the short-form 36-
item instrument showed a similar clear-cut improvement.
There is some evidence that patients with elevated con-
centrations of C-reactive protein benefited more than
those with low or normal levels [104]. Preliminary results
from imaging follow-ups with spinal MRI assessing both
acute and chronic spinal changes suggest a significant
effect of infliximab on disease progression assessed on
this basis. Taken together, these data strongly suggest a
major breakthrough in the short-term therapy of severe AS.
After the placebo phase of the study, these 70 patients
are now being treated with infliximab at 5 mg/kg body
weight every 6 weeks for 2 years. After 48 weeks (when
this article was written), about 75% of the patients are still
being treated. So far, there is no indication of loss of effi-
cacy. When complete, the study should provide more
information about the long-term efficacy and safety of
infliximab treatment in AS.
Another controlled study, from Belgium, has been recently
published [105]. Both primary end points of this study,
improvement in the patient’s and the physician’s global
assessment of disease activity on a visual analogue scale,
improved significantly in the infliximab group in compari-
son with baseline values, while there was no improvement
in the placebo group. Significant efficacy was noted as
early as week 2 and was sustained up to week 12, until
the end of this study.
Regarding the optimal dosage of infliximab in SpA, only
limited data are available. In a small study, we and our col-
leagues found that a dose of 5 mg/kg body weight was
better than 3 mg/kg in patients with undifferentiated SpA
[106]. However, the lower dosage of infliximab seemed to
work also. Some patients may not need doses of infliximab
higher than 3 mg/kg.
Treatment of AS with the soluble TNF-α-receptor etaner-
cept has not been studied as extensively in SpA, but pre-
liminary data from single cases [107], an open study [108]
and now a double-blind study [109] also indicate a clearly
favorable effect. This is in accord with our own preliminary
experience with this therapy in 30 patients. In a study by
Davis and coworkers in California [109], 40 patients were
given either etanercept (25 mg given subcutaneously
twice daily) or a placebo. A major difference from our own
studies was that patients taking DMARDs (40%) or
steroids (25%) were allowed to continue taking them
during the study. Furthermore, different outcome parame-
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
312
ters were used. After 6 months, main outcome parameters
such as morning stiffness and nocturnal spinal pain had
improved significantly in patients given etanercept but not
in those given the placebo. The disease activity combina-
tion score used in that study had also improved signifi-
cantly by 6 months but not by 6 weeks. Further studies
with this drug are in progress or being planned.
There are various targets of SpA therapy (Table 1). In AS,
the main targets are spondylitis, spondylodiscitis and
peripheral arthritis. Other targets that are sometimes diffi-
cult to treat are enthesitis [76] and uveitis [110]. As has
already been mentioned, there are targets in the skin (pso-
riasis) and the gut (colitis associated with inflammatory
bowel disease), which have been shown to respond well
to anti-TNF therapy.
There is evidence from the Berlin randomized, controlled
trial and from case reports that anti-TNF therapy is benefi-
cial in patients who are refractory to standard local and
systemic treatment of enthesitis with NSAIDs, DMARDs
and steroids, even in longstanding cases [104,111,112].
Concerning anterior uveitis associated with SpA, there is
some recent evidence from controlled trials that sul-
fasalazine does prevent attacks [23,27], while the data for
methotrexate are less clear. In a recent retrospective study
[113], 160 patients with chronic uveitis of noninfectious
origin were treated with methotrexate. Control of inflam-
mation was achieved in 76% of patients and steroids were
spared in 56%. Visual acuity was maintained or improved
in 90% of patients.
The response of patients with all kinds of inflammatory eye
disease to anti-TNF has been recently looked at in a
limited number of patients [114]. The picture is not clear:
both improvement and worsening of inflammatory eye
disease upon treatment with infliximab have been found. In
one study [115], 16 patients (4 males and 12 females,
aged 7 to 78 years) who received etanercept (n = 14) or
infliximab (n = 2) for either inflammatory eye disease or
associated joint disease were studied retrospectively.
Uveitis (n = 9) and scleritis (n = 7) occurred in patients
with RA (n = 11), AS (n = 1), and psoriatic SpA (n = 1),
and 3 patients had uveitis without systemic signs of
disease. Although all 12 patients with active articular
inflammation experienced improvement in joint disease,
only 6 of 16 with ocular inflammation (38%) experienced
improvement in their eye disease. Five patients even devel-
oped inflammatory eye disease for the first time while
taking a TNF inhibitor.
In a prospective study [116] with 10 children suffering
chronic active uveitis, 7 had uveitis associated with pau-
ciarticular juvenile RA and 5 were positive for antinuclear
antibodies (ANAs). All patients for whom previous therapy
with topical steroids and methotrexate and/or cyclo-
sporine had failed were treated with etanercept at
0.4 mg/kg body weight twice weekly for the first 3 months,
and then, if their eyes did not improve, with 25 mg twice
weekly (mean 1.1 mg/kg body weight) for at least 3 addi-
tional months. Within 3 months, 10 of 16 affected eyes
(63%) showed a rapid decrease in cell density in the ante-
rior chamber (P = 0.017), including remission in 4 eyes.
Uveitis exacerbated during etanercept therapy in only
1 child (7%). After a dosage increase to an average of
1.1 mg/kg after 3 months in seven children, no further
improvement was noted. It is well known that the natural
course of uveitis in HLA B27+ versus ANA+ patients is
rather different. The authors concluded that treatment of
uveitis with etanercept in systemic and/or topical form
(which has not been studied so far) needs further study.
In a recent report from Austria, El-Shabrawi and Hermann
[117] reported a beneficial effect of infliximab with HLA-
B27-associated uveitis in three patients. The same
authors have recently published in abstract form their
experience with this treatment over one year [118]. Seven
consecutive patients with an acute onset of an HLA-B27-
associated acute anterior uveitis were treated with a
single dose of infliximab (10 mg/kg given intravenously).
One patient received a second infusion 3 weeks after the
first dosage, because of a relapse. The median duration
(±SD) of uveitis was 8 ± 12 days. All the patients
responded to infliximab with a rapid improvement of clini-
cal symptoms and a decrease of cells in the anterior
chamber of the eye. Only one patient did not develop total
resolution of the uveitis. On follow-up, three of the seven
patients were found to have experienced a relapse after a
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
Table 1
Spondyloarthritides — main targets for treatment
Back pain due to:
sacroiliitis
spondylitis or spondylodiskitis
enthesitis
ankylosis
Joint pain due to:
enthesitis
peripheral arthritis
Organ involvement due to:
anterior uveitis
psoriasis
colitis
involvement of internal organs (heart, lung, amyloidosis)
313
median of 120 days. These authors concluded that inflix-
imab was very effective for treating acute anterior uveitis.
Most recently, treatment with infliximab has also been
reported beneficial in patients with uveitis associated with
Crohn’s disease [119].Thus, the results from these uncon-
trolled observations are basically positive. In addition, our
own experience with infliximab in a randomized trial with
AS patients [104] is also suggestive of a beneficial effect,
since three patients out of 35 in the placebo group, versus
one out of 35 in the infliximab group, developed uveitis
over 3 months.
However, the natural course of anterior uveitis in SpA is
rather benign in the vast majority of patients. Thus, anti-
TNF therapy should only be considered in severe, refrac-
tory cases. Controlled studies in homogeneous patient
populations and a systematic comparison with local and
systemic steroid therapy is clearly needed.
Side effects of anti-TNF therapy
Although new, very effective therapies are arising, the great-
est concern is of course about undesired and potentially
severe side effects. There clearly are side effects to be con-
sidered in patients treated with anti-TNF agents. Information
about side effects can come from various sources: directly
from the clinical studies performed, from publication of the
cases reported to the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) or other agencies, from the data released by the drug
companies, from case or group reports of cases and from
personal experience. Every source has advantages but also
shortcomings: clinical studies are controlled and random-
ized but special ‘ideal’ patients are selected for a limited
amount of time; reports to the FDA are relevant because
they reflect how the product is used in clinical practice but
they are uncontrolled and they may lead to both under-
estimation and overestimation of the real risk due to the
Weber effect and reporting bias; data from the drug compa-
nies should be most complete but the reports are also
difficult to control and the reports are potentially influenced
by the financial interest of the companies; case reports and
single experiences may not be truly indicative, but they may,
nevertheless, induce strong feelings because of personal
experience. Thus, we have to select an optimal mixture from
these different sources to arrive at valid statements; this is
difficult. At the moment, final statements are still difficult
because of the paucity of data available.
After the first years of anti-TNF therapy, the following
seven types of adverse events seem to be of special
concern for patients so treated:
1. infections, including sepsis and tuberculosis
2. malignancies, such as lymphoma
3. other hematologic disorders, such as anemia and
pancytopenia
4. demyelinating disorders/neuropathy
5. worsening of congestive heart failure
6. occurrence of autoantibodies and autoimmunity
7. infusion/injection and hypersensitivity reactions.
From the postmarketing data collected by the FDA on the
basis of spontaneous reporting — which are, according to
agency officials, known to be of limited reliability — about
18,400 adverse events are known for etanercept and
2300 for infliximab, including 290 and 201 deaths,
respectively. These figures do not indicate that the mor-
tality is increased and there is also no reason to think that
there is a difference in mortality between the two com-
pounds. These data are taken from the FDA website
(www.fda.gov), where they are regularly updated. The
estimated overall frequency of treatments worldwide is
about 200,000 for infliximab and 150,000 for etanercept.
The main reason for the different numbers of adverse
events reported is that there was a telephone system
installed for etanercept, which facilitates reporting, includ-
ing by the patients themselves. Therefore, it is likely that
the total number of adverse events for etanercept is an
overestimate.
Although, on the basis of their different pharmacologic
profiles (see above), it is generally conceivable that inflix-
imab and etanercept have a distinct potential to cause
adverse events, most statements made in this article
rather relate to a class effect of these biologic agents,
because this best reflects current knowledge. There may
be a few exceptions, one of which may be with regard to
tuberculosis (see below).
Infections
The outstanding and most frequent problem with both bio-
logic agents are infections, accounting for 28% of all
reports regarding etanercept and 39% for infliximab. The
numbers of infections and deaths on treatment with the
two agents were 5143 and 291, respectively, with etaner-
cept and 901 and 228 with infliximab (double reporting
possible; see above).
As recently reported, infection with mycobacteria seems
to be associated with anti-TNF therapy, as it now stands,
and mainly for infliximab [120]. By the end of November
2001, 117 cases had been reported to the agency [121].
The risk of developing tuberculosis in the first year of inflix-
imab therapy has been estimated at 0.03% in the USA
and 0.2% outside the USA. However, there have also
been 18 cases of tuberculosis, including 5 deaths (up to
30 June 2001) associated with etanercept therapy, and
one case of osteoarticular tuberculosis in a child has been
published [122]. It is not clear at present whether the
patients treated with etanercept are demographically com-
parable with those who received infliximab. Demographic
factors could explain differences — especially if it becomes
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
314
clear that patients treated with etanercept have lived in a
safer environment. In the Berlin [104] and the Belgian ran-
domized AS/SpA trials [105] with infliximab, disseminated
tuberculosis occurred in one case at each site.
What is the reason for this increased frequency of tuber-
culosis? Since most of the infections of patients treated
with inflixmab occurred during months 2–5 after the initia-
tion of therapy, reactivation of latent tuberculosis seems to
be the most likely explanation. However, both activation of
latent tuberculosis and also new infections in the case of
challenge with virulent microbes may occur [121]. Reacti-
vation of tuberculosis has also been described in vacci-
nated patients [123].
TNF-deficient mice had similar survival rates in a conven-
tional environment but were clearly more susceptible to a
challenge with mycobacteria than normal controls [124].
Indeed, TNF seems to affect several aspects of the
immune response to mycobacteria, including IFN-γ-inde-
pendent but TNF-dependent nonspecific mycobactericidal
effects of macrophages [121]. However, the immunologic
mechanisms that explain the link between TNF blockade
and the failure of granuloma to contain bacilli are poorly
understood. The T cells in TNF-deficient mice infected
with tuberculosis seem to function normally [125]. All
things considered, TNF-α has important, clinically relevant
immune functions that need to be effective for clearance
of certain microbes including mycobacteria. Whether a
reactivated infection is due more to a heavy bacterial load
or to a genetically determined functional variant or to alter-
ation of the immune system needs to be determined. For
example, there are at least partially genetically determined
differences in the capacity to secrete cytokines such as
TNF-α between individuals and between patients and con-
trols [126; see below].
Other types of infection have been reported in patients
treated with both anti-TNF agents. These include rare but
fatal cases of severe pneumonia [127,128], meningitis
[129], sepsis [130], histoplasmosis [121,131] and
aspergillosis [132]. Furthermore, infections with listeria,
Pneumocystis carinii, coccidioides, and candida [131]
were listed in the FDA database.
In the ATTRACT trial (Anti-TNF Trial in Rheumatoid Arthri-
tis with Comcomitant Therapy), there were seven deaths
of patients treated with infliximab, versus four of control
RA patients treated with methotrexate only [75]. The
deaths were mostly related to the cardiovascular system
or were due to advanced age. However, several patients
died from severe infections, including sepsis and tubercu-
losis (see below).
According to the Centocor (manufacturer of infliximab)
database containing data from all studies performed
(n = 1372), there were 22% serious adverse events (SAE)
on infliximab, versus 16% on placebo. In the totality of
studies with infliximab, 63% of the patients had at least
one infection, versus 51% of controls (n = 192). Treated
infections were identified in 36% of the patients, versus
26% of the controls. Serious infections, however,
occurred in 6.3% of infliximab-treated patients, versus
6.8% of patients on the placebo. The most frequent local-
ization was the respiratory tract. Serious pneumonia was
reported in 1% of the infliximab-treated patients, versus
0.5% among controls.
In recent, open-label, multicenter trials with infliximab,
8.5% of 553 RA patients in the USA had serious adverse
events [133], and in a German trial, 25 of 263 RA patients
(9.5%) withdrew because of side effects and 6 had a
serious infection [134].
In a recent retrospective review of the medical records of
180 patients [135], most with RA (n = 144) started on
etanercept, 81% of these patients remained on therapy for
>6 months and 43% for >12 months. Corticosteroid
dose reduction was possible in 56%, and tapering of the
methotraxate dose was possible in 51%. Forty-three
patients (23.9%) discontinued etanercept. Serious
adverse events occurred in 5 patients (2.9%), mostly
infections including psoas abscess secondary to infection
with Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, septic wrist,
bacteremia, and septic total hip replacement. There were
two deaths associated with infection.
The FDA database also contained many reports of infec-
tions without an identified organism, with 28 deaths during
or after etanercept administration and 11 with infliximab.
Fatal infections may occur with both agents. Tuberculosis
has been more frequently reported with infliximab.
However, as things stand now, the overall quality and
quantity of the data are not good enough to make consis-
tent risk/benefit calculations. Before treatment, patients
should be informed about their immunocompromised
status, especially in the first months of therapy, and edu-
cated to take signs of infection seriously and present to
the responsible physician as soon as possible. Thus, all
patients who are treated with anti-TNF therapy should be
carefully screened for infections and treated with anti-
biotics if there is a suspicion of bacterial infection. Caution
is needed before starting anti-TNF therapy, since latent
infections such as subclinical pulmonary tuberculosis, or
of abdominal tuberculosis in patients with Crohn’s
disease, may be overlooked [136]. If there is a suspicion
or a high risk of exposure, patients should not be treated
with anti-TNF agents. Pre-emptive treatment with isoniaziol
for the first 6–9 months of therapy should be given in
patients who need and have agreed to start infliximab
treatment and who are at risk of latent tuberculosis, being
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
315
positive for purified protein derivative or who have x-ray
evidence of exposure to mycobacteria or a recent history
of confirmed tuberculosis contact.
Malignancy/hematologic disorders
The FDA database showed 26 cases of lymphoma
reported with etanercept and 10 with infliximab. In a
long-term follow-up of patients treated with etanercept,
no increased incidence of malignancies was observed
[137]. A similar finding has been reported for infliximab
[138]. Rapid development of squamous cell carcinoma
has been reported in a few patients treated with etaner-
cept [139].
Looking at all studies with infliximab, 17 (1.2%) of the
patients who had received at least one dose of infliximab
had a reported malignancy (including lymphomas),
whereas in the control group only 1 case was noted
(0.5%). Since both patients with RA and with Crohn’s
disease have an increased risk of malignancy, particularly
lymphoma, no final conclusions can be drawn but, also
due to the limited time frame of follow-up so far, the issue
has not been completely clarified yet.
There have been seven cases of aplastic anemia in
patients taking etanercept, five of whom died. Two cases
of pancytopenia during treatment with infliximab have
been reported.
A very small increase in the incidence of malignancies in
patients treated with anti-TNF agents cannot be definitely
excluded at present, but no increased frequencies have
been observed to date. Etanercept may be associated
with the onset of aplastic anemia, which, however, is a
rare event.
Blood counts should be taken regularly in patients who
are receiving anti-TNF therapy.
Neurologic disorders
The FDA database contained 16 reports of demyelinating
disease in patients receiving TNF antagonists, in 15 cases
associated with etanercept. This has been recently
reported [140]. Earlier, two patients with multiple sclerosis
were reported to have developed multiple sclerosis
lesions while being treated with infliximab [141]. The basis
for the discrepancy between the earlier and the more
recent report is unclear [142]. Furthermore, two cases of
optic neuritis and one of Guillain-Barré syndrome in a
patient with RA have been reported. At present, it is
unclear whether there is an increased risk of such disor-
ders associated with anti-TNF therapy.
Etanercept may be associated with the onset of demyeli-
nating disease, which, however, is a rare event. Patients
should be regularly asked for neurologic symptoms.
Heart failure
Patients with congestive heart failure (a score >II on the
New York Heart Association scale) should not be treated
with either etanercept or infliximab, because, after early
encouraging results, clinical studies with both agents indi-
cated that more patients died or were hospitalized on anti-
TNF therapy than on a placebo; this difference appeared
to be pronounced in patients who received a high dose of
infliximab (10 mg/kg). Not all these studies have been
published yet.
Patients with heart failure, especially severe heart failure,
may be at risk of worsening of their disease upon anti-TNF
therapy. This needs to be carefully considered when thera-
peutic decisions are made.
Miscellaneous disorders
Development of diabetes mellitus has been reported in a
young patient on etanercept [143]. Single cases of vas-
culitis have been described in patients treated with either
agent [144,145].
Autoantibodies
Anti-TNF therapy is associated with the formation of
certain autoantibodies. Looking at all those patients
treated with infliximab from whom samples from before
and after therapy were available (n = 1058), 55% became
ANA+ at some time point, while 19% became positive on
placebo. Of the patients positive for ANA at baseline,
36% became ANA-negative during the study. Autoimmune
diseases such as drug-induced systemic lupus erythe-
matosus or lupus-like syndrome (a term that is not very
sharply defined) occurred very rarely — in 0.4% of all
patients studied. Development of ANA or DNA antibodies
was not predictive of the development of such symptoms.
In an overview of data from all studies concluded with
infliximab up to June 2001, 4.3% out of 1897 patients and
2% out of 192 controls discontinued treatment; 30 (16%)
developed anti-dsDNA and 4 (0.2%) out of the patient
group developed clinical signs of lupus-like syndrome
(Centocor, data on file).
Treatment with etanercept was associated with the devel-
opment of drug-induced lupus in one patient [146]. The
induction of autoantibodies in patients treated with etaner-
cept has been described: ANA developed in 11% (versus
5% on placebo) and anti-DNA antibodies occurred in
15% (versus 4% on placebo). Furthermore, the develop-
ment of non-neutralizing antibodies to etanercept has
been described in 5% of patients.
Patients have been tested for the development of antibod-
ies to infliximab (anti-chimeric antibodies = HACA). In the
ATTRACT trial, the overall incidence of these antibodies
was 8.5%. Although there is a small trend towards a
higher incidence of infusion reactions in patients who are
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
316
positive for these antibodies, there is no indication to add
methotrexate to infliximab to prevent infusion reactions.
Infusion/injection site reactions
The most frequent adverse event with etanercept is a local
reaction at the injection site; such reactions are generally
not a serious problem.
Infusion reactions due to infliximab were defined as any
reaction during or 1 hour after the end of the infusion.
During the studies with infliximab, infusion reactions
occurred in 20% of all patients treated and in about 5% of
all infusions given. The most common symptoms were
headache (3.8%), dizziness (2.8%) and nausea (3.1%).
Serious infusion reactions were rare (0.9%). Discontinua-
tion of treatment due to infusion reactions occurred in
2.6% of the patients (Centocor, data on file).
Delayed adverse reactions 3–12 days after the infusion
were reported in one study of patients with Crohn’s
disease. On the whole, delayed hypersensitivity reactions
were infrequent.
It is not clear whether immunosuppressants such as
methotrexate or azathioprine should or can be succesfully
added to infliximab to prevent antibody formation and aller-
gic side effects.
Influence of anti-TNF therapy on biologic
parameters
As already mentioned, the pathogenesis of RA differs from
that of AS. In contrast to patients with RA [147,148],
those with SpA seem to have an impaired Th1/Th2
balance [149]), with decreased T-cell production of IFN-γ
and IL-2 and increased IL-10 synthesis [150–158], in
both the peripheral blood compartment and synovial mem-
brane. Elevated IL-10 in the synovium of patients with pso-
riasis [150] and in synovial fluid mononuclear cells of
patients with reactive arthritis [149] has also been
reported. Also, IL-10 plasma levels in SpA have been
reported to correlate with disease activity [151]. In
patients with severe reactive arthritis [152], in HLA B27+
AS patients and in HLA B27+ healthy persons, a lower
fraction of TNF-α-producing peripheral blood T cells than
in HLA B27– healthy individuals was found [153]. Taken
all together, these data suggest that an impaired Th1
capacity contributes to the pathogenesis of SpA and also
that gut mucosal lymphocytes are actively involved in the
disease.
The effect of infliximab therapy on the CD3 cytokine profile
was analysed in two pilot studies using FACS (fluores-
cence-activated cell sorting) technology. One study, in a
Ghent cohort, documented that treatment with three infu-
sions of infliximab in patients with SpA resulted in a rapid
and sustained increase of Th1 cytokines (IFN-γ and IL-2),
to levels comparable with those in healthy controls [154].
A reduction of IL-10+ T cells was observed in those
patients with high baseline values. However, this effect
was only observed in the first 4 weeks. No effect was seen
on IL-4 production. In a Berlin cohort, an increase in the
percentage of CD3+ TNF-α or IFN-γ producers increased
significantly at week 2 [155]. Together, these data support
the view that TNF-α blockade essentially reverses the
state of anergy of Th1 cells. However, this seems to be
different when the patients are being followed up for
longer periods. After 6–12 weeks, the TNF-α secretion
capacity goes down again — with some correlation to the
disease activity [156]. The specific immune response to
the putative autoantigen G1 of the proteoglycan aggrecan
is suppressed [157].
In the Ghent patient cohort [158], synovial biopsies were
obtained from eight patients with active knee synovitis at
baseline (three with AS, one with undifferentiated SpA
and four with PsA). Follow-up biopsies were obtained at
weeks 2 and 12. In all eight patients, there was a clear
clinical improvement after anti-TNF-α therapy. Histological
analysis showed that the thickness of the synovial layer
tended to decrease, with a significant reduction of CD55+
synoviocytes at week 12. Vascularity in the sublining layer
was reduced, with decreased endothelial expression of
VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule 1). The
numbers of neutrophils and of CD68+ and CD163+
macrophages decreased, although with no significant
changes in the overall degree of inflammatory infiltration,
since the numbers of CD20+ lymphocytes and plasma
cells increased. There is no explanation for the latter
finding to date. Taken together, there are several indica-
tions that the positive clinical effects of anti-TNF therapy
can also be reproduced by different immunological tech-
niques.
The definition of new outcome parameters
for ankylosing spondylitis studies
A major step forward in the investigation of effective drugs
for the treatment of AS was the definition of outcome
parameters for such studies by the Assessments in Anky-
losing Spondylitis (ASAS) Working Group [159]. Further-
more, the group’s definition of the 20% response criteria
and criteria for partial remission in AS are based on the
four domains of pain, disease activity, function and patient’s
global assessment [160]. In our recent study, we have
extended the response criteria by setting it at 50%, by
analogy to the response level used for RA [104]. This
seems to be a relevant and clinically highly meaningful
approach to document efficacy for expensive treatment
strategies.
Clearly, the different clinical features of AS and for the
whole group of SpA need to be differentially assessed. An
overview is given in Table 1.
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
317
Another important cut-off that needs to be set is the defini-
tion of ‘refractory’ or ‘persistently active’ AS. Possible cri-
teria are listed in Table 2.
There is also a need for a better definition and classifica-
tion of the status of AS patients. Because AS starts early
and lasts long, and because the course and outcome of
the disease differ greatly from patient to patient, the stage
of the disease should be more clearly defined. There is a
proposal for that in progress, which includes not only
major clinical symptoms such as peripheral arthritis, enthe-
sitis, uveitis, psoriasis and colitis, but also the degree of
radiographic damage.
Recent studies [161] have shown that radiographic pro-
gression in AS is slow — at least, if the patients examined
are not preselected for severe disease activity. Indeed, it
seems that no less than 2 years is needed to be able to
detect differences using the BASRI [162] or the SASSS
(Stoke Ankylosing Spondylitis Spine Score) [163] with a
reasonable number of patients. However, there is increas-
ing evidence that acute sacroiliitis, spondylitis and
spondylodiscitis can be visualized by MRI using either
contrast or STIR (short tau inversion recovery) techniques
[78]. In contrast to conventional imaging by x-rays, in
which mainly the result of inflammation, bony changes and
ankylosis but also erosions can be seen, acute spinal
inflammation can be visualized by MRI. In Berlin, an
improvement in detection of spinal inflammation MRI has
already been shown in our open study [95]. Similar results
were obtained in Leeds [107]. The MRIs of the multicenter
study [104] are just being evaluated. Preliminary results
suggest that regression of spinal inflammation occurs after
3 months in patients treated with infliximab (about 40%
improvement) but also with placebo.
Thus, the availability of tools (both clinical and imaging) for
the conduction of studies and the finding that active AS
can be effectively treated, as shown for infliximab, will
hopefully trigger research to find more effective treatments
for AS.
There is really something going on in the field of spondy-
loarthritides. Anti-TNF therapy seems to be a powerful tool
for the treatment of AS and other SpAs. As discussed
above, however, there are open questions that need to be
answered in the coming years (see Table 3). The impor-
tant basic role for NSAIDs and physical therapy remains
unchanged.
References
1. Braun J, Bollow M, Remlinger G, Eggens U, Rudwaleit M, Distler
A, Sieper J: Prevalence of spondylarthropathies in HLA B27-
positive and -negative blood donors. Arthritis Rheum 1998, 41:
58-67.
2. Brandt J, Bollow M, Haberle J, Rudwaleit M, Eggens U, Distler A,
Hamm B, Sieper J: Studying patients with inflammatory back
pain and arthritis of the lower limbs clinically and by magnetic
resonance imaging: many, but not all patients with sacroiliitis
have spondyloarthropathy. Rheumatology (Oxford) 1999, 38:
831-836.
3. Gran JT, Husby G, Hordvik M: Prevalence of ankylosing
spondylitis in males and females in a young middle-aged
population of Tromso, northern Norway. Ann Rheum Dis 1985,
44:359-367.
4. Saraux A, Guedes C, Allain J, Devauchelle V, Valls I, Lamour A,
Guillemin F, Youinou P, Le Goff P: Prevalence of rheumatoid
arthritis and spondyloarthropathy in Brittany, France. Société
de Rhumatologie de l’Ouest. J Rheumatol 1999, 26:2622-
2627.
5. Zink A, Braun J, Listing J, Wollenhaupt J: Disability and handicap
in rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis—results
from the German rheumatological database. German Collab-
orative Arthritis Centers. J Rheumatol 2000, 27:613-622.
6. Zink A, Listing J, Klindworth C, Zeidler H: The national database
of the German Collaborative Arthritis Centres: I. Structure,
aims, and patients. Ann Rheum Dis 2001, 60:199-206.
7. Boonen A, Chorus A, Miedema H, van Der Heijde D, van Der
Tempel H, van der Linden S: Employment, work disability, and
work days lost in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a cross
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
Table 2
Possible criteria for the definition of refractory ankylosing
spondylitis
Diagnosis of AS according to 1984 modified New York criteria
Persistent disease activity for at least 4 months (BASDAI?)
Stage of disease (degree of ankylosis)
Insufficient conventional therapy (definition needed)
Failure of at least three NSAIDs (including phenylbutazone?)
at maximal dose to constantly suppress disease activity
Failure of NSAIDs treatment is not necessary if NSAIDs are
not tolerated or renal insufficiency is present
Failure of DMARD therapy (3 g sulfasalazine daily for 4 months)
Failure of intra-articular corticosteroid therapy (at least 2 injections?)
Failure of low-dose prednisolone (<10 mg daily for 1 week?)
AS, ankylosing spondylitis; BASDAI, Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis
Disease Activity Index; DMARD, disease-modifying antirheumatic drug;
NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
Table 3
Anti-TNF therapy in ankylosing spondylitis — open questions
Long-term efficacy?
Arrest of progression of ankylosis?
Differing responses in different targets?
Dosage?
Intervals?
Continous or intermittent therapy?
Individualization of treatment?
Long-term safety?
Repeated screening for autoantibodies?
Adding of DMARDs to suppress antibody formation?
Duration of tuberculosis prophylaxis?
318
sectional study of Dutch patients. Ann Rheum Dis 2001, 60:
353-358.
8. Boonen A, van Der Heijde D, Landewe R, Spoorenberg A,
Schouten H, Rutten-Van Molken M, Guillemin F, Dougados M,
Mielants H, de Vlam K, van Der Tempel H, van Der Linden S:
Work status and productivity costs due to ankylosing
spondylitis: comparison of three European countries. Ann
Rheum Dis 2002, 61:429-437.
9. Ward MM: Health-related quality of life in ankylosing spondyli-
tis: a survey of 175 patients. Arthritis Care Res 1999, 12:247-
255.
10. van Tubergen A, Coenen J, Landewe R, Spoorenberg A, Chorus
A, Boonen A, van der Linden S, van der Heijde D: Assessment of
fatigue in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a psychometric
analysis. Arthritis Rheum 2002, 47:8-16.
11. van Tubergen A, Landewe R, van der Heijde D, Hidding A, Wolter
N, Asscher M, Falkenbach A, Genth E, The HG, van der Linden S:
Combined spa-exercise therapy is effective in patients with
ankylosing spondylitis: a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis
Rheum 2001, 45:430-438.
12. Santos H, Brophy S, Calin A: Exercise in ankylosing spondyli-
tis: how much is optimum? J Rheumatol 1998, 25:2156-2160.
13. Amor B, Dougados M, Mijiyawa M: Criteria for the classification
of spondylarthropathies. Rev Rhum Mal Osteoartic 1990, 57:
85-89.
14. Leirisalo-Repo M: Prognosis, course of disease, and treatment
of the spondyloarthropathies. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1998,
24:737-751.
15. Amor B, Santos RS, Nahal R, Listrat V, Dougados M: Predictive
factors for the longterm outcome of spondyloarthropathies. J
Rheumatol 1994, 21:1883-1887.
16. Amor B, Dougados M, Khan MA: Management of refractory
ankylosing spondylitis and related spondyloarthropathies.
Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1995, 21:117-128.
17. Calin A, Elswood J: A prospective nationwide cross-sectional
study of NSAID usage in 1331 patients with ankylosing
spondylitis. J Rheumatol 1990, 17:801-803.
18. Toussirot E, Wendling D: Current guidelines for the drug treat-
ment of ankylosing spondylitis. Drugs 1998, 56:225-240.
19. Dougados M, Gueguen A, Nakache JP, Velicitat P, Veys EM,
Zeidler H, Calin A: Ankylosing spondylitis: what is the optimum
duration of a clinical study? A one year versus a 6 weeks non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug trial. Rheumatology (Oxford)
1999, 38:235-244.
20. Dougados M, Behier JM, Jolchine I, Calin A, van der Heijde D,
Olivieri I, Zeidler H, Herman H: Efficacy of celecoxib, a cyclooxy-
genase 2-specific inhibitor, in the treatment of ankylosing
spondylitis: a six-week controlled study with comparison
against placebo and against a conventional nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:180-185.
21. Porter RW, Ralston SH: Pharmacological management of back
pain syndromes. Drugs 1994, 48:189-198.
22. Koh WH, Pande I, Samuels A, Jones SD, Calin A: Low dose
amitriptyline in ankylosing spondylitis: a short term, double
blind, placebo controlled study. J Rheumatol 1997, 24:2158-
2161.
23. Dougados M, van der Linden S, Leirisalo-Repo M, Huitfeldt B,
Juhlin R, Veys E, Zeidler H, Kvien TK, Olivieri I, Dijkmans B, et al.:
Sulfasalazine in the treatment of spondylarthropathy. A ran-
domized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Arthritis Rheum 1995, 38:618-627.
24. Clegg DO, Reda DJ, Abdellatif M: Comparison of sulfasalazine
and placebo for the treatment of axial and peripheral articular
manifestations of the seronegative spondylarthropathies: a
Department of Veterans Affairs cooperative study. Arthritis
Rheum 1999, 42:2325-2329.
25. Nissila M, Lehtinen K, Leirisalo-Repo M, Luukkainen R, Mutru O,
Yli-Kerttula U: Sulfasalazine in the treatment of ankylosing
spondylitis. A twenty-six-week, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Arthritis Rheum 1988, 31:1111-1116.
26. Clegg DO, Reda DJ, Mejias E, Cannon GW, Weisman MH, Taylor
T, Budiman-Mak E, Blackburn WD, Vasey FB, Mahowald ML,
Cush JJ, Schumacher HR Jr, Silverman SL, Alepa FP, Luggen ME,
Cohen MR, Makkena R, Haakenson CM, Ward RH, Manaster BJ,
Anderson RJ, Ward JR, Henderson WG: Comparison of sul-
fasalazine and placebo in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.
Arthritis Rheum 1996, 39:2013-2020.
27. Benitez-Del-Castillo JM, Garcia-Sanchez J, Iradier T, Banares A:
Sulfasalazine in the prevention of anterior uveitis associated
with ankylosing spondylitis. Eye 2000, 14:340-343.
28. Handler RP: Favorable results using methotrexate in the treat-
ment of patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum
1989, 32:234.
29. Creemers MC, Franssen MJ, van de Putte LB, Gribnau FW, van
Riel PL: Methotrexate in severe ankylosing spondylitis: an
open study. J Rheumatol 1995, 22:1104-1107.
30. Biasi D, Carletto A, Caramaschi P, Pacor ML, Maleknia T,
Bambara LM: Efficacy of methotrexate in the treatment of
ankylosing spondylitis: a three-year open study. Clin Rheuma-
tol 2000, 19:114-117.
31. Sampaio-Barros PD, Costallat LT, Bertolo MB, Neto JF, Samara
AM: Methotrexate in the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis.
Scand J Rheumatol 2000, 29:160-162.
32. Ostendorf B, Specker C, Schneider M: Methotrexate lacks effi-
cacy in the treatment of severe ankylosing spondylitis com-
pared to psoriatic arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. J Clin
Rheumatol 1998, 4:129-136.
33. Roychowdhury B, Bindey-Bagot S, Hunt J, Tunn EJ: Methotrex-
ate in severe ankylosing spondylitis – a randomized placebo-
controlled study [abstract]. Rheumatology 2001, 40(suppl 1):
S43.
34. Ward MM, Kuzis S: Treatment used by patients with with anky-
losing spondylitis: comparison with treatment preferences by
rheumatologists. J Clin Rheumatol 1999, 5:1-8.
35. Durez P, Horsmans Y: Dramatic response after an intravenous
loading dose of azathioprine in one case of severe and refrac-
tory ankylosing spondylitis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2000, 39:
182-184.
36. Salvarani C, Macchioni P, Olivieri I, Marchesoni A, Cutolo M, Fer-
raccioli G, Cantini F, Salaffi F, Padula A, Lovino C, Dovigo L,
Bordin G, Davoli C, Pasero G, Alberighi OD: A comparison of
cyclosporine, sulfasalazine, and symptomatic therapy in the
treatment of psoriatic arthritis. J Rheumatol 2001, 28: 2274-
2282.
37. Gonzalez S, Martinez-Borra J, Lopez-Larrea C: Immunogenetics,
HLA-B27 and spondyloarthropathies. Curr Opin Rheumatol
1999, 11:257-264.
38. Chang K Lee, Man S Ahn, Eun Y Lee, Jung H Shin, Mon K Ai, Yoo
S Cho, Bin Yoo Hee, B Moon: Enhanced expession of gluco-
corticoid receptor messenger RNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of patients with ankylosing spondylitis
[abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 45:S238.
39. Tryk A, Schneider U, Berki T, Burmester G, Krause A, Scheffold A,
Buttgereit F: Membrane glucocorticoid receptor expression on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with ankylos-
ing spondylitis [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 45:S237.
40. Mintz G, Enriquez RD, Mercado U, Robles EJ, Jimenez FJ, Gutier-
rez G: Intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy in
severe ankylosing spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum 1981, 24:734-
736.
41. Richter MB, Woo P, Panayi GS, Trull A, Unger A, Shepherd P:
The effects of intravenous pulse methylprednisolone on
immunological and inflammatory processes in ankylosing
spondylitis. Clin Exp Immunol 1983, 53:51-59.
42. Peters ND, Ejstrup L: Intravenous methylprednisolone pulse
therapy in ankylosing spondylitis. Scand J Rheumatol 1992,
21:134-138.
43. Yoshida S, Motai Y, Hattori H, Yoshida H, Torikai K: A case of
HLA-B27 negative ankylosing spondylitis treated with methyl-
prednisolone pulse therapy. J Rheumatol 1993, 20:1805-1806.
44. Mercado U: The use of methylprednisolone pulse therapy in a
severe case of HLA-B27 negative ankylosing spondylitis. J
Rheumatol 1994, 21:1582-1583.
45. Plant MJ, Borg AA, Dziedzic K, Saklatvala J, Dawes PT: Radi-
ographic patterns and response to corticosteroid hip injec-
tion. Ann Rheum Dis 1997, 56:476-480.
46. Maugars Y, Mathis C, Berthelot JM, Charlier C, Prost A: Assess-
ment of the efficacy of sacroiliac corticosteroid injections in
spondylarthropathies: a double-blind study. Br J Rheumatol
1996, 35:767-770.
47. Braun J, Bollow M, Seyrekbasan F, Haberle HJ, Eggens U, Mertz
A, Distler A, Sieper J: Computed tomography guided corticos-
teroid injection of the sacroiliac joint in patients with spondy-
loarthropathy with sacroiliitis: clinical outcome and followup
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
319
by dynamic magnetic resonance imaging. J Rheumatol 1996,
23:659-664.
48. Luukkainen R, Nissila M, Asikainen E, Sanila M, Lehtinen K,
Alanaatu A, Kautiainen H: Periarticular corticosteroid treatment
of the sacroiliac joint in patients with seronegative spondyl-
arthropathy. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1999, 17:88-90.
49. Weiss HA, Darby SC, Doll R: Cancer mortality following X-ray
treatment of ankylosing spondylitis. Int J Cancer 1994, 59:
327-338.
50. Weiss HA, Darby SC, Fearn T, Doll R: Leukemia mortality after
X-ray treatment for ankylosing spondylitis. Radiat Res 1995,
142:1-11.
51. Koehler L, Kuipers JG, Zeidler H: Managing seronegative spon-
darthritides. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2000, 39:360-368.
52. Schmitt E, Ruckbeil C, Wick RR: Long-term clinical investiga-
tion of patients with ankylosing spondylitis treated with 224Ra.
Health Physics 1983, 44(suppl 1):S197-202.
53. Wick RR, Nekolla EA, Gossner W, Kellerer AM: Late effects in
ankylosing spondylitis patients treated with 224Ra. Radiat Res
1999, 152(suppl 6):S8-S11.
54. Braun J, Lemmel M, Manger B, Rau R, Sörensen H, Sieper J:
Therapy of ankylosing spondylitis with Radiumchloride. Z
Rheumatol 2001, 60:74-83.
55. Ueo T, Kobori K, Okumura H, Ito K, Yoshida H, Norioka M,
Shimizu K, Yamamuro T: Effectiveness of lymphocytapheresis
in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis. Transfus Sci 1990, 11:
97-101.
56. Jantunen E, Myllykangas-Luosujarvi R, Kaipiainen-Seppanen O,
Nousiainen T: Autologous stem cell transplantation in a lym-
phoma patient with a long history of ankylosing spondylitis.
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2000, 39:563-564.
57. Koch B, Kranzhofer N, Pfreundschu M, Pees HW, Trumper L:
First manifestations of seronegative spondylarthropathy fol-
lowing autologous stem cell transplantation in HLA-B27-posi-
tive patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 2000, 26:673-675.
58. Hortobagyi GN, Theriault RL, Porter L, Blayney D, Lipton A, Sinoff
C, Wheeler H, Simeone JF, Seaman J, Knight RD, Heffernan M,
Reitsma DJ: Efficacy of pamidronate in reducing skeletal com-
plications in patients with breast cancer and lytic bone metas-
tases. N Engl J Med 1996, 335:1785-1791.
59. Maksymowych WP, Jhangri GS, Leclercq S, Skeith K, Yan A,
Russell AS: An open study of pamidronate in the treatment of
refractory ankylosing spondylitis. J Rheumatol 1998, 25:714-
717.
60. Maksymowych WP, Lambert R, Jhangri GS, Leclercq S, Chiu P,
Wong B, Aaron S, Russell AS: Clinical and radiological amelio-
ration of refractory peripheral spondyloarthritis by pulse intra-
venous pamidronate therapy. J Rheumatol 2001, 28:144-155.
61. Cooper C, Carbone L, Michet CJ, Atkinson EJ, O’Fallon M, Melton
LJ III: Fracture risk in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a
population based study. J Rheumatol 1994, 21:1877-1882.
62. Maksymowych WP, Fitzgerald A, LeClercq S, Chiu P, Yan A,
Skeith K, Aaron S, Homik J, Davis P, Sholter D, Jhangri GS,
Russell AS: A 6 month randomized double-blinded dose
response comparison of i.v. pamidronate (60mg vs 10mg) in
the treatment of NSAID-refractory ankylosing spondylitis
(AS). Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:766-773.
63. Richardson P, Hideshima T, Anderson K: Thalidomide: emerging
role in cancer medicine. Annu Rev Med 2002, 53:629-657.
64. Marriott JB, Muller G, Dalgleish AG: Thalidomide as an emerg-
ing immunotherapeutic agent. Immunol Today 1999, 20:538-
540.
65. Breban M, Gombert B, Amor B, Dougados M: Efficacy of
thalidomide in the treatment of refractory ankylosing
spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum 1999, 42:580-581.
66. Huang F, Gu J, Zhao W et al: A one year open label trial of
thalidomide in ankylosing spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum 2002,
47:in press.
67. Huang F, Gu J, Braun J, Yu D: Identifying the targets of thalido-
mide and anti-TNFαα antibody treatments in ankylosing
spondylitis [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2000, 43:S396.
68. Ginsburg PM, Dassopoulos T, Ehrenpreis ED: Thalidomide treat-
ment for refractory Crohn’s disease: a review of the history,
pharmacological mechanism and clinical literature. Ann Med
2001, 33:516-525.
69. Huizinga TW, Dijkmans BA, van der Velde EA, van de Pouw Kraan
TC, Verweij CL, Breedveld FC: An open study of pentoxyfylline
and thalidomide as adjuvant therapy in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 1996, 55:833-836.
70. Elliott MJ, Maini RN, Feldmann M, Long-Fox A, Charles P, Katsikis
P, Brennan FM, Walker J, Bijl H, Ghrayeb J, et al: Treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis with chimeric monoclonal antibodies to
tumor necrosis factor alpha. Arthritis Rheum 1993, 36:1681-
1690.
71. Elliott MJ, Maini RN, Feldmann M, Kalden JR, Antoni C, Smolen
JS, Leeb B, Breedveld FC, Macfarlane JD, Bijl H: Randomised
double-blind comparison of chimeric monoclonal antibody to
tumour necrosis factor alpha (cA2) versus placebo in
rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 1994, 344:1105-1110.
72. Elliott MJ, Maini RN, Feldmann M, Long-Fox A, Charles P, Bijl H,
Woody JN: Repeated therapy with monoclonal antibody to
tumour necrosis factor alpha (cA2) in patients with rheuma-
toid arthritis. Lancet 1994, 344:1125-1127.
73. Maini RN, Elliott MJ, Brennan FM, Williams RO, Chu CQ, Paleolog
E, Charles PJ, Taylor PC, Feldmann M: Monoclonal anti-TNF
alpha antibody as a probe of pathogenesis and therapy of
rheumatoid disease. Immunol Rev 1995, 144:195-223.
74. Moreland LW, Baumgartner SW, Schiff MH, Tindall EA, Fleis-
chmann RM, Weaver AL, Ettlinger RE, Cohen S, Koopman WJ,
Mohler K, Widmer MB, Blosch CM: Treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis with a recombinant human tumor necrosis factor
receptor (p75) –Fc fusion protein. N Engl J Med 1997, 337:
141-148.
75. Lipsky PE, van der Heijde DM, St Clair EW, Furst DE, Breedveld
FC, Kalden JR, Smolen JS, Weisman M, Emery P, Feldmann M,
Harriman GR, Maini RN: Infliximab and methotrexate in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Anti-Tumor Necrosis Factor
Trial in Rheumatoid Arthritis with Concomitant Therapy Study
Group. N Engl J Med 2000, 343:1594-1602.
76. Braun J, Khan MA, Sieper J: Enthesitis and ankylosis in spondy-
loarthropathy: what is the target of the immune response?
Ann Rheum Dis 2000, 59:985-994.
77. Braun J, Bollow M, Eggens U, Konig H, Distler A, Sieper J: Use of
dynamic magnetic resonance imaging with fast imaging in the
detection of early and advanced sacroiliitis in spondy-
larthropathy patients. Arthritis Rheum 1994, 37:1039-1045.
78. Braun J, Bollow M, Sieper J: Radiology and pathology of the
spondyloarthropathies. Rheum Dis Clin N Am 1998, 24:697-
735.
79. McGonagle D, Gibbon W, O’Connor P, Green M, Pease C,
Emery P: Characteristic magnetic resonance imaging enthe-
seal changes of knee synovitis in spondylarthropathy. Arthritis
Rheum 1998, 41:694-700.
80. Francois RJ, Gardner DL, Degrave EJ, Bywaters EG: Histopatho-
logic evidence that sacroiliitis in ankylosing spondylitis is not
merely enthesitis. Arthritis Rheum 2000, 43:2011-2024.
81. Bollow M, Fischer T, Reiβhauer H, Sieper J, Hamm B, Braun J: T
cells and macrophages predominate in early and active
sacroiliitis as detected by magnetic resonance imaging in
spondyloarthropathies. Ann Rheum Dis 2000, 59:135-140.
82. Laloux L, Voisin MC, Allain J, Martin N, Kerboull L, Chevalier X,
Claudepierre P: Immunohistological study of entheses in
spondyloarthropathies: comparison in rheumatoid arthritis
and osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2001, 60:316-321.
83. Braun J, Bollow M, Neure L, Seipelt E, Seyrekbasan F, Herbst H,
Eggens U, Distler A, Sieper J: Use of immunohistologic and in
situ hybridization techniques in the examination of sacroiliac
joint biopsy specimens from patients with ankylosing
spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum 1995, 38:499-505.
84. Mielants H, Veys EM: HLA B27-related arthritis and bowel
inflammation: Sulfasalazine in HLA B27-related arthritis. J
Rheumatol 1985, 12:287-293.
85. Mielants H, Veys EM, Goemaere S, Cuvelier C, De Vos M: A
prospective study of patients with spondyloarthropathy with
special reference to HLA-B27 and to gut histology. J Rheuma-
tol 1993, 20:1353-1358.
86. Sandborn WJ: Anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy for inflam-
matory bowel disease: a review of agents, pharmacology, clin-
ical results and safety. Inflamm Bowel Dis 1999, 5:119-133.
87. Sandborn WJ, Hanauer SB, Katz S, Safdi M, Wolf DG, Baerg RD,
Tremaine WJ, Johnson T, Diehl NN, Zinsmeister AR: Etanercept
for active Crohn’s disease: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Gastroenterology 2001, 121:1088-
1094.
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
320
88. Sands BE, Tremaine WJ, Sandborn WJ, Rutgeerts PJ, Hanauer
SB, Mayer L, Targan SR, Podolsky DK: Infliximab in the treat-
ment of severe, steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis: a pilot
study. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2001, 7:83-88.
89. Lichtenstein GR: Is infliximab effective for induction of remis-
sion in patients with ulcerative colitis? Inflamm Bowel Dis
2001, 7:89-93.
90. Van den Bosch F, Kruithof E, De Vos M, De Keyser F, Mielants H:
Crohn’s disease associated with spondyloarthropathy: effect
of TNF-alpha blockade with infliximab on articular symptoms.
Lancet 2000, 356:1821-1822.
91. Mease PJ, Goffe BS, Metz J, VanderStoep A, Finck B, Burge DJ:
Etanercept in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis:
a randomised trial. Lancet 2000, 356:385-390.
92. Antoni C, Dechant C, Lorenz HM, Wendler J, Ogilvie A, Lueftl M,
Kalden-Nemeth D, Kalden JR, Manger B: Open-label study of
infliximab treatment for psoriatic arthritis: Clinical and mag-
netic resonance imaging measurements of reduction of
inflammation. Arthritis Care Res 2002, in press.
93. Chaudhari U, Romano P, Mulcahy LD, Dooley LT, Baker DG,
Gottlieb AB: Efficacy and safety of infliximab monotherapy for
plaque-type psoriasis: a randomised trial. Lancet 2001, 357:
1842-1847.
94. Ogilvie AL, Antoni C, Dechant C, Manger B, Kalden JR, Schuler
G, Lueftl M: Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with antitumour
necrosis factor-alpha antibody clears skin lesions of psoriasis
resistant to treatment with methotrexate. Br J Dermatol 2001,
144:587-589.
95. Brandt J, Haibel H, Cornely D, Golder W, Gonzalez J, Sieper J,
Braun J: Successful treatment of active ankylosing spondylitis
with the anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal anti-
body infliximab. Arthritis Rheum 2000, 43:1346-1352.
96. Garrett S, Jenkinson TR, Kennedy LG, Whitelock HC, Gaisford P,
Calin A: A new approach to defining disease status in anky-
losing spondylitis. The Bath AS disease activity index. J
Rheumatol 1994, 21:2286-2291.
97. Brandt J, Haibel H, Reddig J, Sieper J, Braun J: Treatment of
patients with severe ankylosing spondylitis with infliximab – a
one year follow up. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44(12): 2936-2937.
98. Van den Bosch F, Kruithof E, Baeten D, De Keyser F, Mielants H,
Veys EM: Effects of a loading dose regimen of three infusions
of chimeric monoclonal antibody to tumour necrosis factor
alpha (infliximab) in spondyloarthropathy: an open pilot study.
Ann Rheum Dis 2000, 59:428-433.
99. Stone M, Salonen D, Lax M, Payne U, Lapp V, Inman R: Clinical
and imaging correlates of response to treatment with inflix-
imab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. J Rheumatol
2001, 28:1605-1614.
100.Maksymowych WP, Jhangri GS, Lambert RG, Mallon C, Buenviaje
H, Pedrycz E, Luongo R, Russell AS: Infliximab in ankylosing
spondylitis: a prospective observational inception cohort
analysis of efficacy and safety. J Rheumatol 2002, 29: 959-
965.
101.Breban MA, Vignon E, Claudepierre P, Dougados M, et al: Effi-
cacy of infliximab in severe refractory ankylosing spondylitis
(AS). Results of an open label study [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum
2001, 44:S89.
102.Munoz-Villanueva MC, E Collantes, Gratacos J, Sanmarti R,
Canete JD, Gratacos J, Zarco P, Gonzalez C, Torre-Alanso JC:
Successful treatment of active and refractory spondyloarthri-
tis with the anti-TNFαα monoclonal antibody infliximab. Ann
Rheum Dis 2002, 61(suppl 1):300
103.Allali F, Roux C, Kolta S, Claudepierre P, Lespessailles E, Douga-
dos M, Breban M: Infliximab in the treatment of spondy-
larthropathy, bone mineral density effect [abstract]. Arthritis
Rheum 2001, 44:S89.
104.Braun J, Brandt J, Listing J, Zink A, Alten R, Golder W, Gromnica-
Ihle E, Kellner H, Krause A, Schneider M, Sörensen H, Zeidler H,
Thriene W, Sieper J: Treatment of active ankylosing spondylitis
with infliximab - a double-blind placebo controlled multicenter
trial. Lancet 2002, 359:1187-1193.
105.Van den Bosch F, Kruithof E, Baeten D, Herseens A, De Keyser F,
Mielants H, Veys EM: Randomized double-blind comparison of
chimeric monoclonal antibody to tumour necrosis factor
alpha (infliximab) versus placebo in active spondyloarthropa-
thy. Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:755-765.
106.Brandt J, Haibel H, Reddig J, Sieper J, Braun J: Successful treat-
ment of severe undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy with the
anti-tumor necrosis factor αα monoclonal antibody infliximab. J
Rheumatol 2002, 29:118-122.
107.Barthel HR: Rapid remission of treatment-resistant ankylosing
spondylitis with etanercept—a drug for refractory ankylosing
spondylitis? Arthritis Rheum 2001, 45:404.
108.Marzo-Ortega H, McGonagle D, O’Connor P, Emery P: Efficacy
of etanercept in the treatment of the entheseal pathology in
resistant spondylarthropathy: a clinical and magnetic reso-
nance imaging study. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:2112-2117.
109.Gorman JD, Sack KE, Davis JC Jr: Treatment of ankylosing
spondylitis by inhibition of tumor necrosis factor alpha. N Engl
J Med 2002, 346:1349-1356.
110.D’Agostino MA, Breban M, Said-Nahal R, Dougados M: Refrac-
tory inflammatory heel pain in spondyloarthropathy: a signifi-
cant response to infliximab documented by ultrasound
[letter]. Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:840-841.
111.Braun J, Sieper J: Refractory inflammatory heel pain in spondy-
loarthropathy: a significant response to infliximab docu-
mented by ultrasound [reply]. Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:
841-842. {See [110]}
112.Banares A, Jover JA, Fernandez-Gutierrez B, Benitez del Castillo
JM, Garcia J, Vargas E, Hernandez-Garcia C: Patterns of uveitis
as a guide in making rheumatologic and immunologic diag-
noses. Arthritis Rheum 1997, 40:358-370.
113.Samson CM, Waheed N, Baltatzis S, Foster CS: Methotrexate
therapy for chronic noninfectious uveitis: analysis of a case
series of 160 patients. Ophthalmology 2001, 108:1134-1139.
114.Braun J, Sieper J: Infliximab in chronic uveitis [reply]. Arthritis
Rheum 2002, 46:in press. {See [117]}
115.Smith JR, Levinson RD, Holland GN, Jabs DA, Robinson MR,
Whitcup SM, Rosenbaum JT: Differential efficacy of tumor
necrosis factor inhibition in the management of inflammatory
eye disease and associated rheumatic disease. Arthritis
Rheum 2001, 45:252-257.
116.Reiff A, Takei S, Sadeghi S, Stout A, Shaham B, Bernstein B, Gal-
lagher K, Stout T: Etanercept therapy in children with treat-
ment-resistant uveitis. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:1411-1415.
117.El-Shabrawi Y, Hermann J: Infliximab in chronic uveitis [letter].
Arthritis Rheum 2002, 46:in press.
118.El-Shabrawi Y, Hermann J: Anti-TNFαα therapy with infliximab in
the treatment of HLA B27 associated acute anterior uveitis –
a one year follow up [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:
S425.
119.Fries W, Giofre MR, Catanoso M, Lo GR: Treatment of acute
uveitis associated with Crohn’s disease and sacroileitis with
infliximab. Am J Gastroenterol 2002, 97:499-500.
120.Keane J, Gershon S, Wise RP, Mirabile-Levens E, Kasznica J,
Schwieterman WD, Siegel JN, Braun MM: Tuberculosis associ-
ated with infliximab, a tumor necrosis factor alpha-neutraliz-
ing agent. N Engl J Med 2001, 345: 1098-1104.
121.Keane J, Gershon SK, Braun M: Tuberculosis and treatment
with infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:625-626.
122.Riminton S, Pearce N, Basten A: Tuberculosis and treatment
with infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:625.
123.Myers A, Clark J, Foster H: Tuberculosis and treatment with
infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:625.
124.Lim WS, Powell RJ, Johnston ID: Tuberculosis and treatment
with infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:623.
125.Bean GA, Rosch DR, Briscoe H, France MP, Korner H, Sedgwick
JD, Britton WJ: Structural deficiences in granuloma formation
in TNF gene-targeted mice underlie the heightened suscepti-
bility to aerosol mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. J
Immunol 1999, 162:3504-3511.
126.Westendorp RG, Langermans JA, Huizinga TW, Elouali AH,
Verweij CL, Boomsma DI, Vandenbroucke JP, Vandenbrouke JP:
Genetic influence on cytokine production and fatal meningo-
coccal disease. Lancet 1997, 349:170-173.
127.Ritz MA, Jost R: Severe pneumococcal pneumonia following
treatment with infliximab for Crohn’s disease [letter]. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 2001, 7:327.
128.Smith D, Letendre S: Viral pneumonia as a serious complica-
tion of etanercept therapy [letter]. Ann Intern Med 2002, 136:
174.
129.Marotte H, Charrin JE, Miossec P: Infliximab-induced aseptic
meningitis [letter]. Lancet 2001, 358:1784.
130.Baghai M, Osmon DR, Wolk DM, Wold LE, Haidukewych GJ,
Arthritis Research Vol 4 No 5 Braun and Sieper
321
Matteson EL: Fatal sepsis in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis
treated with etanercept. Mayo Clin Proc 2001, 76:653-656.
131.Zhang Z, Correa H, Bégué RE: Tuberculosis and treatment with
infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:624.
132.Warris A, Bjorneklett A, Gaustad P: Invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis associated with infliximab therapy. N Engl J Med
2001, 344:1099-1100.
133.Shergy WJ, Isern RA, Cooley DA, Harshbarger JL, Huffstutter JE,
Hughes GM, Spencer-Smith EA, Goldman AL, Roth SH, Toder
JS, Warner D, Quinn A, Keenan GF, Schaible TF: Open label
study to assess infliximab safety and timing of onset of clini-
cal benefit among patients with RA. J Rheumatol 2002,
29:667-677.
134.Antoni CE, Dechant C, Haentzschel H, Alten R, Soerensen H,
Schwebig A, Kalden JR, Manger B: Safety and efficacy of inflix-
imab in 263 patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite
methotrexate therapy – a German open label trial [abstract].
Arthritis Rheum 2001, 46:S187.
135.Phillips K, Husni ME, Karlson EW, Coblyn JS: Experience with
etanercept in an academic medical center: are infection rates
increased? Arthritis Rheum 2002, 47:17-21.
136.De Rosa FG, Bonora S, Di Perri G: Tuberculosis and treatment
with infliximab [letter]. N Engl J Med 2002, 346:624.
137.Moreland LW, Cohen SB, Baumgartner SW, Tindall EA, Bulpitt K,
Martin R, Weinblatt M, Taborn J, Weaver A, Burge DJ, Schiff MH:
Longterm safety and efficacy of etanercept in RA. J Rheumatol
2001, 28:1238-1244.
138.Kavanaugh A, Keenan G, DeWoody K, Masters P, Hendricks D,
Clark J, Harriman G: Long-term follow-up of patients treated
with Remicade (Infliximab) in clinical trials [abstract]. Arthritis
Rheum 2001, 46:S173.
139.Smith KJ, Skelton HG: Rapid onset of cutaneous squamous
cell carcinoma in patients with rheumatoid arthritis after start-
ing tumor necrosis factor alpha receptor IgG1-Fc fusion
complex therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001, 45:953-956.
140.Mohan N, Edwards ET, Cupps TR, Oliverio PJ, Sandberg G,
Crayton H, Richert JR, Siegel JN: Demyelination occurring
during anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha therapy for inflamma-
tory arthritides. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:2862-2869.
141.van Oosten BW, Barkhof F, Truyen L, Boringa JB, Bertelsmann
FW, von Blomberg BM, Woody JN, Hartung HP, Polman CH:
Increased MRI activity and immune activation in two multiple
sclerosis patients treated with the monoclonal anti-tumor
necrosis factor antibody cA2. Neurology 1996, 47:1531-1534.
142.Robinson WH, Genovese MC, Moreland LW: Demyelinating and
neurologic events reported in association with TNFαα antago-
nism: by what mechanisms could TNFαα antagonism improve
RA but exacerbate multiple sclerosis? Arthritis Rheum 2001,
44:1977-1983.
143.Bloom BJ: Development of diabetes mellitus during etaner-
cept therapy in a child with systemic-onset juvenile rheuma-
toid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2000, 43:2606-2608.
144.Galaria NA, Werth VP, Schumacher HR: Leukocytoclastic vas-
culitis due to etanercept. J Rheumatol 2000, 27:2041-2044.
145.McCain ME, Quinet RJ, Davis WE: Etanercept and infliximab
associated with cutaneous vasculitis. Rheumatology (Oxford)
2002, 41:116-117.
146.Shakoor N, Michalska M, Harris CA, Block JA: Drug-induced
systemic lupus erythematosus associated with etanercept
therapy. Lancet 2002, 359:579-580.
147.Yin Z, Siegert S, Neure L, Grolms M, Liu L, Eggens U, Braun J,
Sieper J: The elevated ratio of interferon-γγ/interleukin-4-posi-
tive T cells found in synovial fluid and synovial membrane of
rheumatoid arthritis patients can be changed by interleukin-4
but not by interleukin-10 or transforming growth factor beta.
Rheumatology 1999, 38:1058-1067.
148.Canete JD, Martinez SE, Farres J, Sanmarti R, Blay M, Gomez A,
Salvador G, Munoz-Gomez J: Differential Th1/Th2 cytokine pat-
terns in chronic arthritis: interferon-γγ is highly expressed in
synovium of rheumatoid arthritis compared with seronegative
spondyloarthropathies. Ann Rheum Dis 2000, 59:263-268.
149.Yin Z, Braun J, Neure L, Wu P, Liu L, Eggens U, Sieper J: Crucial
role of interleukin-10/interleukin-12 balance in the regulation
of the type 2 T helper cytokine response in reactive arthritis.
Arthritis Rheum 1997, 40:1788-1799.
150.Ritchlin C, Haas-Smith S, Looney J: Production, tissue distribu-
tion and function of IL-10 in psoriatic synovium [abstract].
Arthritis Rheum 1999, 42:S163.
151.Claudepierre P, Rymer JC, Chevalier X: IL-10 plasma levels cor-
relate with disease activity in spondyloarthropathy. J Rheuma-
tol 1997, 24:1659-1661.
152.Braun J, Yin Z, Spiller I, Siegert S, Rudwaleit M, Liu L, Radbruch
A, Sieper J: Low secretion of tumor necrosis factor alpha, but
no other Th1 or Th2 cytokines, by peripheral blood mononu-
clear cells correlates with chronicity in reactive arthritis. Arthri-
tis Rheum 1999, 42:2039-2044.
153.Rudwaleit M, Siegert S, Yin Z, Eick J, Thiel A, Radbruch A, Sieper
J, Braun J: Low T cell production of TNFαα and IFN-γγ in ankylos-
ing spondylitis: its relation to HLA-B27 and influence of the
TNF-308 gene polymorphism. Ann Rheum Dis 2001, 60:36-42.
154.Baeten D, Van Damme N, Van den Bosch F, Kruithof E, De Vos M,
Mielants H, Veys EM, De Keyser F: Impaired Th1 cytokine pro-
duction in spondyloarthropathy is restored by anti-TNFalpha.
Ann Rheum Dis 2001, 60:750-755.
155.Braun J, Xiang J, Brandt J, Maetzel H, Haibel H, Wu P, Kohler S,
Rudwaleit M, Siegert S, Radbruch A, Thiel A, Sieper J: Treatment
of spondyloarthropathies with antibodies against tumour
necrosis factor αα: first clinical and laboratory experiences.
Ann Rheum Dis 2000, 59(suppl I):10-14.
156.Xiang J, Rudwaleit M, Thiel A, Braun J, Sieper J: Downregulation
of the nonspecific and the antigen-specific T cell cytokine
response in ankylosing spondylitis after treatment with inflix-
imab [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:S236.
157.Xiang J, Rudwaleit M, Thiel A, Radbruch A, Zhang Y, Braun J,
Sieper J: Cellular immune response to the cartilage-derived
autoantigen G1 of aggrecan in ankylosing spondylitis and
rheumatoid arthritis [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:S236.
158.Baeten D, Kruithof E, Van den Bosch F, De Keyser F, Veys EM:
Immunomodulatory effects of anti-tumor necrosis factor
alpha therapy on synovium in spondylarthropathy. Histologic
findings in eight patients from an open-label pilot study.
Arthritis Rheum 2001, 44:186-195.
159.van der Heijde D, Bellamy N, Calin A, Dougados M, Khan MA, van
der Linden S: Preliminary core sets for endpoints in ankylosing
spondylitis. Assessments in Ankylosing Spondylitis Working
Group. J Rheumatol 1997, 24:2225-2229.
160.Anderson JJ, Baron G, van der Heijde D, Felson DT, Felson M:
ASAS preliminary criteria for short term improvement in anky-
losing spondylitis. Arthritis Rheum, 2001, 44:1878-1886.
161.Spoorenberg A, de Vlam K, van der Heijde D, de Klerk E, Douga-
dos M, Mielants H, van der Tempel H, Boers M, van der Linden S:
Radiologic scoring methods in ankylosing spondylitis: relia-
bility and sensitivity to change over one year. J Rheumatol
1999, 26:997-1002.
162.MacKay K, Mack C, Brophy S, Calin A: The Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Radiology Index (BASRI): a new, validated
approach to disease assessment. Arthritis Rheum 1998,
41:2263-2270.
163.Averns HL, Oxtoby J, Taylor HG, Jones PW, Dziedzic K, Dawes
PT: Radiological outcome in ankylosing spondylitis: use of the
Stoke Ankylosing Spondylitis Spine Score (SASSS). Br J
Rheumatol 1996, 35:373-6.
Correspondence
Prof Dr J Braun, Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet, Landgrafenstr 15, 44652
Herne, Germany. Tel: +49 2325 592 131; fax: +49 2325 592 136;
e-mail: J.Braun@Rheumazentrum-Ruhrgebiet.de
Available online http://arthritis-research.com/content/4/5/307
