Diagnosing and treating Diamond Blackfan anaemia: results of
an international clinical consensus conference
Adrianna Vlachos,1,2
Sarah Ball,3
Niklas Dahl,4
Blanche P. Alter,5
Sujit Sheth,6
Ugo Ramenghi,7
Joerg Meerpohl,8
Stefan Karlsson,9
Johnson M. Liu,1,2
Thierry Leblanc,10
Carole Paley,11
Elizabeth M. Kang,12
Eva Judmann Leder,1
Eva Atsidaftos,2
Akiko Shimamura,13
Monica Bessler,14
Bertil Glader15
and Jeffrey M. Lipton,1,2
on behalf of the
participants of the Sixth Annual Daniella Maria Arturi International Consensus Conference
1
The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, 2
Schneider Children’s Hospital, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New
Hyde Park, NY, USA, 3
St. George’s Hospital Medical School, London, UK, 4
Departments of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden, 5
Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Department of
Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, 6
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, 7
Universita` di Torino, Torino, Italy, 8
Zentrum
fuer Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, Universitaetsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 9
Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
10
Hoˆpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, 11
Novartis, East Hanover, NJ, 12
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 13
Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 14
Washington University, St. Louis, MO, and 15
Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA
Summary
Diamond Blackfan anaemia (DBA) is a rare, genetically and
clinically heterogeneous, inherited red cell aplasia. Classical
DBA affects about seven per million live births and presents
during the ﬁrst year of life. However, as mutated genes have
been discovered in DBA, non-classical cases with less distinct
phenotypes are being described in adults as well as children. In
caring for these patients it is often difﬁcult to have a clear
understanding of the treatment options and their outcomes
because of the lack of complete information on the natural
history of the disease. The purpose of this document is to
review the criteria for diagnosis, evaluate the available
treatment options, including corticosteroid and transfusion
therapies and stem cell transplantation, and propose a plan for
optimizing patient care. Congenital anomalies, mode of
inheritance, cancer predisposition, and pregnancy in DBA
are also reviewed. Evidence-based conclusions will be made
when possible; however, as in many rare diseases, the data are
often anecdotal and the recommendations are based upon the
best judgment of experienced clinicians. The recommendations
regarding the diagnosis and management described in this
report are the result of deliberations and discussions at an
international consensus conference.
Keywords: Diamond Blackfan anaemia, bone marrow failure,
cancer predisposition, genetics, treatment.
Diamond Blackfan anaemia (DBA; OMIM #205900) was ﬁrst
reported by Josephs (1936) and reﬁned as a distinct clinical
entity by Diamond and Blackfan (1938). It is now accepted
that the disorder results from a cellular defect in which
erythroid progenitors and precursors are highly sensitive to
death by apoptosis, leading to erythropoietic failure (Lipton
et al, 1986; Tsai et al, 1989; Perdahl et al, 1994; Ohene-
Abuakwa et al, 2005; Miyake et al, 2008). DBA is a member of
a rare group of genetic disorders characterized by pro-
apoptotic hematopoiesis leading to bone marrow failure,
congenital anomalies (Gripp et al, 2001) and predisposition to
cancer (Lipton et al, 2001), known as the inherited bone
marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) (Young & Alter, 1994).
The ﬁrst DBA gene, mutated in approximately 25% of
patients, has been cloned and was identiﬁed as RPS19, which
codes for a ribosomal protein located at chromosome 19q13.2
(Gustavsson et al, 1997; Draptchinskaia et al, 1999). The
function of this protein in ribosome biogenesis is poorly
understood. In patients with an RPS19 mutation, it has been
proposed that the disease results from rps19 protein haplo-
insufﬁciency, i.e. where the protein produced by a single copy
of a normal gene is not sufﬁcient to produce normal function
(reviewed in Gazda et al, 2004). Studies have demonstrated the
repair of defective hematopoiesis by increased rps19 protein
expression in both rps19-deﬁcient patient-derived progenitors
OnlineOpen: This article is available free online at www.blackwell-synergy.com
Correspondence: Adrianna Vlachos, Schneider Children’s Hospital,
269-01 76th Ave, New Hyde Park, NY 11040, USA.
E-mail: avlachos@lij.edu
Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative
Commons Deed, Attribution 2.5, which does not permit commercial
exploitation.
review
ª 2008 The Authors First published online 30 July 2008
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 doi:10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07269.x
(Hamaguchi et al, 2002) and in rps19 knockdown cellular
models (Celiker et al, 2004; Ebert et al, 2005; Flygare et al,
2005). Recently de novo mutations have been identiﬁed in
ribosomal proteins rps24, encoded by RPS24 at chromosome
10q22-q23 (Gazda et al, 2006) and in rps17, encoded by RPS17
at chromosome 15q25.2 (Cmejla et al, 2007), each in approx-
imately 2% of patients. Furthermore mutations in large
ribosomal subunit-associated proteins rpl5, rpl11, and rpl35a,
have been described in 10%, 6Æ5% and 2% of patients (Farrar
et al, 2007; Gazda et al, 2007). To date, approximately 50% of
DBA patients have a single mutation in a gene encoding a
ribosomal protein. These ﬁndings implicate DBA as a disorder
of ribosome biogenesis and/or function. Indeed a recent study
demonstrates that RPS19 is essential for maturation of the 40S
ribosomal subunit (Flygare et al, 2007). The relationship of
ribosomal protein haploinsufﬁciency to faulty ribosome bio-
genesis has been recently reviewed (Ellis & Lipton, 2007;
Flygare & Karlsson, 2007).
Scientiﬁc advances in DBA and the availability of reliable
clinical data from well-characterized patient populations in
international registries have resulted in a reconsideration of the
diagnostic criteria and clinical management of DBA, developed
at the 6th Annual Diamond Blackfan Anemia International
Consensus Conference held in New York on April 16–18, 2005
and delineated in this ‘‘consensus document’’.
Establishing the diagnosis
Since the original description of the disorder (Diamond &
Blackfan, 1938) and the landmark review in 1976 (Diamond
et al, 1976), a number of developments have both clariﬁed and
complicated the designation of patients to the diagnosis of
DBA. In patients who have unambiguous red cell failure
deﬁned by macrocytic anaemia and reticulocytopenia and
decreased or absent red cell precursors in the bone marrow, the
differential diagnosis of pure red cell aplasia includes DBA and
a diverse array of acquired disorders (Table I). In children, in
particular, transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)
should be the major consideration (Table II). Pearson syn-
drome, parvovirus B19, human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
and other infections, drugs and toxins as well as immune-
mediated disease should be ruled out before the diagnosis of
DBA can be established. The presence of parvovirus genome in
the bone marrow should be assessed by polymerase chain
Table I. Classiﬁcation of pure red cell aplasia*.
Inherited
Diamond Blackfan anaemia
Acquired PRCA
Primary
Autoimmune [includes Transient Erythroblastopenia of
Childhood (TEC)]
Pearson syndrome (sideroblastic anaemia with vacuolated
erythroid precursors)
Preleukemic
Idiopathic
Secondary, associated with:
Thymoma
Hematological malignancies
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Large granular lymphocyte leukemia
Chronic myelocytic leukemia
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Multiple myeloma
Waldenstro¨m macroglobulinemia
Myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia
Essential thrombocythemia
Solid Tumours
Carcinoma of the stomach
Adenocarcinoma of the breast
Adenocarcinoma of bile duct
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lung
Epidermoid carcinoma of the skin
Carcinoma of the thyroid
Renal cell carcinoma
Carcinoma of unknown primary site
Kaposi sarcoma
Infections
Human B19 parvovirus
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virus
Epstein-Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis)
Viral hepatitis
Mumps
Cytomegalovirus
Atypical pneumonia
Meningococcemia
Staphylococcemia
Leishmaniasis
Chronic haemolytic anaemias
Collagen vascular and autoimmune diseases
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Sjo¨gren syndrome
Autoimmune multiple endocrine gland insufﬁciency
Autoimmune hypothyroidism
Autoimmune chronic hepatitis
Drugs and chemicals
Pregnancy
Severe renal failure
Table I. (Continued).
Severe nutritional deﬁciencies (rehabilitation of kwashiorkor)
Miscellaneous
Post-ABO incompatible bone marrow transplantation
Angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy
Anti-erythropoietin antibodies (spontaneous or post-treatment
with erythropoietin)
*Modiﬁed with permission from Dessypris and Lipton, 2003.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
860 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
reaction (Parekh et al, 2005). The diagnosis of thymoma
should be considered in adults, as it rarely occurs in children.
DBA is diagnosed in adults more often than previously
thought (Balaban et al, 1985) although other causes of red cell
failure are more common. Finally, the other IBMFS, in
particular Shwachman Diamond syndrome and Fanconi
anaemia, should be considered, as macrocytic anaemia may
also be a frequent hematological manifestation in these
syndromes.
Diamond Blackfan anaemia was ﬁrst described as a disorder
of impaired red cell production in children. The presentation
in adults, the risk of other cytopenias, the predisposition to
cancer and the high incidence of birth defects are now being
quantiﬁed (Willig et al, 1999a; Vlachos et al, 2001a; Cam-
pagnoli et al, 2004; Ohga et al, 2004; Orfali et al, 2004). The
diagnostic criteria for DBA, presented in 1976 (Diamond et al,
1976), have remained the accepted standard. These include
anaemia, presenting prior to the ﬁrst birthday, with near
normal, but variable, neutrophil and/or platelet counts,
reticulocytopenia, macrocytosis and normal marrow cellularity
with a paucity of red cell precursors. Newborns with DBA
rarely present with hydrops fetalis (Rogers et al, 1997; Dunbar
et al, 2003). Certainly these diagnostic criteria deﬁne
‘‘classical’’ DBA. It is apparent from the study of multiplex
families that affected individuals may present in ‘‘non-
classical’’ ways. For example, individuals may present at an
age greater than one year, only with congenital anomalies,
without anaemia or with a mild hematological phenotype
(macrocytosis only). These cases of ‘‘non-classical’’ DBA need
to be more carefully identiﬁed, particularly when reproductive
choices and transplant donor decisions are being made.
Furthermore, as the risk of malignancy and other complica-
tions of DBA are better deﬁned, the necessity of making a
diagnosis in ‘‘asymptomatic’’ individuals will become more
important.
Diagnostic and supporting criteria for the diagnosis of DBA
are described in Table III. These criteria are subject to future
modiﬁcation as more evidence-based data are accumulated. A
diagnosis of ‘‘classical’’ DBA is made if all the diagnostic
criteria are met. When there is a positive family history, an
otherwise normal individual should be considered as having
‘‘non-classical’’ DBA if a mutation shared by affected family
members is present. Anyone suspected of having DBA, but
with insufﬁcient diagnostic criteria, should be considered as
having sporadic, non-classical DBA if a reported mutation is
present. A patient can be assigned as having a ‘‘probable’’
diagnosis, with a decreasing degree of certitude if; three
diagnostic criteria are present along with a positive family
history; two diagnostic criteria and three minor supporting
criteria are present; or, a positive family history and three
minor supporting criteria are evident, even in the absence of
diagnostic criteria. Of note, macrocytosis may be masked by
iron deﬁciency or thalassemia minor and, in the newborn, can
be obscured by residual fetal erythrocytes. The erythrocyte
adenosine deaminase (eADA) activity, not inﬂuenced by prior
transfusions, is elevated (‡3 SD) in 80–85% of patients
classiﬁed as having DBA (Glader & Backer, 1988). In contrast,
90% of patients classiﬁed as having TEC have normal eADA
activity. Elevated eADA activity, increased fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) are not very
Table II. Differential diagnosis of DBA versus TEC.*
Diamond Blackfan anaemia (DBA) Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)
Pure red cell aplasia Present Present
Age Younger than 1 year Older than 1 year
Inheritance Sporadic and dominant inheritance Not inherited
Congenital anomalies Present Absent
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) Elevated Normal
HbF Elevated Normal
i RBC antigen Present Absent
Erythrocyte ADA (eADA) activity Elevated Normal
All RBC characteristics except eADA activity are helpful only when tested in a reticulocytopenic child. During recovery from TEC, a transient wave of
fetal-like erythropoiesis with elevated MCV, HbF, and i RBC antigen may be detected. This testing is valid in untransfused children only.
*Modiﬁed with permission from Dessypris and Lipton, 2003.
Based on data from Link and Alter, 1981.
Table III. Diagnosing Diamond Blackfan anaemia (DBA).
Diagnostic criteria
Age less than 1 year
Macrocytic anaemia with no other signiﬁcant cytopenias
Reticulocytopenia
Normal marrow cellularity with a paucity of erythroid precursors
Supporting criteria
Major
Gene mutation described in ‘‘classical’’ DBA
Positive family history
Minor
Elevated erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity
Congenital anomalies described in ‘‘classical’’ DBA
Elevated HbF
No evidence of another inherited bone marrow failure syndrome
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 861
strong independent criteria, however, these factors should be
seriously considered when evaluating a sibling as a stem cell
transplant donor. Steroid responsiveness is not considered a
diagnostic criterion and corticosteroids should not be admin-
istered until a diagnosis is made. If the ﬁrst three diagnostic
criteria are present, but there is no paucity of red cell
precursors in the bone marrow and no supporting criteria, the
diagnosis of DBA cannot be made. A bone marrow evaluation
should be repeated at a later date as red cell marrow hypoplasia
may develop after anaemia and reticulocytopenia. Further-
more, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia are not uncommon
ﬁndings (Giri et al, 2000). Thus the presence of additional
cytopenias does not preclude the diagnosis of DBA in a patient
with red cell aplasia and may be severe enough to require
treatment.
An evaluation of the family of a proband is necessary. All
immediate family members should be evaluated with a
thorough relevant history (anaemia, cancer, birth defects,
etc.), complete blood count including red cell indices, eADA
activity and HbF. If the proband has a mutation, then the
parents and siblings need to have appropriate mutation
analysis. The nature of any other positive ﬁndings will dictate
the extent of the family evaluation.
Congenital anomalies
Congenital anomalies mainly involve the head, upper limbs,
heart and genitourinary system (Table IV) (Ball et al, 1996;
Janov et al, 1996; Ramenghi et al, 1999; Willig et al, 1999a;
Gripp et al, 2001; Vlachos et al, 2001a). In a study of 80 DBA
patients from a 20-year birth cohort in the United Kingdom
(Ball et al, 1996), 35% of classical DBA patients were found to
have one or more unequivocal congenital anomalies, not
including growth retardation. A similar proportion has been
described in the French, Italian, and North American registries
(40%, 46%, and 47%, respectively) (Ramenghi et al, 1999;
Willig et al, 1999a; Lipton et al, 2006). More than one anomaly
is found in up to 25% of individuals. There is a wide range of
severity of congenital anomalies in DBA, with variability even
within the same kindred.
Craniofacial anomalies are the most common, represent-
ing 50% of congenital anomalies reported to the North
American DBA Registry, with hypertelorism and broad ﬂat
nasal bridge contributing to the classic DBA facies described
by Cathie (1950). Thumb anomalies have been described in
9–19% of patients. The severity of abnormalities ranges from
hypoplasia of the thenar eminence to absence of the radius
or forearm, duplicated, biﬁd or the classic triphalangeal
thumb (Aase syndrome) (Aase & Smith, 1969). Renal and
cardiac anomalies have each been described in up to 7% of
patients in the UK, France and Italy. However, in the North
American Diamond Blackfan Anemia Registry (DBAR),
where the majority of patients undergo formal genitourinary
and cardiac imaging, the prevalence is higher at 19% and
15%, respectively.
A low birth weight is reported in approximately 25% of
patients (Ball et al, 1996; Willig et al, 1999a). Growth retar-
dation (height below 3rd centile for age) is described in
approximately 30% of children. It must be noted that stature is
difﬁcult to evaluate in the context of severe anaemia, iron
overload and chronic corticosteroid use. Children on chronic
steroid therapy, while over-represented in the bottom quartile
in the UK Registry, did not predominate in the group with
height less than the 3rd centile. Growth retardation is
commonly associated with physical abnormalities, and can
thus be considered part of the spectrum of congenital
anomalies. However, as ﬁnal height is inﬂuenced by other
factors, the true prevalence of constitutional short stature is
not accurately known (Chen et al, 2005).
Renal imaging and echocardiogram are recommended, with
nephrology, urology and cardiology referral as appropriate.
Other specialist referrals should also be made as indicated. The
Table IV. Range of congenital anomalies observed in Diamond
Blackfan anaemia (DBA).
Craniofacial Hypertelorism
Broad, ﬂat nasal bridge
Cleft palate
High arched palate
Microcephaly
Micrognathia
Microtia
Low set ears
Low hair line
Epicanthus
Ptosis
Ophthalmological Congenital glaucoma
Strabismus
Congenital cataract
Neck Short neck
Webbed neck
Sprengel deformity
Klippel-Feil deformity
Thumbs Triphalyngeal
Duplex or biﬁd
Hypoplastic
Flat thenar eminence
Absent radial artery
Urogenital Absent kidney
Horseshoe kidney
Hypospadias
Cardiac Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex cardiac anomalies
Other musculoskeletal Growth retardation
Syndactyly
Neuromotor Learning difﬁculties
The list includes the anomalies that are most characteristic of DBA, but
is not exhaustive. Multiple anomalies, most commonly including
craniofacial, are present in up to 25% of affected individuals.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
862 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
growth of children with DBA should be carefully monitored,
especially during adolescence, and prompt referral should be
made for children with impaired growth velocity. The
judicious use of corticosteroids, maintenance of an adequate
hemoglobin level and appropriate iron chelation are essential
in optimizing growth. The occurrence of equivalent anomalies
in otherwise asymptomatic siblings and parents of DBA
patients is likely to reﬂect non-classical DBA, and should
prompt further investigation.
Genetics and reproductive choices
Recent data showed that approximately 40–45% of DBA cases
are familial with autosomal dominant inheritance (Orfali et al,
2004), the remainder being sporadic or familial with seemingly
different patterns of inheritance. The transmission is often
unpredictable with examples of reduced penetrance and
co-existence of both mild and severe forms within a pedigree
(variable expressivity) (Gustavsson et al, 1997; Willig et al,
1999a,b; Gripp et al, 2001). Indeed up to 30% of these families
were identiﬁed from family studies on ‘‘sporadic’’ patients
(Orfali et al, 2004). Genetic counseling is essential in DBA
because of the risk of recurrence. The incidence of DBA is
estimated to be between 1/100 000 and 1/200 000 without
ethnic predilection, with both sexes equally affected (Ball et al,
1996; Ramenghi et al, 1999; Willig et al, 1999a; Ohga et al,
2004; Lipton et al, 2006). Routine cytogenetic analysis is
usually normal. The genetic basis of DBA is heterogeneous and
approximately 50% of patients are heterozygous for RPS17,
RPS19, RPS24, RPL5, RPL11, or RPL35A. All the mutations to
date have been found in one allele, resulting in severe loss of
function or protein haploinsufﬁciency. Homozygosity, lethal
in the mouse knockout, and compound heterozygosity have
not been described in DBA patients.
The most common mutation is found in RPS19 thus far. A
recent review (Lipton, 2007) describes 113 different RPS19
mutations associated with DBA (Draptchinskaia et al, 1999;
Matsson et al, 1999; Willig et al, 1999b; Cmejla et al, 2000;
Ramenghi et al, 2000; Proust et al, 2003; Campagnoli et al,
2004; Gazda et al, 2004; Orfali et al, 2004). There is no clear
correlation between the type of RPS19 mutation and the degree
of hematological manifestation. Identical mutations may be
associated with a wide range of clinical presentations, even
within a family; thus, even though dominantly inherited, their
expression is clearly modiﬁed by other factors.
Approximately 10–15% of cases are from multiplex families
with classical DBA evident in more than one family member.
Approximately two-thirds of these familial cases appear
autosomal dominant whereas one-third could be consistent
with autosomal recessive inheritance (Willig et al, 1999b;
Campagnoli et al, 2004; Gazda et al, 2004, 2006; Orfali et al,
2004). However ‘‘true’’ recessive forms of DBA have not yet
been ascertained and a dominant inheritance with a reduced
penetrance, or rarely gonadal mosaicism (Cmejla et al, 2000),
is a likely alternative. Identifying family members who are
likely to have silent forms of the disease is important in order
to provide reproductive counseling and to exclude them as
stem cell transplant donors (Orfali et al, 1999).
In a family in which classical DBA is present in the parent
and offspring, or in two or more siblings, the recurrence risk is
up to 50%. In a presumed sporadic case, the recurrence risk
depends on the presence of a DBA-associated mutation or any
manifestations in ﬁrst-degree relatives. A reported DBA
mutation in two successive generations, regardless of clinical
presentation, results in a 50% a priori risk for a second affected
child. If the mutation of the proband is excluded in both
parents, this is likely to be a new mutation with a recurrence
risk related to the possibility of gonadal mosaicism (Cmejla
et al, 2000) or non-paternity. In a few reported cases a partial
or complete deletion of RPS19 has been identiﬁed. Analysis of
a deleted gene by DNA sequencing may result in a ‘‘false’’
normal sequence obtained from the intact allele only. If no
mutation is identiﬁed in the proband and if elevated eADA
activity, Hb F and/or MCV are found in asymptomatic ﬁrst-
degree relatives, the recurrence risk should be stated as 50%
(Orfali et al, 2004). However the possibility of false positive
elevation in these parameters may reduce the risk to 30–40%.
If the analysis of eADA activity, Hb F and MCV is normal, the
recurrence risk is estimated to be 5–10%, due to the possibility
of false negatives.
Prenatal diagnosis is possible for DBA if a mutation is
identiﬁed in the family. More recently, preimplantation genetic
diagnosis (PGD) has become an option to greatly reduce the
risk of a second affected child. This can be performed in
families with a mutation found in a parent, in order to select
and implant embryos without risk for DBA. This method can
also be combined with PGD for human leucocyte antigen
(HLA) typing for families with an affected child in need of an
HLA-matched stem cell transplant. If mutation analysis (50%
probability) and HLA typing (25% probability) are combined,
the maximal success rate is only 12Æ5% of embryos. PGD for
HLA typing for families at risk for DBA but without a
mutation has also been performed with success (Verlinsky
et al, 2004; Kuliev et al, 2005). This option needs to be
combined with clinical and laboratory investigation of family
members followed by information to the couple about their
speciﬁc recurrence risk for DBA as described above. The
practical and ethical considerations of PGD for HLA typing
alone in DBA, when a genetic diagnosis is unavailable and
when no, or only equivocal, risk factors are identiﬁed, are
being debated. Furthermore, this method is not universally
available (Dobson, 2003; Dyer, 2004, 2006; Grewal et al, 2004).
Cancer predisposition
Until recently, information with regard to the cancer risk in
patients with DBA has been limited primarily to case reports:
29 cases (as well as three with myelodysplasia who did not
develop acute myeloid leukemia) were reported among more
than 700 patients in the literature (updated from Alter, 2003;
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 863
Yaris et al, 2006). The reported proportion of 4% is higher
than the expected <1% for a cohort less than 30 years of age.
The median age for cancer in these reports was 15 years (range
1 to 43 years), much younger than the median of 68 years in
the general population (Ries et al, 2001). The cases of cancer in
DBA patients may reﬂect an over-reporting bias and thus the
true risk is unknown. Better information may be derived from
longitudinal follow-up of cohorts of DBA patients. The crude
frequency reported from Boston Children’s Hospital was 5/76
or 6Æ6% (Janov et al, 1996), the French series 9/240 or 3Æ8%
(Willig et al, 1999a), the DBAR 8/420 or 1Æ9% (Lipton et al,
2001), the Italian registry 0/96 (unpublished observations),
and the National Cancer Institutes IBMFS cohort 3/58 or 5%
(unpublished observations), compared to an expected 0Æ5%
after adjustment for age, sex, and birth cohort. None of these
data have yet been analyzed adequately using time-dependent
and appropriately adjusted methods.
While the published data are insufﬁcient to deﬁne the risk of
cancer in DBA, the types of malignancy reported are
informative. The literature includes 11 cases of acute leukemia
(10 acute myeloid leukemia [AML] and one acute lympho-
blastic leukemia), three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome that
did not develop AML, six cases of sarcoma (ﬁve osteogenic,
one soft tissue), three Hodgkin lymphoma, two breast cancer,
two hepatocellular carcinoma, and one each of melanoma,
ﬁbrohistiocytoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, gastric cancer
and colon cancer.
The role of any DBA genes in this process is unknown. The
mechanism for the increased incidence of AML may be related
to selective pressure in patients with pro-apoptotic states, as
described in the IBMFS (Lensch et al, 1999). It is unknown
whether there is any genotype-phenotype correlation between
RPS19 mutations, or other DBA genes, and cancer predispo-
sition. Therefore screening cannot be targeted to a speciﬁc
genotype. It is important to note that DBA is unequivocally
one of the IBMFS with a predisposition to malignancy.
We may speculate that management of cancer with chemo-
therapy may be compromised, because of the reduced bone
marrow reserve seen in patients with a hematopoietic progen-
itor defect (Giri et al, 2000), which could result in delayed
recovery from marrow suppression and increased toxicity.
There may be a role for early hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) in some patients. The survival of
DBA patients with cancer appears to be less than that of
patients with similar cancers in the general population, but this
cannot be analyzed statistically using case reports in the
literature. A prospective cohort is required for this purpose
(Lipton et al, 2006).
Typically a periodic history and physical examination with
blood count monitoring is done at 4–6 month intervals in
stable DBA patients. If abnormalities appear in the blood, bone
marrow aspirate, biopsy, and cytogenetic studies (karyotype, as
well as FISH analysis for abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7,
and 8) should be performed. An annual bone marrow
examination to determine early signs of marrow evolution to
myelodysplasia or AML, done by some centres, is not consid-
ered standard of care. It may be prudent to minimize the
radiation exposure from diagnostic tests, given the increased
risk of sarcoma. Nevertheless, there should be a low threshold
for investigation of bone or joint pain in DBA patients.
Corticosteroid therapy
Corticosteroids remain the mainstay of treatment in DBA
more than half a century after the original report of their
efﬁcacy (Gasser, 1951). Their mechanism of action in DBA is
still unknown and under investigation. Approximately 80% of
DBA patients respond to an initial course of steroids. There is
currently no reliable way to predict steroid responsiveness. The
RPS19 mutation status has not been predictive of response in
any series.
Once steroid therapy is started, an increase in hemoglobin is
usually seen within two to four weeks. The dose is then tapered
to determine the minimum dosage required for continued
transfusion independence. The maintenance dose in steroid
responders is highly variable with some individuals requiring
extremely small doses. The mechanism of this variable
response is unknown. In contrast, some patients become
refractory to steroids despite an initial response. In others,
steroid therapy may have to be discontinued due to unaccept-
able side effects. In over 20% of DBA patients, steroids (or red
cell transfusions) may eventually be stopped completely
with continued maintenance of adequate hemoglobin levels,
a so-called ‘‘remission’’ or more appropriately, treatment
independence.
There is limited long-term follow-up data on the use of
steroids in infancy. Premature infants receiving steroid therapy
have a decrease in growth velocity (Stark et al, 2001),
continued growth delay and neuromotor dysfunction in
toddlerhood (Yeh et al, 1998) and delayed motor milestones.
Thus in babies with DBA, the need for relatively high doses
and prolonged duration of steroid therapy should be balanced
against the possible detrimental effects. Learning difﬁculties
were rarely reported in the UK registry but were more
common in patients with large deletions, possibly consistent
with a contiguous gene syndrome (Orfali et al, 2004).
Based upon these observations and the lack of evidence that
a delay in starting a trial of steroids affects responsiveness,
steroid therapy is not generally recommended in babies under
6 months of age. Some consensus participants recommend a
steroid trial beginning at one year of age, but there is no
general consensus. An earlier trial of steroids may be consid-
ered if there is poor venous access, or where the safety of the
blood supply is questionable. When steroids are started in
babies less than 1 year of age, growth and neuromotor
development should be closely monitored. Prednisone, or
prednisolone, is most commonly used, although the steroid
preparation does not appear to inﬂuence response. The
recommended starting dose is 2 mg/kg of prednisone, or
the glucocorticoid equivalent, given as a single daily dose in the
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
864 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
morning. Some clinicians use divided doses. Steroids should be
started once the post-transfusion hemoglobin is at a level of
80–90 g/l, low enough to prevent erythroid suppression, but
high enough to allow time for response before the next
transfusion. This starting dose should be given for a maximum
of 4 weeks. If transfusion independence is not achieved after
this time, the steroids should be discontinued. Continuation of
steroids or dose escalation in non-responders beyond this time
is unwarranted.
There are little data to support a speciﬁc steroid tapering
schedule. Based on consensus, once the patient responds,
the steroids should be weaned to an average daily dose of
1 mg/kg per day over 8–12 weeks. Reducing to an alternate
day dosing schedule, often increasing the ﬁrst day’s dose while
decreasing the second day’s dose, can accomplish this. The
dose should then be further tapered slowly to ﬁnd the minimal
maintenance dose necessary to keep the hemoglobin in the
range of 80–100 g/l, the target level being determined by the
individual patient’s requirement to sustain growth and activity.
The recommended maximum maintenance dose is £1 mg/kg
every other day or £0Æ5 mg/kg daily. Steroids should be
tapered more slowly, and with great care, below this level to
reduce the risk of overshooting the minimal effective dose for
that individual. If this occurs, the dose should be immediately
increased to the previous level at which the hemoglobin was
within target range. The hemoglobin should be monitored
closely during this phase because a too rapid taper often
necessitates the reinstitution of the initial 2 mg/kg per day
dose to re-achieve response. If an acceptable hemoglobin
cannot be sustained at the recommended dose, steroids should
be tapered and discontinued. Some patients require very small
doses for continued response.
The steroid dose in partial responders (patients with
decreased transfusion requirement on steroids) should be
tapered to ﬁnd the minimal effective dose like complete
responders. If there is no reduction in transfusion requirement
at this level, steroids should be tapered and discontinued.
Some experts do not favor the use of both modalities
simultaneously and discontinue steroids if transfusion inde-
pendence cannot be achieved.
An increase in the maintenance dose of steroids is usually
not required for transient falls in hemoglobin, as may be seen
with non-speciﬁc viral infections. Occasional transfusions may
be given. As children grow they should be permitted to
outgrow their dose with upward dose adjustments only if the
steady state hemoglobin decreases signiﬁcantly. Parvovirus B19
infection should be considered as a possible cause of an acute,
prolonged drop in hemoglobin (Tchernia et al, 1993),
although patients have sustained this infection with no effect.
A proportion of steroid responders become increasingly
resistant, requiring progressively higher doses to maintain
their hemoglobin in the target range. Girls, in particular, may
show a reduction in steroid sensitivity at puberty. It is
important to be careful not to escalate the steroid dose above
the recommended limit. Transfusion therapy may be necessary
during this time. The combined oral contraceptives and other
estrogen mimetic agents should be avoided in steroid-depen-
dent women, as oestrogens may induce steroid refractoriness.
Those patients who are treatment independent may have their
stability disrupted with the introduction of estrogen deriva-
tives. A repeat trial of steroids may be considered for non-
responders, as response to a second course has been described
anecdotally.
Side effects and monitoring
The onset of anaemia during early infancy and the prolonged
duration of steroid therapy make DBA unique with respect to
the risk of side effects (Table V). A review of all possible
steroid side effects is beyond the scope of this article, however
those of speciﬁc interest to DBA patients are highlighted. The
importance of steroid side effects in DBA is illustrated by data
from the French registry, in which complications due to
steroid therapy, including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and
growth retardation, were noted in 20% of patients on long-
term steroid therapy (Willig et al, 1999a). In North America,
where steroid dosing and monitoring practices may vary, the
DBAR has documented 22% of patients on steroids with
pathological fractures and 12% with cataracts (Lipton et al,
2006). Avascular necrosis, especially affecting the femoral head,
is a potential risk and should be investigated in patients with
joint pain and stiffness.
Deaths of DBA patients, especially infants, on steroid
therapy have been attributed to Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly
carinii) pneumonia (Huh et al, 2002). Therefore, Pneumocystis
pneumonia prophylaxis is indicated for patients receiving
steroids at a dose of >2 mg/kg, for those undergoing
prolonged treatment with >1 mg/kg and for those receiving
any additional immunosuppressive therapy. Sulfamethoxazole-
trimethoprim is the prophylactic treatment of choice at 5
mg/kg per day in two divided doses per day, on three
Table V. Summary of steroid side effects.
Cosmetic Hirsuitism, moon face, facial erythema,
striaie, acne, weight gain
Behavioral Hyperactivity, depression, psychosis
Endocrine Adrenal suppression, impaired glucose
tolerance, diabetes mellitus,
menstrual irregularities
Fluid and electrolytes Hypertension, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia
Skeletal Osteopenia, avascular necrosis, fractures
Growth Impaired growth velocity, especially
at puberty
Muscular Myopathy affecting proximal muscles
Immunosuppression Varicella, Pneumocystis pneumonia, candida
Ophthalmological Cataract
Neurological Pseudotumor cerebri
Gastrointestinal Gastritis, perforation, pancreatitis
Cardiovascular Hypertension
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 865
consecutive days per week. Alternative treatment with Pent-
amidine, Dapsone or Atavoquone can be used for sulfa allergic
patients or in patients with concurrent or intermittent
neutropenia.
The initiation of high-dose steroid therapy in infancy, before
the acquisition of immunity to live vaccines, also carries an
additional potential risk. A prednisone (or equivalent) dose of
<2 mg/kg per day or <20 mg/d for body weight greater than
10 kg is applied by the American Academy of Pediatrics as the
cut-off limit for the safe administration of live vaccines
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2006). Varicella can be fatal
in non-immune individuals on steroid therapy. Varicella
immunization is recommended for non-immune individuals
older than 12 months of age (Krause & Klinman, 1995). Non-
immune individuals being treated with steroids should be
advised to seek urgent medical attention following exposure to
chickenpox. A hepatitis B immunization program is also
recommended.
United Kingdom guidelines on the management of bone
density in adults on steroid therapy recommend dual energy
X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning for patients receiving
>7Æ5 mg/d for more than 6 months, and repeated every 1–
3 years (Eastell et al, 1998) with the addition of bisphos-
phonate therapy for those patients on >15 mg/d for more
than 6 months. Bisphosphonate therapy has been used in a
limited number of children with secondary osteoporosis from
corticosteroid administration. Although short-term use has
been well tolerated, there is insufﬁcient evidence to support
the use of bisphosphonates as standard therapy (Ward et al,
2007).
Growth retardation is a very important complication of
steroid therapy in a disorder already associated with short
stature. Growth curves should be closely monitored especially
during periods of high growth velocity, such as in infancy and
puberty. Steroid dosage should be kept to a minimum during
these times. A growth plateau may indicate that steroids
should be interrupted and substituted by a short-term
transfusion program. Growth hormone therapy has been used
successfully to increase growth velocity (Scott et al, 2004), but
early, prolonged exposure to pharmacological doses of growth
hormone should only be carefully considered on a case-by-case
basis in DBA. As there is an increased risk of malignancy in
DBA, including osteogenic sarcoma, the use of growth
hormone should be individualized, although no relationship
between the administration of growth hormone and cancer has
been established (Alter, 2004).
Patients should be made aware of the danger of stopping
steroids suddenly and of the need to inform any medical
practitioner of current and past steroid treatment in order that
stress doses be administered under appropriate conditions, i.e.
surgery, sepsis, injury, and other emergencies (Walsh & Dayan,
2000). Maintenance treatment with steroids should be given as
an early morning dose to minimize adrenal suppression. An
endocrinological evaluation may be helpful in guiding a steroid
taper after prolonged use.
Transfusion therapy
After an initial period of transfusion at diagnosis, chronic
transfusion therapy with packed red blood cells is begun once
it has been established that the patient is not responsive to
corticosteroids. Since suppression of erythropoiesis is not a
goal of transfusion in DBA, as it is in thalassemia major,
trough hemoglobin levels of 80 g/l are usually acceptable for
maintaining adequate growth and development. No data are
available on the incidence or prevalence of alloimmunization
in DBA patients, thus, extended panel crossmatching should be
performed according to institutional policies. Red blood cell
units should be leucocyte depleted.
Assessment of iron overload
Iron is released from the breakdown of red blood cells by
macrophages in the reticuloendothelial system. Since iron is
not recycled into new red cells in DBA and there is no speciﬁc
mechanism for excretion, iron accumulates in tissues. Even-
tually, as the capacity for safe sequestration of the excess iron is
surpassed, extensive iron-induced injury develops in the heart,
liver, pancreas, thyroid, and other organs. With transfusional
iron overload, the onset of toxic manifestations, the pattern of
organ involvement and the severity of tissue damage are
known to be inﬂuenced by a variety of factors, including the
magnitude of the body iron burden, the rate of iron loading,
the distribution of excess iron between the reticuloendothelial
storage compartment and the parenchymal cells of sensitive
tissues, and the amounts of non-transferrin-bound iron in the
plasma (Brittenham, 1995). Data on the rate of iron accumu-
lation and its effect on different tissues are available in
transfusion-dependent thalassemia patients (Olivieri & Brit-
tenham, 1997), but not in DBA, where ineffective erythropoi-
esis is not a concern. In a 10-year prospective study of the
quantitative relationship between the risk of death from
cardiac disease and the magnetically determined hepatic iron
concentration, a threshold was identiﬁed for deaths from
cardiac causes equivalent to about 80 lmol iron/g liver, wet
weight (15 mg iron/g liver, dry weight) (Brittenham et al,
1994). From these studies, an optimal range of liver iron of 3–
7mg/g (dry weight) is suggested for regularly transfused and
chelated thalassemia patients. Though it is possible that
patients with DBA may tolerate higher levels, there are no
data to support this hypothesis. These constraints must be
considered when adopting these recommendations.
Without chelation, the hepatic iron concentration in
patients receiving monthly transfusions would be predicted
to rise from the ideal range (3–7 mg/g, dry weight) to the high-
risk range (>15 mg/g, dry weight) in just 12 months. Effec-
tively chelating a patient to prevent tissue deposition and
morbidity requires accurately assessing the body’s iron load on
a regular basis. The hepatic iron concentration is the most
reliable measure of iron burden (Angelucci et al, 1995, 2000).
The ‘‘gold standard’’ for estimating hepatic iron concentration
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
866 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
is measurement of non-haem iron in a liver tissue biopsy
sample. Non-invasive and validated methods of measuring
liver iron include magnetic susceptometry (SQUID) (Britten-
ham et al, 1982, 1989) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(Gandon et al, 2004; Voskaridou et al, 2004; St Pierre et al,
2005). SQUID has the disadvantages of limited accessibility
(only two instruments in the United States and two in Europe)
and the inability to study iron deposition in the other organs.
MRI is more readily accessible and can image the heart,
pancreas and pituitary gland, but testing requires speciﬁc
sequences, and measurements in the heart are still investiga-
tional. An assessment of liver iron concentration is recom-
mended every 12–18 months (more frequently if the patient is
in the high risk range and intensive chelation is underway to
reduce it more rapidly). Of note, one-third of transfusion-
dependent DBA patients in an Italian study had signiﬁcant
iron overload as determined by SQUID imaging (Ramenghi U,
Piga A, personal communication). Though several groups have
shown that measuring the serum ferritin level is not a reliable
indicator of the body iron load, in the absence of the
availability of SQUID, MRI or liver biopsy data, it continues
to be used to monitor the iron load.
Many methods have been proposed to assess cardiac iron
(Hershko et al, 2004), including T2* (Anderson et al, 2001),
R2 (Wood et al, 2004) and signal intensity ratio (SIR) (Jensen
et al, 2003) measurements. T2* is being used clinically, with a
value of <8 ms considered an indicator of high risk for cardiac
disease. However, it does not have a high positive predictive
value, and should be interpreted with caution. Annual
monitoring of cardiac function by echocardiography or MRI,
and Holter monitoring has some utility and is recommended,
even though the onset of cardiac failure is often sudden and
may occur even after reassuring normal parameters on routine
echocardiography and electrocardiography. Detailed endocrine
evaluation, including bone densitometry, is recommended at
intervals based on age, compliance with chelation therapy and
iron status.
Chelation therapy
There are few data to guide the initiation of chelation therapy.
However chelation should be initiated when the hepatic iron
concentration has reached 6–7 mg/g, dry weight, which
corresponds to approximately 170–200 ml/kg of transfused
packed red cells. If SQUID and MRI are not readily available at
this time, a liver biopsy should be performed although it may
be deemed too invasive or unavailable for some patients. In
such situations, a ferritin level of 1000–1500 lg/l has been used
as a starting point and, although not perfect, may be used to
monitor iron balance. Initiating iron chelation too early may
result in toxicity from the chelator, whereas delaying it risks
tissue deposition and consequent organ dysfunction and
morbidity. Standard chelation, until recently, has been limited
to the use of deferoxamine (DesferalÒ
, Novartis) (Olivieri &
Brittenham, 1997), initiated at a dose of 40 mg/kg by
subcutaneous infusion over 8–12 h, 4–6 nights per week. This
may be modiﬁed using the hepatic iron concentration as a
guide (or, when necessary, serum ferritin level); if the level is
low, chelation may be reduced to 3–4 nights per week, or the
dose per infusion reduced, and if it is too high it may be
increased to 7 nights per week. When iron overload is severe,
and cardiac dysfunction has developed, deferoxamine should
be administered by continuous intravenous infusion (Davis &
Porter, 2000). There are some data suggesting that increasing
the dose beyond 50–60 mg/kg in a 24-h period does not have
any additional beneﬁt. Monitoring for toxicity of deferox-
amine includes regular ophthalmic (for visual ﬁelds) and
audiological (for high frequency hearing loss) examinations.
Two oral chelators are currently in use. Deferiprone (L1,
Apopharma, not licensed in the USA) (Hoffbrand et al, 2003)
is a bidentate oral iron chelator, which at higher doses has been
shown in non-randomized studies to increase the cardiac T2*
more than deferoxamine (Davis & Porter, 2000; Anderson
et al, 2001). The clinical signiﬁcance of this is not clear. Serious
toxicity includes arthritis, sometimes severe, and neutropenia.
In particular, the recent documentation of mortality due to
agranulocytosis in patients treated with Deferiprone has
resulted in the recommendation to avoid Deferiprone in
patients with DBA (Hoffbrand et al, 1989; Henter & Karle´n,
2007). Deferasirox (ICL670, ExjadeÒ
, Novartis) is a tridentate
oral iron chelator whose long half-life permits once daily
dosing. Phase II and III trials in transfusion-dependent
patients with a variety of underlying conditions (Nisbet-
Brown et al, 2003) have demonstrated that doses of 20 and
30 mg/kg per day stabilize or decrease liver iron. Toxicity is
mild and usually transient and generally includes rash, nausea
and abdominal discomfort, elevations in creatinine, rare
proteinuria and transaminase elevations. ExjadeÒ
is now
approved in the United States as ﬁrst line therapy for
transfusional iron overload in patients two years and older.
The effect of deferasirox on cardiac iron remains to be studied.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is curative in DBA
(August et al, 1976; Iriondo et al, 1984; Mugishima et al, 1995;
Willig et al, 1999a; Vlachos et al, 2001b). However, its role is
controversial. The Italian and German DBA registries reported
nine of 11 patients and 20 of 22 patients, respectively, who
were transplanted successfully (unpublished observations). The
largest series of HSCT comes from the DBAR (Lipton et al,
2006) where the major indication for HSCT was transfusion
dependence. Two patients were also transplanted for severe
aplastic anaemia and one for signiﬁcant thrombocytopenia.
Bone marrow was the most common source of stem cells,
however four unrelated cord blood and one unrelated
peripheral stem cell transplants were performed. Only one of
these ﬁve DBA patients is alive. These deaths were due to
toxicity and none were attributable to graft rejection or loss.
The survival for allogeneic sibling versus alternative donor
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 867
transplant was 72Æ7% vs. 17Æ1% at greater than 5 years from
SCT (P = 0Æ012). Importantly the survival for patients less
than 10 years of age transplanted using HLA-matched allo-
geneic siblings was 92Æ3%. More recently, successful related
umbilical cord blood and unrelated donor transplants have
been reported to the DBAR but the data are too early for
meaningful analysis.
In general, patients with DBA, whether steroid-responsive
or transfusion-dependent, may be considered for transplant
prior to age 10 years, and preferably between the ages of 2
and 5 years, if an HLA-matched related donor is available.
This is particularly true for transfusion-dependent patients,
in whom iron overload, as described in the thalassemia
transplant experience, is a signiﬁcant adverse prognostic
factor (Lucarelli et al, 1990, 2002). The actuarial likelihood
of treatment independence of around 20% needs be taken
into account when considering HSCT. Also, as most patients
taken to HSCT are steroid non-responders, the effect of a
second steroid trial can be tested prior to HSCT. Data on
the conditioning regimen in DBA are relatively limited;
however patients not receiving total body irradiation have a
better outcome (Vlachos et al, 2001b). There are insufﬁcient
data supporting a recommendation for non-myeloablative/
reduced intensity transplant conditioning in DBA (Gomez-
Almaguer et al, 2003). In addition, the role of any
conditioning regimen in the development of malignancy
must be taken into account. One patient developed
osteogenic sarcoma post-HSCT (Lipton et al, 2001). If
possible, it is recommended that umbilical cord blood be
harvested as a source of stem cells from subsequent
pregnancies once a DBA-affected proband is identiﬁed.
Strict criteria must be applied to ensure that the potential
donor is unaffected.
While recent data on unrelated HSCT may be encouraging,
the indications for HSCT for a patient without a family
matched donor are limited. There are too few transplants to
recommend routine unrelated donor SCT. At present, the
indications for unrelated HSCT are the onset of bi- or
trilineage cytopenia and/or the evolution to myelodysplasia or
AML. Transfusion complications, such as occurence of red cell
allosensitzation or iron chelator intolerance, may be indicators
for proceeding to unrelated HSCT and should be evaluated on
a case-by-case basis.
Alternative therapies
Other treatments, summarized in Table VI, have been used in
DBA over the last 30 years. These drugs appear to be largely
ineffective and there is currently no evidence that any of these
has a major role in the management of DBA (Geller et al, 1975;
Dunbar et al, 1991; Fiorillo et al, 1991; Niemeyer et al, 1991;
Gomez-Almaguer & Gonzalez-Llano, 1992; Sumimoto et al,
1992; Bejaoui et al, 1993; Gillio et al, 1993a, 1993b; Bastion
et al, 1994; Brown et al, 1994; Olivieri et al, 1994; Ozsoylu,
1994; Ball et al, 1995; Bernini et al, 1995; Buchanan, 2001;
Alter, 2003). Speciﬁc patients may respond to cyclosporine
Table VI. Summary of alternative treatments*.
Treatments Number of patients Response References
Androgens >100 20% Gomez-Almaguer and Gonzalez-Llano (1992)
High dose corticosteroids 12 7 (Ozsoylu, 1994)
8 3 complete, 1 partial (Bernini et al, 1995)
9 5 all transient (Buchanan, 2001)
Erythropoietin 10 1 transient (Fiorillo et al, 1991; Niemeyer et al, 1991)
Interleukin-3 100 10% (Dunbar et al, 1991; Gillio et al, 1993a, 1993b;
Bastion et al, 1994; Olivieri et al, 1994;
Ball et al, 1995)
Cyclosporine ± prednisone 20 (with steroids)
10 (CSA alone)
50% all transient
2 sustained response
(Totterman et al, 1984; Williams et al, 1987;
Seip & Zanussi, 1988; Leonard et al, 1989;
Splain & Berman, 1992; Monteserin et al, 1993;
Alessandri et al, 2000; Bobey et al, 2003)
Metoclopromide 9 1 complete
2 partial on steroid taper
(Abkowitz et al, 2002; Akiyama et al, 2005;
Leblanc et al, 2007)
1 1 complete
33 2 partial
Valproic acid 1 1 complete (Jabr & Taher, 2006)
Leucine 1 1 complete (Pospisilova et al, 2007)
Other (6-MP, cyclophosphamide,
Vincristine, stem cell factor,
PIXY 321, IVIG)
Largely ineffective (Geller et al, 1975; Sumimoto et al, 1992;
Bejaoui et al, 1993; Brown et al, 1994)
and anectodal communications
*Data taken from Alter (2003).
ATG, antithymocyte globulin; PIXY 321, a GM-CSF/IL-3 fusion protein; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin; 6-MP, 6-mercaptopurine.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
868 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
(Totterman et al, 1984; Williams et al, 1987; Seip & Zanussi,
1988; Leonard et al, 1989; Splain & Berman, 1992; Monteserin
et al, 1993; Alessandri et al, 2000; Bobey et al, 2003) or
metoclopramide (Abkowitz et al, 2002; Akiyama et al, 2005;
Leblanc et al, 2007), but currently these responders cannot be
identiﬁed a priori. There have been two reports on the use of
valproic acid (Jabr et al, 2004; Jabr & Taher, 2006) and leucine
(Pospisilova et al, 2007) with good outcomes, however these
are case reports and warrant further study before any
conclusions can be drawn. The known rate of remission
should be considered when evaluating these small trials and
anecdotes.
Gene therapy
Gene therapy is under development for rps19 deﬁcient DBA.
Currently, it has been shown that enforced expression of rps19
improves erythroid development in primary cells from patients
in vitro (Flygare et al, 2005). Model systems with rps19
deﬁciency in primary human hematopoietic cells have been
generated (Hamaguchi et al, 2003). Animal models with rps19
deﬁciency have to be created (Matsson et al, 2004) to test
therapeutic efﬁcacy of the viral vectors. The roadmap to
develop a human gene therapy protocol is expected to take at
least 5 years.
Outcomes
Overall, in most national registries, approximately 40% of
patients with DBA are transfusion-dependent, having failed to
respond or having become refractory to steroids, while 40%
are steroid-dependent, and 20% are transfusion-independent
on no medication (‘‘in remission’’) (Willig et al, 1999a; Lipton
et al, 2006). Remission occurs in some patients who are
initially steroid responsive when steroids can be stopped
completely with continued maintenance of adequate hemo-
globin levels. A small number of steroid non-responders may
also enter remission even after prolonged transfusion depen-
dence. The DBAR deﬁnes remission as a stable, physiologically
acceptable hemoglobin, maintained for at least six months
independent of corticosteroids, transfusions or other therapy.
Seventy percent of the remitters in the DBAR did so within the
ﬁrst decade of life. Most patients have a sustained remission.
However hormonal stress in pregnancy appears to be an
important factor contributing to ‘‘relapse’’; this may be
transient.
An analysis of the North American DBAR data (Lipton
et al, 2006) revealed 70% of the deaths were treatment-
related: infections, complications of iron overload, vascular
access device complication, and HSCT complications. Thirty
percent of deaths are disease-related: severe aplastic anaemia
and malignancy. The overall actuarial survival at greater than
40 years of age is 75Æ1%; 86Æ7% for corticosteroid-maintain-
able patients and 57Æ2% for transfusion-dependent patients.
Of note, the majority of deaths in the transfusion-dependent
group are a consequence of HSCT-related complications. The
French registry reported a 17-month-old boy on long-term
steroid therapy that died after presenting with silent peri-
tonitis (Willig et al, 1999a). Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly
carinii) pneumonia has also been a notable complication in
DBA patients treated with very high dose steroids (Huh et al,
2002). These data strongly support recommendations of
judicious steroid use, adherence to chelation regimens,
and the critical evaluation of transplant indications on a
case-by-case basis.
Five DBAR patients have been diagnosed with severe aplastic
anaemia, which presented while the patient was receiving
treatment for DBA. This is consistent with the ﬁnding of
decreased marrow cellularity with age in patients with DBA
(Giri et al, 2000). Anecdotally these patients have failed
medical management and have required stem cell transplan-
tation (DBAR, unpublished observations).
Management of adult patients
With advances in supportive care, transfusion and steroid
therapy, and stem cell transplantation, DBA is evolving from
an exclusively childhood disorder to a disorder also affecting
adults. There are known DBA patients who survive late into
adulthood, as well as patients newly diagnosed as adults.
Heterogeneity of presentation and atypical clinical features
may be confounding factors in the diagnosis of DBA.
Important causes of acquired pure red cell aplasia are
enumerated in Table I. The diagnosis of DBA may have
therapeutic implications, as some individuals who are ﬁrst
recognized in adulthood may respond to steroid therapy
(Balaban et al, 1985). Due to a paucity of data regarding
adult patients there are a number of unanswered questions
about natural disease progression and what factors lead to
long-term survival. It is unclear whether DBA worsens over
time, however, age-related decreases in erythroid and
granulocyte/macrophage progenitor numbers have been
reported (Casadevall et al, 1994). Cancer is also part of the
natural history but the cancer risk, including the incidence
of AML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), is unknown
in adults. Also, DBA may need to be considered in the
differential diagnosis of patients who present with aplastic
anaemia.
There are also a number of considerations that may be
intrinsic to adult patients, namely postadolescence and hor-
monal changes; aging; concomitant chronic diseases; sexually
transmitted diseases; lifestyle diseases; fertility and pregnancy
(Table VII); psychosocial and ﬁnancial concerns. Thus, the
lifetime management of DBA patients should be by a
multidisciplinary team involving pediatric and adult hemato-
logists, internists and subspecialists, as needed. Physicians
should be aware of the possibility of developing aplastic
anaemia, AML, MDS, or solid tumors. In general, asymptom-
atic adults with known DBA mutations should be followed like
children in remission.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 869
Management of pregnancy
Improvements in the management of pregnant women with
DBA have resulted in an increase in survival, quality of life and
reproductive potential. Consequently, many affected women
who have reached childbearing age in good condition are now
willing and able to experience pregnancy. The recurrence risk
in offspring has been discussed and follows that of an
autosomal dominant disorder.
No prospective study on pregnancy in women with DBA
is available. Nevertheless a number of reported cases in the
literature tend to highlight the risks associated with preg-
nancy (Alter et al, 1999). Complications of pregnancy
include complications in the mother, the child, or, both.
A recent study, relying on the French and German registries,
reports on 60 pregnancies in 44 women, and emphasizes the
potential hazards, including fetal loss, pre-eclampsia, preterm
delivery, intra-uterine death, infants with intra-uterine
growth retardation and children with congenital abnormal-
ities (Faivre et al, 2006) (Table VII). The etiology of such
complications remains a matter of debate and may be either
a direct result of the DBA mutation, chronic anaemia, iron
overload, DBA treatment, or some combination of any, or
all, of these. Of interest, some of the observed complications
are similar to those reported in placental vascular disease.
Although a placental vasculopathy has not been documented
in pregnant women with DBA, treatment with aspirin has
been beneﬁcial in some cases. There is no signiﬁcant
correlation between the outcome of pregnancy and fetal
DBA status.
The additional iron burden as a consequence of a new
transfusion requirement should be dealt with postpartum as
chelation is contraindicated during pregnancy (Skordis et al,
1998; Aessopos et al, 1999). Deferoxamine is known to be
teratogenic at high doses in rodents while deferasirox is not.
However, neither medication is licensed for use in pregnancy
despite reports of safe administration of deferoxamine in a
limited number of pregnant thalassemia patients and
pregnant women with iron poisoning (Singer & Vichinsky,
1999). Chelation should cease when the patient is planning
to become pregnant, or as soon as a pregnancy is
recognized.
To the extent possible, pregnancies should be planned.
When indicated, an intensiﬁcation of iron chelation should
be performed before the onset of pregnancy. Any woman
with DBA contemplating pregnancy should undergo a
thorough evaluation of any feature that may interfere with
pregnancy outcome, including the presence of blood-borne
infections, iron overload and related diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism or cardiomyopathy. Some of these will have
to be regularly assessed during the pregnancy thus care
should be administered in a high-risk obstetrical practice in
collaboration with hematologists and other appropriate
subspecialists. Intensiﬁed ultrasound and Doppler follow-up
are recommended to screen for congenital abnormalities and
hydrops fetalis in the fetus, and to assess a potential placental
vascular disorder. In cases where the father of the child is the
DBA-affected individual, the pregnancy should also be
considered high risk and closely monitored for signs of fetal
distress, hydrops fetalis and other complications of the fetus
(Rogers et al, 1997).
The hemoglobin concentration to be maintained in
pregnancy has not been established. The available literature
on anaemia and pregnancy outcome is mainly devoted to
severe iron deﬁciency and sickle cell disease and is not
relevant in this setting. In thalassemia patients, the usually
recommended hemoglobin in pregnancy is 100 g/l (Skordis
et al, 1998; Aessopos et al, 1999). Chronically transfused
DBA patients should be maintained at that hemoglobin
level. Steroid responsive women often experience an
increased steroid requirement or become transfusion-depen-
dent during pregnancy. In most cases, an increase in the
prepregnancy steroid dose fails to maintain a satisfactory
hemoglobin level. It is also unlikely that steroid treatment
initiation in a previously untreated woman will be
efﬁcacious (Alter et al, 1999; Faivre et al, 2006). Ultimately,
steroid toxicity must be considered in both the mother
and the fetus. Transfusion therapy is therefore usually
necessary.
In conclusion, much of the new data suggesting manage-
ment pathways derive from the analysis of data from
worldwide DBA registries. Relevant supporting literature is
cited, when available, but clinical recommendations are largely
based on the experience of veteran clinicians (Appendix I) and
extrapolation from similar clinical situations. When consulta-
tion is recommended, it should be with specialists who have
experience in the management of patients with IBMFS.
Families and patients should be referred to DBA support
groups in their area (www.dbafoundation.org).
Table VII. Complications of pregnancy in women with Diamond
Blackfan anaemia (DBA).
Maternal
Increased anaemia with a loss of steroid responsiveness or an
increase in transfusion requirement
Accelerated haemochromatosis during respite from chelation
Risk of:
Abortion
Preterm delivery
Pre-eclampsia
Caesarean section
Placental vasculopathy
Fetal
Fetal death
Intra-uterine growth retardation
Prematurity
Recurrence of DBA including severe form, e.g. profound neonatal
anaemia and hydrops fetalis
Risk of congenital abnormalities
Data from Faivre et al (2006).
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
870 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Daniella Maria
Arturi Foundation, Diamond Blackfan Anemia Foundation,
Pediatric Cancer Foundation (J.M.Lipton), Association Franc¸-
aise de la maladie de Blackfan-Diamond (T.L.), National
Institutes of Health RO1 HL 079571 (J.M.Lipton, A.V., E.A.),
5R01-HL079567-02 (N.D.), R21 DK075443 (M.B.) and RO1
CA10532 (M.B.), The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research
General Clinical Research Center MO1 RR018535 (J.M.Lipton,
A.V., E.A.), the Intramural Research Program of the National
Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute (B.P.A.),
the Division of Intramural Research of National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases/ National Institutes of Health
(E.M.K.), Children’s Cancer Foundation of Sweden (N.D.),
Ministero Italiano dell’Universita` e Ricerca (U.R.). Dr. J.M.Liu
is a consultant for Alexion Pharmaceuticals.
A.V. and J.M.Lipton wrote, reviewed and revised the
manuscript. E.J.L. recorded conference discussions. E.A.
recorded conference discussions and assisted with technical
preparation of the manuscript. S.B., N.D., B.P.A., S.S., U.R.,
J.M., S.K., J.M.Liu, T.L., C.P., E.M.K. and B.G. wrote their
designated sections and reviewed the manuscript. A.S. and
M.B. reviewed the manuscript and contributed to various
sections.
We are indebted to David G. Nathan, Gil Tchernia and
George Buchanan for their critical review of the manuscript.
References
Aase, J.M. & Smith, D.W. (1969) Congenital anemia and triphalangeal
thumbs: a new syndrome. Journal of Pediatrics, 74, 471–474.
Abkowitz, J.L., Schaison, G., Boulad, F., Brown, D.L., Buchanan, G.R.,
Johnson, C.A., Murray, J.C. & Sabo, K.M. (2002) Response of
Diamond-Blackfan anemia to metoclopramide: evidence for a role
for prolactin in erythropoiesis. Blood, 100, 2687–2691.
Aessopos, A., Karabatsos, F., Farmakis, D., Katsantoni, A., Hatziliami,
A., Youssef, J. & Karagiorga, M. (1999) Pregnancy in patients with
well-treated beta-thalassemia: outcome for mothers and newborn
infants. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 180, 360–365.
Akiyama, M., Yanagisawa, T., Yuza, Y., Yokoi, K., Ariga, M., Fujisawa,
K., Hoshi, Y. & Eto, Y. (2005) Successful treatment of Diamond-
Blackfan anemia with metoclopramide. American Journal of Hema-
tology, 78, 295–298.
Alessandri, A.J., Rogers, P.C., Wadsworth, L.D. & Davis, J.H. (2000)
Diamond-blackfan anemia and cyclosporine therapy revisited.
Journal of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 22, 176–179.
Alter, B.P. (2003) Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. In:
Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood (eds by
D.G. Nathan, S.H. Orkin, A.T. Look & D. Ginsburg), pp. 280–365.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Alter, B.P. (2004) Growth hormone and the risk of malignancy.
Pediatric Blood Cancer, 43, 534–535.
Alter, B.P., Kumar, M., Lockhart, L.L., Sprinz, P.G. & Rowe, T.F.
(1999) Pregnancy in bone marrow failure syndromes: Diamond-
Blackfan anaemia and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. British
Journal Haematology, 107, 49–54.
American Academy of Pediatrics (2006) Immunization in special
clinical circumstances. In: Red Book: 2006 Report of the Committee on
Infectious Diseases (ed. by L. Pickering), pp. 76–78. American
Academy of Pediatrics, Elk Grove Village, IL.
Anderson, L.J., Holden, S., Davis, B., Prescott, E., Charrier, C.C.,
Bunce, N.H., Firmin, D.N., Wonke, B., Porter, J., Walker, J.M. &
Pennell, D.J. (2001) Cardiovascular T2-star (T2*) magnetic reso-
nance for the early diagnosis of myocardial iron overload. [See
comment]. European Heart Journal, 22, 2171–2179.
Angelucci, E., Baronciani, D., Lucarelli, G., Baldassarri, M., Galimberti,
M., Giardini, C., Martinelli, F., Polchi, P., Polizzi, V. & Ripalti, M.
(1995) Needle liver biopsy in thalassaemia: analyses of diagnostic
accuracy and safety in 1184 consecutive biopsies. British Journal
Haematology, 89, 757–761.
Angelucci, E., Brittenham, G.M., McLaren, C.E., Ripalti, M., Bar-
onciani, D., Giardini, C., Galimberti, M., Polchi, P. & Lucarelli,
G. (2000) Hepatic iron concentration and total body iron stores
in thalassemia major. New England Journal of Medicine, 343, 327–
331.
August, C.S., King, E., Githens, J.H., McIntosh, K., Humbert, J.R.,
Greensheer, A. & Johnson, R.B. (1976) Establishment of erythro-
poiesis following bone marrow transplantation in a patient with
congenital hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-Blackfan syndrome).
Blood, 48, 491–498.
Balaban, E.P., Buchanan, G.R., Graham, M. & Frenkel, E.P. (1985)
Diamond-Blackfan syndrome in adult patients. American Journal of
Medicine, 78, 533–538.
Ball, S.E., Tchernia, G., Wranne, L., Bastion, Y., Bekassy, N.A., Bor-
digoni, P., Debre, M., Elinder, G., Kamps, W.A., Lanning, M.,
Leblanc, T. & Makipernaa, A. (1995) Is there a role for interleukin-3
in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia? Results of a European multicentre
study. British Journal Haematology, 91, 313–318.
Ball, S.E., McGuckin, C.P., Jenkins, G. & Gordon-Smith, E.C. (1996)
Diamond-Blackfan anaemia in the U.K.: analysis of 80 cases from a
20-year birth cohort. British Journal Haematology, 94, 645–653.
Bastion, Y., Bordigoni, P., Debre, M., Girault, D., Leblanc, T., Tcher-
nia, G., Ball, S., McGuckin, C., Gordon-Smith, E.C., Bekassy, A.,
Be´kassy, A. & Wranne, L. (1994) Sustained response after
recombinant interleukin-3 in diamond blackfan anemia. Blood, 83,
617–618.
Bejaoui, M., Fitouri, Z., Sfar, M.T. & Lakhoua, R. (1993) Failure of
immunosuppressive therapy and high-dose intravenous
immunoglobulins in four transfusion-dependent, steroid-unre-
sponsive Blackfan-Diamond anemia patients. Haematologica, 78,
38–39.
Bernini, J.C., Carrillo, J.M. & Buchanan, G.R. (1995) High-dose
intravenous methylprednisolone therapy for patients with Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia refractory to conventional doses of predni-
sone. Journal of Pediatrics, 127, 654–659.
Bobey, N.A., Carcao, M., Dror, Y., Freedman, M.H., Dahl, N. &
Woodman, R.C. (2003) Sustained cyclosporine-induced erythropoi-
etic response in identical male twins with diamond-blackfan anemia.
Journal of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 25, 914–918.
Brittenham, G.M. (1995) Disorders of iron metabolism: deﬁciency and
overload. In: Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice (eds by R.
Hoffman, E. Benz, S. Shattil, B. Furie, H. Cohen & L. Silberstein),
pp. 492–523. Churchill Livingstone, New York.
Brittenham, G.M., Farrell, D.E., Harris, J.W., Feldman, E.S., Danish,
E.H., Muir, W.A., Tripp, J.H. & Bellon, E.M. (1982)
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 871
Magnetic-susceptibility measurement of human iron stores. New
England Journal of Medicine, 307, 1671–1675.
Brittenham, G.M., Allen, C.J., Farrell, D.E. & Harris, J.W. (1989)
Hepatic iron stores in thalassemia: non-invasive magnetic mea-
surements. Progress in Clinical and Biological Research, 309, 101–106.
Brittenham, G.M., Grifﬁth, P.M., Nienhuis, A.W., McLaren, C.E.,
Young, N.S., Tucker, E.E., Allen, C.J., Farrell, D.E. & Harris, J.W.
(1994) Efﬁcacy of deferoxamine in preventing complications of iron
overload in patients with thalassemia major. New England Journal of
Medicine, 331, 567–573.
Brown, K.E., Green, S.W., Antunez de Mayolo, J., Bellanti, J.A., Smith,
S.D., Smith, T.J. & Young, N.S. (1994) Congenital anaemia after
transplacental B19 parvovirus infection. Lancet, 343, 895–896.
Buchanan, G.R. (2001) Oral megadose methylprednisolone therapy for
refractory Diamond-Blackfan anemia. International Diamond-
Blackfan Anemia Study Group. Journal of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology, 23, 353–356.
Campagnoli, M.F., Garelli, E., Quarello, P., Carando, A., Varotto, S.,
Nobili, B., Longoni, D., Pecile, V., Zecca, M., Dufour, C., Ramenghi,
U. & Dianzan, I. (2004) Molecular basis of Diamond-Blackfan
anemia: new ﬁndings from the Italian registry and a review of the
literature. Haematologica, 89, 480–489.
Casadevall, N., Croisille, L., Auffray, I., Tchernia, G. & Coulombel, L.
(1994) Age-related alterations in erythroid and granulopoietic pro-
genitors in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia. British Journal Haemato-
logy, 87, 369–375.
Cathie, I.A. (1950) Erythrogenesis imperfecta. Archives of Disease in
Childhood, 25, 313–324.
Celiker, M.Y., Arkin, S., Celiker, I., Atsidaftos, E. & Lipton, J.M. (2004)
Differentiation and survival of UT-7/Epo cells: a potential in vitro
model for erythropoiesis. Pediatric Blood & Cancer, 42, 513.
Chen, S., Warszawski, J., Bader-Meunier, B., Tchernia, G., Da Costa,
L., Marie, I. & Dommergues, J.P. (2005) Diamond-blackfan anemia
and growth status: the French registry. Journal of Pediatrics, 147,
669–673.
Cmejla, R., Blafkova, J., Stopka, T., Zavadil, J., Pospisilova, D., Mihal,
V., Petrtylova, K. & Jelinek, J. (2000) Ribosomal protein S19 gene
mutations in patients with diamond-blackfan anemia and identiﬁ-
cation of ribosomal protein S19 pseudogenes. Blood Cells, Molecules,
and Diseases, 26, 124–132.
Cmejla, R., Cmejlova, J., Handrkova, H., Petrak, J. & Pospisilova, D.
(2007) Ribosomal protein S17 gene (RPS17) is mutated in Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia. Human Mutation, 28, 1178–1182.
Davis, B.A. & Porter, J.B. (2000) Long-term outcome of continuous
24-hour deferoxamine infusion via indwelling intravenous catheters
in high-risk beta-thalassemia. Blood, 95, 1229–1236.
Dessypris, E.N. & Lipton, J.M. (2003) Red cell aplasia. In: Wintrobe’s
Clinical Hematology, 11th edn (eds. by J.P. Greer, J. Foerster, J.N.
Lukens, G.M. Rogers, F. Paraskevas & B.E. Glader), pp. 1421–1437.
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Diamond, L.K. & Blackfan, K. (1938) Hypoplastic anemia. American
Journal of Diseases of Children, 56, 464–467.
Diamond, L.K., Wang, W.C. & Alter, B.P. (1976) Congenital hypo-
plastic anemia. Advances in Pediatrics, 22, 349–378.
Dobson, R. (2003) ‘‘Saviour sibling’’ is born after embryo selection in
the United States. BMJ, 326, 1416.
Draptchinskaia, N., Gustavsson, P., Andersson, B., Pettersson, M.,
Willig, T.N., Dianzani, I., Ball, S., Tchernia, G., Klar, J., Matsson, H.,
Tentler, D., Mohandas, N., Carlsson, B. & Dahl, N. (1999) The gene
encoding ribosomal protein S19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan
anaemia. Nature Genetics, 21, 169–175.
Dunbar, A.E., III, Moore, S.L. & Hinson, R.M. (2003) Fetal Diamond-
Blackfan anemia associated with hydrops fetalis. American Journal of
Perinatology, 20, 391–394.
Dunbar, C.E., Smith, D.A., Kimball, J., Garrison, L., Nienhuis, A.W. &
Young, N.S. (1991) Treatment of Diamond-Blackfan anaemia with
haematopoietic growth factors, granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor and interleukin 3: sustained remissions following
IL-3. British Journal Haematology, 79, 316–321.
Dyer, C. (2004) Couple allowed to select an embryo to save sibling.
BMJ, 329, 592.
Dyer, C. (2006) Couple is given go-ahead to use embryo selection to
help existing child. BMJ, 332, 114.
Eastell, R., Reid, D.M., Compston, J., Cooper, C., Fogelman, I., Francis,
R.M., Hosking, D.J., Purdie, D.W., Ralston, S.H., Reeve, J., Russell,
R.G., Stevenson, J.C. & Torgerson, D.J. (1998) A UK Consensus
Group on management of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: an
update. Journal of Internal Medicine, 244, 271–292.
Ebert, B.L., Lee, M.M., Pretz, J.L., Subramanian, A., Mak, R., Golub,
T.R. & Sieff, C.A. (2005) An RNA interference model of RPS19
deﬁciency in Diamond-Blackfan anemia recapitulates defective
hematopoiesis and rescue by dexamethasone: identiﬁcation of
dexamethasone-responsive genes by microarray. Blood, 105, 4620–
4626.
Ellis, S.R. & Lipton, J.M. (2007) Diamond Blackfan anemia: a disorder
of red cell development. In: Current Topics in Developmental Biology
(ed. by J. Bieker), pp. 215–239. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands.
Faivre, L., Meerpohl, J., Da Costa, L., Marie, I., Nouvel, C., Gnekow,
A., Bender-Gotze, C., Bauters, F., Coifﬁer, B., Peaud, P.Y., Rispal, P.,
Berrebi, A., Berger, C., Flesch, M., Sagot, P., Varet, B., Niemeyer, C.,
Tchernia, G. & Leblanc, T. (2006) High-risk pregnancies in Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia: a survey of 64 pregnancies from the French
and German registries. Haematologica, 91, 530–533.
Farrar, J., Nater, M., Caywood, E., McDevitt, M., Kowalski, J.,
Takemoto, C., Talbot, C., Meltzer, P., Esposito, D., Beggs, A.,
Schneider, H., Grabowska, A., Ball, S., Niewiadomska, E., Sieff, C.,
Vlachos, A., Atsidaftos, E., Ellis, S., Lipton, J., Gazda, H. & Arceci,
R.J. (2007) A large ribosomal subunit protein abnormality in Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia (DBA). Blood, 110, 131a.
Fiorillo, A., Poggi, V., Migliorati, R., Parasole, R., Selleri, C. & Rotoli,
B. (1991) Unresponsiveness to erythropoietin therapy in a case of
Blackfan Diamond anemia. American Journal of Hematology, 37, 65.
Flygare, J. & Karlsson, S. (2007) Diamond-Blackfan anemia: erythro-
poiesis lost in translation. Blood, 109, 3152–3154.
Flygare, J., Kiefer, T., Miyake, K., Utsugisawa, T., Hamaguchi, I., Da
Costa, L., Richter, J., Davey, E.J., Matsson, H., Dahl, N., Wiz-
nerowicz, M., Trono, D. & Karlsson, S. (2005) Deﬁciency of ribo-
somal protein S19 in CD34+ cells generated by siRNA blocks
erythroid development and mimics defects seen in Diamond-
Blackfan anemia. Blood, 105, 4627–4634.
Flygare, J., Aspesi, A., Bailey, J.C., Miyake, K., Caffrey, J.M., Karlsson,
S. & Ellis, S.R. (2007) Human RPS19, the gene mutated in Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia, encodes a ribosomal protein required for
the maturation of 40S ribosomal subunits. Blood, 109, 980–986.
Gandon, Y., Olivie, D., Guyader, D., Aube, C., Oberti, F., Sebille, V. &
Deugnier, Y. (2004) Non-invasive assessment of hepatic iron stores
by MRI. [see comment]. Lancet, 363, 357–362.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
872 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
Gasser, C. (1951) Aplastische Anamie (chronische Erythroblastophth-
ise) und Cortison. Schweizerische Medizinische Wochenschrift.
Journal Suisse de Medecine, 81, 1241–1242.
Gazda, H.T., Zhong, R., Long, L., Niewiadomska, E., Lipton, J.M.,
Ploszynska, A., Zaucha, J.M., Vlachos, A., Atsidaftos, E., Viskochil,
D.H., Niemeyer, C.M., Meerpohl, J.J., Rokicka-Milewska, R.,
Pospisilova, D., Wiktor-Jedrzejczak, W., Nathan, D.G., Beggs, A.H.
& Sieff, C.A. (2004) RNA and protein evidence for haplo-insufﬁ-
ciency in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia patients with RPS19 muta-
tions. British Journal Haematology, 127, 105–113.
Gazda, H.T., Grabowska, A., Merida-Long, L.B., Latawiec, E., Schnei-
der, H.E., Lipton, J.M., Vlachos, A., Atsidaftos, E., Ball, S.E., Orfali,
K.A., Niewiadomska, E., Da Costa, L., Tchernia, G., Niemeyer, C.,
Meerpohl, J.J., Stahl, J., Schratt, G., Glader, B., Backer, K., Wong, C.,
Nathan, D.G., Beggs, A.H. & Sieff, C.A. (2006) Ribosomal protein
S24 gene is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia. American Journal
of Human Genetics, 79, 1110–1118.
Gazda, H.T., Sheen, M.R., Darras, N., Shneider, H., Sieff, C.A., Ball,
S.E., Niewiadomska, E., Newberger, P.E., Atsidaftos, E., Vlachos, A.,
Lipton, J.M. & Beggs, A.H. (2007) Mutations of the genes for
ribosomal proteins L5 and L11 are a common cause of Diamond-
Blackfan anemia. Blood, 110, 130a.
Geller, G., Drivit, W., Zalusky, R. & Zanjani, E.D. (1975) Lack of
erythropoietic inhibitory effect of serum from patients with con-
genital pure red cell aplasia. New England Journal of Medicine, 292,
198–201.
Gillio, A.P., Faulkner, L.B., Alter, B.P., Reilly, L., Klafter, R., Heller, G.,
Young, D.C., Lipton, J.M., Moore, M.A. & O’Reilly, R.J. (1993a)
Successful treatment of Diamond-Blackfan anemia with interleukin
3. Stem Cells, 11(Suppl 2), 123–130.
Gillio, A.P., Faulkner, L.B., Alter, B.P., Reilly, L., Klafter, R., Heller, G.,
Young, D.C., Lipton, J.M., Moore, M.A. & O’Reilly, R.J. (1993b)
Treatment of Diamond-Blackfan anemia with recombinant human
interleukin-3. Blood, 82, 744–751.
Giri, N., Kang, E., Tisdale, J.F., Follman, D., Rivera, M., Schwartz,
G.N., Kim, S., Young, N.S., Rick, M.E. & Dunbar, C.E. (2000)
Clinical and laboratory evidence for a trilineage haematopoietic
defect in patients with refractory Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.
British Journal Haematology, 108, 167–175.
Glader, B.E. & Backer, K. (1988) Elevated red cell adenosine deaminase
activity: a marker of disordered erythropoiesis in Diamond-Blackfan
anaemia and other haematologic diseases. British Journal Haema-
tology, 68, 165–168.
Gomez-Almaguer, D. & Gonzalez-Llano, O. (1992) Danazol in the
treatment of Diamond Blackfan anemia (abstract). Blood, 80, 382a.
Gomez-Almaguer, D., Ruiz-Arguelles, G.J., Tarin-Arzaga Ldel, C.,
Gonzalez-Llano, O., Jaime-Perez, J.C., Lopez-Martinez, B., Cantu-
Rodriguez, O.G. & Herrera-Garza, J.L. (2003) Reduced-intensity
stem cell transplantation in children and adolescents: the Mexican
experience. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 9, 157–
161.
Grewal, S.S., Kahn, J.P., MacMillan, M.L., Ramsay, N.K. & Wagner,
J.E. (2004) Successful hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for
Fanconi anemia from an unaffected HLA-genotype-identical sibling
selected using preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Blood, 103, 1147–
1151.
Gripp, K.W., McDonald-McGinn, D.M., La Rossa, D., McGain, D.,
Federman, N., Vlachos, A., Glader, B.E., McKenzie, S.E., Lipton,
J.M. & Zackai, E.H. (2001) Bilateral microtia and cleft palate in
cousins with Diamond-Blackfan anemia. American Journal of Med-
ical Genetics, 101, 268–274.
Gustavsson, P., Willing, T.N., van Haeringen, A., Tchernia, G., Dian-
zani, I., Donner, M., Elinder, G., Henter, J.I., Nilsson, P.G., Gordon,
L., Skeppner, G., van’t Veer-Korthof, L., Kreuger, A. & Dahl, N.
(1997) Diamond-Blackfan anaemia: genetic homogeneity for a gene
on chromosome 19q13 restricted to 1.8 Mb. Nature Genetics, 16,
368–371.
Hamaguchi, I., Ooka, A., Brun, A., Richter, J., Dahl, N. & Karlsson, S.
(2002) Gene transfer improves erythroid development in ribosomal
protein S19-deﬁcient Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Blood, 100, 2724–
2731.
Hamaguchi, I., Flygare, J., Nishiura, H., Brun, A.C., Ooka, A., Kiefer,
T., Ma, Z., Dahl, N., Richter, J. & Karlsson, S. (2003) Proliferation
deﬁciency of multipotent hematopoietic progenitors in ribosomal
protein S19 (RPS19)-deﬁcient diamond-Blackfan anemia improves
following RPS19 gene transfer. Molecular Therapy, 7, 613–622.
Henter, J.I. & Karle´n, J. (2007) Fatal agranulocytosis after deferiprone
therapy in a child with Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Blood, 109,
5157–5159.
Hershko, C., Cappellini, M.D., Galanello, R., Piga, A., Tognoni, G. &
Masera, G. (2004) Purging iron from the heart. British Journal
Haematology, 125, 545–551.
Hoffbrand, A.V., Bartlett, A.N., Veys, P.A., O’Connor, N.T. & Kon-
toghiorghes, G.J. (1989) Agranulocytosis and thrombocytopenia in
patient with Blackfan-Diamond anaemia during oral chelator trial.
Lancet, 2, 457.
Hoffbrand, A.V., Cohen, A. & Hershko, C. (2003) Role of deferiprone
in chelation therapy for transfusional iron overload. Blood, 102, 17–
24.
Huh, W.W., Gill, J., Sheth, S. & Buchanan, G.R. (2002) Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia in patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia
receiving high-dose corticosteroids. Journal of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology, 24, 410–412.
Iriondo, A., Garijo, J., Baro, J., Conde, E., Pastor, J.M., Sabanes, A.,
Hermosa, V., Sainz, M.C., Perez de la Lastra, L. & Zubizarreta, A.
(1984) Complete recovery of hemopoiesis following bone
marrow transplant in a patient with unresponsive congenital hypo-
plastic anemia (Blackfan-Diamond syndrome). Blood, 64, 348–351.
Jabr, F.I. & Taher, A. (2006) Diamond-Blackfan anemia in remission
for 2 years on valproic acid. Haematologica, 91, e47.
Jabr, F.I., Aoun, E., Azar, C. & Taher, A. (2004) Diamond-Blackfan
anemia responding to valproic acid. Blood, 104, 3415.
Janov, A.J., Leong, T., Nathan, D.G. & Guinan, E.C. (1996) Diamond-
Blackfan anemia. Natural history and sequelae of treatment. Medi-
cine (Baltimore), 75, 77–78.
Jensen, P.D., Jensen, F.T., Christensen, T., Nielsen, J.L. & Ellegaard, J.
(2003) Relationship between hepatocellular injury and transfusional
iron overload prior to and during iron chelation with desferriox-
amine: a study in adult patients with acquired anemias. Blood, 101,
91–96.
Josephs, H.W. (1936) Anemia in infancy and early childhood. Medicine
(Baltimore), 15, 307.
Krause, P.R. & Klinman, D.M. (1995) Efﬁcacy, immunogenicity, safety,
and use of live attenuated chickenpox vaccine. Journal of Pediatrics,
127, 518–525.
Kuliev, A., Rechitsky, S., Tur-Kaspa, I. & Verlinsky, Y. (2005) Prei-
mplantation genetics: improving access to stem cell therapy. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1054, 223–227.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 873
Leblanc, T.M., Da Costa, L., Marie, I., Demolis, P. & Tchernia, G.
(2007) Metoclopramide treatment in DBA patients: no complete
response in a French prospective study. Blood, 109, 2266–2267.
Lensch, M.W., Rathbun, R.K., Olson, S.B., Jones, G.R. & Bagby, G.C.,
Jr (1999) Selective pressure as an essential force in molecular evo-
lution of myeloid leukemic clones: a view from the window of
Fanconi anemia. Leukemia, 13, 1784–1789.
Leonard, E.M., Raefsky, E., Grifﬁth, P., Kimball, J., Nienhuis, A.W. &
Young, N.S. (1989) Cyclosporine therapy of aplastic anaemia, con-
genital and acquired red cell aplasia. British Journal Haematology, 72,
278–284.
Link, M.P. & Alter, B.P. (1981) Fetal-like erythropoiesis during
recovery from transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC).
Pediatric Research, 15, 1036–1039.
Lipton, J.M. (2007) Diamond-Blackfan anemia: ‘‘novel’’ mecha-
nisms—ribosomes and the erythron. Blood, 109, 850–851.
Lipton, J.M., Kudisch, M., Gross, R. & Nathan, D.G. (1986) Defective
erythroid progenitor differentiation system in congenital hypoplastic
(Diamond-Blackfan) anemia. Blood, 67, 962–968.
Lipton, J.M., Federman, N., Khabbaze, Y., Schwartz, C.L., Hilliard,
L.M., Clark, J.I. & Vlachos, A. (2001) Osteogenic sarcoma associated
with Diamond-Blackfan anemia: a report from the Diamond-
Blackfan Anemia Registry. Journal of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
23, 39–44.
Lipton, J.M., Atsidaftos, E., Zyskind, I. & Vlachos, A. (2006) Improving
clinical care and elucidating the pathophysiology of Diamond
Blackfan anemia: an update from the Diamond Blackfan Anemia
Registry. Pediatr Blood Cancer, 46, 558–564.
Lucarelli, G., Galimberti, M., Polchi, P., Angelucci, E., Baronciani, D.,
Giardini, C., Politi, P., Durazzi, S.M., Muretto, P. & Albertini, F.
(1990) Bone marrow transplantation in patients with thalassemia.
New England Journal of Medicine, 322, 417–421.
Lucarelli, G., Andreani, M. & Angelucci, E. (2002) The cure of
thalassemia by bone marrow transplantation. Blood Reviews, 16, 81–
85.
Matsson, H., Klar, J., Draptchinskaia, N., Gustavsson, P., Carlsson, B.,
Bowers, D., de Bont, E. & Dahl, N. (1999) Truncating ribosomal
protein S19 mutations and variable clinical expression in Diamond-
Blackfan anemia. Human Genetics, 105, 496–500.
Matsson, H., Davey, E.J., Draptchinskaia, N., Hamaguchi, I., Ooka,
A., Leveen, P., Forsberg, E., Karlsson, S. & Dahl, N. (2004)
Targeted disruption of the ribosomal protein S19 gene is lethal
prior to implantation. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 24, 4032–
4037.
Miyake, K., Utsugisawa, T., Flygare, J., Kiefer, T., Hamaguchi, I.,
Richter, J. & Karlsson, S. (2008) Ribosomal protein S19 deﬁciency
leads to reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis but does not
affect terminal erythroid differentiation in a cell line model of
Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Stem Cells, 26, 323–329.
Monteserin, M.C., Garcia Vela, J.A., Ona, F. & Lastra, A.M. (1993)
Cyclosporin A for Diamond-Blackfan anemia: a new case. American
Journal of Hematology, 42, 406–407.
Mugishima, H., Gale, R.P., Rowlings, P.A., Horowitz, M.M., Marmont,
A.M., McCann, S.R., Sobocinski, K.A. & Bortin, M.M. (1995) Bone
marrow transplantation for Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Bone Mar-
row Transplantation, 15, 55–58.
Niemeyer, C.M., Baumgarten, E., Holldack, J., Meier, I., Trenn, G.,
Jobke, A., Eckhardt, K.U., Reiter, A., Sauter, S. & Riehm, H. (1991)
Treatment trial with recombinant human erythropoietin in children
with congenital hypoplastic anemia. Contributions to Nephrology, 88,
276–280; discussion 281.
Nisbet-Brown, E., Olivieri, N.F., Giardina, P.J., Grady, R.W., Neufeld,
E.J., Sechaud, R., Krebs-Brown, A.J., Anderson, J.R., Alberti, D.,
Sizer, K.C. & Nathan, D.G. (2003) Effectiveness and safety of ICL670
in iron-loaded patients with thalassaemia: a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation trial. [see comment].
Lancet, 361, 1597–1602.
Ohene-Abuakwa, Y., Orfali, K.A., Marius, C. & Ball, S.E. (2005) Two-
phase culture in Diamond Blackfan anemia: localization of erythroid
defect. Blood, 105, 838–846.
Ohga, S., Mugishima, H., Ohara, A., Kojima, S., Fujisawa, K., Yagi, K.,
Higashigawa, M. & Tsukimoto, I. (2004) Diamond-Blackfan anemia
in Japan: clinical outcomes of prednisolone therapy and hemato-
poietic stem cell transplantation. International Journal of Hematol-
ogy, 79, 22–30.
Olivieri, N.F. & Brittenham, G.M. (1997) Iron-chelating therapy and
the treatment of thalassemia. [see comment] [erratum appears in
Blood 1997 Apr 1;89(7):2621]. Blood, 89, 739–761.
Olivieri, N.F., Feig, S.A., Valentino, L., Berriman, A.M., Shore, R. &
Freedman, M.H. (1994) Failure of recombinant human interleukin-
3 therapy to induce erythropoiesis in patients with refractory Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia. Blood, 83, 2444–2450.
Orfali, K.A., Ohene-Abuakwa, Y. & Ball, S.E. (2004) Diamond Blackfan
anaemia in the UK: clinical and genetic heterogeneity. British Journal
Haematology, 125, 243–252.
Orfali, R.F., Wynn, R.F., Stevens, R.F., Chopra, R. & Ball, S.E. (1999)
Failure of red cell production following allogenic BMT for Diamond
Blackfan anaemia (DBA) illustrates functional signiﬁcance of high
erythrocyte adenosine deaminase (eADA) activity in the donor.
Blood, 94, 414a.
Ozsoylu, S. (1994) Oral megadose methylprednisolone for the treat-
ment of Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, 11, 561–562 and 567–568.
Parekh, S., Perez, A., Yang, X.Y. & Billett, H. (2005) Chronic
parvovirus infection and G6PD deﬁciency masquerading as Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia. American Journal of Hematology, 79,
54–57.
Perdahl, E.B., Naprstek, B.L., Wallace, W.C. & Lipton, J.M. (1994)
Erythroid failure in Diamond-Blackfan anemia is characterized by
apoptosis. Blood, 83, 645–650.
Pospisilova, D., Cmejlova, J., Hak, J., Adam, T. & Cmejla, R. (2007)
Successful treatment of a Diamond-Blackfan anemia patient with
amino acid leucine. Haematologica, 92, e66–e67.
Proust, A., Da Costa, L., Rince, P., Landois, A., Tamary, H., Zaizov, R.,
Tchernia, G. & Delaunay, J. (2003) Ten novel Diamond-Blackfan
anemia mutations and three polymorphisms within the rps19 gene.
The Hematology Journal, 4, 132–136.
Ramenghi, U., Garelli, E., Valtolina, S., Campagnoli, M.F., Timeus, F.,
Crescenzio, N., Mair, M., Varotto, S., D’Avanzo, M., Nobili, B.,
Massolo, F., Mori, P.G., Locatelli, F., Gustavsson, P., Dahl, N. &
Dianzani, I. (1999) Diamond-Blackfan anaemia in the Italian pop-
ulation. British Journal Haematology, 104, 841–848.
Ramenghi, U., Campagnoli, M.F., Garelli, E., Carando, A., Brusco, A.,
Bagnara, G.P., Strippoli, P., Izzi, G.C., Brandalise, S., Riccardi, R. &
Dianzani, I. (2000) Diamond-Blackfan anemia: report of seven
further mutations in the RPS19 gene and evidence of mutation
heterogeneity in the Italian population. Blood Cells, Molecules, and
Diseases, 26, 417–422.
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
874 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
Ries, L.A.G., Eisner, M.P., Kosary, C.L., Hankey, B.F., Miller, B.A.,
Clegg, L. & Edwards, B.K. (eds). (2001) SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, 1973–1998. National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD, http://
seer.cancer.gov/Publications/CSR1973_1998/.
Rogers, B.B., Bloom, S.L. & Buchanan, G.R. (1997) Autosomal dom-
inantly inherited Diamond-Blackfan anemia resulting in non-
immune hydrops. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 89, 805–807.
Scott, E.G., Haider, A. & Hord, J. (2004) Growth hormone therapy for
short stature in Diamond Blackfan anemia. Pediatric Blood Cancer,
43, 542–544.
Seip, M. & Zanussi, G.F. (1988) Cyclosporine in steroid-resistant
Diamond-Blackfan anaemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica, 77, 464–
466.
Singer, S.T. & Vichinsky, E.P. (1999) Deferoxamine treatment during
pregnancy: is it harmful? American Journal of Hematology, 60, 24–26.
Skordis, N., Christou, S., Koliou, M., Pavlides, N. & Angastiniotis, M.
(1998) Fertility in female patients with thalassemia. Journal of
Pediatric Endocrinology, 11(Suppl 3), 935–943.
Splain, J. & Berman, B.W. (1992) Cyclosporin A treatment for
Diamond-Blackfan anemia. American Journal of Hematology, 39,
208–211.
St Pierre, T.G., Clark, P.R., Chua-anusorn, W., Fleming, A.J., Jeffrey,
G.P., Olynyk, J.K., Pootrakul, P., Robins, E. & Lindeman, R. (2005)
Noninvasive measurement and imaging of liver iron concentrations
using proton magnetic resonance. Blood, 105, 855–861.
Stark, A.R., Carlo, W.A., Tyson, J.E., Papile, L.A., Wright, L.L.,
Shankaran, S., Donovan, E.F., Oh, W., Bauer, C.R., Saha, S.,
Poole, W.K., Stoll, B.J.. & National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development Neonatal Research, N. (2001) Adverse
effects of early dexamethasone in extremely-low-birth-weight
infants. National Institute of Child Health and Human Devel-
opment Neonatal Research Network. New England Journal of
Medicine, 344, 95–101.
Sumimoto, S., Kawai, M., Kasajima, Y. & Hamamoto, T. (1992)
Intravenous gamma-globulin therapy in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
Acta Paediatrica Japonica, 34, 179–180.
Tchernia, G., Morinet, F., Congard, B. & Croisille, L. (1993) Diamond
Blackfan anaemia: apparent relapse due to B19 parvovirus. European
Journal of Pediatrics, 152, 209–210.
Totterman, T.H., Nisell, J., Killander, A., Gahrton, G. & Lonnqvist, B.
(1984) Successful treatment of pure red-cell aplasia with cyclospo-
rin. Lancet, 2, 693.
Tsai, P.H., Arkin, S. & Lipton, J.M. (1989) An intrinsic progenitor
defect in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia. British Journal Haematology,
73, 112–120.
Verlinsky, Y., Rechitsky, S., Sharapova, T., Morris, R., Taranissi, M. &
Kuliev, A. (2004) Preimplantation HLA testing. JAMA, 291, 2079–
2085.
Vlachos, A., Klein, G.W. & Lipton, J.M. (2001a) The Diamond
Blackfan Anemia Registry: tool for investigating the epidemiology
and biology of Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Journal of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, 23, 377–382.
Vlachos, A., Federman, N., Reyes-Haley, C., Abramson, J. & Lipton,
J.M. (2001b) Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for Diamond
Blackfan anemia: a report from the Diamond Blackfan Anemia
Registry. Bone Marrow Transplantation, 27, 381–386.
Voskaridou, E., Douskou, M., Terpos, E., Papassotiriou, I., Stam-
oulakatou, A., Ourailidis, A., Loutradi, A. & Loukopoulos, D. (2004)
Magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of iron overload in
patients with beta thalassaemia and sickle cell disease. British Journal
Haematology, 126, 736–742.
Walsh, J.P. & Dayan, C.M. (2000) Role of biochemical assessment in
management of corticosteroid withdrawal. Annals of Clinical Bio-
chemistry, 37, 279–288.
Ward, L., Tricco, A.C., Phuong, P., Cranney, A., Barrowman, N.,
Gaboury, I., Rauch, F., Tugwell, P. & Moher, D. (2007) Bis-
phosphonate therapy for children and adolescents with secondary
osteoporosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 17,
CD00532422.
Williams, D.L., Mageed, A.S., Findley, H. & Ragab, A.H. (1987)
Cyclosporine in the treatment of red cell aplasia. American Journal of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 9, 314–316.
Willig, T.N., Niemeyer, C.M., Leblanc, T., Tiemann, C., Robert, A.,
Budde, J., Lambiliotte, A., Kohne, E., Souillet, G., Eber, S., Stephan,
J.L., Girot, R., Bordigoni, P., Cornu, G., Blanche, S., Guillard, J.M.,
Mohandas, N. & Tchernia, G. (1999a) Identiﬁcation of new prog-
nosis factors from the clinical and epidemiologic analysis of a reg-
istry of 229 Diamond-Blackfan anemia patients. DBA group of
Societe d’Hematologie et d’Immunologie Pediatrique (SHIP),
Gesellshaft fur Padiatrische Onkologie und Hamatologie (GPOH),
and the European Society for Pediatric Hematology and Immu-
nology (ESPHI). Pediatric Research, 46, 553–561.
Willig, T.N., Draptchinskaia, N., Dianzani, I., Ball, S., Niemeyer, C.,
Ramenghi, U., Orfali, K., Gustavsson, P., Garelli, E., Brusco, A.,
Tiemann, C., Perignon, J.L., Bouchier, C., Cicchiello, L., Dahl, N.,
Mohandas, N. & Tchernia, G. (1999b) Mutations in ribosomal
protein S19 gene and diamond blackfan anemia: wide variations in
phenotypic expression. Blood, 94, 4294–4306.
Wood, J.C., Tyszka, J.M., Carson, S., Nelson, M.D. & Coates, T.D.
(2004) Myocardial iron loading in transfusion-dependent thalasse-
mia and sickle cell disease. Blood, 103, 1934–1936.
Yaris, N., Erduran, E. & Cobanoglu, U. (2006) Hodgkin lymphoma in
a child with Diamond Blackfan anemia. Journal of Pediatric Hema-
tology/Oncology, 28, 234–236.
Yeh, T.F., Lin, Y.J., Huang, C.C., Chen, Y.J., Lin, C.H., Lin, H.C., Hsieh,
W.S. & Lien, Y.J. (1998) Early dexamethasone therapy in preterm
infants: a follow-up study. [see comment]. Pediatrics, 101, E7.
Young, N.S. & Alter, B. (1994) Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syn-
dromes: Introduction. In: Aplastic Anemia Acquired and Inherited
(ed. by N. Young & B.P. Alter), pp. 271–274. WB Saunders Com-
pany, Philadelphia, PA.
Appendix I
Participants in the Sixth Annual Diamond Blackfan Anemia
International Consensus Conference, New York, April 16–18,
2005 – in alphabetical order:
Blanche P. Alter, MD, MPH, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA
Eva Atsidaftos, MA, Schneider Children’s Hospital, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA
Sarah Ball, MD, St. George’s Hospital Medical School,
London, UK
Monica Bessler, MD, PhD, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
Niklas Dahl, MD, PhD, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876 875
Irma Dianzani, MD, PhD, Universita` del Piemonte Orien-
tale, Novara, Italy
Yigal Dror, MD, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada
Steven Ellis, PhD, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY,
USA
Hanna Gazda, MD, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA, USA
Bertil Glader, MD, PhD, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA,
USA
Karen Gripp, MD, DuPont Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA
Elizabeth M. Kang, MD, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA
Stefan Karlsson, MD, PhD, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Thierry Leblanc, MD, Hoˆpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France
Jeffrey M. Lipton, MD, PhD, Schneider Children’s Hospital,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA
Johnson M. Liu, MD, Schneider Children’s Hospital, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA
Fabrizio Loreni, PhD, Universita` Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy
Joerg Meerpohl, MD, Zentrum fu¨r Kinderheilkunde und
Jugendmedizin, Universitaetsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany
Carole Paley, MD, Novartis, East Hanover, NJ, USA
Charles Peterson, MD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA
Pankaj Qasba, PhD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA
Ugo Ramenghi, MD, Universita` di Torino, Torino, Italy
Sujit Sheth, MD, MS, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA
Akiko Shimamura, MD, PhD, Children’s Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA
Colin Sieff, MD, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA
Adrianna Vlachos, MD, Schneider Children’s Hospital,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA
Winfred Wang, MD, St. Jude Children’s Hospital, Memphis,
TN, USA
Review
ª 2008 The Authors
876 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 142, 859–876
