Br. J. Cancer (1973) 27, 1.91
Review Article
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA: RECENT TISSUE CULTURE STUDIES ON THE
NATURE OF MYELOID LEUKAEMIA*
1). MIETCALF
From the Cancer Research Unit, lValter and Eliza Hall Institute, MVelbourne, Australia
Receive(d 27 November 1972. Accepte(d 28 November 1972
THE earliest recognition of leukaemia
as a distinct disease entity can be dated
with some accuracy to three independent
reports of cases, each published in 1845,
by (Craigie, Bennett and Virchow. The
view that the leukaemias are neoplastic
diseases apparently was first proposed by
Babes in 1902 and it is of interest that
even as late as 1938 Forkner, in his
scholarly monograph " Leukemia and
Allied Disorders ", listed three major
possibilities regarding the nature of leu-
kaemia-infection, regulator disorder or
neoplasm-none of which was over-
whelmingly supported by the experimental
or clinical evidence then available.
The view held by most workers today
is that the leukaemias are neoplastic
diseases. The general clinical features of
the leukaemias progressive, ultimately
fatal, diseases involving the accumulation
of abnormal numbers of primitive white
cells, often in abnormal locations fit the
pattern of other forms of cancer. Despite
the fact that none of the various forms of
leukaemia in animals is a particularly
accurate model of the human diseases,
work on the nature of leukaemia in
animals, particularly mice, has obviously
had an overwhelming impact on modern
views on the human diseases.
Many lines of evidence suggest that
leukaemia in animals is a neoplastic
disease. Agents such as irradiation and
methylcholanthrene, which are able to
induce carcinomata in various tissues in
animals, are also leukaemogenic. Possibly
the most convincing experiments proving
the neoplastic nature of murine leukaemia
were the demonstrations by Furth and
Kahn (1937) that leukaemia could be
transplanted to mice by the injection of a
single leukaemic cell, and also the subse-
quent work of others showing that the
cells of transplanted leukaemias are de-
rived from the progressive proliferation of
the original transplanted cells.
The clonal nature of an abnormal
population is highly suggestive, if not
conclusive, evidence for a neoplastic
process. Karyotypic studies on mouse
leukaemias have shown the clonal nature
ofsome leukaemic populations and parallel
studies on certain acute leukaemias in
humans where the cells possessed karyo-
typic markers have suggested also that
leukaemic populations can be clonal in
nature (Sandberg et al., 1964; Jensen,
1967). Recent work on patients with
chronic granulocytic leukaemia who are
heterozygous for the G-6-PD locus has
also suggested that the leukaemic popula-
tion can be clonal (Fialkow, Gartler and
Yoshida, 1967). However, no information
yet exists on the nature of chronic lym-
phoid leukaemic populations.
Attachment of the label " cancer " to
a disease process is of course merely to beg
the question " What is cancer? " The
word appears deceptively simple until one
attempts a precise definition which is
sufficiently broad to cover all forms of
cancer. A useful definition is still that
given by Furth (1959): "Neoplasia is a
* This work was supported by the Car(len Fellowship Fund of the Anti-Cancer Council of Victoria.
13
1). METCALF
state in which cells, normally limited,
proliferate with no restraint ". Note
that in this definition there is no mention
of chromosomal abnormalities, as manv
neoplastic cells have no obvious abnor-
malities. Nor is there mention of the
concept that neoplasia is necessarily the
consequence of intrinsic, genetically deter-
mined, abnormalities within the cancer
cells the definition would also include
situations in which cells were exhibiting
unrestrained progressive proliferation as
a consequence of imbalance in humoral
regulators controlling cell growth. If the
above definition of cancer is acceptable,
then clearly there are many ways in which
a cell population might come to exhibit un-
restrained, progressive proliferation and
all such possibilities must be kept in
mind when analysing the nature of
leukaemia in humans.
In the past, the label " cancer " has
tended to convey the very restricted
concept that the cells have irreversible
genetic changes. The unfortunate con-
sequence of this restricted view has been
that much cancer research has been
defeatist in outlook and has concentrated
on methods for selective cell killing rather
than on an aggressive analysis of the exact
nature of the disordered cell function.
While one can sympathize with the urgent
clinical desire to obtain drugs of thera-
peutic value, the above approach has been
doubly unfortunate for the investigation
of human leukaemia where the clinical
behaviour of a disease like acute leukaemia
is at such variance with other forms of
cancer.
For complex populations like the
haemopoietic cells, the nature of the
abnormal cellular processes operating in
leukaemia can only be characterized
satisfactorily if simple tissue culture
systems can be developed which permit
analysis of the regulation of white cell
proliferation and differentiation. This is
particularly true for the human leukae-
mias where considerable reservations
exist regarding the validity of available
animal models.
It is possible to obtain a limited degree
of proliferation in PHA- or antigen-
stimulated liquid cultures of lymphoid
cells. However, the usefulness of this
technique for studies of leukaemic lym-
phoid cells has been limited, and to date
such cultures have not permitted a syste-
matic analysis of the regulatory mecha-
nisms normally controlling lymphopoiesis.
The situation with granulocytic and mono-
cytic cells has changed dramatically in
recent years and the discussion to follow
will concentrate on recent information
obtained from tissue culture studies on
normal and leukaemic granulocytic and
monocytic cells.
The agar culture sy8temfor growing granulo-
cytes and macrophages
In 1965 a semi-solid agar culture
system was developed which supports the
clonal proliferation of mouse granulocytic
and monocytic-inacrophage cells (Bradley
and Metcalf, 1966; Ichikawa, Pluznik and
Sachs, 1966). The technique was sub-
sequently modified by Pike and Robinson
(1970) to permit colony growth by human
cells. Essentially what the agar culture
does is to allow the specific progenitor
cells of granulocytes and monocytes to
proliferate in agar and generate colonies
of progeny cells which can differentiate to
fully mature polymorphs and monocytes
or macrophages (Metcalf, Bradley and
Robinson, 1967; Cline, Warner and Met-
calf, 1972) in a manner which reproduces
events occurring in vivo during granulo-
poiesis and monocyte formation.
It is important to emphasize that this
is a primary culture system which always
uses marrow, spleen or blood cells taken
directly from the animal or patient and
answers questions relating to the cultured
cells as they existed in the body. It is not
concerned with the long-term growth
characteristics of these cells on continued
cultivation in vitro.
The progenitor cells initiating agar
colonies are variously termed " in vitro
192
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA
colony-forming cells" (in vitro CFC) or
" colony-forming cells-agar" (CFU-C,
A-CFC) and most of these cells have been
demonstrated to be progeny of the multi-
potential haemopoietic stem cells (spleen
colony-forming cells or CFU) which
throughout life initiate and maintain the
pro(luction of blood cells of all classes
(Worton, McCulloch and Till, 1969; Has-
kill, McNeill and Moore, 1970; Metcalf,
and Moore, 1971). Stem cells and their
progenitor cell progeny are located mainly
in the bone marrow in adult mice or
humans but small numbers of these cells
are also demonstrable in the spleen and
blood. In adult humans the incidence of
colony-forming cells is approximately 20-
30 per 105 nucleated marrow cells.
Colonies developing in agar are clones
derived from single progenitor cells and
single in vitro CFCs are able to generate
populations of both granulocytes and
macrophages (Moore, Williams and Met-
calf, 1972). In fact, most colonies initially
contain granulocytic populations, some
members of which then switch to the
alternative monocyte-macrophage path-
way as colony growth proceeds (Metcalf
et al., 1967; Metcalf, 1971). The agar
culture studies have clearly shown that
monocytes and macrophages are closely
related to granulocytes and have a
common precursor cell the in vitro CFC.
This provides the explanation for the
observation in humans and animals that
monocytic populatioins are commonly ab-
normal in myeloid leukaemia, often to the
degree of causing the leukaemia to be
classified as myelomonocytic. In fact,
analysis of a myelomonocytic leukaemia
in mice demonstratedl that both the
granulocytic and monocytic populations
share(d a common leukaemic progenitor
cell (colony-forming cell) and were mem-
bers of the same neoplastic clone (Warner,
Moore and Metcalf, 1969; Metcalf, Moore
and Warner, 1969). Similar studies have
been made on a myeloid leukaemia in
mice (Ichikawa, 1969, 1970) in which it
was demonstrated that undifferentiated
leukaemic cells could be induced in agar
culture to generate clones of mature
granulocytes and macrophages.
The various myeloid, myelomonocytic
and monocytic leukaemias are probably
best regarded as a continuous spectrum
in which one cell population or the other
is involved in the leukaemic process to a
greater or lesser degree.
There is a characteristic heterogeneity
in the size ofgranulocytic and macrophage
colonies developing in agar cultures of
bone marrow cells which appears to be
based on a decreasing capacity for pro-
liferation of the progressively more mature
progeny of the progenitor cells. Thus
small colonies seem to be generated by the
progeny of cells forming large colonies
whereas clusters are generated by the
progeny of cells forming small colonies.
Analysis of the size and frequency pattern
of colonies and clusters appears to be a
useful method for characterizing the
pattern of differentiation existing in the
population at the time of sampling
(Metcalf and Stevens, 1972) and is a
technique which has obvious applications
in determining the exact location of a
block in cellular proliferation in many
human diseases, e.g. aplastic anaemia,
agranulocytosis, drug-induced neutro-
penia, etc.
Colony formation in vitro by marrow
cells is dependent entirely on the presence
in the culture medium of a specific glyco-
protein, colony stimulating factor (CSF),
which has a concentration-dependent effect
on the number and growth rate of colonies
developing in the culture (Metcalf, 1970).
Agar cultures of mouse bone marrow cells
can be used as a highly sensitive bioassay
system for both mouse and human CSF
and will detect concentrations of less than
100 pg/ml (Stanley and Metcalf, 1972).
CSF is a neuraminic acid-containing
glycoprotein, and is detectable in all
normal human sera and urines (Chan,
Metcalf and Stanley, 1971; Stanley et al.,
1972). In human urine, CSF has a
molecular weight of 45,000 (Stanley and
Metcalf, 1971) but the CSFs extractable
from many tissues, although having simi-
193
D. METCALF
lar biological activity, vary considerably
in size and charge (Sheridan and Stanley,
1971; Austin, McCulloch and Till, 1971;
Bradley, Stanley and Sumner, 1971;
Sheridan and Metcalf, 1972).
Studies of CSF levels in mice and
humans during fluctuations in the level of
granulopoiesis or monocyte formation,
together with observations on the in vivo
effects of injected preparations of CSF,
suggest that CSF is a humoral regulator
of granulopoiesis and monocyte formation
(Bradley et al., 1969; Metcalf and Stanley,
1971; Metcalf and Moore, 1971; Morley
et al., 1971).
Lipoproteins are demonstrable in nor-
mal human and mouse serum and are
termed " CSF inhibitors " because they
exert a species-specific blocking action in
vitro on CSF although the inhibitors do
not appear to be cytotoxic for colony-
forming cells (Chan et al., 1971; Chan,
1971). The exact role played by CSF
inhibitors in the intact animal remains to
be clarified but they are tentatively
regarded as modulating the stimulating
effects ofCSF on granulopoiesis and mono-
cyte formation.
The curious situation has been docu-
mented that a common progenitor cell
(the in vitro CFC) generates both granulo-
cytic and macrophage progeny and that
proliferation in both of the alternate
cellular pathways is regulated by a single
regulator-CSF (Metcalfand Moore, 1972).
This requires the existence of an accessory
mechanism for determining the relative
proportions of cells entering one or other
pathway. In part this seems to be deter-
mined by the concentration of CSF, with
low CSF concentrations favouring entry
into the monocyte-macrophage pathway,
and vice versa. However, a more impor-
tant accessory mechanism appears to
involve the CSF inhibitors. In the
presence of these inhibitors, colony differ-
entiation switches prematurely to the
monocyte-macrophage pathway and pre-
incubation of in vitro CFCs with inhibitors
has a similar end result when these cells
are subsequently cultured in an inhibitor-
free system (Chan, 1971). Observations
on mice with high and low serum inhibitor
levels suggest that this mechanism may
also operate in vivo.
The agar culture system therefore
allows two types of studies in humans
(a) an assessment of the number and
proliferative status of granulocytic and
monocytic progenitor cells and their
progeny in any tissue, and (b) the
assay of two regulators of their prolifera-
tion and differentiation CSF and CSF
inhibitors.
It is important to emphasize that there
are probably other regulatory mechanisms
controlling these cell populations which
have not yet been identified. One known
gap in technology is the inability to quanti-
tate haemopoietic stem cells in the agar
culture system and also the inability to
obtain colony-forming cell progeny from
these cells under controlled conditions. It
is not possible therefore to assess in
humans the behaviour of the haemopoietic
stem cells and a consequence of this will
be discussed later in relation to patients
with acute myeloid leukaemia. It is
possible that more recent culture systems
may support the production of in vitro
CFCs by stem cells (Dicke, Platenburg
and Van Bekkum, 1971; McCulloch and
Till, 1971; Sumner et al., 1972; Testa and
Lajtha, 1972) but this has not been
documented using a purified starting
population of stem cells. Most circum-
stantial evidence from observations in vivo
suggests that the generation of progenitor
cells from stem cells requires a cell-contact,
inductive, interaction between stem cells
and tissue microenvironmental cells (Met-
calf and Moore, 1971). Culture systems
capable of permitting this sophisticated
type of cell-cell interaction are not yet
available.
The heterogeneity of tissue CSFs has
raised many problems concerning their
interrelationships and significance. In this
context, certain evidence suggests that the
CSF produced locally in the marrow may
be a major factor determining the level of
granulopoiesis and monocyte formation
194
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA
(Chan and Metcalf, 1972, 1973; Moore and
Williams, 1972).
Observations in grey collie dogs with
cyclic neutropenia suggest that CSF levels
fluctuate periodically in an out-of-phase
relationship with neutrophil levels (Dale
et al., 1971) and it has been suggested that
polymorphs and/or monocytes and macro-
phages may operate feedback systems
controlling CSF production (Paran et al.,
1968; Robinson and Pike, 1970; Moore
and Williams, 1972; Moore, Williams and
Metcalf, 1973). This may regulate basal
production of CSF but observations on
humans and animals with infections
(Foster, Metcalf and Kirchmyer, 1968,
1968a; Metcalf and Wahren, 1968) or
mice following the injection of bacterial
antigens (Metcalf, 1971a; Quesenberry et
at., 1972; Shadduck et at., 1972) suggest
that the entry of microbial products into
the body is the primary factor deter-
mining major fluctuations in CSF produc-
tion.
Culture of blood or marrow cells from
patients with leukaemia
Human cells, like cells from all other
species except the mouse, exhibit some
colony formation in the absence of added
CSF. This is due to the presence of CSF-
producing cells in these suspensions (Moore
and Williams, 1972). Blood and bone
marrow cells from most leukaemic
patients also contain cells with a com-
parable capacity to stimulate colony
formation although cells from some
patients with acute gtanulocytic leukaemia
lack this capacity (Robinson and Pike,
1970; Greenberg, Nichols and Schrier,
1971; Moore et al., 1973).
To ensure a uniform level of stimula-
tion, feeder layers of normal human or
monkey peripheral blood cells or medium
conditioned by various human cells are
normally used to supply CSF and possibly
other growth factors required for colony
formation in agar cultures of human
colony-forming cells.
There are discrepancies in the pub-
lished reports on the growth pattern of
human leukaemic cells in agar due to
differences in scoring colonies and some-
times to the use of inadequate culture
media. However, there is sufficient agree-
ment to permit a number of useful
generalizations to be made from the
results.
When blood or bone marrow cells
from an untreated patient with chronic
myeloid leukaemia (CML) are cultured in
agar over feeder layers of normal peri-
pheral blood cells, the cultures develop
colonies with a normal gross morphology
and the cultures show a normal distribu-
tion of colonies and clusters. Colony cells
exhibit good differentiation to polymorphs
and macrophages although the pattern of
differentiation deviates somewhat from
normal in that macrophages appear earlier
than in normal colonies (Pike and Robin-
son, 1970; Greenberg et al., 1971; Moore
et al., 1973a). The most obvious abnor-
mality is the greatly increased incidence
of colony-forming cells in the marrow and
particularly the blood, where levels may
be up to 50,000-fold above normal (Paran
et al., 1970; Moore et al., 1973a). Indeed,
it is usual to find a higher frequency of
colony-forming cells per 105 nucleated
cells in the blood than in the marrow.
Karyotypic studies of the dividing cells in
such colonies have demonstrated the
Ph+ chromosomal abnormality in colony
cells although Ph-cells have been described
in colonies grown from some CML patients
(Chervenick et al., 1971; Moore and
Metcalf, 1973). The colony-forming cells
in these patients have been shown to differ
significantly from normal cells (a) in
possessing longer cell cycle times or being
more often in a Go (non-cycling) state and
(b) in having a significantly lighter
buoyant density as assessed by centrifuga-
tion in bovine serum albumin (Moore et
al., 1972a, 1973a).
In remission, patients with CML ex-
hibit normal numbers of colony-forming
cells and these cells have a normal cell
cycle status and near-normal buoyant
density. Persistence of Ph+ colonies has
195
D. METCALF
been reported in cultures from some
patients in remission.
Although agar-proliferating cells from
untreated patients with acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML) exhibit similar abnor-
malities of cell cycle status and buoyant
density to those described above for
CML colony-forming cells, they can readily
be distinguished from CML cells by their
quite different proliferative behaviour in
agar (Iscove et al., 1971; Greenberg et al.,
1971; Brown and Carbone, 1971; Moore
et al., 1972a, 1973a). Cells from approxi-
mately half of these patients fail to pro-
liferate at all in agar a situation never
encountered in uncomplicated CML. The
majority of the remaining AML patients
have no detectable colony-forming cells
in the blood or marrow but the leukaemic
cells proliferate with a high cloning
efficiency (up to at least 60O%) and form
small clusters of poorly differentiated cells.
When such patients enter remission there
is a reappearance of colony-forming cells
(Harris and Freireich, 1970; Greenberg
et al., 1971) and suich cells have a normal
cell cycle status and buoyant density
(Moore et al., ] 973a). The colonies
generated are of normal size and contain
cells which differentiate normally and
exhibit a normal karyotypic pattern.
Some untreated AML patients, vari-
ously classified as subacute ML, do possess
colony-forming cells in the blood and
marrow but these cells have the above cell
cycle and density abnormalities. The
colonies generated may exhibit karyotypic
abnormalities if such abnormalities are
present in the leukaemic population in
vivo (Duttera et al., 1972; Moore and
Metcalf, 1973).
The growth pattern of cells from
patients with acute myelomonocytic leu-
kaemia is similar to that of cells from
patients with AML. When CML patients
enter blast crisis, the leukaemic cells
behave in essentially the same manner as
cells from patients with AML, either being
unable to proliferate in agar or capable
only of forming small clusters (Paran et al.,
1970; Moore et al., 1973a).
These data from the behaviour in
cultutre of AML and CML cells are a little
puzzling in that they suggest that the
leukaemic process affects a more ancestral
granulocytic cell in CML (the colony-
forming cell) than in AML (the cluster-
forming cell). It may be, however, that
the clusters appearing in cultures of AML
cells are not generated by cells at an
equivalent level of maturation to those
generating clusters in normal marrow
populations. Clusters in cultures of AML
cells are generated by myeloblasts (Moore
et al., 1973a) and the impression gained
from the small size and unhealthy state of
these clusters is that the blast cells in
AML must have a very restricted capacity
for proliferation. However, this is difficult
to reconcile with their apparent capacity
for proliferation in vivo and it is wise to
keep the possibility in mind that the
culture systems used may be unsuitable
for AML blast cells and may not allow
them to express their full capacity for
proliferation.
It is clear from the acute myeloid
leukaemic patients so far studied that the
transition from relapse to remission is
associated with the re-emergence of a
population of normal colony-forming cells
and the simultaneous loss or decline of the
leukaemic population. It may be that in
some AML patients relapse involves the
re-acquisition by leukaemic cells of the
capacity to proliferate and differentiate in
a normal fashion but such cases have not
yet been documented. The possible origin
of the normal colony-forming cells that
appear in remission warrants comment
since in relapse there is characteristically
a complete absence of such cells. At the
onset of remission it is possible that
normal colony-forming cells are generated
by surviving normal stem cells which, as
mentioned above, cannot be detected in
the present agar culture system.
The situation is less clear at present
with chronic myeloid leukaemia but the
data are again consistent with a double
population situation with more normal
colony-forming cells (often with the Ph+
196
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA
marker chromosome) supplanting pre-
existing leukaemic populations during
the development of the remission.
In a study of more than 70 AMI, and
CML patients, in every case the growth of
the leukaemic cells in agar was dependent
on, and responded to, stimulation by
CSF either as assessed by colony growth
rates or the total numbers of colonies or
clusters developing (Moore et al., 1973a;
Metcalf and Moore, unpublished data).
This rather surprising finding supports
earlier observations on the responsiveness
of murine myelomonocytic and myeloid
leukaemic cells, and stronglv suggests that
myeloid leukaemic cells in humans rarely
ever reach the theoretical end-stage of
showing autonomy with respect to the
normal reguilator. In other words, if
myeloid leukaemias in humans really are
cancers they must all be in a responsive or
dependent state and not autonomous with
respect to the normal growth regulators.
Levels of CSF and CSF inhibitors have
been studied extensively in patients with
AML and in less detail in CML patients
(Robinson and Pike, 1970; Metcalf et al.,
1971). All patients so far studied with
AML exhibited elevated serum or urine
CSF levels at some stage in their disease,
with levels sometimes rising fifty-fold
above normal. Such rises were sometimes
associated with the development of in-
fections but patients in relapse rather
characteristically tended to be unable to
exhibit the normal response of elevated
seruin and urine CSF levels during such
episodes of infections. More than half of
the sera tested from AML patients were
found to have subnormal or undetectable
CSF-inhibitor levels (Chan and Metcalf,
1970; Metcalf et al., 1971). Occasional sera
with subnormal inhibitor levels have been
observed in other types of leukaemia and
other diseases, but the frequency of such
sera is low and inhibitors are rarely com-
pletely undetectable. The only other situ-
ation in which inhibitor levels have been
found to be uniformly low is in CML
patients who are in terminal blast crisis
(Metcalf and Chan, 1972).
Most sera from uncomplicated CML
patients have high CSF levels but normal
inhibitor levels.
Preleukaemic changes
The agar culture system is a(dmnirably
suited for studies of the nature of granulo-
poietic cell populations and regulator
levels in patients before overt leukaemia
develops. Are there antecedent abnor-
malities or does leukaemia develop against
a background of normal haemopoietic
function?
As leukaemia is relatively uncommon,
it is not practicable to screen populations
at random in an attempt to detect cellular
or regulator abnormalities in the pre-
leukaemic period. However, some infor-
mation has been gathered on cellular and
humoral abnormalities in various haema-
tological diseases carrying a higher than
normal risk of subsequient leuikaemia
development, e.g. polycythaemia vera,
aplastic anaemia, refractory sideroblastic
anaemia, paroxysmal noctuirnal haemo-
globinuria, agnogenic myeloid metaplasia.
Many specimens of serum and urine from
these patients exhibited elevated CSF
levels (Metcalf et al., 1972). Again, some
of these could be discounted on the
grounds that the patient had a concurrent
infection but on many occasions there was
no clinical evidence of an infection. Less
frequently, abnormally low serum CSF
inhibitor levels were observed.
The status of the colony-forming cells
in the marrow of these patients is of coIn-
siderable interest. Kurnick, Robinson and
Dickey (19]71) and Greenberg et al. (19.71)
have reported a subnormal incidence of
in vitro (1FCs in the marrow of patients
with granulocytopenia and aplastic
anaemia. Intriguing informationi is emerg-
ing from a sequential stucdy which has so
far analysed 45 potentially preleukaemic
patients, two ofwhom have since developed
leuLkaemia (Moore and W;11illiams, un-
published data). A variety of situations
has been documented in these patients:
normal or subnormal numbers of in vitro
197
D. METCALF
CFCs of normal density and cell cycle
status; normal or subnormal numbers of
apparently normal in vitro CFCs but where
the in vitro CFCs were of light density and
had an abnormal cell cycle status; an
absence ofin vitro CFCs with only abnormal
cluster-forming cells in the marrow. The
transition of two of these patients to AML
was associated with a sharp rise in the
incidence of these latter cluster-forming
cells in the marrow and the appearance of
similar cells in the blood.
While these potentially preleukaemic
patients are a very heterogeneous group,
it is tempting to speculate that the above
changes form a sequence in which pro-
gressively more abnormal granulopoietic
populations replace one another, with the
process culminating in the emergence of an
AML population. It remains to be
established whether a particular pattern
of abnormalities in these potentially pre-
leukaemic patients is associated with an
exceptionally high probability of leu-
kaemia development and, of equal impor-
tance, what time scale is involved for the
sequence-weeks, months or years.
Only about one-third of AML patients
have an antecedent haematological illness
of sufficient severity to attract clinical
investigation and it is therefore not yet
possible to determine whether the majority
of AML patients exhibit comparable
abnormalities in the period preceding
leukaemia development.
Ifthe above changes are representative
of the situation during AML develop-
ment, then leukaemogenesis is far more
complex than the simple overgrowth of a
normal population by a fully developed
leukaemic population. However, even if
the initial population displacing the normal
granulopoietic cells is not a fully leukaemic
one, there still remains the difficulty of
explaining how this population is able to
overgrow the normal one in view of the
longer cell cycles of the abnormal cells or
their preponderance of non-cycling cells.
It is of course well recognized that cell
cycle times per se are only a minor factor
in determining the proliferative advantage
of a population of cells. Of much more
importance is the pattern of differentia-
tion in the dividing cells, i.e. the fraction
(growth fraction) of daughter cells re-
maining capable of division. In a leukae-
mic population this growth fraction is
always much larger than in a resting
normal population of haemopoietic cells.
However, normal cells can respond to
population size decrease, e.g. following
irradiation, by increasing their growth
fraction to levels comparable with that
of leukaemic populations. This raises the
problem of why the normal cells do not
rebound in a similar manner to the relative
deficiency caused by the initial displace-
ment of normal by preleukaemic or
leukaemic cells? Such a rebound should
allow normal cells to compete more than
effectively with the more slowly dividing
abnormal cells. The answer here may lie
in the inadequacy of the bone marrow
environment to support and stimulate
normal granulopoiesis following infiltra-
tion by abnormal cells. If microenviron-
mental and CSF-producing cells are
damaged by this infiltration, the normal
population may well be unable to rebound
and then be at a relative growth dis-
advantage. For example, preliminary
experiments in mice have suggested that
the production of CSF by marrow stromal
cells may be depressed in marrows
infiltrated by some types of tumour cells
(Metcalf, unpublished data) but further
work is required on this question. An
alternative possibility is that the AML or
preleukaemic cells may activate a specific
feedback system shutting down granulo-
poiesis because sensor systems monitoring
total body granulocytes are activated both
by leukaemic and normal cells, but normal
cells are more susceptible to feedback
inhibition. This latter alternative may be
more likely in CML where the progeny of
the leukaemic population do exhibit
relatively good differentiation.
Leaving aside the reasons why leu-
kaemic or preleukaemic cells have a
competitive advantage over normal cells,
the commonly observed combination of
198
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA
high CSF levels and low inhibitor levels in
preleukaemic and leukaemic patients,
together with the observation that leukae-
mic cells are responsive to stimulation by
CSF, raises the possibility that develop-
ment and progression ofmyeloid leukaemia
may be significantly influenced by this
regulator imbalance. Of possible addi-
tional relevance is the observation that
high concentrations of CSF tend to cause
the progeny of colony-forming cells to
remain undifferentiated and capable of
further divisions (Metcalf and Moore,
1972).
Evidence from the analysis of myeloid
leukaemia development in mice is of
particular interest in this context. In
certain mouse strains, e.g. the Rf, irradia-
tion can induce myeloid leukaemia deve-
lopment and some evidence suggests that
disease development is initiated by the
activation of a latent C-type leukaemia
virus. In distinction from the results
following irradiation of conventional Rf
mice, irradiation of germfree Rf mice does
not cause myeloid leukaemia development
although such mice can develop myeloid
leukaemia if subsequently conventiona-
lized (Upton et al., 1966). The possible
involvement of CSF in this process is
indicated by observations on CSF levels
in germ-free mice. Germ-free mice have
abnormally low serum CSF levels (Metcalf,
Foster and Pollard, 1967a), emphasizing
the role of bacterial products in provoking
CSF production by the tissues. Further-
more, serum CSF levels in germ-free mice
are not elevated by whole-body irradia-
tion, as occurs following irradiation of
conventional mice (Morley et al., 1971,
1972). It seems possible therefore that the
capacity of C-type viruses to induce
myeloid leukaemia development may be
dependent on a sufficient proliferative
pressure being applied by CSF on the
virus-altered granulopoietic cells to force
the emergence of an abnormal (leukaemic)
subpopulation.
The stepwise emergence of pro-
gressively more abnormal granulopoietic
populations in potentially preleukaemic
patients seems to be occurring often in the
presence of elevated serum CSF levels and
low inhibitor levels and it is possible that
a similar situation may exist to that in the
Rf mouse.
The findings emerging from the in vitro
analysis of leukaemic populations in
patients with AML and CML make it no
longer possible to retain certain concepts
which are currently held regarding the
nature of leukaemia. Several new facts
must be incorporated into the revised
concepts regarding these diseases: (a) the
leukaemic cells in CML and AML are not
autonomous cancer cells, (b) the leukaemic
cells do respond to regulatory control and
can be induced to produce non-dividirng
progeny, (c) leukaemia development is
not a single-step transformation event.
While C-type viruses will probably be
shown to be initiating agents of human
leukaemia, as has been documented in
several animal species, the available data
are compatible with the concept that
disturbed levels of factors regulating
granulopoiesis may be obligatory for the
development and progression of AML and
CML. The data suggest that an imbalance
favouring proliferation may permit or
force the emergence of progressively more
abnormal (virus-damaged) granulopoietic
populations and that coincident damage of
the regulatory microenvironmental cells in
the marrow places normal granulopoietic
cells at a disadvantage in competition
with the abnormal cells. On this basis the
curious phenomenon ofremission, with the
disappearance of leukaemic populations
and the re-emergence of normal popula-
tions, may result from a restoration of
microenvironmental cell function as much
as from killing of leukaemic cells.
If further work confirms this concept
of the nature and progression of myeloi(d
leukaemia in humans, serious considera-
tion must be given to the possible pre-
ventive or therapeutic effects of re-
adjustment of granulopoietic reguilator
levels. It seems premature at this time to
contemplate attempts to readjust regulator
balance in leukaemic or preleukaemic
199
200 D. METCALF
patients. However, there is now sufficient
evidence to justify extensive investigations
in animals to determine (a) how regulator
balance can be altered for prolonged
periods and (b) the long-term haema-
tological effects of such procedures. It is
also appropriate at this time to develop
methods for the large-scale production of
CSF and CSF inhibitors from human source
material so that such materials are avail-
able should future developments warrant
their use in certain patients.
REFERENCES
AUSTIN, P. E., MCCULLOCH, E. A. & TILL, J. E.
(1971) Characterisation of the Factor in L-cell
Conditioned Medium Capable of Stimulating
Colony Formation by Mouse Marrow Cells in
Culture. J. cell. Physiol., 77, 121.
BABES (1902) Neoplastische leukemie. Zentbl. allg.
Path. path. Anat., 13, 695.
BENNETT, J. H. (1845) Case of Hypertrophy of the
Spleen and Liver in which Death Took Place
from Suppuration of the Blood. Edinb. nmed. J.,
64, 413.
BRADLEY, T. R. & METCALF, D. (1966) The Growth
of Mouse Bone Marrow Cells in vitro. Aust. J.
exp. Biol. med. Sci., 44, 287.
BRADLEY, T. R., METCALF, D., SUMNER, M. &
STANLEY, R. (1969) Characteristics of in vitro
Colony Formation by Cells from Haemopoietic
Tissues. In In Vitro, Vol. 4, Ed. P. Farnes.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins. p. 22.
BRADLEY, T. R., STANLEY, E. R. & SUMNER, M. A.
(1971) Factors from Mouse Tissues Stimulating
Colony Growth of Mouse Bone Marrow Cells in
vitro. Aust. J. exp. Biol. med. Sci., 49, 595.
BROWN, C. H. & CARBONE, P. P. (1971) In vitro
Growth of Normal and Leukaemic Human Bone
Marrow. J. natn. Cancer In8t., 46, 989.
CHAN, S. H. (1971) Influence of Serum Inhibitors on
Colony Development in vitro by Bone Marrow
Cells. Aust. J. exp. Biol. med. Sci., 49, 553.
CHAN, S. H. & METCALF, D. (1970) Inhibition of Bone
Marrow Colony Formation by Normal and
Leukaemic Human Serum. Nature, Lond., 227,
845.
CHAN, S. H. & METCALF, D. (1972) Local Production
of Colony Stimulating Factor within the Bone
Marrow: Role of Non-hematopoietic Cells. Blood,
40, 646.
CHAN, S. H. & METCALF, D. (1973) Local and
Systemic Control of Granulocytic and Macrophage
Progenitor Cell Regeneration after Irradiation.
Cell Tiss. Kinet., 6, 187.
CHAN, S. H., METCALF, D. & STANLEY, E. R. (1971)
Stimulation and Inhibition by Normal Human
Serum of Colony Formation in vitro by Bone
Marrow Cells. Br. J. Haemat., 20, 329.
CHERVENICK, P. A., LAWSON, A. L., ELLES, L. D. &
PAN, S. F. (1971) In vitro Growth of Leukemic
Cells Containing the Philadelphia (Ph) Chromo-
some. J. Lab. clin. Med., 78, 838.
CLINE, M. J., WARNER, N. L. & METCALF, D. (1972)
Identification of the Bone Marrow Colony
Mononuclear Phagocyte as a Macrophage. Blood,
39, 326.
CRAIGIE, D. (1845) Case of Disease of the Spleen in
which Death Took Place in Consequence of the
Presence of Purulent Matter in the Blood. Edinb.
med. J., 64, 400.
DALE, D. C., BROWN, C. H., CARBONE, P. & WOLFF,
S. M. (1971) Cyclic Urinary Leukopoietic Activity
in Grey Collie Dogs. Science, N.Y., 173, 152.
DICKE, K. A., PLATENBURG, M. G. C. & VAN
BEKKUM, D. W. (1971) Colony Formation in Agar:
In vitro Assay for Haemopoietic Stem Cells.
Cell Tism. Kinet., 4, 463.
DUTTERA, M. J., WHANG-PENG, J., BULL, J. M. C. &
CARBONE, P. P. (1972) Cytogenetically Abnormal
Cells in vitro in Acute Leukaemia. Lancet, i, 715.
FIALKOW, P. J., GARTLER, S. M. & YOSHIDA, A.
(1967) Clonal Origin of Chronic Myelocytic
Leukaemia in Man. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci., 58,
1468.
FORKNER, C. E. (1938) Leukemia and Allied Di8-
order8. New York: McMillan.
FOSTER, R., METCALF, D. & KIRCHMYER, R. (1968)
Induction of Bone Marrow Colony-stimulating
Activity by a Filterable Agent in Leukemic and
Normal Mouse Serum. J. exp. Med., 127, 853.
FOSTER, R., METCALF, D., ROBINSON, W. A. &
BRADLEY, T. R. (1968a) Bone Marrow Colony
Stimulating Activity in Human Sera. Br. J.
Haemat., 15, 147.
FURTH, J. (1959) A Meeting of Ways in Cancer
Research: Thoughts on the Evolution and Nature
of Neoplasms. Cancer Re8., 19, 241.
FURTH, J. & KAHN, M. C. (1937) The Transmission
of Leukemia of Mice with a Single Cell. Am. J.
Cancer, 31, 276.
GREENBERG, P. L., NICHOLS, W. C. & SCHRIER, S. L.
(1971) Granulopoiesis in Acute Myeloid Leukemia
and Preleukemia. New Engl. J. Med., 284, 1225.
HARRIS, J. E. & FREIREICH, E. J. (1970) In vitro
Growth of Myeloid Colonies from Bone Marrow of
Patients with Acute Leukemia in Remission.
Blood, 36, 61.
HASKILL, J. S., McNEILL, T. A. & MOORE, M. A. S.
(1970) Density Distribution Analysis of in vivo
and in vitro Colony Forming Cells in Bone
Marrow. J. cell. Phy8iol., 75, 167.
ICHIKAWA, Y. (1969) Differentiation of a Cell Line
of Myeloid Leukemia. J. cell. Physiol., 74, 223.
ICHIKAWA, Y. (1970) Further Studies on the
Differentiation of a Cell Line of Myeloid Leukemia.
J. cell. Physiol., 76, 175.
ICHIKAWA, Y., PLUZNIK, D. H. & SACHS, L. (1966)
In vitro Control of the Development ofMacrophage
and Granulocyte Colonies. Proc. natn. Acad.
Sci., 56, 488.
ISCOvE, N. N., SENN, J. S., TILL, J. E. & MCCULLOCH,
E. A. (1971) Colony Formation by Normal and
Leukemic Human Marrow Cells in Culture:
Effect of Conditioned Medium from Human
Leukocytes. Blood, 37, 1.
JENSEN, M. K. (1967) Chromosome Studies in Acute
Leukemia. III. Chromosome Constitution of
Bone Marrow Cells in 30 Cases. Acta med. 8cand.,
182, 629.
KURNICK, J. E., ROBINSON, W. A. & DICKEY, C. A.
(1971) In vitro Granulocytic Colony-forming
Potential of Bone Marrow from Patients with
HUMAN LEUKAEMIA 201
Granulocytopenia and Aplastic Anemia. Proc.
Soc. exp. Biol. med., 137, 917.
MCCULLOCH, E. A. & TILL, J. E. (1971) Effects of
Short Term Culture on Populations of Hemo-
poietic Progenitor Cells from Mouse Marrow.
Cell Tiss. Kinet., 4, 11.
METCALF, D. (1970) Studies on Colony Formation
in vitro by Mouse Bone Marrow Cells. II. Action
of Colony Stimulating Factor. J. cell. Physiol.,
76, 89.
METCALF, D. (1971) Transformation of Granulocytes
to Macrophages in Bone Marrow Colonies in vitro.
J. cell. Physiol., 77, 277.
METCALF, D. (1971a) Acute Antigen-induced Eleva-
tion of Serum Colony Stimulating Factor (CSF)
Levels. Immunology, 21, 427.
METCALF, D. & CHAN, S. H. (1972) Abnormal
Regulation of Granulopoiesis in Human Acute
Granulocytic Leukemia. In Proceedings Vth
International Congress on Leukemia. Ed. L.
Chieco-Bianchi. Basel: Karger. In press.
METCALF, D. & MOORE, M. A. S. (1971) Haemopoietic
Cell. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
METCALF, D. & MOORE, M. A. S. (1972) Regulation
of Growth and Differentiation in Haemopoietic
Colonies Growing in Agar. In Haemopoietic
Stem Cells. CIBA Symposium. Ed. G. E. W.
Wolstenholme. Amsterdam: Associated Scientific
Publishers. In press.
METCALF, D. & STANLEY, E. R. (1971) Haema-
tological Effects in Mice of Partially Purified
Colony Stimulating Factor (CSF) Prepared from
Human Urine. Br. J. Haemat., 21, 481.
METCALF, D. & STEVENS, S. (1972) Influence of Age
and Antigenic Stimulation on Granulocyte and
Macrophage Progenitor Cells in the Mouse Spleen.
Cell Tiss. Kinet., 5, 433.
METCALF, D. & WAHREN, B. (1968) Bone Marrow
Colony-stimulating Activity of Sera in Infectious
Mononucleosis. Br. med. J., iii, 99.
METCALF, D., BRADLEY, T. R. & RoBINSoN, W.
(1967) Analysis of Colonies Developing in vitro
from Mouse Bone Marrow Cells Stimulated by
Kidney Feeder Layers or Leukemic Serum. J.
cell. Physiol., 69, 93.
METCALF, D., CHAN, S. H., GUNZ, F. W., VINCENT,
P. & RAVICH, R. B. M. (1971) Colony-stimulating
Factor and Inhibitor Levels in Acute Granulocytic
Leukemia. Blood, 38, 143.
METCALF, D., CHAN, S. H., STANLEY, E. R., MOORE,
M. A. S., GUNZ, F. W. & VINCENT, P. C. (1972)
Regulation of Normal and Leukaemic Granulo-
cytic Cells by Colony Stimulating Factor (CSF).
In The Nature of Leukaemia. Ed. P. C. Vincent.
Sydney: Australian Cancer Society. p. 173.
METCALF, D., FOSTER, R. & POLLARD, M. (1967a)
Colony Stimulating Activity of Serum from
Germfree Normal and Leukemic Mice. J. cell.
Physiol., 70, 131.
METCALF, D., MOORE, M. A. S. & WARNER, N. L.
(1969) Colony Formation in vitro by Myelomono-
cytic Leukemic Cells. J. natn. Cancer Inst., 43,
983.
MOORE, M. A. S. & METCALF, D. (1973) Cytogenetic
Analysis of Human Acute and Chronic Myeloid
Leukemic Cells Cloned in Agar Cultures. Int. J.
Cancer. In press.
MOORE, M. A. S. & WILLIAMS, N. (1972) Physical
Separation of in vitro Colony Forming Cells from
Colony Stimulating Cells in Blood and Bone
Marrow. J. cell. Physiol., 80, 195.
MOORE, M. A. S., WILLIAMS, N. & METCALF, D.
(1972) Purification and Characterisation of the
in vitro Colony Forming Cell in Monkey Hemo-
poietic Tissue. J. cell. Physiol., 79, 283.
MOORE, M. A. S., WILLIAMS, N., METCALF, D.,
GARSON, 0. M. & HURDLE, A. D. F. (1972a)
Control of Human Leukemic Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation in Agar Culture. In Cell Differen-
tiation. Ed. R. Harris and D. Viza. Copen-
hagen: Munksgaard. p. 108.
MOORE, M. A. S., WILLIAMS, N. & METCALF, D.
(1973) In vitro Colony Formation by Norrral and
Leukemic Human Hemopoietic Cells: Interaction
between Colony-forming and Colony-stimulating
Cells. J. natn. Cancer Inst. In press.
MOORE, M. A. S., WILLIAMS, N. & METCALF, D.
(1973a) In vitro Colony Formation by Normal
and Leukemic Human Hemopoietic Cells: Charac-
terisation of the Colony-forming Cells. J. natn.
Cancer Inst. In press.
MORLEY, A., RICKARD, K. A., HOWARD, D. &
STOHLMAN, F. (1971) Studies on the Regulation of
Granulopoiesis. IV. Possible Humoral Regula-
tion. Blood, 37, 14.
MORLEY, A., QUESENBERRY, P., BEALMEAR, F.,
STOHLMAN, F. & WILSON, R. (1972) Serum Colony
Stimulating Factor Levels in Irradiated Germfree
and Conventional GFW Mice. Proc. Soc. exp.
Biol. Med., 140, 478.
PARAN, M., ICHIKAWA. Y. & SACHS, L. (1968)
Feedback Inhibition of the Development of
Macrophage and Granulocyte Colonies. II. In-
hibition by Granulocytes. Proc. natn. Acad.
Sci., 62, 81.
PARAN. M., SACHS, L., BARAK, Y. & RESNITSKY, P.
(1970) In vitro Induction of Granulocyte Differen-
tiation in Hematopoietic Cells from Leukemic and
Non-leukemic Patients. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci.,
67, 1542.
PIKE, B. L. & ROBINSON, W. A. (1970) Human Bone
Marrow Colony Growth in Agar. J. cell. Physiol.,
76, 77.
QUESENBERRY, P. J., MORLEY, A. A., RICKARD,
K. A., GARRITY, M., HOWARD, D. & STOHLMAN,
F. (1972) Effect of Endotoxin on Granulopoiesis
and Colony-stimulating Factor. New Engl. J.
Med., 286, 227.
ROBINSON, W. A. & PIKE, B. L. (1970) Leukopoietic
Activity in Human Urine: The Granulocytic
Leukemias. New Engl. J. Med., 282, 1291.
SANDBERG, A. A., ISHIHARA, T., KIKUCHI, Y. &
CROSSWHITE, L. H. (1964) Chromosomal Differ-
ences among the Acute Leukemias. Annls N. Y.
Acad. Sci., 113, 663.
SHADDUCK, R. K., NUNNA, N. G., MANDARINO, F.
& YURECHKO, F. (1972) Correlative Studies of
CSF and Granulocyte Turnover in Rats. In
In Vitro Culture of Hemopoietic Cells. Ed. D. W.
Van Bekkum and K. A. IDicke. Rijswijk:
Radiobiological Institute TNO. p. 31.
SHERIDAN, J. W. & METCLAF, D. (1972) Studies on
the Bone Marrow Colony Stimulating Factor
(CSF): Relation of Tissue CSF to Serum CSF.
J. cell. Physiol., 80, 129.
SHERIDAN, J. W. & STANLEY, E. R. (1971) Tissue
Sources of Bone Marrow Colony Stimulating
Factor. J. cell. Physiol., 78, 451.
STANLEY, E. R. & METCALF, D. (1971) The
202 D. METCALF
Molecular Weight of Colony-stimulating Factor
(CSF). Proc. Soc. exp. Biol. Med., 137, 1029.
STANLEY, E. R. & METCALF, D. (1972) Purification
and Properties of Human Urinary Colony
Stimulating Factor (CSF). In Cell Differentiation.
Ed. R. Harris and D. Viza. Copenhagen:
Munksgaard. p. 149.
STANLEY, E. R., METCALF, D., MARTIZ, J. S. & YEO,
G. F. (1972) Standardised Bioassay for Bone
Marrow Colony Stimulating Factor in Human
Urine: Levels in Normal Man. J. Lab. clin. Med.,
79, 657.
SUMNER, M. A., BRADLEY, T. R., HoDasoN, G. S.,
CLINE, M. J., FRY, P. A. & SUTHERLAND, L.
(1972) The Growth of Bone Marrow Cells in
Liquid Culture. Br. J. Haemat., 23, 221.
TESTA, N. G. & LAJTHA, L. G. (1972) Some Factors
Affecting Survival of CFU and CFUC in Culture.
In In Vitro Culture of Hemopoietic Cells. Ed.
D. W. Van Bekkum and K. A. Dicke. Rijswijk:
Radiobiological Institute TNO. p. 102.
UPTON, A. C., JENKINS, V. K., WALBUTRG, H. E.,
TYNDALL, R. L., CONKLIN, J. W. & WALD, N.
(1966) Observations on Viral, Chemical and
Radiation-induced Myeloid and Lymphoid Leu-
kemias in Rf Mice. J. natn. Cancer Inst.,
Monograph, 22, 329.
VIRCHOW, R. (1845) Weisses Blut. Froriep's
Notizen, 33, 151.
WARNER, N. L., MCORE, M. A. S. & METCALF, D.
(1969) A Transplantable Myelomonocytic Leu-
kemia in BALB/c Mice: Cytology, Karyotype
and Muramidase Content. J. natn. Cancer Inst.,
43, 963.
WORTON, R. G., MCCULLOCH, E. A. & TILL, J. E.
(1969) Physical Separation of Hemopoietic Stem
Cells from Cells Forming Colonies in Culture.
J. cell. Physiol., 74, 171.
