Br. J. Cancer (1984), 50, 753-756
Comparison of mesna with forced diuresis to prevent
cyclophosphamide induced haemorrhagic cystitis in marrow
transplantation: A prospective randomised study
J.M. Hows, A. Mehta, L. Ward, K. Woods, R. Perez, M.Y. Gordon & E.C.
Gordon-Smith
Department of Haematology and MRC Leukaemia Unit, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, London,
WJ2 OHS, UK.
Summary A prospective randomised study was carried out to compare the effect of mesna (2-
mercaptoethane sulphonate sodium) with that of forced diuresis in preventing cyclophosphamide induced
haemorrhagic cystitis in marrow transplant recipients. Sixty-one consecutive BMT recipients were randomised
for treatment with forced diuresis or mesna. The incidence of macroscopic haematuria was significantly lower
in the mesna treated group (X2 = 4.03, P <0.05). No specific side effects of mesna were detected. The
lymphopenia induced by cyclophosphamide in the aplastic recipients was similar in the mesna and forced
diuresis groups suggesting that mesna has no effect on the lymphocytotoxic activity of cyclophosphamide,
although 6 out of 7 episodes of graft failure documented in the study occurred in mesna treated patients. As a
result of this study our present policy is to use mesna in all BMT recipients but to continue careful
documentation of the incidence of graft failure.
High dose cyclophosphamide (HDC) is used as
pregraft immunosuppression in bone marrow
transplant recipients to prevent graft rejection. A
total dose of 120-200mgkg-1 is given i.v. over 2-4
days either alone or in combination with total body
irradiation (1000-1200cGy). Haemorrhagic cystitis
is the most frequent serious side effect of HDC
therapy in BMT recipients (Storb et al., 1976), this
is thought to be caused by a metabolite of
cyclophosphamide called acrolein (Cox et al., 1978).
Forced diuresis with or without bladder irrigation
has been used to prevent haemorrhagic cystitis by
diluting the acrolein in the urine thereby reducing
its contact with the urothelium. This procedure
requires skilled supervision to prevent dangerous
water overload and electrolyte imbalance
particularly as HDC has an anti diuretic effect.
Mesna, (2-mercaptoethane sulphonate sodium), is
a sulphydryl compound which has been developed
to prevent haemorrhagic cystitis in patients
receiving HDC or isophosphamide. It is
administered i.v. and is rapidly excreted via the
urinary tract. Within the urinary tract mesna
combines with acrolein to form a non-toxic
compound (Brock et al., 1979). A preliminary study
showed that only 1 out of 10 marrow transplant
patients given HDC together with mesna developed
haemorrhagic cystitis (Link et al., 1981). We carried
out a prospective randomised study to compare the
efficiency of mesna and forced diuresis in
preventing haemorrhagic cystitis in marrow
transplant patients, to assess possible side effects of
mesna treatment and to find out if it interfered with
the immunosuppresive activity of
cyclophosphamide. Our preliminary results have
already been documented (Hows et al., 1983).
Patients and methods
Patients
Sixty-one consecutive patients admitted for bone
marrow transplantation were randomly allocated to
receive mesna or forced diuresis as prophylaxis
against haemorrhagic cystitis. Thirty-four patients
received mesna and 27 forced diuresis. The clinical
features of patients receiving mesna or forced
diuresis are compared in Table I. All patients
transplanted for aplastic anaemia had severe disease
measured by conventional criteria (Camitta et al.,
1976) and all were multiply transfused having
received more than 10 units of blood before BMT.
Pre-transplant immunosuppresive therapy
The aplastic patients received HDC 50mgkg-1i.v.
on four consecutive days and the leukaemic patients
received 60mg kg1 on 2 days and total body
irradiation (TBI) 1000-1200cGy in fractions of
200 cGy over 3 days. All patients received
The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1984
Correspondence: J.M. Hows.
Received 22 May 1984; accepted 20 August 1984.
754 J. HOWS et al.
Table I Clinical features of 61 BMT patients.
Mesna Forced diuresis
Treatment allocated n=34 n=27
Leukaemic patients 18 17
Aplastic patients 16 10
Median age (range) 24 26
(3-44) (11-39)
Sex ratio M:F 1.8:1 1:1
Pre-existing UTI or 5 2
haematuria
cyclosporine in the post transplant period as
previously described to prevent graft versus host
disease (Hows et al., 1982).
Prevention ofhaemorrhagic cystitis
Forced diuresis group (n = 27)
Patients received 6 litres of dextrose saline i.v. over
24 h on the days of HDC administration. Fifty
mmol of sodium bicarbonate, 20 mmol of
potassium chloride and 10mg of frusemide were
added to each litre. Diamox (acetazolamide)
150 mg m2 and frusemide 20 mg m2 was given
30min before HDC administration. The urinary pH
during the diuresis was 7.5-8.5.
Mesna group (n = 34)
Patients received 3 litres of dextrose saline over 24 h
on the days of HDC administration. No electrolytes
or diuretics were routinely added to the infusion
but were given as necessary. Sodim bicarbonate was
not given and the urinary pH was 7.0-8.0. Mesna
was given by i.v. bolus injection, 20-25mg kg-
30 min before cyclophosphamide administration.
The dose was repeated 3 h, 6 h and 9 h after HDC.
The mesna schedule was continued on the day
following the last dose of HDC.
Urinary monitoring
Early morning urine samples (EMU) were obtained
from all patients before starting HDC and then
daily for 28 days. Samples were examined for the
presence of macroscopic and microscopic
haematuria. Macroscopic haematuria visible to the
naked eye approximated to > 100 RBC per high
power field (HPF) when examined under the ward
miscroscope. Between 1 and 100 RBC per HPF was
documented as microscopic haematuria and
<1 RBC per HPF was recorded as no haematuria.
The occurrence of dysuria and urinary tract
infection was also documented.
Measurement of the immunosuppressive effect of
cyclophosphamide
This was attempted in the aplastic patients who
received HDC alone without TBI. The nadir of the
lymphocyte count 10 days following HDC
administration was measured in the mesna and
forced diuresis treated aplastic patients. The
incidence of graft versus host disease and graft
failure in these patients was also documented.
Culture ofbone marrow cells
Preliminary studies showed a higher incidence of
graft failure in mesna treated aplastic patients than
in the control group (Hows et al., 1983a, b). The
possibility that mesna inhibited progenitor cell
proliferation was investigated by adding graded
concentrations of the drug (0-8 M) to agar cultures
containing 105 normal bone marrow mononuclear
cells and 10% phytohaemagglutinin-stimulated
leucocyte conditioned medium (PHA-LCM) as a
source of granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating activity. The colonies produced by the
granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cells (GM-
CFC) were counted once after 7 days incubation at
37°C in 7.5% CO2 and again after 14 days. The
effect of mesna was calculated as the percentage of
GM-CFC that survived the treatment in vitro.
Analysis ofresults
Three patients died within the study period, 2 in the
mesna group and one in the forced diuresis group.
None of these patients had developed macroscopic
haematuria at the time of death. The causes of
death were cerebral haemorrhage (day + 15),
cyclosporine toxicity (day +10) and acute GVHD
(day + 14). As these patients were not studied for
the full period they were excluded from the final
analysis. Patients with microscopic haematuria had
no symptoms or signs of cystitis and were therefore
analysed with the patients completely free of
haematuria.
Results
The incidence of haemorrhagic cystitis is shown in
Table II. Nine out of 26 patients receiving forced
diuresis (35%) developed macroscopic haematuria
with two severe cases, one fatal. Four out of 32
mesna patients (12.5%) developed haematuria, with
one severe case requiring bilateral nephrostomies.
Macroscopic haematuria was less frequent is the
mesna group (X2=4.034, P<0.05, >0.02). Ten
patients (36%) in the mesna group and 8 patients
(47%) in the forced diuresis group developed
microscopic haematuria. None of the patients with
microscopic haemature had urinary tract symptoms
and were analysed with those patients with no
haematuria. Only 2 out of 7 patients with pre-
existing microscopic haematuria or urinary tract
MESNA VS FORCED DIURESIS IN BMT 755
Table II Incidence of haemorrhagic cystitis (Results
n = 58b).
Treatment Diagnosis None/micro Macro
Mesna Aplasia 8/5 = 13 2
Leukaemia 10/5 = 15 2
aTotal 28 4
Forced diuresis Aplasia 2/2 = 4 6
Leukaemia 7/6 = 13 3
aTotal 17 9
aX2 =4.03 P <0.05, >0.02.
None/micro - no haematuria or microscopic
haematuria only.
Macro - macroscopic haematuria.
'Three patients died within the study period from
unrelated causes - see text.
infection (Table I) developed macroscopic
haematuria, a result similar to the group as a
whole. No specific side effects of mesna were
documented although we observed false positive
results for urinary ketones in the mesna treated
patients using the Ames multistix reagent (Gordon-
Smith et al., 1982). The incidence of
cyclophosphamide induced vomiting was the same
in mesna and forced diuresis groups (data not
shown).
In the aplastic patients HDC was the sole
pregraft immunosuppresive agent used. We
therefore attempted to estimate effective
immunosuppression in these patients. Table III
shows that despite a similar fall in the post
treatment lymphocyte count in mesna and forced
diuresis patients more episodes of graft rejection
occurred in mesna treated patients. There was no
Table III Immunosuppresive effect of cyclophosphamide
and graft rejection in 25 aplastic patients.
Mesna Forced diuresis
n=15 n=JO
Pre Rx 1.1 0.8
Lymphocytes (0.3-2.6) (0.4-2.3)
x 1091-' (range)
Nadir lymphocytes 0.13 0.15
x 109 1'- (range) (0-0.37) (0-0.32)
Primary graft failure 3 1
Late graft failure 3 0
Severe GVHD 6/12 3/9
agrade III-IV
'Clinical grading (Glucksberg et
corrected for primary graft failure.
al., 1974). Numbers
Table IV Effect of mesna on GM-CFC Assay.
Normal donor marrow.
(Survivingfraction)
Dose mesna d.7 GM-CFC d.14 GM-CFC
0 1.0 1.0
2 M 1.0 0.96
4 M 1.2 0.99
8 M 0.97 0.88
significant difference in the incidence or severity of
GVHD between mesna and forced diuresis patients.
In vitro mesna has no effect on the growth of
normal marrow progenitor cells (Table IV).
Discussion
Haemorrhagic cystitis has been reported in -30%
of BMT recipients receiving HDC despite
prophylaxis with forced diuresis and bladder
irrigation (Storb et al., 1976). Our results show a
comparable overall incidehce of macroscopic
haematuria in 12/58 (21%) of patients analysed.
Macroscopic haematuria was less frequent in the
mesna treated group (P= <0.05). The improved
results were most marked in the aplastic patients
treated with mesna (Table II). Administration of
mesna was simple and required less nursing time
than supervision of forced diuresis.
Late onset haemorrhagic cystitis has been
described during and following cyclophosphamide
therapy (George, 1963). In our study 3 cases of late
onset haemorrhagic cystitis occurred, 2 in the
forced diuresis group and one in the mesna group
14-28 days after BMT. All three late cases were
severe and one was fatal.
Clinical studies have failed to demonstrate a
reduction in the antitumour activity of
isophosphamide by the concurrent administration
of mesna (Bryant et al., 1980). Further studies have
supported this finding showing that mesna is auto-
oxidised in the plasma and therefore cannot affect
active metabolites of cyclophosphamide or
isophosphamide in the circulation (Brock et al.,
1981). In human marrow transplantation
cyclophosphamide is used primarily for its
immunosuppresive effect, rather than antitumour
activity. In our study the aplastic recipients did not
receive TBI so the immunosuppresive activity of
HDC was of great importance for successful
engraftment. It is notable that 6/7 of the episodes
of graft failure occurring in the aplastic transplant
recipients were in mesna treated patients (Table
III). However, there was no difference in the
lymphocytotoxic effect of cyclophosphamide as
756 J. HOWS et al.
measured by the nadir of the lymphocyte count in
forced diuresis and mesna treated patients. This
finding makes it unlikely that mesna affects the
lymphocytotoxic activity of cyclophosphamide.
Mesna was administered the day before marrow
infusion to the aplastic patients but not within 12h
of the infusion. In one patient mesna was detected
in the urine on the morning of the marrow infusion
(data not shown). To exclude the possibility of a
direct toxic effect of mesna on marrow progenitor
cells GM-CFC cultures were carried out in the
presence of supra pharmacological concentrations
of the drug (Table IV). From our in vitro results we
conclude that mesna has no effect on GM-CFC
and that direct toxicity to at least these marrow
progenitor cells is an unlikely explanation for the
high incidence of graft failure in the mesna treated
aplastic patients.
In conclusion mesna is more effective than forced
diuresis in preventing cyclophosphamide induced
haemorrhagic cystitis in BMT recipients (P<0.05).
However, treatment failures did occur possibly
because there may be other causes of haemorrhagic
cystitis than acrolein toxicity or the dose schedule
of mesna was not optimal. Mesna was simpler to
administer and required less supervision than forced
diuresis. No immediate side effects of mesna were
detected in this study nor could an effect of mesna
on the lymphocytotoxic activity of cyclo-
phosphamide be determined. The higher incidence
of graft failure in the mesna treated aplastic
patients compared to the forced diuresis group
remains to be explained. As a result of this study
our present policy is to use mesna to prevent
haemorrhagic cystitis in all BMT recipients and to
continue careful documentation of the incidence of
graft failure in our patients.
We would like to thank Dr J. Dalton of Boehringer
Ingelheim for helpful advice and discussion and Dr I.
Shaw, Department of Toxicology, University College,
London for measuring urinary mesna levels. We are
grateful to Dr J. Goldman for allowing us to study his
patients.
References
BROCK, N., POHL, J. & STEKAR, J. (1981) Detoxification
of urotoxic oxazaphosphorines by sulphydryl
compounds. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol., 100, 311.
BROCK, N., STEKAR, J., POHL, J., NIEMEYER, U. &
SCHEFFLER, G. (1979). Acrolein The causative factor
of urotoxic side effects of cyclophosphamide. Drug
Res., 29, 659.
BRYANT, B.M., JARMAN, M., FORD, H.T. & SMITH, I.E.
(1980). Prevention of isophosphamide-induced
urothelial toxicity with 2-mercaptoethane sulphonate
sodium (mesnum) in patients with advanced
carcinoma. Lancet, ii, 657.
CAMITTA, B.M., THOMAS, E.D., NATHAN, D.G., SANTOS,
G., GORDON-SMITH, E.C., GALE, R.P., RAPPEPORT,
J.M. & STORB, R. (1976). Severe aplastic anaemia: a
prospective study of the effect of early marrow
transplantation on mortality. Blood, 48, 63.
COX, P.J. (1978). Cyclophosphamide cystitis -
identification of acrolein as the causative agent.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 28, 2045.
GEORGE, P. (1963). Haemorrhagic cystitis and
cyclophosphamide. Lancet, ii, 942.
GLUCKSBERG, H., STORB, R., FEFER, A. & 5 others.
(1974). Clinical manifestations of graft versus host
disease in human recipients of marrow from HLA
matched sibling donors. Transplantation, 18, 295.
GORDON-SMITH, E.C., HOWS, J., WOODS, K. & WARD, L.
(1982). Mesna and fasle positive results in ward testing
for urinary ketones. Lancet, 1, 503.
HOWS, J.M., CHIPPING, P.M., FAIRHEAD, S., BAUGHAN,
A. & GORDON-SMITH, E.C. (1983a). Nephrotoxicity in
bone marrow transplant recipients treated with
cyclosporin A. Br. J. Haematol., 54, 69.
HOWS, J., MEHTA, A. & GORDON-SMITH, E.C. (1983b).
Mesna versus forced diuresis to prevent
cyclophosphamide induced haemorrhagic cystitis in
marrow transplant patients (preliminary data). Cancer
Treat. Rev., 10 (Suppl.A) 53.
HOWS, J., PALMER, S. & GORDON-SMITH, E.C. (1982).
Use of cyclosporin A in allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation for severe aplastic anaemia.
Transplantation, 33, 382.
LINK, H., NEEF, V., NIETHAMMER, D. & WILMS, K.
(1981). Prophylaxis of haemorrhagic cystitis due to
cyclophosphamide conditioning for bone marrow
transplantation. Blut., 43, 329.
STORB, R., THOMAS, E.D., WEIDEN, P.L. & 10 others.
(1976). Aplastic anemia treated by allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation. A report on 49 new cases
from Seattle. Blood, 48, 817.
