Br. J. Cancer (1990), 61, 385-389 C) Macmillan Press Ltd., 1990
Origin of marrow stromal cells and haemopoietic chimaerism following
bone marrow transplantation determined by in situ hybridisation
N.A. Athanasou, J. Quinn, M.K. Brenner', H. Grant Prentice', A. Graham, S. Taylor,
D. Flannery & J. O'D. McGee
Nuffield Department ofPathology, University of Oxford, Level 1, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK; and
'Department ofHaematology and Immunology, Royal Free Hospital School ofMedicine, London, UK.
Summary The origin and cell lineage of stromal cells in the bone marrow is uncertain. Whether a common
stem cell exists for both haemopoietic and stromal cells or whether these cell lines arise from distinct stem cells
is unknown. Using in situ hybridisation for detection of the Y chromosome, we have examined histological
sections of bone marrow from seven patients who received marrow transplants from HLA-matched donors of
the opposite sex. Stromal cells (adipocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, osteoblasts and osteocytes) were
identified in these recipients as being of host origin. This result is consistent with the concept of a distinct
origin and separate cell lineage for cells of the haemopoietic and stromal systems. It also shows that
engraftment of marrow stromal cell precursors does not occur and that host stromal cells survive conditioning
regimens for marrow transplantation. With the exception of one case, with a markedly hypocellular marrow,
mixed chimaerism was seen in haemopoietic cells, indicating that this is not a rare event after marrow
transplantation.
Stromal tissue in bone and marrow consists of a
heterogeneous collection of loose and dense connective tis-
sues including fibroblasts, adipocytes, endothelial cells and
cells of bone and cartilage (Owen, 1985). Little is known of
the cell lineage of each of these cellular elements. The
ontogenic relationship of cells of the stromal system to cells
of the haemopoietic system is also uncertain. In particular, it
is not certain whether a common stem cell exists for both the
haemopoietic and stromal cell systems in the post-natal
animal (Dexter, 1982; Loutit et al., 1982).
One approach to this question has been the investigation
of the origin and lineage of stromal cells present in the
haemopoietic microenvironment following bone marrow
transplantation. A donor origin for these cells suggests that
there is a common stem cell for both haemopoietic and
stromal cell systems in the marrow. Support for this concept
has come from both cytogenetic and enzyme marker studies
of adherent stromal cells in long-term marrow cultures
derived from allogeneic transplant recipients (Keating et al.,
1982; Piersma et al., 1983; Marshall et al., 1984). However,
results of similar in vitro experiments in both animals
(Friedenstein et al., 1978; Bentley et al., 1982; Chertkov et
al., 1985; Perkins & Fleischman, 1988) and humans (Golde et
al., 1980; Laver et al., 1987; Simmons et al., 1987) have
shown a host origin for stromal cells, suggesting that a
common precursor cell does not exist for both systems.
The cells collectively called stromal cells in the above
studies represent a heterogeneous population of cells which
share the common property of adherence to the substratum
in vitro (Dexter, 1982; Tavassoli & Friedenstein, 1983). It is
not possible to characterise fully and identify the cells which
form the adherent cell population in these cultures, and it has
been shown that they do contain cells of haemopoietic origin
(Tavassoli & Friedenstein, 1983; Perkins & Fleischman,
1988). In this study, we have addressed this problem by
examining intact bone marrow trephines without cell dis-
sociation or culture. We have determined the origin of
haemopoietic and stromal cell elements in allogeneic sex-
mismatched bone marrow transplant patients using DNA in
situ hybridisation with a Y chromosome probe to distinguish
donor from recipient cells. This technique enables the origin
and phenotype of the cells to be determined in their natural
microanatomical location and avoids the uncertainty sur-
rounding the nature of the adherent cell population found in
long-term marrow cultures (Dexter, 1982).
Mixed haemopoietic chimaerism, i.e. the presence of
haemopoietic marrow or blood cells of both donor and
recipient origin following bone marrow transplantation for
haematological malignancies, is a well recognised phenom-
enon (Branch et al., 1985; Petz et al., 1987). The frequency
and degree to which this occurs and its relationship to graft
versus host disease and survival after transplantation is
uncertain. In this study, we have also examined and
quantified the degree of haemopoietic chimaerism in the
transplant patients studied.
Materials and methods
Patient details
Nine bone marrow trephine biopsies examined were derived
from seven patients (four female, three male) being treated
for acute leukaemia. These patients had received bone mar-
row transplants from HLA-matched donors of the opposite
sex. All recipients were conditioned with high dose cyclo-
phosphamide, 60 mg kg-' for two days, and total body
irradiation (maximum 750 cGy at a dose rate circa
17 cGy min-' in air) (Prentice et al., 1984). All marrows were
treated with the Royal Free T depletion protocol using
monoclonal antibodies RFT12 or MBG6 (anti-CD6) and
RFT8 (anti-CD8) and two rounds of rabbit complement. The
age range of those transplanted was 10-43. All grafts were
self sustaining. No patients received routine prophylactic
treatment for graft versus host disease post-transplantatation.
Bone marrow trephines were taken to check engraftment or
to investigate suspected graft failure. Clinical and biopsy
details of each patient are shown in Table I. Follow up
post-transplantation has shown that cases 103, 109 and 185
are well and remain free of disease. Case 93 was an AML
who subsequently relapsed. The time of the relapse was dated
three weeks after the time of initial biopsy. Case 116 initially
rejected his allogeneic marrow at the time of biopsy and
subsequently had an autologous bone marrow transplant.
Case 99 was an ALL patient who relapsed and had a second
bone marrow transplant which is the one biopsied. He subse-
quently died of cytomegalovirus pneumonitis.
Control bone marrow trephines of normal cellularity were
also studied from three male and three female patients being
investigated for anaemia. These were similarly decalcified and
processed before non-isotopic in situ hybridisation.
Specimen details andpreparation of tissue sections
Bone marrow trephines were taken from the posterior iliac
Correspondence: N.A. Athanasou.
Received 29 June 1989; and in revised form 25 October 1989.
'." Macmillan Press Ltd., 1990Br. J. Cancer (1990), 61, 385-389
386 N.A. ATHANASOU et al.
Table I Clinical details of marrow transplant recipients and analysis of stromal cells and haemopoetic chimaerism post-transplantation
Percentage of
Y chromosome
Sex of stromal positive
Donor Days post- cells post- haemopoietic
UPN Age Sex Diagnosis sex transplantation transplantation cells
93b 35 F AML M 74; 126; 203 F 28; 45; 32
ggb 18 M ALL F Ill M 66
103 39 F ALL M 3 F 3
0l1b 9 F ALL M 26 F 0o
109 42 F AML M 21 F 60
116b 14 M ALL F 77 M 10
185 18 M ALL F 22 M 40
UPN, unique patient number (given to each patient); AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
'Extremely hypocellular marrow with very few haemopoietic cells present; bbiopsies taken for suspected graft rejection.
crest using a Jamshidi needle. The specimen was immediately
fixed in formalin and decalcified in 8% formic acid for 24 h.
The specimen was processed and embedded in paraffin wax
and 3 tsm sections were cut and mounted on Multispot slides
(Hendley, Essex, UK) precoated with 3-aminopropyltri-
ethoxysilane (Sigma, UK), 2% in acetone (Burns et al.,
1988); each spot was 12 mm in diameter. Paraffin sections
were dewaxed in xylene (3 x 5 min), washed in tap water
(10 min), and rinsed in distilled water (10 min) before pro-
teolytic digestion and in situ hybridisation. The sections were
then subjected to limited proteolysis in 0.4% pepsin
(3,200-3,800 units tg-' protein; Sigma, UK) in 0.2 M HCI at
37°C for periods between 2 and 15 min (Burns et al., 1988).
After digestion, the sections were washed in distilled water
(3 x 5 min) and rinsed (2 x 5 min) in phosphate buffered
saline solution (PBS), then dried in a warm oven.
Non-isotopic in situ hybridisation (NISH)
A Y 'specific' probe, pHY 2.1, was labelled with dUTP biotin
by nick translation as described in detail elsewhere (Ferguson
et al., 1986). The degree of dUTP-biotin substitution for
thymine was 20% for pHY 2.1. The labelled probe (20 lsg
DNA m'-') was stored in 5 gl aliquots at - 70°C in
I mmol I' ethylene diamino tetra-acetic acid (EDTA),
5 mmol 1'- Tris HCI, pH 7.3.
Hybridisation buffer (10 pi) containing 1 ng biotinylated
pHY 2.1 was pipetted onto each Multispot slide and each
spot covered with a circular 14 mm glass coverslip. Hybrid-
isation buffer contained 50% (v/v) formamide (Sigma, UK),
10% (v/v) dextran sulphate (BDH, UK) 2 x SSC
(I x SSC = 0.15 mmol 1' sodium chloride, sodium citrate),
0.1 mmol I` EDTA and 0.05 mmol `' Tris HCI, pH 7.3
Negative controls were incubated under similar conditions
with hybridisation buffer only or irrelevant biotinylated vec-
tor, pBR322. Slides were placed in sealed heat resisting plas-
tic containers containing sufficient water to saturate the at-
mosphere. The tissue section and probe in hybridisation
buffer were denatured simultaneously in a hot air oven at
95C for 15 min. The containers were transferred to a 42C
oven and hybridised for 2 h. The coverslips were removed
and the slides then washed sequentially for 2 x Omin in
4 x SSC at 22°C to remove non-specifically bound DNA
probe. The slides placed in TBS-base pH 7.2 + 0.05% Triton
solution containing 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA).
Two methods were used to detect hybridised biotinylated
probes. In the first, the hybridised biotinylated probes were
detected by an avidin-alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Dako,
UK) as described (Burns et al., 1988). Briefly, sections were
incubated for 30 min with 50 IL of the avidin-alkaline phos-
phatase conjugate (diluted 1/100 with 0.05 M Tris HCI: 5%
BSA); slides were washed for 5 min in 0.05 M Tris HCI buffer
(pH 7.2) and 50 sLI of the alkaline phosphatase substrate
added to the sections. The alkaline phosphatase substrate
Nitroblue tetrazolium containing BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-
indolyl phosphate: Sigma) was prepared as previously de-
scribed (Burns et al., 1988). The slides were incubated in this
substrate for 20 min. The substrate was washed off with PBS
and the slides placed in running tap water for at least 5 min,
and lightly counterstained by immersion in Gills Haematoxy-
lin (R.A. Lamb) for 10-20 s. Slides were thoroughly washed
(40 min) in tap water, rinsed briefly in 5% Borax solution
(Sigma), rinsed again in tap water and mounted in glycerine
jelly.
The second method used a rabbit anti-biotin polyclonal
antibody and an immunoperoxidase diaminobenzidine
(DAB)-silver reaction to detect the biotinylated probe (Bhatt
et al., 1988). The slides were first washed in PBS then
immersed in a 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide (Gibco) in
industrial methylated spirits for 30 min to block endogenous
peroxide activity. After a further wash in PBS, a 1/200 rabbit
anti-biotin serum (Enzo, NY) was incubated on the sections
for 30 min. This was washed off with PBS and the slides then
incubated in 1/50 diluted peroxidase conjugated swine anti-
rabbit immunoglobulin antibody (Dako) for a further
30 min. After washing, the sections were incubated for 5 min
in a solution of 0.5 mg ml-' DAB that contained freshly
added 5 pL ml ' 30% peroxide solution (Gibco). The gold-
silver method was used to amplify the signal: the sections
were incubated for 5 min in 0, 1% solution of sodium
chloraurate (BDH) then a 0.1% solution of sodium sulphide
(Gibco) (pH 7.3) for 5 min. After washing in PBS, a silver
solution prepared from a kit supplied by Janssen (Belgium)
was incubated on the section for approximately 12 min and
the reaction monitored by light microscopy. The sections
were variably counterstained with pyronin, dried and
mounted in DPX. The advantage of this second method was
that the signal was stronger and more easily identified in
stromal cells for photographic purposes.
The percentage of Y chromosome positive cells was deter-
mined after counting 300 cells in each of five high power
( x 25) fields using an eyepiece graticule.
Results
The presence of a Y chromosome in a male cell was identi-
fied as a blue or black dot in the cell nucleus, usually near
the nuclear membrane. In all control untransplanted female
marrow biopsies examined, no evidence of a Y chromosome
was seen in either haemopoietic or stromal cell elements. In
all control untransplanted male marrow biopsies, a Y
chromosome was easily identified in over 80% of the large
rounded haemopoietic cells. It was often difficult, however, to
,detect the Y chromosome in the thin flattened nuclei of the
various stromal cell types. Nevertheless, this could generally
be resolved in most (52-62%) stromal cell nuclei after thin
serial sections of the biopsy were examined.
Stromal cell origin
In all female hosts who had received a male marrow trans-
plant, a Y chromosome indicating donor origin was never
seen in cells of the stromal system; these included osteoblasts
and osteocytes (Figure 1), endothelial cells (Figure 2),
adipocytes (Figure 3) and fibroblasts in the marrow inter-
STROMAL CELL ORIGIN FOLLOWING MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
stitial connective tissue and periosteum of the bone biopsies.
Smooth muscle cells in the wall of small blood vessels were
also negative for the Y chromosome. In all control untrans-
planted female marrow biopsies, all stromal cells were also
entirely negative for Y chromosome. Conversely, in all male
hosts transplanted with female marrow, a Y chromosome
was always seen in osteoblasts, osteocytes, fibroblasts,
adipocytes, and endothelial cells (Figure 4) in the marrow.
After examination of serial sections, a Y chromosome could
be resolved in 48-66% of stromal cell nuclei in each of the
biopsies. This compared favourably with the average percent-
age of stromal cell nuclei containing a Y chromosome in
control untransplanted male marrow biopsies. The reason
why all stromal cell nuclei in the male marrow biopsies are
not stained is uncertain but is probably {elated to the
decalcification required for histological processing of bone
biopsies as well as variations in time of fixation and the
individual requirements for unmasking of nucleic acid by
pepsin/HCl (Burns et al., 1988). Generally, where the biopsy
specimen had been fixed for a prolonged period (more than
24 h), there was less Y chromosome detection; to some extent
this was overcome by a longer period of proteolysis. Another
important reason for the difficulty in observing the Y probe
signal in stromal cells is simply the morphology of the cells
themselves. All the stromal cells studied have thin elongated
nuclei as in the case of osteocytes and adipocytes where the
nucleus is compressed along one cell margin or in the case of
osteoblasts and endothelial cells which are flattened cells
lining the bone and blood vessel surface respectively. Given
the above constraints, the possibility that low level stromal
chimaerism has not been detected by this technique cannot
be entirely excluded.
Figure I Part of bone trabecula and bone marrow from female
recipient of transplanted male marrow showing: (a) mixed
chimaerism (thick arrowhead) in haemopoietic cells (right) and
no staining of Y chromosome in osteocytes or osteoblasts (thin
arrowhead) lining bone trabecula (x 170, DAB reaction); (b) no
Y staining of flattened osteoblasts (thin arrowhead) lining bone
trabecular (bottom) but Y staining amongst surrounding
haemopoietic cells (thick arrowhead) (x 340, alkaline phos-
phatase reaction).
Figure 2 Small capillary channel (centre) and surrounding
haemopoietic marrow in female recipient of transplanted male
marrow showing no Y chromosome in lining endothelial cells but
Y chromosome staining in some haemopoietic cells (arrowheads)
( x 340, alkaline phosphatase reaction).
Figure 3 Bone marrow of female recipient of transplanted male
marrow showing staining of Y chromosome in clusters of
haemopoietic cells (thick arrowhead), but no Y chromosome of
surrounding pale staining adipocytes (thin arrowheads) ( x 340,
DAB reaction).
Mixed haemopoietic chimaerism
In all sex-mismatched marrow transplants, the haemopoietic
elements in the marrow, including morphologically
identifiable erythroid and myeloid precursors and megakary-
ocytes showed mixed donor/host chimaerism with a variable
fraction of the cells containing a Y chromosome (Table I). In
general, haemopoietic cells in the more hypocellular marrow
biopsies showed fewer cells of donor origin. In one extremely
hypocellular female host marrow (UPN101) biopsied 26 days
post-transplantatation, no Y chromosome was seen in the
few haemopoietic cells present suggesting that the graft had
not taken and the cells were of host origin. Similar cases
(UPNl 85 and 109) biopsied 22 and 21 days post-
transplantation showed that up to 60% of haemopoietic cells
were of donor origin.
Discussion
This study has shown that cells of the stromal system
(adipocytes, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, osteocytes and
endothelial cells) are of host origin in marrow transplants.
This suggests that engraftment of bone marrow stromal cell
precursors does not occur and argues against the origin of
stromal cells from a common haemopoietic/stromal stem cell.
In contrast, as has been noted previously following allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation (Thomas et al., 1975; Sparkes
et al., 1977; Branch et al., 1975; Petz et al., 1987),
haemopoietic cells are a chimaera of both donor and host
cell origin.
387
388 N.A. ATHANASOU et al.
Figure 4 Bone biopsy of male recipient of transplanted female
marrow showing staining of Y chromosome (arrowed) in: (a)
osteoblasts lining bone trabecula (below) ( x 1,356, DAB reac-
tion); (b) two osteocytes in lacunae of bone trabecula ( x 867,
DAB reaction); (c) one endothelial and several smooth muscle
cells of blood vessel ( x430, DAB reaction); (d) adipocyte nuclei
for fatty marrow ( x 867, DAB reaction).
The two main cellular systems in bone and marrow are the
haemopoietic and stromal cell systems. It is generally
believed that these two systems are distinct and do not arise
from a common pluripotent stem cell (Owen, 1985). Evidence
for this has come largely from analysis of adherent 'stromal'
cells in long-term cultures of bone marrow derived from
allogeneic marrow transplant recipients in both animals
(Friedenstein et al., 1978; Bentley et al., 1982; Chertkov et
al., 1985; Perkins & Fleischman, 1988) and humans (Golde et
al., 1980; Laver et al., 1987; Simmons et al., 1987). However,
similar studies in both humans (Keating et al., 1982; Piersma
et al., 1983) and mice (Marshall et al., 1984) have shown that
stromal cells of donor origin are present in such marrow
transplants. In addition, using the X chromosome linked
enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, it was reported
that adherent stromal cells found in long-term in vitro cul-
tures of human marrow were derived from the same trans-
formed clone as the neoplastic haemopoietic cells (Fialkow et
al., 1980; Fialkow, 1983; Singer et al., 1984). These results
suggested that a common stem cell may exist for both
haemopoietic and stromal cell lines.
One of the major limiting factors with these in vitro models
is the uncertainty about the nature and origin of adherent
stromal cells which form in long-term marrow cultures (Dex-
ter, 1982; Tavassoli & Friedenstein, 1983). The adherent cells
are a heterogenous population including fibroblasts, endo-
thelial cells, adipocytes and macrophages. One recent study
of the origin and transplantability of stromal cells in long-
term bone marrow culture in chimaeric mice showed that
75-95% of the adherent cells were of donor origin and that
these were haemopoietic cells of the monocyte/macrophage
lineage (Perkins & Fleischman, 1988). This high proportion
of donor derived macrophages could not have been recog-
nised by the techniques used to assess the nature of adherent
cells, and may account for the divergent results of previous in
vitro studies. One of the advantages of the present study is
that it is the first which has used in situ hybridisation on
tissue sections of transplanted marrow. In this way, cells can
be clearly identified cytologically and by their micro-
anatomical location. In addition, the use of a Y chromosome
probe is also more effective than the fluorescence method of
visualising Y bodies (Burns et al., 1985), a technique which
has been employed previously in detection of allogeneic
stromal cells in long-term marrow cultures (Keating et al.,
1982).
Successful engraftment of donor haematopoietic cells in
marrow transplants is dependent upon the marrow stroma
providing a favourable microenvironment for stem cell pro-
liferation and differentiation. The failure to demonstrate a
donor origin for the stromal cells in transplanted marrow
indicates that the achievement of successful haematopoietic
engraftment does not depend solely on transfusion and en-
graftment of stromal cell precursors but on the persistence of
host stromal cells in the haematopoietic microenvironment.
The role of stromal cells in influencing haematopoietic en-
graftment is unknown but the nature of the interaction
between host stromal cells and donor haematopoietic stem
cells is clearly central to an understanding of this. These
findings clearly have practical implications for marrow trans-
plantation as they suggest that successful haematopoietic
engraftment or development of graft versus host disease may
be determined by the effect of various factors, such as
cytotoxic therapy, on the survival and function of host
stromal cells (Greenberger, 1986).
Mixed haemopoietic chimaerism was found in early follow-
up marrow biopsies in almost all cases studied; the single
exception had an extremely hypocellular marrow with very
few haemopoietic cells present. Indeed, the degree of mixed
haemopoietic chimaerism appeared almost directly propor-
tional to marrow haemopoietic cellularity. Extensive
chimaerism was evident as early as three weeks post-
transplantation in cases with normocellular marrows but was
not well-developed in two cases where the haemopoietic
elements were hypocellular. Mixed haemopoietic chimaerism
has previously been reported after bone marrow transplant-
ation by other investigators and in one study (Hill et al.,
1986), this feature was associated with a higher risk of graft
rejection. As the reason for biopsy in several of our cases was
suspected graft rejection, the chimaerism noted in the
haemopoietic cells may be significant. However, it is not
possible to make firm conclusions regarding the effect of
mixed haemopoietic chimaerism on graft survival or rejection
from the small number of cases investigated in this study.
STROMAL CELL ORIGIN FOLLOWING MARROW TRANSPLANTATION 389
This work was supported by grants from the Cancer Research
Campaign and the Medical Research Fund, University of Oxford.
We thank Miss L. Watts for typing the manuscript and Mr G.
Richardson for photographic assistance.
References
BENTLEY, S.A., KNUTSEN, T. & WHANG-PENG, J. (1982). The origin
of the hematopoietic microenvironment in continuous bone mar-
row culture. Exp. Hematol., 10, 367.
BHATT, B., BURNS, J., FLANNERY, D. & MCGEE, J.O'D. (1988).
Direct visualisation of single copy genes on banded metaphase
chromosomes by non-isotopic hybridisation. Nucleic Acids Res.,
16, 3951.
BRANCH, D.R., GALLAGHER, M.T., FORMAN, S.J., WINKLER, K.J.,
PETZ, L.D. & BLUME, K.G. (1985). Endogenous stem cell
repopulation resulting in mixed haemopoietic chimaerism follow-
ing total body irradiation and marrow transplantation for acute
leukaemia. Transplantation, 34, 226.
BURNS, J., CHAN, V.T.-W., JONASSON, J.A., FLEMING, K.A.,
TAYLOR, S. & MCGEE, J.O'D. (1985). Sensitive system for
visualizing biotinylated DNA probes hybridised in situ: rapid sex
determination of intact cells. J. Clin. Pathol., 38, 1085.
BURNS, J., GRAHAM, A.K. & MCGEE, J.O'D. (1988). Non-isotopic
detection of in situ nucleic acid in cervix: an updated protocol. J.
Clin. Pathol., 40, 874.
CHERTKOV, J.L., DRIZE, N.J., GUNEVITCH, O.A. & SAMOYLOVA,
R.S. (1985). Origin of hemopoietic stromal progenitor cells in
chimeras. Exp. Hematol., 13, 1217.
DEXTER, T.M. (1982). Is the marrow stroma transplantable? Nature,
298, 222.
FERGUSON, D.J.P., BURNS, J., HARRISON, D., JONASSON, J.A. &
MCGEE, J.O'D. (1986). Chromosomal localization of genes by
scanning electron microscopy using in situ hybridization with
biotinylated probes: Y chromosome repetative sequences. Histo-
chem., 18, 266.
FIALKOW, P.J. (1983). Cell lineages in hematopoietic neoplasia
studied with glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase cell markers. J.
Cell. Physiol., Suppl., 37.
FIALKOW, P.J., JACOBSON, R.J., SINGER, J.W., SACHER, R.A.,
MCGUTTEN, R.W. & NEEFE, J.R. (1980). Philadelphia
chromosome (Ph') - Negative chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML): a clonal disease with origin in a multipotent stem cell.
Blood, 56, 70.
FRIEDENSTEIN, A.J., IVANOV-SMOLENSKI, A.A., CHAJLAKJAN,
R.K. & 4 others (1978). Origin of bone marrow stromal
mechanocytes in radiochimeras and heterotopic transplants. Exp.
Hematol., 6, 440.
GOLDE, D.W., HOCKING, W.G., QUAN, S.G., SPARKES, R.S. & GALE,
R.P. (1980). Origin of human bone marrow fibroblasts. Br. J.
Haematol., 44, 183.
GREENBERGER, J.S. (1986). Future directions in clinical bone mar-
row transplantation: interests converge on the bone marrow mic-
roenvironment. Br. J. Haematol., 62, 603.
HILL, R.S., BO PETERSEN, F., STORB, R. & 5 others (1986). Mixed
hematologic chimaerism after allogeneic marrow transplantation
for severe aplastic anemia is associated with a higher risk of graft
rejection and a lessened incidence of acute graft versus host
disease. Blood, 67, 811.
KEATING, A., SINGER, J.W., KILLEN, P.D. & 6 others (1982). Donor
origin of the haematopoietic microenvironment after marrow
transplantation in man. Nature, 298, 280.
LAVER, J., JHANWAR, S.C., O'REILLY, R. & CASTRO-MALASPINA,
H. (1987). Host origin of the human hematopoietic microenviron-
ment following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood,
70, 1966.
LOUTIT, J.F., MARSHALL, M.J., NISBET, N.W. & VAUGHAN, J.M.
(1982). Versatile stem cells in bone marrow. Lancet, ii, 1090.
MARSHALL, M.J., NISBET, N.W. & EVANS, S. (1984). Donor origin of
the in vitro hematopoietic microenvironment after marrow trans-
plantation in mice. Experientia, 40, 385.
OWEN, M. (1985). Lineage of osteogenic cells and their relationship
to the stromal system. In Bone and Mineral Research 3, Pack,
W.A. (ed.) p. 1. Elsevier: Amsterdam.
PERKINS, S. & FLEISCHMAN, R.A. (1988). Hematopoietic microen-
vironment: origin, lineage and transplantability of the stromal cell
in long-term marrow cultures from chimeric mice. J. Clin. Invest.,
81, 1072.
PETZ, L.O., YAM, P., WALLACE, B. & 8 others (1987). Mixed
hematopoietic chimaerism following bone marrow transplant-
ation for hematologic malignancies. Blood, 70, 1331.
PIERSMA, A.H., PLOEMACHER, R.E. & BROCKBANK, K.G.M. (1983).
Transplantation of bone marrow fibroblastoid stromal cells in
mice via the intravenous route. Br. J. Haematol., 54, 285.
PRENTICE, H.G., BLACKLOCK, H.A., JONASSY, G. & 9 others (1984).
Depletion of T lymphocytes in donor marrow prevents significant
graft versus host disease in matched allogeneic leukaemic marrow
transplant recipients. Lancet, i, 472.
SIMMONS, P.J., PRZEPIORKA, D., DONNALL THOMAS, E. & TOROK-
STORB, B. (1987). Host origin of marrow stromal cells following
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Nature, 328, 429.
SINGER, J.W., KEATING, A., CUTTNER, J. & 9 others (1984).
Evidence for a stem cell common to hematopoiesis and its in
vitro microenvironment: studies of patients with clonal
hematopoietic neoplasia. Leuk. Res., 8, 535.
SPARKES, M.C., CRIST, M.L., SPARKES, R.S., GALE, R.P., FEIG, S.A.
AND UCLA TRANSPLANTATION GROUP (1977). Gene markers
in human marrow transplantation. Vox Sanguinis, 33, 202.
TAVASSOLI, M. & FRIEDENSTEIN, A. (1983). Hemopoietic stromal
microenvironment. Am. J. Hematol., 15, 195.
THOMAS, E.D., STORB, R., CLIFT, R.A. & 6 others (1975). Bone
marrow transplantation. N. Engl J. Med., 292, 832 and 895.
