Current perspectives on primary immunodeﬁciency diseases
ARVIND KUMAR, SUZANNE S. TEUBER, & M. ERIC GERSHWIN
Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of California
at Davis School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA
Abstract
Since the original description of X-linked agammaglobulinemia in 1952, the number of independent primary
immunodeﬁciency diseases (PIDs) has expanded to more than 100 entities. By deﬁnition, a PID is a genetically determined
disorder resulting in enhanced susceptibility to infectious disease. Despite the heritable nature of these diseases, some PIDs
are clinically manifested only after prerequisite environmental exposures but they often have associated malignant, allergic, or
autoimmune manifestations. PIDs must be distinguished from secondary or acquired immunodeﬁciencies, which are far more
common. In this review, we will place these immunodeﬁciencies in the context of both clinical and laboratory presentations as
well as highlight the known genetic basis.
Keywords: Primary immunodeﬁciency disease, primary immunodeﬁciency, immunodeﬁciencies, autoimmune
Introduction
Acquired immunodeﬁciencies may be due to malnu-
trition, immunosuppressive or radiation therapies,
infections (human immunodeﬁciency virus, severe
sepsis), malignancies, metabolic disease (diabetes
mellitus, uremia, liver disease), loss of leukocytes or
immunoglobulins (Igs) via the gastrointestinal tract,
kidneys, or burned skin, collagen vascular disease such
as systemic lupus erythematosis, splenectomy, and
bone marrow transplant (BMT) (Tangsinmankong
et al. 2001). The importance of gaining a fuller
understanding of the PIDs lies in the difﬁculties of
diagnosis, their potentially severe clinical manifes-
tations as well as the fact that their study provides
insight into basic immunologic mechanisms in health
and disease. With this in mind, the focus of this article
will be to describe some of the most representative,
clinically signiﬁcant PIDs.
Classiﬁcation of PIDs
In 1970, a committee of the World Health Organiz-
ation (WHO) classiﬁed the then fourteen known PIDs
into a uniform nomenclature (Chapel et al. 2003).
The International Union of Immunological Societies
(IUIS) has subsequently convened an international
committee of experts every two to three years to revise
this classiﬁcation based on new PIDs and further
understanding of the molecular basis. A recent IUIS
committee met in 2003 in Sintra, Portugal with its
ﬁndings published in 2004 in the Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology (Chapel et al. 2003). The last
IUIS meeting took place in June 2005 in Budapest,
Hungary, with their ﬁndings published in the April
2006 issue of the JACI. The next WHO/IUIS Expert
Meeting will be in May 2007.
PIDs may involve one or multiple components of
the immune system, i.e. B cells, T cells, natural killer
(NK) cells, phagocytes, complement and/or the
immune mechanisms that link these components,
such as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
I and II. Although some authors group PIDs by known
vs. unknown associated molecular defects, the generic
classiﬁcation divides PIDs into broad deﬁciencies:
humoral, cell-mediated, combined humoral and cell-
mediated, phagocyte, complement pathway, and other
well-characterized immunodeﬁciency syndromes of
ISSN 1740-2522 print/ISSN 1740-2530 online q 2006 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/17402520600800705
Correspondence: M. E. Gershwin, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of California at Davis School of
Medicine, 451 E. Health Sciences Drive, Suite 6510, Davis, CA 95616, USA. Tel: 1 530 752 2884. Fax: 1 530 752 4669. E-mail:
megershwin@ucdavis.edu
Clinical & Developmental Immunology, June–December 2006; 13(2–4): 223–259
uncertain molecular mechanism (Chapel et al. 2003).
Some further divide the combined immunodeﬁcien-
cies into severe combined immunodeﬁciency disease
(SCIDs) and combined immunodeﬁciency disease
(CID), with SCID implying a more signiﬁcant cellular
immune deﬁciency than CID. However, given the
variability in presentation and severity in these
disorders, these groups may overlap and are some-
times not subdivided (Notarangelo et al. 2004).
SCIDs are also sometimes described as T2
Bþ
to
indicate T cell deﬁciency with relatively preserved B
cell numbers or T2
B2
to signify the absence of both T
and B cells (Notarangelo et al. 2004).
Genetic basis of PID
Most PIDs are secondary to an abnormality of a single
gene and most are autosomal recessive (Buckley
2003a, Notarangelo et al. 2004). A few PIDs,
including one of the most well known of such
disorders, Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, are
X-linked recessive. Advances in genetics and molecu-
lar biology techniques over the last two decades have
allowed genetic identiﬁcation and often the abnormal
gene has been cloned, sequenced, and the product
identiﬁed. Uncovering the pathophysiologic basis of
certain PIDs in this fashion creates a foundation from
which targeted therapy may be possible. The tables
that follow identify the known genes and gene
products that are affected in the various PIDs.
Frequency of PIDs
Clearly, PIDs are uncommon. Estimates of incidence
vary from less than 1 in 2 million live births for
extremely rare conditions to as many as 1 in 333 for Ig
A deﬁciency, the most frequently diagnosed PID
(Cunningham-Rundles 2001, Vihinen 2004). How-
ever, as a group, PIDs may be as common as pediatric
leukemia and lymphoma and four times as common as
cystic ﬁbrosis (Tangsinmankong et al. 2001).
Humoral PIDs are the most common, representing
more than half of cases, while cellular, or combined, or
phagocyte disorders account for about 10–20% of
cases (Matamoros Flori et al. 1997, Javier et al. 2000,
Stray-Pedersen et al. 2000, Tangsinmankong et al.
2001). Complement pathway defects account for only
1–3% of cases (Matamoros Flori et al. 1997, Javier
et al. 2000, Stray-Pedersen et al. 2000, Tangsinman-
kong et al. 2001).
Commonalities and general rules
As alluded to above, many PIDs classically present
during early life with recurrent infection, severe
infection, difﬁcult to control infection, or infection
from opportunistic pathogens. In today’s setting of
frequent broad-spectrum antibiotic use, such classic
presentations are often altered. Clinicians may not
initially ﬁnd such obvious susceptibility to infections
and may face patients who present with autoimmune
or allergic complaints (Buckley 2003a). This makes
diagnosis all the more difﬁcult, and necessitates a high
index of suspicion for PIDs. PID is most often
diagnosed in the pediatric age group, with more than
80% of cases diagnosed before age 20, but can present
in adults (Lindegren et al. 2004, Riminton and
Limaye 2004). There is a male predominance in
children, but slight female predominance in those
diagnosed as adults (Buckley 2003a).
Complications and pathogen susceptibility patterns
vary according to the immune deﬁcit. For example, B
cell, phagocyte, or complement abnormalities often
result in recurrent encapsulated bacterial infections,
while T cell abnormalities lead to opportunistic
infections from viral and fungal organisms and failure
to thrive. Combined PIDs typically include infections
from pathogens of either or both groups. In a recent
update on PID, Bonilla and Geha have summarized
patterns of pathogen susceptibility for various PIDs
(Figure 1).
Humoral PIDs
PIDs that result in humoral, or antibody, deﬁciency are
the most frequently encountered congenital immune
deﬁciency. Humoral PIDs include X-linked agamma-
globulinemia as well as several autosomal recessive
disorders. Due to the delay in fetal production of
antibody and the gradual loss of maternally derived
IgG over the ﬁrst six to twelve months of life, humoral
PIDs often have a delayed presentation until six to
twelve months of age (Bonilla and Geha 2003). Typical
infectious problems include respiratory disease from
encapsulated bacteria. Nonrespiratory infection and
sepsis from these pathogens also occurs. Enteroviral
gastrointestinal or systemic disease is also typical of
humoral PID (Bonilla and Geha 2003; Figure 1).
Appropriate use of antibiotics and regular intravenous
Ig infusions are the foundation of therapy of most
humoral PIDs. IVIG is contraindicated in certain
diseases such as selective IgA deﬁciency and not
indicated in others, such as most cases of IgG subclass
deﬁciency. Table I lists the humoral PIDs, the genetic
and molecular defects (if known) thought to be
causative, and other immuno-clinical features of each
disease. The most signiﬁcant individual disorders are
further described in the text below.
Humoral PIDs
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (Bruton’s
agammaglobulinemia, XLA, Bruton’s disease)
XLA is the most common of the agammaglobuline-
mias, representing 80–90% of cases (Bonilla and
A. Kumar et al.224
Geha 2003) and the clinical manifestations are
recurrent infections due to encapsulated bacteria
including Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus aur-
eus, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Nesseria meningiditis but
also Mycoplasma and Pseudomonas species (Buckley
2003a). Although there is a delay in onset of most
infections during the ﬁrst few months of life due to
maternal antibodies, these patients may have mucous
membrane disease, i.e. conjunctivitis or otitis. This
occurs since there is a lack of secretory IgA (Buckley
2003a). Once passive immunity from maternal IgG
wanes, the almost complete absence of Igs of any
isotype allows recurrent infection, especially mucous
membrane disease (pneumonia, otitis, gastroenteritis,
urinary tract infection), systemic infection (meningi-
tis, sepsis), osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, cellulitis,
and skin abscesses (Timmers et al. 1991, Bonilla and
Geha 2003). Enteroviruses such as Poliovirus from
live virus-vaccines can lead to viremia and subsequent
CNS disease, paralysis, and death (Mellor 1981).
Hepatitis is also a possible viral complication (Buckley
2003a). Despite these frequent infections, patients
with XLA typically do not have failure to thrive unless
they develop bronchiectasis or persistent enteroviral
disease (Buckley 2003a). As with most humoral PIDs,
these patients do not usually get fungal, mycobacter-
ial, or non-enterovirus viral infections. On physical
exam, patients have small or absent lymphoid tissue,
including tonsils, adenoids, and peripheral lymph
nodes due to abnormal B cell development (Buckley
2003a). A few patients with XLA have had associated
growth hormone deﬁciency (Buzi et al. 1994).
Although Bruton recognized this disease in 1952,
the molecular basis for XLA was not identiﬁed until
1993 (Tsukada et al. 1993, Vetrie et al. 1993) as a
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase known as Bruton tyrosine
kinase (Btk). Btk is found in many cells of
hematopoiesis, and large amounts of the kinase are
produced normally in all B cells and B cell precursors,
but not in T cells (de Weers et al. 1993). This kinase is
essential for intracellular signal transduction that must
occur in bone marrow pre-B cells in order for
maturation to B cells and antibody-producing plasma
cells (Tsukada et al. 1993, Vetrie et al. 1993).
Hundreds of mutations in the human Btk gene have
been identiﬁed (Vihinen et al. 2001) and all patients
with XLA have had low or undetectable levels of Btk
messenger ribonucleic acid and kinase activity
(Buckley 2003a).
Immunologically, XLA presents with almost non-
existent concentrations of Igs of all isotypes. These
patients will not demonstrate isohemagglutinins, nor
appropriate antibody production after immunization
with protein or polysaccharide vaccines (Buckley
2003a). Bone marrow analysis may demonstrate some
pre-B cells, but ﬂow cytometry will reveal few to no
circulating B cells or plasma cells (Buckley 2003a).
T cell and NK cell numbers may be increased in the
circulation, and they function normally (Buckley
2003a). CD4/CD8 ratios, thymus, and T-cell zones of
lymphoid tissues are also normal in XLA (Buckley
2003a). Granulocyte function is normal if patients
are given IgG, but a few patients with XLA develop
transient neutropenia without cause or at the start of a
severe infection (Cham et al. 2002, Buckley 2003a).
This may be related to the fact that Btk is also found in
myeloid cell lineages (Cham et al. 2002).
The mainstay of treatment for XLA, and most
humoral PIDs, is regular infusion of intravenous Ig
(IVIG) (Aghamohammadi et al. 2004). If IVIG is
started early, patients have a good prognosis.
However, some patients develop persistent enteroviral
Figure 1. Infectious organisms associated with major categories of immune deﬁciency.
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 225
Table I. Humoral PIDs.
Presumed pathogenetic mechanism
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
T cell
#
(blood)
B cells #
(blood) Serum Ig Inheritance
Agammaglobulinemias
X-linked agammaglobulinemia
(Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia,
XLA)
BTK Xq22 Btk (Bruton
tyrosine
kinase)
Severe bacterial infection; enteroviral infec-
tion; possible rheumatoid arthritis/ malig-
nancy
N or " # # # # ALL XL
IgM heavy chain defect (m defect) IGHM 14q32.3 m (IgM
heavy chain)
Same as XLA Same
as XLA
Same as
XLA
Same as XLA AR
Ig-a defect (CD79a defect) CD79A 19p13.2 Ig-a Same as XLA Same
as XLA
Same as
XLA
Same as XLA AR
Surrogate light chain defect (l5
deﬁciency, CD179b deﬁciency)
CD179B 22q11.2 Surrogate
light chain
Same as XLA Same
as XLA
Same as
XLA
Same as XLA AR
B cell-linker protein (BLNK) defect BLNK 10q23.2–
q23.33
BLNK Same as XLA Same
as XLA
Same as
XLA
Same as XLA AR
Leucine-rich repeat-containing 8
gene defect (LRRC8 defect)
LRRC8 9q33.2 LRRC8 Same as XLA Same
as XLA
Same as
XLA
Same as XLA AR
Hyper IgM syndromes, autosomal recessive type
Activation-induced cytidine deami-
nase (AICD) defect
AICD 12p13 AID Severe bacterial infection; enlarged lymph
nodes and germinal centers
N N High IgM; others low AR
Uracil nucleoside glycosylase
(UNG) defect
UNG 17q11.2 UNG Severe bacterial infection; enlarged lymph
nodes and germinal centers
N N High IgM; others low AR
Others
Immunodeﬁciency, centromeric
instability, facial anomalies (ICF)-
syndrome
DNMT3B 20q11.2 DNA
methyltrans-
ferase 3B
Recurrent respiratory bacterial infection in
2/3, abnormal facies in 2/3, pathognomonic
centromere anomalies of chromosomes 1,9,
or 16
N N Variably # AR
k light-chain deﬁciency IGKC 2p12 k light chain Often asymptomatic N N or #
k-bearing
B cells
Ig(k) # ; Ab response Nl
or #
AR
Ig heavy chain gene deletions – 14q32 – Often asymptomatic N N or # IgG1, IgG2, or IgG4
absent & some with absent
IgE and IgA1 or IgA2
AR
CVID (subset with associated molecular defect)
Inducible T Cell costimulator
(ICOS) defect
ICOS 2q33 ICOS Recurrent bacterial infection, autoimmunity,
splenomegaly
N # # All AR
Transmembrane activator and
calcium modulator and cyclophilin
ligand interactor (TACI) Defect
TNFRSF13B 17p11.2 TACI Recurrent bacterial infections, autoimmu-
nity, hepatosplenomegaly, malignancy
N # # All AR
A.Kumaretal.226
Table I – continued
Presumed pathogenetic mechanism
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
T cell
#
(blood)
B cells #
(blood) Serum Ig Inheritance
Humoral PIDs with unknown molecular basis
CVID of unknown etiology ? ? ? Recurrent bacterial infections, autoimmu-
nity, hepatosplenomegaly, collagen vascular
disease, malignancy
N
usually
# or N # IgG and usually IgA ^
IgM
Variable;
Unknown
Selective IgA deﬁciency (IGDA) IGAD1 6p21.3 ? Often asymptomatic, possible bacterial
infections, autoimmunity, collagen vascular
disease, malignancy, atopy
N N or
# sIgaþ
cells
# IgA1 and IgA2 ?
Speciﬁc antibody deﬁciency with
normal immunoglobulins (SADNI)
? ? ? Cannot make antibodies against speciﬁc
antigens
N N N ?
IgG subclass deﬁciency (IGGSD) ? ? ? Often asymptomatic N N or
immature
# in one or more IgG
subtypes
?
Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia
of Infancy (THI)
? ? ? Usually mild respiratory infections N N # IgA and IgG ?
Data abstracted from Anonymous 2000, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Salzer et al. 2005, Vihinen 2004, Bonilla and Geha 2006. Abbreviations: AR, Autosomal recessive;
XL, X-linked; SCID, severe combined immunodeﬁciency; # , decreased; # # , profoundly decreased; " , increased; N, normal; for Serum Ig Column, “All” refers to all isotypes.
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases227
infections, poliomyelitis, rheumatoid arthritis-like
disease, or malignancies of the lymphoreticular or
other systems (Hermaszewski et al. 1993, Lavilla et al.
1993, Lee et al. 1993, Sany et al. 1993, Filipovich et al.
1994, Buckley 2003a). These patients have a much
poorer prognosis. The incidence of lymphoreticular
malignancy in XLA patients is as high as 6% (Buckley
2003a). In addition, a signiﬁcant number of patients
without these complications may develop persistent
enteroviral infection or severe sinopulmonary disease
despite IVIG (Buckley 2003a). Many such patients
are managed with prophylactic and long-term
antibiotics (Table I).
Autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemias: m Deﬁciency
(IgM heavy chain deﬁciency); B cell linker protein
deﬁciency (BLNK defect); Ig-a deﬁciency (CD79a
deﬁciency); surrogate light chain deﬁciency (l5 deﬁciency,
CD179b deﬁciency); and leucine-rich repeat-containing
8 gene defect (LRRC8 defect)
The ﬁve defects listed above are autosomal recessive
and patients have agammaglobulinemia or signiﬁcant
hypogammaglobulinemia (Yel et al. 1996, Minegishi
et al. 1998, Minegishi et al. 1999, Wang et al. 2002,
Sawada et al. 2003). They all present with clinical and
immunologic phenotypes similar to XLA (Bonilla and
Geha 2003) but are much more uncommon.
Mutations in the m heavy chain gene have been
reported in approximately twelve patients, while there
have only been single reports of the other defects in
humans (Bonilla and Geha 2003). LRRC8 defect was
associated with abnormal facies in the affected girl
(Sawada et al. 2003). IgM heavy chain deﬁciency,
BLNK deﬁciency, Ig-a deﬁciency, and surrogate light
chain deﬁciency all cause arrest of B cell development
at the pre-B cell stage in the bone marrow (Buckley
2003a). This is because development of the pre-B cell is
dependent on signal transduction through the pre-B
cell receptor (Buckley 2003a). The pre-B cell receptor
consists of IgM heavy chain, surrogate light chain (in a
heterodimer with VpreB), and Ig-a (in a heterodimer
with Ig-b). Defects in these components prevent
expression of the pre-B cell receptor on the cell surface,
leading to agammaglobulinemia. Similar to Btk,
BLNK is a protein involved in pre-B cell signal
transduction, and defects in BLNK lead to agamma-
globulinemia by this mechanism (Minegishi et al.
1999). Leucine-rich repeat-containing eight gene
codes for a protein of unknown function. However, a
truncated version of the protein results in arrest at the
pre-B cell stage and agammaglobulinemia by mechan-
isms yet to be elucidated (Sawada et al. 2003; Table I).
Hyper IgM syndrome
Both activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AICD)
defect and uracil nucleoside glycosylase (UNG)
defect are part of the so-called hyper IgM syndrome.
Although we will focus primarily on the autosomal
group in this section, some of the immunology
described applies to all types. In addition, a third
autosomal recessive form of hyper IgM syndrome will
be discussed in the combined immunodeﬁciency
section along with the X-linked form given their
closely related molecular defects. As the name
suggests, this syndrome consists of very low levels of
IgG, IgA, and IgE but normal or elevated levels of
polyclonal IgM (Levitt et al. 1983). All types of hyper
IgM syndrome are due to problems with Ig gene class-
switching and somatic hypermutation (Levitt et al.
1983). B cells ﬁrst produce IgM and IgD during a
primary antibody response (Bonilla and Geha 2003).
Class switching refers to the process whereby the B
cell Ig genes are rearranged as the immune response
progresses. This gene rearrangement and the resultant
“class switch” to production of IgG, IgA, and IgE is
vital for resistance to bacterial infections and requires
interaction between T and B cells and enzyme-driven
modiﬁcations of B cell genetic material. When the
T–B cell interaction goes awry (due to defects in
CD40 Ligand or CD40 that are discussed further
in the X-linked hyper IgM syndrome section), class
switching and somatic hypermutation do not occur
and the hyper IgM phenotype is seen. Somatic
hypermutation refers to the accumulation of point
mutations in the Ig-gene variable regions such that
the accumulated mutations increase the antibody’s
afﬁnity for the antigen (Bonilla and Geha 2003). In
the autosomal recessive hyper IgM syndromes, the
problem lies in the nucleotide-editing enzymes
AICD or UNG (Levitt et al. 1983, Revy et al. 2000,
Durandy et al. 2003). These enzymes are only present
in the germinal center B cells, and defects in either
disrupt B-cell development and antibody production.
Unlike the hyper IgM syndromes due to defects
in CD40–CD40L interactions, the hyper IgM
syndromes due to these enzyme defects are associated
with defective formation of germinal centers
(Durandy et al. 2003). This disordered B cell
development leads to lymphoid hyperplasia, which is
not seen with the types discussed later. Patients with
these enzyme defects have severe hypogammaglobu-
linemia and have infections similar to those of patients
with XLA. T cell numbers and function are normal in
these two diseases. The treatment of choice is IVIG
(Revy et al. 2000; Table I).
Common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID) associated
with inducible T cell costimulator (ICOS) deﬁciency or
transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and
cyclophilin ligand interactor (TACI) deﬁciency
CVID is a clinically deﬁned disease characterized by
low IgG, possibly low IgA, and a signiﬁcant defect in
speciﬁc antibody formation when challenged with
A. Kumar et al.228
vaccines or natural pathogens (Conley et al. 1999,
Bonilla and Geha 2003, Goldacker and Warnatz
2005). Although the vast majority of cases of CVID
are of unknown genetic and molecular basis, a
minority of patients with CVID have been identiﬁed
that have genetic mutations.
ICOS is a gene that codes for ICOS, a T cell surface
protein that interacts with ICOS ligand found on B
cells (Grimbacher et al. 2003, Salzer et al. 2004).
Without this interaction, patients display panhypo-
gammaglobulinemia, poor speciﬁc antibody pro-
duction, and a clinical phenotype meeting criteria for
CVID (Bonilla and Geha 2006). Features of CVID
such as splenomegaly, sarcoid-like granulomatous
disease, and autoimmune disease are also seen with
ICOS defects (Vihinen 2004). ICOS seems to be
necessary for T cell-dependent late B cell differen-
tiation, class-switching and formation of memory B
cells (Vihinen 2004). This disorder has an onset
delayed until late childhood or adulthood. Only 9 of
226 patients with CVID screened for ICOS defects
have been found to have the ICOS mutations, each of
them is from the Black Forest region of Germany, and
each carries the same deletion (Salzer et al. 2004,
Bonilla and Geha 2006).
Seventeen of 181 patients with CVID and one of
16 with selective IgA deﬁciency have had mutations
in the gene encoding the B cell surface protein called
transmembrane activator and calcium modulator
and cyclophilin ligand interactor (TACI) (Salzer
and Grimbacher 2005, Salzer et al. 2005). TACI
interaction with B-cell activating factor (BAFF) and a
proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL) on macro-
phages and dendritic cells is important for activation
of B cells and class switching (Salzer and Grimbacher
2005, Salzer et al. 2005). Except for the single patient
with selective IgA deﬁciency, these patients display
panhypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity, lym-
phoproliferation with hepatosplenomegaly and
cancer, and inadequate antibody response to infec-
tious or vaccine challenge (Bonilla and Geha 2006;
Table I).
Common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID) (due to
unknown defect)
Speciﬁc molecular defects have not been identiﬁed in
the vast majority of patients with CVID. CVID is a
syndrome with highly variable presentation and
includes a heterogeneous group of disorders. It is
typically deﬁned by poor antibody responses to
infection/vaccines with low IgG, usually low IgA,
and sometimes low IgM serum levels. Onset can be at
any age but peaks in early childhood and early
adulthood (Vihinen 2004). Onset is usually later than
that of XLA, and both sexes are equally affected
(Buckley 2003a). The types of pathogens these
patients are infected with tend to be the same as
those with XLA. Infections of the gastrointestinal and
respiratory tracts are common, sometimes leading to
chronic sinusitis or bronchiectasis. Giardiasis is also
common (Buckley 2003a). Associated problems
may variably include autoimmune disorders such as
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, seronegative
arthritis, sicca, vitiligo, thymoma, alopecia areata,
pernicious anemia, and vasculitis (Buckley 2003a).
Thyroid disease is a frequent ﬁnding (Buckley 2003a).
Benign or malignant thymoma in CVID patients
may lead to myasthenia gravis or hematologic disease
(Vihinen 2004). A sprue-like syndrome is also found
(Goldacker and Warnatz 2005). Lymphoid prolifer-
ation is seen in about a third of patients, while the
chance of lymphoma is increased by more than 300-
fold (Bonilla and Geha 2003, Buckley 2003a). Tonsils
and peripheral lymph nodes may be normal or
enlarged, with splenomegaly occurring in a quarter
of cases (Buckley 2003a). Other malignant compli-
cations include gastric carcinoma. A unique manifes-
tation is nodular hyperplasia in the bowel (Vihinen
2004). About 10% of patients have asthma and
allergic rhinitis without antigen-speciﬁc IgE (Buckley
2003a). Non-caseating granulomatous disease and
amyloidosis are also seen (Buckley 2003a, Morimoto
and Routes 2005).
Despite the hypogammaglobulinemia, CVID
patients typically have normal numbers of blood T
and surface Ig-bearing B cells (Buckley 2003a). As
with most predominantly antibody-deﬁcient PID
patients, CVID patients normally handle viral and
fungal infections. CVID has usually been thought to
be due to B cell defects, and inability of CVID B-cells
to differentiate into plasma cells despite stimulation
and the presence of normal T cells in vitro support this
belief (Cunningham-Rundles 1989). Additional sup-
port of intrinsic B cell etiologies include lack of
L-selectin on B cells and lack of proper protein kinase
C activation and translocation in stimulated CVID B
cells in vitro (Kaneko et al. 1996, Zhang et al. 1996).
However, recent data suggests that inadequate
signaling from T cells (cellular defects) could be
contributing to the B cell differentiation problems
in CVID (Buckley 2003a). Speciﬁcally, some
patients have abnormal CD4 T cell differentiation or
abnormal T cell function, and CVID B cells can be
stimulated to isotype switch and produce Ig by
providing artiﬁcial T cell help (Spickett et al. 1990,
Nonoyama et al. 1993, Farrant et al. 1994, Farrington
et al. 1994).
The pathogenesis of CVID is unknown. It has been
speculated that a common genetic problem may result
in IgA deﬁciency (IGAD) and CVID based on the
facts that ﬁrst-degree relatives of CVID patients often
have selective IGAD and that some IGAD patients
become panhypogammaglobulinemic (Hammarstrom
et al. 2000). Additional support for this includes the
high prevalence of autoimmune and malignant disease
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 229
in both disease groups (Hammarstrom et al. 2000).
Although particular MHC haplotypes have been
found to be abnormally frequent in patients with
CVID and IGAD, environmental factors such as
drugs like phenytoin may play a triggering role in
patients with appropriate genetic susceptibility (Ash-
man et al. 1992, Buckley 2003a). As other PIDs
may initially be diagnosed as CVID, it is important
to consider performing genetic screens in male CVID
patients for X-linked lymphoproliferative disorder,
XLA, X-linked hyper IgM, AICD defects, and CD40
defect-related autosomal recessive hyper IgM syn-
drome (Buckley 2003a). Females with CVID should
be screened for only the last two defects.
IVIG and aggressive treatment of infections are the
main treatments for CVID (Eisenstein and Sneller
1994). Early diagnosis and treatment may prevent
complications such as bronchiectasis. As CVID
patients with low IgA levels may have anti-IgA
antibodies that can cause anaphylaxis when given
IgA-containing IVIG, caution and screening for anti-
IgA antibodies are warranted before starting such
IVIG (Burks et al. 1986). If these antibodies
are detected, IVIG containing low levels of IgA may
be used cautiously. CVID patients have a reasonably
good prognosis if severe autoimmune or malignant
disease does not develop (Buckley 2003a; Table I).
Selective IgA deﬁciency (IGAD)
Selective IGAD is the most common PID, with an
incidence from 1 in 333 to 1 in 700 (Cunningham-
Rundles 2001). It is deﬁned by serum IgA levels of
10 mg/dl or less with normal concentrations of other Ig
isotypes (Buckley 2003a). Many patients with IGAD
are asymptomatic, but those with symptoms are prone
to infectious complications involving mucosa (gastro-
intestinal, respiratory, urogenital) and pathogens
common to other humoral PIDs. Viral infection is
not common. Like CVID, IGAD may have associated
autoimmune, autoantibody, collagen vascular, and
malignant disease (Vihinen 2004). Atopic symptoms
with speciﬁc IgE are common (Bonilla and Geha
2003).
Immunologically, in addition to the IgA deﬁciency,
some may have IgG2 subclass deﬁciency with elevated
IgM (Sandler et al. 1996). IgE and other antibodies
against IgA may be present in nearly half of IGAD
patients (Clark et al. 1983, Sandler et al. 1995,
Sandler and Zantek 2004, Sandler 2006). These anti-
IgA antibodies can cause severe or fatal anaphylaxis if
IgA-containing blood products (such as IVIG) are
infused into IGAD patients. Therefore, IGAD
patients should receive blood products from other
IGAD patients or normal donor red blood cells after
ﬁve washes (Buckley 2003a).
The failure of terminal differentiation in IgA-
positive B cells in IGAD is of unknown etiology, but
genetic studies have suggested that HLA-DQ/DR is
the major IGAD1 locus (Vihinen 2004). The
pathophysiologic mechanisms causing disease remain
unclear. Inheritance patterns are variable, both sexes
are equally affected, and drug triggers are suspected to
facilitate expression (Buckley 2003a). As mentioned
above, a common genetic relationship with CVID is
also postulated (Hammarstrom et al. 2000).
Treatment of IGAD consists of antibiotics for
infections that develop. IVIG is not appropriate given
the risk of anaphylaxis and since most IGAD patients
do not lack IgG, which is what IVIG provides
(Cunningham-Rundles 2001). Prognosis of asympto-
matic patients is excellent. Symptomatic children may
display resolution of the disease, while adults tend to
have persistent disease that may develop into CVID in
some (Hammarstrom et al. 2000, Buckley 2003a;
Table I).
Speciﬁc antibody deﬁciency with normal immunoglobulins
(SADNI)
Speciﬁc antibody deﬁciency with normal Igs (SADNI)
is a relatively common PID, representing 23% of PID
cases in one tertiary center (Javier et al. 2000). It is of
unknown etiology and characterized by normal
amounts of Ig isotypes and subtypes but an impaired
ability to make speciﬁc antibody, especially against
polysaccharides (Antall et al. 1999; Table I).
Immunoglobulin G subclass deﬁciency (IGGSD)
IGGSD is another PID with unknown etiology and
characterized by normal total IgG with low or
nonexistent levels of one or more of the IgG subclasses
(IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, or IgG4). Most patients with
IGGSD are asymptomatic, but some do get recurrent
sinopulmonary infections from encapsulated bacteria
(Morell 1994). Although the IgG2 subclass makes up
most of the antibodies against polysaccharides, the
clinical importance of IgG2 in preventing disease is
not clear, as there are patients with normal IgG2 levels
who cannot form antibodies against polysaccharides
and those with low IgG2 levels who can (Shackelford
et al. 1990a,b, Shackelford 1993, Alyanakian et al.
2003). In some children with infections with low IgG2
levels, a more thorough immunologic workup up
reveals a broader pattern of immune dysfunction than
that of children with asymptomatic IgG2 deﬁciency
(Shackelford et al. 1990b). Experts suggest that IgG
subclass measurement and deﬁciency is not of clinical
utility unless there is a corresponding deﬁciency in
production of speciﬁc antibodies to a broad array of
protein and polysaccharide antigens (Buckley 2003a).
IVIG use in IGGSD patients not meeting the latter
criterion is not appropriate. Speciﬁc infections may be
treated with appropriate antibiotics, and evidence of
A. Kumar et al.230
speciﬁc antibody production defects should be sought
(Table I).
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy (THI)
THI is deﬁned as a low level of IgG associated with
recurrent bacterial and viral infections which resolves
by age four (Rosefsky 1990, Kilic et al. 2000, Dogu
et al. 2004). Most patients make normal speciﬁc
antibodies, and serious infections are uncommon.
THI is not an indication for IVIG (Table I).
Immunodeﬁciency, centromeric instability, facial anomaly
syndrome (ICF syndrome)
ICF syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome
associated with mutations in the DNA methyltrans-
ferase 3B gene in 75% of cases (Blanco-Betancourt
et al. 2004). Patients have variable hypogammaglo-
bulinemia but typically have profound reduction or
absence of two or more Ig isotypes (Vihinen 2004).
This leads to severe immunodeﬁciency and death due
to infection often before adulthood (Vihinen 2004).
Peripheral blood B cells are limited to naı¨ve B cells,
which also often express autoreactive heavy chain
variable regions (Blanco-Betancourt et al. 2004). This
is thought to suggest abnormal B cell negative
selection (Blanco-Betancourt et al. 2004). In vitro
studies show increased apoptosis of these B cells.
Some cases also display impaired cellular immune
function, neurologic, and intestinal dysfunction
(Vihinen 2004). The facial anomalies include low-set
ears, epicanthal folds, ﬂat nasal bridge, hypertelorism,
and macroglossia (Bonilla and Geha 2006; Table I).
Cellular PIDs
Cellular PID is deﬁned as defective T cell or NK cell
function with normal or largely normal humoral
immunity. Infections in patients with cellular PIDs
tend to be from viral, fungal, or opportunistic
organisms such as mycobacteria (Figure 1). PIDS
with primarily phagocyte defects, which one might
also consider “cellular”, are often grouped separately.
This convention will be followed herein. However,
since defects of the interferon-g/IL-12 axis may affect
T cells, NK cells, and traditional phagocytes such as
monocytes and macrophages, these disorders and
their role in T cell and NK predominant disease will
be discussed. Table II lists these various disorders,
and additional description of signiﬁcant disorders is
noted in sections below. Management of cellular
PIDs of signiﬁcant severity, as well as cellular
deﬁciency that is part of combined immunodeﬁ-
ciency, is limited in terms of effective therapeutic
options. The treatment of choice to correct the
cellular deﬁciency is usually a BMT.
Defects in the interferon-g/IL-12 axis: IL-12 p40 subunit
deﬁciency; IL-12 receptor a1 chain deﬁciency; IFN-g
receptor a chain deﬁciency; IFN-g receptor a chain
deﬁciency; and signal transducer and activator or
transcription 1 (STAT-1) deﬁciency
Interferon-g (IFN-g) is vital in activating mono-
nuclear cell cytotoxic pathways needed to control
intracellular pathogens such as Salmonella and
mycobacteria (Bonilla and Geha 2003). IL-12 is the
main stimulus for IFNg production by TH1–T cells
and NK cells (Dofﬁnger et al. 1999). Cellular PID due
to mutations in components of IL-12, the IL-12
receptor, and the IFN-g receptor has been reported.
The same is true for defects in signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 1, as this molecule
allows signaling via the IFN-g receptor. Partial IFN-g
receptor, IL-12, and IL-12 receptor deﬁciency may
respond to subcutaneous injections of IFN-g (Bonilla
and Geha 2003; Table II).
Deﬁciency of the p40 subunit of IL-12 is an
autosomal recessive defect that usually results in mild
infections due to intracellular organisms (Vihinen et al.
2001, Notarangelo et al. 2004). The abnormal IL-12
production prevents normal IFN-g secretion. The
macrophage is the main cell affected. A similar clinical
phenotype results from defective IL-12R b1 chain,
however this disorder primarily affects lymphocytes
and NK cells (Vihinen et al. 2001, Notarangelo et al.
2004).
Defects in the a or b chain of the IFN-g receptor
similarly lead to Salmonella and mycobacterial infec-
tions. These disorders affect both macrophages
and lymphocytes, since both are dependent on the
Il-12/IFN-g pathway to ﬁght intracellular infection.
With the IFN-g receptor defects, partial defects cause
mild disease, while defects resulting in complete
absence of either the a or b chain of the IFN-g
receptor lead to severe infections (Vihinen et al. 2001,
Notarangelo et al. 2004). The a chain defect is also
characterized by atopy, glomerulonephritis, vasculitis,
and a positive rheumatoid factor (Vihinen et al. 2001,
Notarangelo et al. 2004).
After IFN-g attaches to the IFN-g receptor on
macrophages and lymphocytes, the signal is trans-
duced by a transcription factor called STAT1.
STAT1 binds response elements within the nucleus
to trigger production of inﬂammatory mediators of
cellular cytotoxicity (Vihinen et al. 2001). Defects in
STAT1 cause increased propensity for infection due
to mycobacteria and Salmonella, but not viruses
(Vihinen et al. 2001, Notarangelo et al. 2004).
There are both autosomal dominant and recessive
forms of this disorder. As in IFN-gR deﬁciency,
atopy, glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, and a
positive rheumatoid factor are also found in this
disorder and are a marker of immune dysregulation
(Vihinen et al. 2001).
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 231
Table II. Cellular PIDs.
Presumed pathogenetic mechanism
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
Affected
cell (s)
B cells #
(blood)
Serum
Ig Inheritance
IFN-g/IL-12 axis
IL-12 p40 subunit deﬁciency IL12B 5q31.1–
q33.1
IL-12 p40 Mycobacteria and Salmonella susceptibility, mild symptoms M N N AR
IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) b1 chain
deﬁciency
IL12RB1 19p13.1 IL-12R b1 Mycobacteria and Salmonella susceptibility, mild symptoms L þ NK N N AR
IFN-g receptor (IFNgR) a chain
deﬁciency (IFNgR1 deﬁciency)
IFNGR1 6q23–24 IFN-gR a Mycobacteria and Salmonella susceptibility, mild if partial
defect, severe if full defect; atopy, glomerulonephritis,
vasculitis, rheumatoid factor
M þ L N N AR, AD
IFN-g receptor (IFNgR) b chain
deﬁciency (IFNgR2 deﬁciency)
IFNGR2 21q22.1–
q22.2
IFN-gR b Mycobacteria and Salmonella susceptibility, mild if partial
defect, severe if full defect
M þ L N N AR
Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT-1) deﬁciency
STAT1 2q32.2–
q32.3
STAT-1 Mycobacteria and Salmonella susceptibility M þ L N N AR, AD
NK cell defects
CD16 (FcgRIIIa) deﬁciency (NK
deﬁciency)
FCGR3A 1q23 FcgRIIIa Viral infections, abnormal response to BCG vaccine NK
mainly
N N ?
Cellular PIDs with unknown molecular basis
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
(CMCC)
? ? ? Fungal (especially Candida albicans) infection, possible
endocrinopathy or thymoma, possible bacterial and viral
infection
? N N Varies
Idiopathic CD4þ
T lymphocytope-
nia
? ? ? Opportunistic infections, autoimmune disease, hematologic
malignancy; HIV and viral studies negative
# CD4þ
T
cell
N N ?
Isolated NK cell defects ? ? ? NK cell number or function deﬁcit; B and T cells normal;
predisposed to herpesvirus or papillomavirus infection;
important to rule out other PIDs associated with NK cell
defects
NK N N ?
Data abstracted from de Vries et al. 1996, Anonymous 2000, Lilic 2002, Orange 2002, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004, Bonilla and Geha 2006. Abbreviations:
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XL, X-linked; M, monocyte/macrophage; L, lymphocyte; NK, Natural killer; # , decreased; # # , profoundly decreased; " , increased; N, normal; for
Serum Ig Column, “All” refers to all isotypes.
A.Kumaretal.232
NK cell defects
CD 16 deﬁciency (FcgRIIIa deﬁciency, NK deﬁciency)
Recurrent viral infection with a cellular PID pheno-
type has been reported in a single boy who had a
mutation in CD16, also known as FcgRIIIa (de Vries
et al. 1996). CD16 is part of the FcgRIII found on NK
cells as well as macrophages and some T cells. The
receptor allows NK cells to phagocytose organisms or
cells coated with IgG in the absence of MHC
(antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity). The
mutation disrupts NK cell function and is associated
with NK cytopenia. The patient also had problems
after BCG vaccination (Table II).
Natural killer cell deﬁciency (due to unknown defect)
Isolated defects in NK cell numbers and/or function
due to poorly characterized abnormalities have been
reported and often include severe herpesvirus infection
(Orange 2002). If such disorders are suspected, it is
important to rule out other PIDs associated with NK
defects, including XLA, Chediak-Higashi syndrome,
severe combined immunodeﬁciency disorder (SCID),
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, and nuclear factor kB
essential modulator deﬁciency, and of course CD16
deﬁciency (Bonilla and Geha 2006; Table II).
Other cellular PIDs
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (due to unknown
defect)
CMCC refers to a heterogeneous group of diseases
rather than a single PID. CMCC is considered
secondary to abnormal cellular immunity, though
the cause is not known in most cases apart from the
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ecto-
dermal dystrophy (APECED) subset. Patients have
recurrent and difﬁcult to treat infections of the skin,
mucous membranes, or nails with fungal organisms,
particularly Candida albicans (Lilic 2002). There may
be associated endocrinopathy (see APECED above)
or thymoma (Vihinen 2004). Although it is felt to be a
cellular defect, some patients have bacterial infections
in addition to fungal, viral, Toxoplasma, and myco-
bacterial disease. Animal and human studies suggest
decreased amounts of Th1 cytokines in these patients
(Lilic 2002). Treatment includes topical and oral
antifungal agents. Management also requires regular
screening for endocrinopathy such as hypothyroidism,
adrenal insufﬁciency, and hypoparathyroidism
(Vihinen 2004; Table II).
Idiopathic CD41
T lymphocytopenia
Idiopathic CD4þ
T lymphocytopenia is a rare PID
resembling HIV infection. All known tests for this and
other viruses are negative, however. CD4 counts are
less than 300 cells/mm3
, and patients develop
opportunistic infection, autoimmunity, as well as
hematological malignancies (Bonilla and Geha 2006;
Table II).
Combined PIDs
Combined PIDs are deﬁned by abnormal cellular
immunity combined with abnormal humoral immu-
nity. The latter may occur in the form of normal or
elevated numbers of B cells that do not function well
(as in T–
Bþ
SCID) or in the form of signiﬁcantly
reduced or absent B cells (as in T–
B2
SCID). As
expected, combined PIDs complications include
bacterial, viral, fungal, mycobacterial, and opportu-
nistic infections. Chronic diarrhea with failure to thrive
is commonly seen, as are recurrent sinopulmonary
infections and systemic infections (Bonilla and Geha
2003). Severe combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID)
is the term used by most to refer to combined PIDs
with severe or absent T cell function associated with
humoral immunodeﬁciency. When T cell function is
low but not absent, some experts refer to this as
“combined immunodeﬁciency”(CID). Examples of
CID include purine nucleoside phosphorylase
deﬁciency, ataxia–telangiectasia, and cartilage–hair
hypoplasia. The classic example of SCID is X-linked
SCID. Given the variability of presentations of a
particular PID with humoral and cellular immunode-
ﬁciency, some authors do not always make a distinction
between CID and SCID. In addition to the combined
PIDs with known molecular defects, there are SCIDs
and CIDs with unknown molecular defects.
Management of combined PIDs requires speciﬁc
and sometimes prophylactic antibiotic use and
vaccination with appropriate non-live vaccines. IVIG
is indicated to treat the humoral defect, but is not
sufﬁcient to control combined disease. SCID patients
have been treated with BMTs for many years. Success
rates vary from 50 to 100% based on the age at BMT,
donor marrow type, and the particular type of SCID
(Bonilla and Geha 2003). When BMT is needed, the
treatments of choice are an HLA-identical related
donor or HLA-haploidentical related donor (Buckley
2003a). Graft vs. host disease (GVHD) is prevented
while using haploidentical donor marrow by depleting
mature T cells from the donor marrow before
transplant. This has allowed successful BMT in
hundreds of infants with SCID who did not have an
HLA-identical marrow donor (1993, Buckley et al.
1999, Buckley 2003b). HLA-identical BMT is an
option for patients with partial DiGeorge syndrome,
while complete DiGeorge syndrome requires trans-
plant of HLA-matched fetal thymic epithelial cells for
cure (Buckley 2003a, Cleveland 1975, Thong et al.
1978). Although two forms of SCID, X-linked SCID
and adenosine deaminase (ADA) deﬁciency have been
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 233
successfully treated with gene therapy, leukemia in
several patients has brought this form of treatment
under closer scrutiny (Aiuti et al. 2002, Aiuti 2004,
Gaspar et al. 2004). Table III as well as the sections
below describe combined PIDs.
Severe combined immunodeﬁciency diseases
(SCIDs)
Common g chain deﬁciency (X-linked SCID, SCID-
X1,gc SCID)
SCIDs represent a large and ever-expanding group of
PIDs, many with known molecular defects. As the
name suggests, SCIDs display the most severe cellular
immune dysfunction, sometimes with complete
absence of functional lymphocytes. The prototypical
SCID is common g chain deﬁciency (gc SCID). As
such, much of what is described about it applies to the
other SCIDs as well. Like the other members of this
subgroup, gc SCID is a T–B þ SCID, suggesting
that B cells are usually present, but are not normal
functionally. gc SCID is the most common SCID and
X-linked (Bonilla and Geha 2003). gc SCID should
be considered a pediatric emergency that is fatal if
untreated. Patients present within the ﬁrst few months
of life with recurrent sinopulmonary, skin infections,
and diarrhea. As with most SCIDs, the pathogens
include bacteria, viruses, mycobacteria, and opportu-
nistic organisms. Infections can be fatal. GVHD may
also occur due to maternal T cells that entered the
patient during gestation or from immunocompetent T
cells present in donated bone marrow or non-
irradiated blood products (Buckley 2003a). Affected
infants have low lymphocyte counts and abnormal
lymphocyte proliferation to stimuli (Uribe and
Weinberg 1998). Absolute lymphopenia from cord
blood of newborns is deﬁned as 2000–11,000/mm3
,
while that of six month old infants is below 4000
(Buckley 2003a). There is a profound decrease or
total absence of T cells. B cell numbers are normal or
increased but speciﬁc antibody responses are absent.
Serum Ig levels are low. NK cell number and function
are also low. As with most SCID patients, gc SCID
infants have small, histologically abnormal thymuses
that are, however, able to educate T cells. Tonsil,
adenoid, and peripheral lymphoid tissues are small or
absent (Buckley 2003a).
The defective gene in gc SCID encodes for an
abnormal or absent cytokine receptor g chain, a
protein that is a part of the receptor complex for
multiple cytokines including IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9,
IL-15, and IL-21 (Asao et al. 2001). The defect leads
to widespread problems in cytokine signaling and the
immunologic defects discussed.
Treatment for gc SCID and most SCIDs is bone
marrow transplantation. IVIG does not prevent
progression of the disease, which is fatal by the ﬁrst
or second year of life if not treated (Buckley 2003a).
Although gene therapy using a retrovirus to insert a
normal gene into the host has been successful,
occurrences of leukemia with such treatment have
been reported (Gaspar et al. 2004). Successful
treatment relies heavily on early diagnosis, which can
be facilitated by white blood cell counts with manual
differential on cord blood (Buckley 2003a, Gaspar
et al. 2004). This test is not routine (Table III).
Janus kinase 3 deﬁciency (Jak3 deﬁciency)
Janus Kinase 3 (Jak3) is a signaling molecule
associated with the common g chain (Rane and
Reddy 2000). Deﬁciency of Jak 3 produces a clinical
and immunologic phenotype similar to gc SCID
(Table III).
CD3d deﬁciency
The T cell receptor complex consists of two groups of
proteins. The ﬁrst, called Ti is a heterodimer (ab or
gd) that has the variable, antigen-binding site. The
second is the invariant protein complex called CD3,
which is comprised of one g, one d, two e, and two z
subunits. CD3 transduces the signal generated by
antigen binding to the antigen-binding site of the Ti.
Interestingly, CD3d deﬁciency results in T cell
numbers in the blood to be very low or absent, while
deﬁciencies in CD3e or CD3g result in normal
numbers of circulating T cells that are dysfunctional
(Buckley 2003a). CD3d deﬁciency thus produces a
SCID, while the latter defects produce a CID that
usually is mild (Notarangelo et al. 2004) (Table III).
IL-7 receptor a deﬁciency
The IL-7 receptor (along with IL-7) is important in T
cell function. However, the fact that IL-7Ra
deﬁciency is associated with normal numbers of NK
cells suggests that this cytokine pathway is not
essential for NK development (Buckley 2003a).
Another feature distinguishing this disorder from gc
SCID is that BMT corrects the B cell function in
IL7Ra deﬁciency (Table III).
Il-2 receptor a deﬁciency
The IL-2 cytokine pathway is needed for T cell
development and function. Mutation in the IL-2
receptor’s a chain (CD25) results in a clinical
phenotype very similar to the prototypical T–
Bþ
SCID, X-linked SCID (Bonilla and Geha 2003).
The single patient described with this defect had
lymphocytic inﬁltration of her organs. The immuno-
phenotype is characterized by normal B cell numbers
in the blood (Vihinen 2001, 2004). There are low
T cell numbers due to abnormal thymocyte
A. Kumar et al.234
Table III. Combined PIDs.
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
T Cell #
(blood)
B Cells #
(blood) Serum Ig
NK Cell #
(blood) Inheritance
T–
Bþ
SCIDs
X-linked SCID (gc SCID) IL2RG Xq13.1 Common
g chain
Bacterial, viral, fungal, mycobacterial,
opportunistic infections, diarrhea, FTT,
possible cure with BMT but B cell
dysfunction persists, gene therapy exists
but leukemia in some, small/absent
lymphoid tissue, GVHD risk
# # N or " # # # XL
Janus kinase-3 (Jak3) deﬁciency JAK3 19p13.1 Jak3 Same as gc SCID, (atypical cases may have
T cells)
# # N or " # # # AR
IL-7 receptor a (IL7Ra)
deﬁciency
IL7R 5p13 IL7R a Same as gc SCID except BMT restores B
and T cell immunity, T–
Bþ
NKþ
SCID
# # N or " # N AR
Il-2 receptor a (IL2Ra)
deﬁciency (CD25 deﬁciency)
IL2RA 10p15–
p14
IL2Ra Same as gc SCID, extensive
lymphocytic inﬁltration of organs, absence
of IL2Ra on thymic
epithelial cells impairs T cell
differentiation, 1 case
# N IgA # , others
N or "
– AR
CD45 deﬁciency PTPRC 1q31–
q32
CD45 Typical combined PID infections, normal
gd T cells
# # N # – AR
CD3d deﬁciency CD3D 11q23 CD3d Typical combined PID infections; may still
have thymic shadow but thymocytes fail to
mature
# # N # N AR
Winged Helix Nude (WHN)
deﬁciency
FOXN1 17q11–
q12
WHN
gene pro-
duct
Alopecia, nails pitted and ridged, typical
combined PID infections, thymic epi-
thelium abnormal, CD8 numbers normal
# # N # – AR
Immunodeﬁciency with thy-
moma
? ? ? Thymomas usually benign, may have
eosinophilia/eosinopenia, anemia,
agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia,
pancytopenia
# N # – ?
T–
B2
SCIDs
Adenosine deaminase (ADA)
deﬁciency
ADA 20q13.2–
q13.11
ADA Typical combined PID infections, pro-
found lymphopenia, NK function normal,
BMT restores B and T cell immunity
Progressive # Progressive
#
# # (but
functional)
AR
Recombinase activating gene
(RAG) deﬁciencies: RAG1
deﬁciency, RAG2 deﬁciency
RAG1/2 11p13 RAG1/2 T–
B2
NKþ
SCID, NK cell is main cell in
circulation, deﬁciency due to defective
VDJ recombination; usual defect causing
Omenn syndrome
(see below)
# # , but may
have oligoclo-
nal T cells
# # # but " IgE N AR
Artemis deﬁciency DCCRE1C 10p13 Artemis T–
B2
NKþ
SCID, radiation sensitivity,
deﬁciency due to defective VDJ
recombination; sometimes associated
with Omenn’s syndrome
# # # N AR
Reticular dysgenesis ? ? ? Absent T and B cells and granulocytes,
deafness, thrombocytopenia
# # # # # – Likely AR
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases235
Table III – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
T Cell #
(blood)
B Cells #
(blood) Serum Ig
NK Cell #
(blood) Inheritance
Other SCIDs
Selective IL-2 production defect ? ? ? Il-2 gene present but Il-2 selectively not
produced, only 2 cases
N – – – ?
Multiple lymphokine
production defects
? ? ? IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IFN-g, and TNF-a may
be lacking, only 4 cases, may be due to
abnormal NFAT binding to lymphokine
promoters on gene
N – – – ?
CIDs
X-linked hyper IgM syndrome TNFSF5 Xq26.3–
q27.1
CD40L Neutropenia, autoimmune cytopenias,
thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia,
hepatoma and other cancers, typical
combined PID infections, deﬁciency due
to abnormal CD40L/CD40 interaction
N Only IgM
or IgD-
bearing
cells
IgM " or N,
rest #
– XL
CD40 deﬁciency hyper IgM
syndrome
TNFRSF5 20q12–
q13.2
CD40 Neutropenia, hemolytic anemia, hepatic
and gastrointestinal involvement, oppor-
tunistic infections, deﬁciency due to
abnormal CD40L/CD40 interaction
N Only IgM
or IgD-
bearing
cells
IgM " or N,
rest #
– AR
Purine nucleoside phosphoryl-
ase (PNP) deﬁciency
NP 14q13.1 PNP AIHA, neurologic symptoms, T cell deﬁcit
due to toxic metabolites from enzyme
deﬁciency
# progressive N N or # " AR
Omenn syndrome RAG1 or 2 11p13 RAG1 or 2 hepatosplenomegaly, hypereosinophilia,
erythroderma, desquamation, and
diarrhea, deﬁciency due to defective
VDJ recombination
N #, oligo-
clonal
Usually # Most # but
# IgE
NK AR
MHC I deﬁciencies:
Transporter associated protein
(TAP) 1 deﬁciency
TAP-1 6p21.3 TAP-1 Vasculitis, relatively mild PID; if defect
due to tapasin, low level of MHC I may be
expressed
CD8 # , N
CD4
N N – AR
TAP-2 deﬁciency TAP-2 6p21.3 TAP-2
TAP-binding protein (Tapasin)
deﬁciency
TAPBP 6p21.3 tapasin
MHC II deﬁciencies:
RFX5 deﬁciency RFX5 1q21 RFX5 More severe than MHC I deﬁciency
but less than SCID
CD4 # , N
CD8
N N or # – AR
RFXAP deﬁciency RFXAP 13q14 RFXAP
RFXANK deﬁciency RFXANK 19p12 RFXANK
CIITA deﬁciency MHC2TA 16p13 MHCIITA
Zeta-associated protein 70
(ZAP-70) deﬁciency
ZAP70 2q12 ZAP-70
kinase
Majority in Mennonites, may be fatal but
less severe and later presentation than
SCID, abnormal thymic selection
CD8 # , N
CD4
N N or # or " N AR
p56 Lck deﬁciency LCK 1p35–
p34.3
p56 Lck T cell activation defect CD4 # N # N ?
A.Kumaretal.236
Table III – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
T Cell #
(blood)
B Cells #
(blood) Serum Ig
NK Cell #
(blood) Inheritance
CD3e deﬁciency,
CD3g deﬁciency
CD3E,
CD3G
11q23,
11q23
CD3e,
CD3g
T cell activation defect N but dys-
functional
N N – AR
CD8 deﬁciency due to CD8a
gene mutation
CD8A 2p12 CD8 1 case CD8 # , N
CD4
N N N AR
DNA repair defects
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) ATM 11q22–
q23
ATM pro-
tein
Cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous
telangiectasia, Sensitivity to ionizing
radiation, 30% develop cancer, growth
retardation, sexual immaturity,
# N Often # IgA,
IgE, IgGs; "
IgM; varies
– AR
Ataxia–telangiectasia-like syn-
drome
MRE11A 11q21 MRE11a
protein
Moderate ataxia, severely increased
radiosensitivity, otherwise similar to but
milder than AT
# N See AT – AR
Nijmegan breakage syndrome
(NBS)
NBS1 8q21 NBS1 pro-
tein
Short stature, progressive microcephaly/
cognitive decline, lymphoma, radiosensi-
tivity, chromosomal instability, abnormal
facies with age, infections (pulmonary),
ovarian failure, irregular skin pigmentation
# N See AT – AR
DNA ligase I deﬁciency LIG1 19q13.2–
q13.3
DNA
ligase 1
1 case, sun sensitivity, short stature,
lymphoma, sinopulmonary infections,
developmental delay, sexual immaturity,
similar to Bloom syndrome
– – – – AR
DNA ligase IV deﬁciency LIG4 13q22–
q34
DNA
ligase 4
Microcephaly, facial dystrophy,
radiosensitivity, clinically similar to NBS,
Defective DNA NHEJ required for
double-strand break repair and V(D)J
recombination
# # # – AR
Bloom syndrome BLM 15q26.1 Bloom
helicase
Chromosomal instability; leukemia; lym-
phoma; short stature; bird-like face; sun
sensitive, hypo-/hyper pigmented,
telangiectatic skin; prone to diabetes;
lung infections; defect in DNA
repair/copy, Ashkenazi Jews
N N # – AR
Data abstracted from Webster et al. 1992, Anonymous 2000, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 2000, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Kaneko and Kondo 2004, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen
2004, Bonilla and Geha 2006. Abbreviations: AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XL–X, linked; M, monocyte/macrophage; L, lymphocyte; NK, Natural killer; # , decreased; # # ,
profoundly decreased; " , increased; N, normal; for Serum Ig Column, “All” refers to all isotypes.
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases237
differentiation in the thymus due to the absence of IL-
2Ra on thymic epithelial cells (Vihinen et al. 2001,
Vihinen 2004; Table III).
CD45 deﬁciency
CD45 is a tyrosine phosphatase found on hemato-
poietic cells that regulates kinases vital for signal
transmission through B and T cell antigen receptors.
Two cases have been reported (Kung et al. 2000,
Tchilian et al. 2001, Buckley 2003a; Table III).
Winged helix nude deﬁciency (WHN deﬁciency)
Only 2 cases of this T–
Bþ
SCID have been reported
(Vihinen 2004, Auricchio et al. 2005). Notable
features are deﬁciency of mature T cells (decreased
CD4 cells and relatively normal CD8 cells), alopecia,
and nail dystrophy (Vihinen 2004). The WHN protein
is thought to be a transcriptional regulator in the
thymus that is involved in T cell development
(Table III).
Immunodeﬁciency with thymoma
Another T–
Bþ
SCID of unknown molecular etiology
is the group of disorders known as immunodeﬁciency
with thymoma. This is a PID of adults with
panhypogammaglobulinemia, cellular immunodeﬁ-
ciency, and usually benign thymoma. Although the
fraction of circulating Ig-bearing B cells is usually
normal, Ig production is defective (Litwin 1979,
Buckley 2003a). Various cytopenias are sometimes
seen (Litwin 1979, Buckley 2003a) (Table III).
Severe combined immunodeﬁciency diseases
(SCIDs): T–
B2
SCID
Adenosine deaminase deﬁciency (ADA deﬁciency)
ADA deﬁciency is the most common autosomal
recessive SCID, making up 15% of SCID cases
(Bonilla and Geha 2003). These patients are similar to
gc SCID patients but may be distinguished by ribcage
anomalies and osseochondral dysplasia at the costo-
chondral junctions, iliac joints, and vertebral bodies
(Buckley 2003a). ADA deﬁciency typically causes
more severe lymphopenia (absolute counts less than
500/mm3
) than other SCIDs (Buckley 2003a). NK
cell number and function is intact, and if cellular
immunity is reconstituted with BMT, B cell function
returns (Resta and Thompson 1997). Lack of ADA
enzymatic activity allows toxic adenosine metabolites
to accumulate. These metabolites result in thymocyte
and circulating T and B cell apoptosis (Resta and
Thompson 1997). Milder forms with delayed onset
and diagnosis have been reported. Although poly-
ethylene–glycol-modiﬁed bovine ADA (PEG–ADA)
can help by replacing the missing enzyme, the
response is not as effective as that from BMT (Zegers
and Stoop 1983, Buckley 2003a). Gene therapy has
also has resulted in immune reconstitution but some
leukemic complications have been reported (Chinen
and Puck 2004, Fischer et al. 2004, Ferguson et al.
2005; Table III).
Recombinase activating gene 1 deﬁciency (RAG1
deﬁciency) and recombinase activating gene 2 deﬁciency
(RAG2 deﬁciency)
RAG1 and RAG2 encode for proteins that control
somatic recombination of the T and B cell receptor
genes. Without this regulation of the gene recombina-
tion, there is no assembly of the receptor genes, no
receptors are formed, and Tand B cell development is
arrested at immature stages (Corneo et al. 2001).
These patients have functional NK cells as the
predominant cell type in their circulation (Buckley
2003a; Table III). Defects in RAG 1 or 2 are the usual
cause of Omenn syndrome.
Artemis gene product deﬁciency (Athabascan SCID)
After RAG1 or 2 make cuts in DNA, the protein
produced from the Artemis gene is responsible for
repairing the DNA. Artemis gene product deﬁciency
results in a T–
B2
NKþ
SCID similar to RAG1 or 2
deﬁciency (Li et al. 2002). A hallmark of this SCID is
increased radiation sensitivity (Table III). Defects in
the Artemis gene have also been associated with
Omenn syndrome (Bonilla and Geha 2006).
Reticular dysgenesis
Also known as SCID with leukopenia, reticular
dygenesis is a T–
B2
SCID of unknown molecular
etiology. It is characterized by profoundly decreased
numbers of B and T cells, hypogammaglobulinemia as
well as granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia
(Roper et al. 1985). Deafness is also seen. Only
about 30 cases have been reported, a few of which
have displayed normal-appearing granulocytes in the
blood and one with a normal T cell fraction in cord
blood. These facts suggest that the suspected stem cell
maturation defect responsible for defective develop-
ment of T cells, B cells, and granulocytes, may not be
complete (Buckley 2003a; Table III).
Other rare SCIDs
SCID with cytokine production defects
Very rare patients with SCID of uncertain molecular
etiology have been found that do not produce a single
or multiple cytokines. Selective inability to produce
IL-2 despite presence of the IL-2 gene has been seen
A. Kumar et al.238
in 2 cases (Litwin 1979, DiSanto et al. 1990). One
female with defective ability to transcribe genes for IL-
2, IL-3, IL-4, and IL-5 has been reported; the latter
deﬁciency may be due to abnormal binding of nuclear
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) to lymphokine gene
enhancers (Castigli et al. 1993). Two cases of boys
with SCID who had normal appearing circulating
lymphocytes but whose T cells could not make Il-2,
IFN-g, IL-4, or TNF-a were found to have very low
levels of NFAT binding to DNA promoter regions of
the IL-2 gene (Feske et al. 1996; Table III).
Combined immunodeﬁciency diseases (CIDs)
Hyper IgM syndromes related to CD40 ligand/CD40 axis:
X-linked hyper IgM syndrome (CD40 ligand deﬁciency)
and CD40 deﬁciency hyper IgM syndrome (CD40
deﬁciency)
As opposed to the isolated humoral deﬁciency in hyper
IgM syndrome due to UNG or AICD deﬁciency,
defects in the CD40 ligand/CD40 interaction result in
combined immunodeﬁciency. X-linked hyper IgM
syndrome is due to mutations in the gene coding for
CD40 ligand (DiSanto et al. 1993). CD40 ligand, a
protein on T helper cells, normally interacts with
CD40 protein on B cells. This interaction is needed
for proper isotype switching, without which the B cells
produce only IgM (Seyama et al. 1998). Also, if CD40
is not stimulated, these B cells do not upregulate the
costimulatory molecules CD 80/86, which in turn
allows T cells to become “tolerogenic”. Tolerogenic T
cells are thought to cause the increase in malignancy,
especially hepatoma, in this disease (Buckley 2003a).
The mutation also leads to autoimmune cytopenias.
Neutropenia and the intrinsic T cell abnormality is felt
to contribute to opportunistic infections (Buckley
2003a). These patients develop the typical infectious
complications of combined PIDs and have little
lymphoid tissue. The treatment of choice, given the
poor prognosis, is BMT, but IVIG is used as well
(Buckley 2003a). Prophylaxis against Pneumocystis
pneumonia is also routinely given (Bonilla and Geha
2003). CD40 deﬁciency presents similarly to CD40
ligand deﬁciency and is treated in the same fashion
(Table III).
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase deﬁciency (PNP
deﬁciency)
PNP deﬁciency is another disorder of purine
metabolism like ADA deﬁciency. T cells are low in
number but not absent (Buckley 2003a). B cells are
normal in number and serum Igs are usually normal.
NK cells are increased. The defect is due to
accumulation of toxic metabolites due to the absence
of the PNP enzyme. Many patients have neurologic
symptoms and autoimmunity. Without BMT, the
disease is fatal in childhood (Myers et al. 2004,
Notarangelo et al. 2004) (Table III).
Omenn syndrome
Omenn syndrome is a CID characterized by hepatos-
plenomegaly, hypereosinophilia, erythroderma, des-
quamation, increased serum IgE, and diarrhea in
newborns (Aleman et al. 2001). This syndrome is due
to partial deﬁciency in RAG1 or RAG2, with the signs
mediated by oligoclonal, activated T cells in the
circulation. B cells are usually reduced in the blood
(Villa et al. 1999) (See RAG deﬁciency above and
Table III below).
MHC class I deﬁciencies: Transporter associated protein 1
deﬁciency (TAP-1 deﬁciency); transporter associated
protein 2 deﬁciency (TAP-2 deﬁciency); and TAP-binding
protein (tapasin) deﬁciency (tapasin deﬁciency) MHC
class II deﬁciencies: CIITA; RFX5; RFXAP; and
RFXANK
The MHC antigens (MHC class I or MHC class II)
bound to processed antigen are recognized by the T
cell receptor, allowing activation of T cells. MHC I is
found on all nucleated cells and platelets and
recognized by CD8þ
T cells, while MHC II, found
on B cells, monocyte-macrophages, antigen-present-
ing cells, and some T cells, is recognized by CD4þ
T
cells.
Transporter-associated protein 1 (TAP-1) and trans-
porter-associated protein 2 (TAP-2) are two genes
encoding proteins that normally transport processed
antigen to the MHC I molecule. Mutations in either
TAP-1 or TAP-2 result in destruction of the MHC I
proteins before they appear on the cell surface, leading
to a combined immunodeﬁciency with decreased
CD8þ
T cells but normal numbers of CD4þ
T cells (de
la Salle et al. 1994, Gadola et al. 2000). However,
MHC I is present in normal amounts in serum
(Buckley 2003a). Peripheral B cells and Ig levels are
normal. This immunodeﬁciency is milder than SCID
and often presents at a later age. Vasculitis is common.
A similar deﬁciency has been reported due to
mutations of genes coding for a protein coined
tapasin, which acts as a molecular chaperone for
TAP (Yabe et al. 2002).
MHC II defects result in a more severe immuno-
deﬁciency than that of MHC I defects, but still milder
than that of SCID. This is usually seen in patients
of North African ancestry and presents with very
low CD4þ
counts and normal CD8þ
counts (Buckley
2003a). These patients have abnormal T cell and
subsequent antibody responses to speciﬁc antigens
and underdeveloped thymus and lymphoid tissue.
MHC II defects have been reported that are due to
mutations in genes that code for various components
(RFX5, RFXAP, and RFXANK) of a multiprotein
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 239
complex called RFX, which binds a promoter on the
MHC II gene (Steimle et al. 1995, Villard et al. 1997).
The same immunodeﬁciency may result from a
mutation in the gene coding for MHC Class II
transactivator (CIITA), a protein that controls
inducibility and cell-speciﬁc expression of MHC II
(Zhou and Glimcher 1995, Buckley 2003a; Table III).
Other T cell activation defects: Zeta-associated protein
70 (ZAP-70); p56 Lck; CD3g; and CD3e
Normal T cell signal transduction involves recognition
of the antigen–MHC complex by the TCR, as noted
above in the MHC deﬁciency section. Subsequently,
this signal is transduced into the cytoplasm via the
CD3 complex, which activates various protein
tyrosine kinases such as ZAP-70, p56 Lck, Fyn, and
Syk (Buckley 2003a). These kinases phosphorylate
phospholipase C and activate other proteins, all of
which results in distal signaling events such as
activation of protein kinase C and calcium inﬂux,
which lead to transcription of cytokine genes such as
IL-2. Together these events result in T cell activation.
If any of the components of this complex cascade are
defective or absent, immunodeﬁciency can result.
Defects in the gene encoding ZAP-70 result in a
CID with CD8 lymphopenia with normal numbers of
abnormally functional CD4 cells, normal NK cell
function, and variable serum Ig levels (Chan et al.
1994, Elder et al. 1994).
p56 Lck gene mutation has been described in an
infant presenting with CD4 lymphopenia, low serum
Igs, but normal B and NK cell numbers (Timon et al.
1993, Buckley 2003a).
Unlike defects in CD3d, which results in SCID,
mutations in CD3g or CD3e result in a combined
immunodeﬁciency with normal numbers of circulat-
ing T cells (Timon et al. 1993, Buckley 2003a).
However, the T cells have abnormal proliferative
responses, and clinical problems have included severe
viral and bacterial infections and autoimmune
phenomena (Table III).
CD8 deﬁciency
A complete absence of CD8 cells has been reported in
one patient found to have mutations in part of the gene
coding for CD8 called CD8a with normal Ig levels,
NK cell function, but recurrent infections (de la Calle-
Martin et al. 2001; Table III).
DNA repair defects: Ataxia–telangiectasia (AT);
ataxia–telangiectasia-like syndrome; Nijmegan breakage
syndrome; DNA ligase IV deﬁciency; DNA ligase I
deﬁciency; and Bloom syndrome
Various defects in DNA repair can lead to PID.
A common feature is increased sensitivity to ionizing
radiation. AT is a syndrome with immunodeﬁciency,
cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, sen-
sitivity to ionizing radiation, and frequent malignancy
(lymphoreticular, leukemia, and others) (Bonilla and
Geha 2003). The disorder is due to mutation in the
AT-mutated (ATM) gene, whose product normally
detects damaged DNA and prevents the damaged cell
from dividing (Perlman et al. 2003). The mutant
ATM allows such damaged cells to divide, which leads
to chromosomal instability and increases risk of
malignancy. The mutation also interferes with
lymphocyte development, resulting in decreased
circulating T cells and variable decrease in antibodies,
presumably due to interference with TCR and B cell
receptor assembly (Bonilla and Geha 2003). Since a-
fetoprotein is elevated in 95% of patients, this is useful
diagnostically (Bonilla and Geha 2003). Unfortu-
nately, AT is treated only with supportive care; toxicity
of pre-BMT myeloablation is severe and does not
allow successful BMT (Bonilla and Geha 2003).
Several other PIDs due to defective DNA repair are
presented in Table III.
Defects of innate immunity
Defective regulation of the nuclear factor of kB (NF-kB)
pathway: Nf-kB essential modulator (NEMO) defect and
inhibitor of kB (IkB) defect
Nf-kB is a transcription factor that controls pro-
duction of molecules that play important roles in the
processes of a normal immune and/or inﬂammatory
response; the downstream molecules include IL-1, IL-
2, Il-6, IL-8, G and GM-CSF, and TNF (Bonilla and
Geha 2003). Normally, an inhibitor of Nf-kB (called
IkB) is prevented from inactivating Nf-kB because
another molecule, IkB kinase (IKK) phosphorylates
IkB, degrading this inhibitor, and allowing Nf-kB to
remain active. Partial-loss-of function mutations in
the g chain of IkB kinase (also known as NEMO, for
Nf-kB essential modulator) means that IkB is not
degraded and therefore inhibits Nf-kB activity
(Orange et al. 2004a, Bonilla and Geha 2006). This
disrupts immune function, resulting in the NEMO
syndrome, which is characterized by speciﬁc antibody
deﬁciency to polysaccharides, infections (especially
mycobacterial), and almost always anhidrotic ecto-
dermal dysplasia. This NEMO syndrome is also
known as EDA-ID (for ectodermal dysplasia associ-
ated immunodeﬁciency). Some patients with this
NEMO mutation have had hyper IgM, and two
patients reported do not have ectodermal dysplasia,
highlighting the variable nature of the NEMO
syndrome (Niehues et al. 2004, Orange et al.
2004b). Another NEMO mutation causes a syndrome
with additional features such as osteopetrosis and
lymphedema and is abbreviated OL-EDA-ID.
A mutation that activates IkB can cause the EDA-ID
A. Kumar et al.240
phenotype, since an activated IkB allows IkB to inhibit
Nf-kB (Courtois et al. 2003; Table IV). Additional
defects of innate immunity including those listed
below are described in Table IV. Defects in
complement may also be considered defects of innate
immunity.
IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 deﬁciency (IRAK-4
deﬁciency)
Most of the toll-like receptors (TLRs) use a signaling
pathway that involves a kinase called IRAK-4
(Notarangelo et al. 2004). IRAK-4 is upstream of
NEMO in the NFkB signaling pathway described
above (Vihinen 2004). The defect in IRAK-4 affects
lymphocyte and monocyte inﬂammatory responses to
pathogens and results in pyogenic bacterial infections
(Notarangelo et al. 2004).
Warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and
myelokathexis syndrome (WHIM syndrome)
Another defect of innate immunity is the WHIM
syndrome (Stiehm 1993). Treatment-resistant warts
due to HPV infection, hypogammaglobulinemia with
associated bacterial infections that tend to be mild,
and myelokathexis (retention of mature myeloid cells
in the marrow) are the hallmarks of this disease (Tarzi
et al. 2005). It is the ﬁrst described PID due to
abnormality of a chemokine receptor. In this disorder,
mutation in the gene coding for a leukocyte
chemokine receptor called CXCR4 results in
increased response of CXCR4 to its ligand CXCL12
(Notarangelo et al. 2004). This interaction is
responsible for homing of neutrophils and other
hematopoietic cells to the bone marrow and proper
release of mature leukocytes from the marrow
(Vihinen 2004). The mutation results in retention of
mature neutrophils in the marrow and neutropenia.
Peripheral lymphocyte numbers and function are
variably deﬁcient (Vihinen 2004). Infections often
respond to antibiotics, aided by the inﬂammation-
induced release of neutrophils from the bone marrow
despite the defect. G-CSF, GM-CSF, and IVIG are
also used in managing WHIM syndrome (Vihinen
2004).
Phagocyte defect-associated PIDs
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD): X-linked CGD
(XCGD); p22phox deﬁciency (p22phox CGD); p47phox
deﬁciency (p47phox CGD); p67phox deﬁciency (p67phox
CGD)
Phagocytic disorders typically result in poor wound
healing and susceptibility to bacterial (particularly
catalase-positive), mycobacterial, and fungal infec-
tions (Figure 1). CGD is the prototypical disorder of
phagocyte function that presents in children and
occasionally in adults. Both X-linked and autosomal
recessive forms are characterized by infections due to
isolated inability to effectively destroy intracellular
pathogens and, as a result of this ineffective killing,
granuloma formation in any organ. Initially, infections
are from catalase-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus
aureus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, and Serratia marces-
cens), however, not from catalase-negative pathogens
(Hemophilus inﬂuenzae or Streptococcus pneumoniae).
Abscesses and osteomyelitis are frequent compli-
cations. Aspergillus and other fungal disease is
prominent.
The fundamental defect underlying all of the CGDs
is a mutation in any of the closely related proteins
making up the phagocyte oxidase complex (also
known as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phos-
phate oxidase or NADPH oxidase), which normally
allows the cell to form hydrogen peroxide and
superoxide radicals that can directly kill phagocytosed
pathogens during a respiratory burst (Bonilla and
Geha 2003). The NADPH oxidase complex is made
of two membrane protein subunits (gp91phox and
p22phox) and two intracytoplasmic proteins
(p67phox, p47phox, and p40phox). The NADPH
oxidase complex has its activity and assembly
regulated by two intracytoplasmic membrane-associ-
ated GTPase proteins (Rac2 and Rap1). Mutation in
the gene coding for gp91phox is the most common
cause of CGD, and is the defect in XCGD, while less
common defects in the p22phox, p47phox, or p67phox
genes have been shown to cause the autosomal
recessive forms of CGD. Because Rac2 also is involved
in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, Rac2 gene
mutations result in leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency
(LAD) with associated oxidative killing defect
(Notarangelo et al. 2004). Although not yet reported,
CGD due to defects in p40phox or Rap1 is also
possible.
Diagnosis of CGD is established by documenting
the inability of patients’ neutrophils to generate
superoxide after they are stimulated with phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA) or after they phagocytose
(Buckley 2003a). Superoxide generation can be
detected by measuring chemiluminescence using the
nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) dye reduction test or by
using a ﬂow cytometry-based respiratory burst assay
(Buckley 2003a). Both are abnormal in CGD.
The frequent use of antibiotics has reduced child-
hood death due to CGD, and has made aspergillus
infection a more frequent cause of fatality in CGD
(Czarnetzki 1989, Buckley 2003a). Aspergillus infec-
tions may be treated with amphotericin B, regular
normal granulocyte infusions, and maintenance oral
antifungals. IFN-g injected subcutaneously seems to
reduce serious infections without improving phago-
cyte killing abilities (Mamishi et al. 2005). BMT has
not been very successful, unless done very early, due to
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 241
Table IV. Defects of innate immunity.
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene pro-
duct Classic/associated features
Affected
cells Functional defect Inheritance
Ectodermal dysplasia associated
immunodeﬁciency (EDA-ID)
Nf-kB essential modulator
(NEMO) defect
IKBKG Xq28 NEMO
(g chain
of IkBK)
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (usually), lack
of antibody response to polysaccharides,
various infections (Mycobacteria, bacterial),
possible Hyper IgM
L þ M NFkB pathway XL
Inhibitor of kB (IkB) Defect IKBA ? a chain of
IkB
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, T-cell defect,
infections
L þ M NFkB pathway AD
Defects of toll-like receptor
signalling
Il-1 receptor-associated kinase 4
(IRAK-4) deﬁciency
IRAK4 Chr.4 IRAK-4 Bacterial infection, standard screening tests for
PID usually normal
L þ M IRAK-4 is critical for signaling through
majority of TLRs
AR
Chemokine receptor defect
Warts, hypogammaglobuline-
mia, infections, and myelo-
kathexis (WHIM) syndrome
CXCR4 2q21 CXCR4 Hypogammaglobulinemia, low B cell num-
bers, severe neutropenia, warts (HPV infec-
tion), retention of mature PMNs in bone
marrow (myelokathexis)
G þ ?L Increased response of CXCR4 chemokine
receptor to its ligand CXCL12 (interaction
homes PMN to marrow so they stay there
AD
Data abstracted from Anonymous 2000, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 2000, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004, Bonilla and Geha 2006. Abbreviations:
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XL, X-linked; M, monocyte/macrophage; L, lymphocyte; NK, Natural killer; # , decreased; # # , profoundly decreased; " , increased; N, normal; for
Serum Ig Column, “All” refers to all isotypes.
A.Kumaretal.242
difﬁculty in managing chronic infections during
transplant-related marrow ablation of the host
(Czarnetzki 1989, Buckley 2003a; Table V).
Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency (LAD): LAD type 1
(LAD1); LAD type 2 (LAD2); LAD type 3 (LAD3);
and LAD with Rac2 deﬁciency (Rac2 LAD)
Defects in proteins involved in leukocyte rolling,
adhesion, and cytoskeletal regulation make up the
group of phagocyte immunodeﬁciencies called LAD.
All four types are characterized by poor wound
healing, skin ulcers, gingivitis/periodontitis, delayed
separation of the umbilical cord, leukocytosis, and
bacterial and fungal infections.
LAD1 is due to mutation of the gene encoding
CD18, the common chain of integrin heterodimers
(Bonilla and Geha 2003). Without CD18, the
integrins, including LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18), Mac-1
(also known as CR3) (CD11b/CD18), and CR4
(CD11c/CD18), are not formed. Leukocyte function
associated molecule 1 (LFA-1) on leukocytes binds
adhesion molecules, such as intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM-1), on endothelial cells. This
interaction is vital for adhesion before diapedesis of
leukocytes such as neutrophils (Bonilla and Geha
2003). Without LFA-1, leukocytes stay marginated in
the blood vessels and are unable to reach sites of
infection. LAD-1 patients may therefore have ex-
tremely high blood leukocyte counts. BMT may be
curative but routine antibiotics and sometimes
granulocyte transfusion are used (Vihinen 2004).
LAD2 is due to a defective GDP-fucose transporter,
resulting in inability to fucosylate glycoproteins,
including sialyl–Lewis–X, the ligand for E and P
selectins (Vihinen 2004). The interaction between
fucosylated sialyl–Lewis–X on leukocytes and selec-
tins on endothelial cells is needed for the initial binding
of the leukocyte to the vessel wall (Bonilla and Geha
2003). This defect results in a clinical picture similar to
LAD1, but additionally, patients with LAD2 defects
have the Bombay (hh) blood group, mental retar-
dation, and dysmorphic features. Oral fucose can
reduce fevers and infections (Vihinen 2004).
A less well-characterized LAD is LAD3. Although a
speciﬁc genetic locus or mutation is not conﬁrmed,
the defect is felt to be due to abnormality of Rap1,
a regulatory GTPase that is thought to be involved in
activation of integrins (and that has a regulatory role
in the NADPH oxidase). Abnormality of the former
function impairs leukocyte adhesion (Notarangelo
et al. 2004). LAD3 results in a clinical picture similar
to LAD1 with an additional bleeding propensity
(Notarangelo et al. 2004).
LAD with Rac2 deﬁciency results in a clinical
picture similar to LAD due to abnormal leukocyte
adherence, chemotaxis, and degranulation (Notaran-
gelo et al. 2004). Rac2, a GTPase involved in the
regulation of the NADPH oxidase, also regulates the
actin cytoskeleton. Abnormalities of this cytoskeletal
regulation lead to these leukocyte adhesion and
degranulation problems. The defective regulation of
the NAPDH oxidase due to Rac2 deﬁciency leads to
defective superoxide radical formation, as seen in
CGD due to Rac2 deﬁciency (Notarangelo et al.
2004).
Chediak–Higashi syndrome
Chediak–Higashi syndrome is a disorder character-
ized by partial oculocutaneous albinism, variable
neurological deﬁcits, and severe bacterial infections
(especially by Staphylococcus aureus) (Vihinen 2004).
A fatal “accelerated phase” of lymphoproliferation
with hemophagocytosis and encephalopathy is often
fatal (Bonilla and Geha 2003). Malignant lymphoma
may be seen. The defect is due to mutations in a
lysosomal trafﬁcking protein called LYST (Bonilla
and Geha 2003). Without this normal protein, any
lysosome-forming cells, including neutrophils, are
unable to form normal phagolysosomes and melano-
somes, leading to the clinical ﬁndings (Notarangelo
et al. 2004). Abnormal transport to and from the
lysosomes is associated with uncontrolled granule
fusion, which leads to defective neutrophil granules.
The immunophenotype of this disease includes low
NK and cytotoxic T cell function with normal blood
T and B cell levels and Ig levels. BMT can be
curative.
The severe congenital neutropenias: Kostmann syndrome
(congenital neutropenia); and cyclic neutropenia;
X-linked neutropenia/myelodysplasia
Kostmann syndrome (congenital neutropenia)
describes a PID with persistent absolute neutropenia
(,500/mm3
) resulting in frequent bacterial infec-
tions, newborn temperature instability, and in one
subgroup, myelodysplasia (Cham et al. 2002).
Mutations in the gene coding for Elastase 2 (ELA2)
makes up about two-thirds of cases, with mutations
GFI1 making up the remainder (Notarangelo et al.
2004, Vihinen 2004). Abnormal myeloid differen-
tiation with granulocytes arrested at the promyelocytic
stage is seen (Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004).
ELA2 mutations are thought to result in mistrafﬁcking
of neutrophil elastase, which is important in degrading
pathogen virulence factors and in the leukocyte life
cycle (Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004). GFI1 is
a proto-oncogene and likely a transcription factor
involved in regulating neutrophil cell division and
repressing ELA2 transcription (Notarangelo et al.
2004, Vihinen 2004). Mutations in the granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) receptor seen in
some cases of Kostmann syndrome are now believed
to be acquired defects, possible due to underlying
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 243
genetic instability (Bonilla and Geha 2006). Recom-
binant G-CSF (rGCS-F) treatment can reduce
infections and improve survival in severe congenital
neutropenia (SCN) (Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen
2004).
Cyclic neutropenia is a PID characterized by blood
neutrophil, lymphocyte, platelet, monocyte, and
reticulocyte levels that cycle between normal and
zero with a 21 day periodicity (Notarangelo et al.
2004, Vihinen 2004). It is due to autosomal dominant
mutation in ELA2, with resulting abnormal elastase
trafﬁcking.
In X-linked neutropenia/myelodysplasia, there is
loss of autoinhibition of Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
protein (WASP) (Devriendt et al. 2001). WASP is
involved in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton of
hematopoietic cells, including neutrophils. This
constitutively activating mutation in WASP causes
neutropenia and myelodysplasia in this disorder
(Devriendt et al. 2001). Other mutations in WASP,
as described below, result in the Wiskott–Aldrich
syndrome and in X-linked thrombocytopenia (Oda
and Ochs 2000, Notarangelo et al. 2002).
Complement deﬁciency-associated PIDs
There have been reported deﬁciencies of every
soluble complement component except for factor B
(Yabe et al. 2002, Bonilla and Geha 2003). These
are relatively uncommon PIDs. The complement
system plays several vital roles in human immunity,
which can be divided into three groups: defense
against infectious agents, connection between the
innate and adaptive immune systems, and elimin-
ation of waste products and dying cells (Walport
2001a,b). Although partial deﬁciency of a com-
plement component generally does not lead to
infectious disease, complete deﬁciencies result in
infectious complications from bacterial pathogens,
particularly Neisseria (Bonilla and Geha 2003;
Figure 1). Defects of the classic and late com-
plement pathways tend to be associated with less
severe infectious disease than alternative pathway
deﬁciencies, particularly with initial exposure to the
pathogen, when the alternative pathway is most
important (Buckley 2003a). Autoimmune disease
such as systemic lupus erythematosis is more
common in patients with partial and complete
complement deﬁciencies, particularly those with
early component defects (Walport 2001a,b). Disrup-
tion of the clearance of immune complexes when
these deﬁciencies are present is a proposed reason
for increased susceptibility to autoimmunity in these
diseases (Buckley 2003a). Defects in some com-
plement components lead to non-infectious disease,
as is the case with hereditary angioedema due to
C1 esterase inhibitor deﬁciency. Unfortunately,
there is no speciﬁc replacement therapy for these
deﬁciencies, and treatment is largely appropriate
antibiotic use and fresh–frozen plasma infusion for
emergent replacement of some complement
components (Buckley 2003b, Vihinen 2004). Auto-
immune disease can be treated with immunosup-
pressive medicines (Bonilla and Geha 2003). The
characteristics of immunodeﬁciency due to the
various complement components are included in
Table VI.
Other well-deﬁned immunodeﬁciency
syndromes and PIDS
Hyper IgE syndrome (Job’s syndrome)
Hyper IgE syndrome is of unknown etiology and is
marked by extremely elevated serum IgE levels,
severe and recurrent abscess formation in lungs,
skin, joints, and other organs due primarily to
Staphylococcus aureus, pneumatocele formation, and
non-atopic dermatitis (Shemer et al. 2001). Patients
have coarse facial features including a prominent
forehead, deep-set eyes, a broad nasal bridge, a wide
and ﬂeshy nasal tip, and facial asymmetry (Grimba-
cher et al. 1999, O’Connell et al. 2000, Buckley
2003a, Grimbacher et al. 2005). Many display
scoliosis, hyperextensible joints, delayed shedding of
the primary teeth, and osteopenia with easily-
fractured bones (Grimbacher et al. 1999, O’Connell
et al. 2000, Buckley 2003a, Grimbacher et al. 2005).
Males and females are both susceptible. Usually
hyper IgE syndrome is autosomal dominant, but
recently an autosomal recessive form has been
described that is characterized by more severe viral
infections, central nervous system vasculitis (in
some) but a lack of skeletal involvement, dental
pathology, or pneumatocele formation (Bonilla and
Geha 2006).
Immunologically, in addition to the serum IgE in
the tens of thousands, IgD is high, and the other
isotypes are normal (Grimbacher et al. 1999,
O’Connell et al. 2000, Grimbacher et al. 2005).
There is a marked eosinophilia of blood, sputum, and
lymphoid and pulmonary tissues. There is a decreased
humoral (especially anamnestic) and cellular immune
response to new antigens despite normal fractions of
CD4 and CD8 subtypes (Buckley 2003a). Lympho-
cytes proliferate normally when stimulated with
mitogens but not antigens; there is decreased
CD45RO, or memory phenotype, T cells (Buckley
2003a). Prognosis largely depends on the rapidity of
initiation of aggressive and long-term anti-staphylo-
coccal (and other pathogen-speciﬁc antibiotics) treat-
ments (Buckley 2003a,b). If this is done, prognosis is
good, but without it, patients develop progressive
pulmonary disease. Surgical correction of persistent
or infected pneumatoceles is also standard of care
(Table VII).
A. Kumar et al.244
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome (WAS)
WAS, also classiﬁed as a combined PID, is marked by
thrombocytopenic purpura, small defective platelets,
eczema, and infection with encapsulated bacteria at
younger ages followed by opportunistic pathogens
later (Buckley 2003a). The typical presentation occurs
during infancy with bleeding problems, followed by
eczema, infections, and often other atopic disease
(Buckley 2003a). Cancers, especially lymphoreticular
malignancy, bleeding, and infections are the usual
reasons for death, which occurs before the teen years
(Paller 1995, Oda and Ochs 2000). Autoimmunity in
the form of cytopenias and vasculitis is frequent
(Buckley 2003a). Synthesis and catabolism of Igs are
increased, leading to variable levels, but the classic
pattern shows elevated IgA and IgE with low IgM and
normal or mildly low IgG. The antibody response is
blunted, particularly to polysaccharides, but later also
to proteins. Absence of isohemagglutinins due to this
poor polysaccharide-induced antibody response may
aid in diagnosis (Buckley 2003a) The cellular immune
system is also defective, with reduced numbers of T
cells with poor response to mitogens (Buckley 2003a).
Finding non-random X chromosome lyonization in
several hematopoietic cell lines or detecting the
abnormal gene can identify carriers, while prenatal
diagnosis is possible via chorionic villus or amniotic
ﬂuid sampling (Marone et al. 1986, Paller 1995, Oda
and Ochs 2000).
The molecular defect results from various
mutations in the gene coding for WAS protein
(WASP). WASP, which is found only in lymphocytes
and megakaryocytes, is critical for actin polymer-
ization, and therefore, normal cytoskeletal structure
and function (Oda and Ochs 2000). Other mutations
in the WASP gene can result in isolated X-linked
thrombocytopenia or X-linked neutropenia (Dev-
riendt et al. 2001, Notarangelo et al. 2002).
HLA-identical BMT can cure WAS, but haploi-
dentical BMT has been less successful (Conley et al.
2003). Problematic thrombocytopenia is treated with
splenectomy. IVIG therapy is also routinely used
(Table VII).
DiGeorge syndrome (DGS)
DGS is also known as thymic hypoplasia and
sometimes grouped with other combined PIDs. It is
along a spectrum of disease, also containing the
velocardiofacial syndrome, usually due to deletions on
chromosome 22q11.2 (the DiGeorge chromosomal
region) (Bonilla and Geha 2006). The deletion results
in abnormal development of the third and fourth
pharyngeal pouches during human embryonic devel-
opment. Numerous structures that develop from these
pouches, including the thymus and parathyroid
glands, are underdeveloped or absent in DGS.
Abnormalities of the heart (atrial septal defects,
conotruncal disorders), great vessels (right-sided
aortic arch), abnormal facies (wide-set eyes, low-set
and notched ears, mandibular hypoplasia, short upper
lip philtrum), and esophageal atresia are seen in DGS
since these structures develop from similar areas and
at the same time as the thymus and parathyroids
(Sullivan 2004). Newborns may have hypocalcemic
seizures due to hypoparathyroidism (Buckley 2003a).
Clinically, patients with milder thymic and parathy-
roid hypoplasia have few serious infections and do not
have failure to thrive. This is called partial DGS, while
those with more signiﬁcant thymic hypoplasia or
aplasia of the thymus and the resulting SCID-like
immunodeﬁciency pattern that results, are said to
have complete DGS (Sullivan 2004).
Immunologically, DGS usually has mild lympho-
penia, with a variable decrease in T cells with reduced
response to mitogens depending on the degree of
thymic hypoplasia. The T cells present seem to be
intrinsically normal in many patients, but some with
complete DGS may have populations of abnormally
functioning T cells (Buckley 2003a, Bonilla and Geha
2006). The thymus-dependent lymphoid tissues are
similarly variably hypoplastic.
Although most cases are associated with microdele-
tions in 22q11.2, others include deletions on
chromosome 10p13, and more recently, mutations
in a transcription factor called T-box-1 (Kim and
Basson 2001, Sullivan 2004).
Treatment of DGS depends on the severity. Partial
DGS requires no treatment, while complete DGS is
fatal if not immunologically reconstituted via BMTor,
according to some experts, thymic epithelial explants
(Sullivan 2004). Cardiac lesions need to be treated
surgically (Table VII).
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP)
XLP is an excellent example of a genetic disorder
whose expression seems to require the correct
environmental stimulus to become active. Boys with
XLP typically are seemingly healthy until they have
infectious mononucleosis due to Epstein–Barr virus
(EBV). In response to the EBV infection, the XLP
patient will have fulminant infectious mononucleosis,
often with hepatic necrosis and death (50%),
hypogammaglobulinemia (30%), or B cell lymphoma
(20%) (Morra et al. 2001). Patients surviving the EBV
infection typically develop hypogammaglobulinemia
or lymphoma later (Buckley 2003a).
A protein called signalling lymphocyte activation
protein (SLAM) is found on T cells, thymocytes, and
NK cells. In patients without XLP, a protein called
SLAM-associated protein (SAP) inhibits signal
transduction via SLAM and thus prevents T cell
proliferation in response to EBV. SAP also interacts
with NK cells. The gene coding for SAP, SH2D1A, is
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 245
Table V. Phagocyte abnormalities.
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene product Classic/associated features
Affected
cells Functional defect Inheritance
Chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD)
X-linked CGD (gp91phox CGD)
p22phox deﬁciency (p22phox CGD)
p47phox deﬁciency (p47phox CGD)
p67phox deﬁciency (p67phox CGD)
CYBB
CYBA
NCF1
NCF2
Xp21.1
16q24
7q11.23
1q25
gp91phox
p22phox
p47phox
p67phox
Poor wound healing, granulomas,
catalase- þ bacterial and fungal infec-
tions, gingivitis, delayed separation of
the cord, osteomyelitis
P þ M Oxidative burst-dependent killing
impaired due to defective NADPH
oxidase components
XL AR AR
AR
Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency (LAD)
LAD type 1 (LAD1) ITGB2 21q22.3 CD18 (com-
mon chain of
b2 integrins)
Poor wound healing, skin ulcers,
gingivitis/periodontitis, delayed separ-
ation of the umbilical cord, leukocy-
tosis, bacterial and fungal infections,
BMT may be curative but routine
antibiotics and sometimes granulocyte
transfusion are used
P þ M þ L
þ NK
CD18 defect results in defective b2
integrins (a/CD18 heterodimers),
needed for leukocyte adhesion to EC
adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1
AR
LAD type 2 (LAD2) SLC35C1 11p11.2 FUCT1
GDP-fucose
transporter
Like LAD 1 plus Bombay (hh) blood
group and mental retardation, dys-
morphic features, oral fucose can
reduce fevers and infections
P þ M Mutations in the guanosine dipho-
sphate-fucose transporter gene results
in inability to fucosylate glycoproteins,
including sialyl-Lewis-X, the ligand for
E and P Selectins (needed for
leukocyte rolling chemotaxis)
AR
LAD type 3 (LAD3) ? ? ?Rap 1 Like LAD 1 plus bleeding propensity P þ M þ L
þ NK
Leukocyte adherence is abnormal due
to defective activation of integrins
AR
LAD with Rac2 deﬁciency (Rac2
LAD)
RAC2 22q12.3–
q13.2
RAC2 Like LAD 1, BMT can be curative P Abnormal P chemotaxis, adherence,
and respiratory burst. Rac2, part of the
NADPH oxidase complex, helps regu-
late the actin cytoskeleton (needed for
chemotaxis and degranulation) and
superoxide production via the NADPH
oxidase
AD
Neutropenic disorders
Kostmann syndrome (congenital neu-
tropenia)
ELA2*
*2/3 of
cases
GFI1
1p35–
p34.3
Elastase 2*
GFI1 *2/3 of
cases
Persistent absolute neutropenia
,500/mm3
; frequent bacterial infec-
tions; newborn temperature instability
irritability; one subgroup with myelo-
dysplasia; rG-CSF treatment can
reduce infections and improve survival
P Abnormal myeloid differentiation with
granulocytes arrested at promyelocytic
stage; ELA2 mutations thought to
result in mistrafﬁcking of N elastase
(important in degrading pathogen
virulence factors and leukocyte life
cycle):GFI1 defects may repress elas-
tase
AD
A.Kumaretal.246
Table V – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene product Classic/associated features
Affected
cells Functional defect Inheritance
Cyclic neutropenia ELA2 19p13.3 Elastase 2 Neutrophils, lymphocytes, platelets,
monocytes, and reticulocytes levels in
blood cycle between normal zero with a
21 day periodicity; rG-CSF treatment
can reduce infections and improve
survival
P ELA2 mutations thought to result in
mistrafﬁcking of N elastase (important
in degrading pathogen virulence
factors and leukocyte life cycle)
AD
X-linked neutropenia/ myelodysplasia WAS Xp11.4–
p11.21
WAS protein
(WASP)
Neutropenia; other mutations in
WASP lead to WAS and X-linked
thrombocytopenia
P þ M Loss of autoinhibition of WASP
impairs cytoskeletal control in hema-
topoietic cells, leading to the neutro-
penia
XL
Other phagocyte defects
Chediak–Higashi syndrome (CHS) CHS1 1q42.1–
q42.2
LYST Partial oculocutaneous albinism; severe
bacterial infections; giant lysosomes;
low NK and CTL function; Normal
blood T/B cell levels and Ig; accelerated
encephalopathic stage; malignant lym-
phoma; BMT may cure
P þ all
lysosome
containing
cells
Mutation in LYST (lysosomal traf-
ﬁcking regulator) impairs intracellular
transport to and from the lysosome,
causing giant inclusion bodies in a
variety of cell types, uncontrolled
granule fusion leading to defective
granules in neutrophils, and thus failed
chemotaxis.
AR
Griscelli syndrome, type 1 (GS1) MYO5A 15q21 Myosin 5A Partial pigmentary dilution or albinism
with silvery gray hair, frequent infec-
tions, stable neurologic abnormalities;
never have hemophagocytic syndrome;
BMT may help; [GS, type 3 (isolated
hypopigmentation phenotype) is also
due to a MYO5A defect)]
No
abnormality
observed
Myosin 5A is a motor that may be
involved in melanosome transport, or
may be required for cell polarization
needed for dendrite formation
AR
Griscelli syndrome, type 2 (GS2) RAB27A 15q21 RAB27A pro-
tein
Partial albinism (silvery gray hair); low
NK and CTL function; normal blood
T/B cell levels and Ig; anemia,
neutropenia; giant lysosomes of CHS
absent;, frequent infections; acceler-
ated phase of the disease with fever,
jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, lym-
phadenopathy, pancytopenia and gen-
eralized lymphohistiocytic inﬁltrates of
various organs including the central
nervous system
P þ T
þ M
RABD27 protein is key effector of
intracellular vesicular transport, so
regulates cytotoxic granule exocytosis
and affects T cell and macrophage
activation; if it occurs, uncontrolled T
cell and macrophage activation
(Hemophagocytic syndrome) is fatal
without BMT
AR
b-actin deﬁciency ACTB 7p15–
p12
Cytoplasmic
b-actin
Mental retardation; short stature P þ M Mutation in cytoskeletal protein
impairs leukocyte motility
AD
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases247
Table V – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal
gene product Classic/associated features
Affected
cells Functional defect Inheritance
Neutrophil-speciﬁc granule deﬁciency CEBPE 14q11.2 C/EBPE
(Ccaat/
enhancer-
binding pro-
tein e)
Severe bacterial infections; P with
bilobed nuclei; P with abnormal
nuclear morphology, lacking primary,
speciﬁc, and tertiary granule proteins;
rG-CSF treatment can reduce infec-
tions and improve survival; BMT is an
option
P Defective transcription factor
(C/EBPE) leads to lack of speciﬁc or
secondary granules in mature neutro-
phils and eosinophils with defective
chemotaxis and killing
AR
Myeloperoxidase deﬁciency MPO 17q23.1 MPO (myelo-
per-oxidase)
Most people with defect are asympto-
matic; common (1 in 2000); if
immunodeﬁcient, have defective can-
didal killing and increased malignancy;
may have eosinophilia; visceral infec-
tions often seen with DM
P þ M Defect in P and M MPO, which is
involved in oxidative killing of patho-
gens
AR
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deﬁciency
G6PD Xq28 G6PD Most asymptomatic but some with
neonatal jaundice, infections, drug-
induced hemolytic anemia
P þ M Defective G6PD, which is needed to
produce NADPH as reduction agent
for oxidative stresses; defect leads to
faulty superoxide production and kill-
ing
XL
Shwachman–Bodian–Diamond syn-
drome (SBDS)
SBDS 7q11 SBDS protein Pancytopenia (may have malignant
transformation); exocrine pancreatic
insufﬁciency; chondrodysplasia; bone
defects (metaphyseal dysostosis, pectus
carinatum), cutaneous defects
(ichthyosis), psychomotor retardation;
infections; FTT
P Defective chemotaxis; SBDS protein
may be involved in RNA metabolism
AR
Data abstracted from Anonymous 2000, Devriendt et al. 2001, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004, Bonilla and Geha 2006. Abbreviations: AR, Autosomal
recessive; XL, X-linked; SCID, severe combined immunodeﬁciency; L, lymphocyte; M, monocyte; G, granulocyte; K, keratinocyte; NK, natural killer cell; P, polymorphonuclear cell (neutrophil); EC,
endothelial cell; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; TLR, toll-like receptors; ANC, absolute neutrophil count; G-CSF, granulocyte colony stimulating factor; rG-CSF, recombinant granulocyte
colony stimulating factor; BMT, bone marrow transplant; Ig, immunoglobulin; DM, diabetes mellitus; FTT, failure to thrive; # , decreased; # # , profoundly decreased; " , increased; N, normal; for
Serum Ig Column: All refers to all isotypes.
A.Kumaretal.248
Table VI. Complement pathway disorders
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal gene
product Classic/associated features Functional defect Inheritance
Classic complement pathway
component defects
C1q a-chain deﬁciency
C1q b-chain deﬁciency
C1q g-chain deﬁciency
C1QA
C1QB
C1QG
1p36.3–
p34.1
C1q a chain
C1q b chain
C1q g chain
SLE-like syndrome (often early-onset and may be
severe), rheumatoid disease, pyogenic infections;
defective classic complement pathway
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired IC
clearance
AR
C1r deﬁciency C1R 12p13 C1r SLE-like syndrome (often early-onset and may be
severe), rheumatoid disease, pyogenic infections;
defective classic complement pathway; often
associated with C1s deﬁciency
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired IC
clearance
AR
C1s deﬁciency C1S 12p13 C1s SLE-like syndrome (often early-onset and may be
severe), rheumatoid disease, pyogenic infections;
defective classic complement pathway; often
associated with C1r deﬁciency
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired IC
clearance
AR
C2 deﬁciency C2 6p21.3 C2 SLE and SLE-like syndrome (often less severe
than in normocomplementemic patients), pyo-
genic encapsulated bacterial infections, vasculitis,
Polymyositis, GN; most common C deﬁciency;
C2 deﬁciency, Type 1 involves absence of C2,
while Type 2 involves isolated secretion defect
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired IC
clearance
AR
C3 deﬁciency C3 19p13.3–
p13.2
C3 Recurrent pyogenic infections, SLE, 25% with
vasculitis or GN
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired bacteri-
cidal action; absent opsonization; impaired IC
clearance
AR
C4 deﬁciency C4A C4B 6p21.3 C4a C4b Pyogenic infections, SLE with or without GN;
C4A and C4B both encode the C4 protein
Absent C-mediated hemolysis; impaired IC
clearance
AR
Late complement pathway
defects
C5 deﬁciency C5 9q32–
q34
C5 Neisserial infections, SLE-like syndrome Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
C6 deﬁciency C6 5p13 C6 Neisserial infections, few with SLE-like syndrome Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
C7 deﬁciency C7 5p13 C7 Neisserial infections, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis,
pyoderma gangrenosum, scleroderma, vasculitis
Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
C8 a-chain deﬁciency C8A 1p32 C8a Neisserial infections, SLE-like syndrome, more
common in African–Americans, abnormal C8a
and normal C8g chains covalently bind and then
join normal C8a to form abnormal C8
Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
C8 b-chain deﬁciency C8B 1p32 C8b Neisserial infections, SLE-like syndrome, more
common in caucasians
Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
C8 g-chain deﬁciency C8G 9q34.3 C8g Neisserial infections, SLE-like syndrome, more
common in African–Americans, normal C8a and
abnormal C8g chains covalently bind and then
join normal C8a to form abnormal C8
Absent C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action;
AR
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases249
Table VI – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal gene
product Classic/associated features Functional defect Inheritance
C9 deﬁciency C9 5p13 C9 Often asymptomatic, some ability to kill Neisseria
but slowly, some may still get systemic Neisserial
infections, possess some serum hemolytic and
bactericidal activity but less than normal, more
common in Japan
Decreased C-mediated hemolysis (defective MAC
formation); impaired bactericidal action
AR
Alternative complement
pathway component defects
Factor B deﬁciency BF 6p21.3 Factor B Neisserial infections (meningococcemia) with
high mortality, no detectable alternative pathway
activity, decreased classical pathway activity and,
only dysfunctional Factor B
Absent C-mediated hemolysis via alternate
pathway
AR
Factor D deﬁciency DF 19p13.3 Factor D Neisserial infection, factor D converts factor B to
Bb
Absent C-mediated hemolysis via alternate path-
way
AR
Factor H deﬁciency HF1 1q32 Factor H Recurrent Neisserial and encapsulated bacterial
infection; renal disease (GN, IgA nephropathy,
hemolytic uremic syndrome);
Spontaneous activation of complement alternative
pathway with C3 consumption via alternate
pathway; factor H normally binds C3b and thus
prevents Factor B from binding C3b and forming
C3bBb (the alternative pathway C3 convertase);
factor H also normally is a cofactor for Factor I,
which inactivates C3b; factor H also increases
dissociation of the C3 convertase (C3bBb) and
C3bBb3b (C5 convertase)
AR
Properdin deﬁciency PFC Xp11.3–
p11.23
Properdin Neisserial infections; properdin normally binds to
and stabilizes the alternative pathway C3 and C5
convertases; may have complete deﬁciency (type
I), incomplete deﬁciency (type II), or dysfunction
of properdin (type III)
Absent C-mediated hemolysis via alternate path-
way
XL
Mannose-binding lectin
pathway component defects
Mannose-binding lectin
deﬁciency
MBL2 10q11.2–
q21
Mannose-bind-
ing lectin
Pyogenic infections; very low penetrance Defective mannose recognition and lectin path-
way-mediated hemolysis
AR
Mannose-binding lectin-
associated serine protease
(MASP) 2 deﬁciency
MASP2 1p36.3–
p36.2
MASP2 Pyogenic infections, SLE-like syndrome Absent lectin pathway-mediated hemolysis AR
Complement regulatory
protein defects
C1 inhibitor deﬁciency
(hereditary angioedema)
SERPING1 11q12–
q13.1
C1 inhibitor Hereditary Angioedema; episodic edema of the
limbs, larynx, gastrointestinal tract; type 1 with no
C1 Inhibitor, type 2 with normal or elevated levels
of dysfunctional inhibitor
Spontaneous activation of classical pathway with
consumption of C4/C2, blood coagulation,
ﬁbrinolysis, and kinin pathways; C1 inhibitor
normally inhibits C1s, C1r, kallikrein conversion
of high-molecular weight kininogen to bradykinin,
plasmin, and Hageman factor autoactivation
AD
A.Kumaretal.250
Table VI – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus
Abnormal gene
product Classic/associated features Functional defect Inheritance
C4 binding protein a
deﬁciency
C4BPA 1q32 C4 bp a Angioedema, cutaneous vasculitis, arthritis Activation of classical pathway with consumption
of C3, increased C3a and C5a anaphylatoxin
formation; normally, C4 bp binds to and (by
acting as a cofactor Factor I) degrades C4b; also,
C4 bp accelerates the decay of C4b2a (classical
pathway C3 convertase)
AR
C4 binding protein b
deﬁciency
C4BPB 1q32 C4 bp b Increased risk for thromboembolic disorders Inactivation of the protein C anticoagulatory
pathway; normally, C4 bp binds the anticoagulant
vitamin K-dependent protein S; C4 bp b also is a
part of the dimmer C4 bp
AR
Factor I deﬁciency IF 4q25 Factor I Recurrent pyogenic infections; some may be
asymptomatic; rheumatic disease uncommon
Continuous activation and cleavage of C3 through
the alternative pathway, producing C3b; normally
Factor I cleaves C3b and C4b in presence of
cofactors Factor H and C4 bp
AR
Decay-accelerating factor
(CD55) deﬁciency
DAF 1q32 Decay acceler-
ating factor
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
(increased lysis of red blood cells by complement);
intravascular hemolysis, pancytopenia, and recur-
rent (usually venous) thromboses/Budd-Chiari
syndrome; often in patients with aplastic anemia;
possibility of transformation into acute myelo-
blastic leukemia. progressive renal impairment
due to hemoglobinuria)
Abnormal activation of red cell lysis via the
classical and alternative pathways; Normally,
DAF, a control protein for the classical and
alternative pathways, protects cells from comp-
lement-mediated cytolysis and is involved in T cell
activation; DAF binds C3b and C4b, preventing
their ability to activate C2 and Factor B.
AR
CD59 deﬁciency CD59 11p13 CD59 Recurrent hemolytic anemia and strokes; MAC-mediated red blood cell lysis; Normally,
CD59 is a potent inhibitor of MAC and involved
in signal transduction for T cell activation and NK
cell function
Data abstracted from Bonilla and Geha 2006, Buckley 2003a, Chapel et al. 2003, Anonymous 2000, Notarangelo et al. 2004, Vihinen 2004, Walport 2001a, Walport 2001b. Abbreviations: AR,
Autosomal recessive; XL, X-linked; SCID, severe combined immunodeﬁciency; C, complement; IC, immune complex; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; GN, glomerulonephritis; MAC, membrane
attack complex.
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases251
Table VII. Other well-deﬁned immunodeﬁciency syndromes and PIDs.
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus Abnormal gene product Classic/associated features T cell # (blood)
B cells
#
(blood) Serum Ig
NK
cell #
(blood)
Inheri-
tance
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome WAS Xp11.4–
p11.21
WAS protein (WASP) Thrombocytopenia; small, defective pla-
telets; eczema; vasculitis; lymphoma; poor
Ab to protein
# progressive N Varies #
IgM, "
IgA,
" IgE
– XL
DiGeorge syndrome DGCR 22q11 multiple Hypoparathyroidism, abnormal facies,
conotruncal malformation; contiguous
gene defect in 90% that affects thymic
development
# or N N N or # – AD or
de novo
defect
Hyper IgE syndrome (Job’s
syndrome)
? ? ? Recurrent abscess formation in lungs,
skin, joints, and other organs due
primarily to Staphylococcus aureus,
pneumatocele formation, and non-atopic
dermatitis; coarse facies;dental and skel-
etal abnormalities; eosinophilia; decreased
humoral (especially anamnestic) and
cellular immune response to new antigens;
AR type lack dental, skeletal, pneumato-
cele problems and have more severe viral
infections
N N IgE " " ,
IgD "
others N
– AD or
AR
X-linked lymphoprolifera-
tive syndrome (XLP)
SH2D1A Xq25–
q26
SAP Induced by EBV: Hepatitis, aplastic
anemia, lymphoma
N N or # N, rarely
#
– XL
Autoimmune polyendocri-
nopathy–candidiasis–ecto-
dermal dystrophy
(APECED)
AIRE 21q22.3 AIRE Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, muco-
cutaneous candidiasis, ectodermal dys-
plasia
N N N – ?
Autoimmune Lymphoproli-
ferative syndromes (ALPS)
CD95 (Fas) Defect, ALPS
type 1a
TNFRSF6 10q23–
q24.1
Fas Defective lymphocyte apoptosis; Spleno-
megaly, lymphadenopathy; risk of lym-
phoma; autoimmune cytopenias
N, " double
negative T cells,
activated
N N or " – AR
CD95L (Fas ligand) Defect,
ALPS type 1b
TNFSF6 1q23–
q23
Fas Ligand Defective apoptosis; lymphadenopathy;
autoimmunity; lupus
N, " double
negative T cells
N N – AR
Caspase 10 Defect, ALPS
type 2a
CASP10 2q33–
q34
Caspase 10 Defective apoptosis; Splenomegaly, lym-
phadenopathy; autoimmunityl increased
dendritic cells
N, " double
negative T cells
N N – AR
Caspase 8 Defect, ALPS
type 2b
CASP8 2q33–
q34
Caspase 8 Defective lymphocyte apoptosis and acti-
vation; Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy;
recurrent bacterial and viral infection
N, slightly "
double negative
T cells; #
CD4þ
T
N N or # – AR
A.Kumaretal.252
Table VII – continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locus Abnormal gene product Classic/associated features T cell # (blood)
B cells
#
(blood) Serum Ig
NK
cell #
(blood)
Inheri-
tance
Familial Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis
(FHPL)
FHPL type 1 (FHPL1) ? 9q21.3–
q22
? Early onset, multisystem, fatal immunor-
egulatory disorder with uncontrolled
activation of T cells and macrophages
(hemophagocytic activation) that inﬁltrate
liver, spleen, bone marrow, CNS; highly
variable symptoms include fever, irrit-
ability, general pain, edema, hepato-
splenomegaly, rash, neurological pro-
blems; granulocytopenia, thrombocytope-
nia, anemia are due to phagocytosis of
these cells and histiocytic inﬁltration of the
bone marrow; often have a healthy few
months followed by a viral infection-
triggered (usually) hemophagocytic acti-
vation phase; immunosuppressants, ster-
oids, and other agents may precede BMT
N N N – ?
Perforin deﬁciency (FHPL
type 2, FHPL2)
PRF1 10q22 Perforin Same as FHPL1 # NK and CTL activity;
due to defects in perforin, which poly-
merizes into transmembrane channels that
lyse cells
N N N – AR
Munc deﬁciency (FHPL
type 3, FHPL3)
UNC13D 17q25.3 UNC13d Same as FHPL1; # NK and CTL activity;
due to defects in UNC13d, which is
involved in vesicle maturation during
exocytosis of cytolytic granule contents
N N N – AR
STX11 deﬁciency (FHPL
type 4, FHPL4)
STX11 6q24 STX11 Same as FHPL1; due to defect in STX11,
which like UNC13dl, functions in mem-
brane trafﬁcking and vesicle fusion
N N N – AR
Others
Immunodeﬁciency, Polyen-
docrinopathy, Enteropathy,
X-linked Syndrome (IPEX)
FOXP3 Xp11.23–
q13.3
FOXP3 Infections; prolonged diarrhea; ichthyosi-
form dermatitis, early-onset IDDM, thy-
roiditis; hemolytic anemia, variable
autoimmune phenomena; often fatal in
infancy or early childhood; supportive
treatment and BMTare treatment options;
FOXP3 is a homologue of the murine
protein, Scurﬁn, which is required for the
development of CD4þ
CD25þ
T regulat-
ory cells. Without these T cells, CD4 cells
trigger tissue damage
– – – – XL
Primaryimmunodeﬁciencydiseases253
defective in XLP (Sayos et al. 1998, Morra et al.
2001). Without SAP, EBV infection-induced T cell
proliferation is uncontrolled in XLP, and NK cell
function is abnormal. HLA-identical or unrelated
BMT has cured the disease in about half of known
attempts (Gross et al. 1996; Table VII).
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED)
APECED is a subset of the group of disorders known as
CMCC. APECED is also known as autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome 1 (APS-1). APECED is
associated with a mutation in the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE), a molecule of uncertain function.
The disease is characterized by autoimmunity against
numerous endocrine organs resulting in hypothyroid-
ism, hypoparathyroidism, adrenocortical failure, insu-
lin-dependent diabetes mellitus, hypogonadism,
pernicious anemia, hepatitis, CMCC, and ectodermal
problems (vitiligo, alopecia, dental enamel dystrophy)
(Aaltonen and Bjorses 1999, Vihinen 2004, Villasenor
et al. 2005). Candidiasis typically requires antifungal
therapy (Table VII). Descriptions of additional PID
syndromes can be found in Table VII.
Diagnostic considerations (Buckley 1986,
Tangsinmankong et al. 2001, Bonilla et al. 2005)
The medical history should be thorough but special
attention should be given to types, frequency, and
severity of infections; age of onset, presence of atopic
disease, systemic transfusion reactions, and risk
factors or evidence for secondary immunodeﬁciency.
Family history should address infections or early
deaths in other family members, as well as parental
consanguinity. Physical exam should look for signs
speciﬁc to the various immunodeﬁciencies including
presence or absence of tonsillar or peripheral
lymphoid tissue (e.g. XLA), skin or nail changes
(e.g. AT, EDA-ID, Chediak–Higashi syndrome),
severe eczema (e.g. WAS, hyper IgE syndrome),
abnormal facies (e.g. DGS, Bloom syndrome, ICF,
NBS, hyper IgE syndrome), short stature (e.g. DNA
repair defects), cardiac anomalies (DGS), and
neurologic deﬁcits (e.g. AT, PNP deﬁciency). Radio-
logy studies may detect an absent thymic shadow in
infants with DGS or SCID, skeletal abnormalities in
patients with ADA deﬁciency, pneumatoceles in hyper
IgE syndrome, great vessel anomalies in DGS, and
other such disease speciﬁc ﬁndings. Minimal basic lab
evaluation should include complete blood count with
manual differential, and, as appropriate, evaluation of
humoral and cellular immunity.
Humoral immune evaluation typically includes
serum Ig levels with isotypes; measurement of speciﬁc
antibody response to polysaccharides (isohemaggluti-
nins to ABO blood groups, Pneumovax) and proteins
TableVII–continued
Disorder
Abnormal
gene
Abnormal
genetic
locusAbnormalgeneproductClassic/associatedfeaturesTcell#(blood)
Bcells
#
(blood)SerumIg
NK
cell#
(blood)
Inheri-
tance
Cartilage–HairHypoplasiaRMRP9p21–
p12
RMRP(RNAcomponentof
mitochondrialRNA-pro-
cessingendoribo-nuclease)
Progressivemetaphysealchrondrodyspla-
siacausingshortstature,shorthands,
possiblyshortdeformedlimbs;ﬁne,slow-
growinghair;Neutropenia;immunodeﬁ-
ciencyinmany,especiallywithvaricella
###orN–AR
DataabstractedfromBennettetal.2001,BennettandOchs2001,BonillaandGeha2006,Buckley2003a,Chapeletal.2003,Anonymous2000,Notarangeloetal.2004,OnlineMendelianInheritance
inMan2000,Soleetal.1993,Vihinen2004,Wildinetal.2002,zurStadtetal.2005.Abbreviations:AR,Autosomalrecessive;XL,X-linked;SCID,severecombinedimmunodeﬁciency;CNS,central
nervoussystem;#,decreased;##,profoundlydecreased;",increased;N,normal;forserumIgColumn:AllreferstoAllisotypes.
A. Kumar et al.254
(conjugated pneumococcal vaccine, conjugated
Hemophilus inﬂuenza B vaccine, diphtheria toxoid,
tetanus toxoid); and quantitation of B cell numbers
and markers with ﬂow cytometry.
If infection pattern or other evidence suggests
cellular PID, T cell numbers and subsets can be
measured with ﬂow cytometry or monoclonal anti-
body methods. Alternatively, delayed hypersensitivity
skin tests against common antigens such as Candida,
tetanus toxoid, mumps, Trychophyton and tubercu-
lin, can be performed for assessment of cellular
immune function. Non-speciﬁc and speciﬁc in vitro
stimulation of T cell proliferation may provide more
speciﬁc information in some cases. Should phagocyte
dysfunction be suspected, in addition to measuring
the absolute numbers of and assessing the morphology
of circulating neutrophils with the manual differential,
the NBT reduction test or chemiluminescence/ﬂow
cytometry respiratory burst assays can assess neutro-
phil oxidative capacity.
Overall complement function can be evaluated
using the complement hemolytic assays (CH50 for the
classic pathway and AH50 for the alternative path-
way), while individual complement components in the
blood can be quantiﬁed in local or specialty labs.
Selection of tests should be individualized and
interpreted with the clinical context in mind.
Abnormal tests should be repeated. Genetic testing
for individual PIDs may be pursued at specialty labs or
immunodeﬁciency centers and is encouraged to
increase the base of knowledge of these rare disorders.
In X-linked disease, heterozygous female carriers
may be detected by looking for non-random patterns
of X-chromosome inactivation in the affected cells
type (Bonilla and Geha 2003, Bonilla et al. 2005).
Prenatal diagnosis is also possible in high-risk
pregnancies, using umbilical cord blood lymphocytes
for phenotype and functional analysis. If the gene
defect is known, genetic tests are appropriate.
Conclusion
Clearly, PIDs are uncommon disorders. Despite this,
the last few decades have seen an explosion in study of
primary immunodeﬁciency and better understanding
of the basic defects in many of them. This rapid pace
of study and growing knowledge of the mechanisms of
immunity in health and disease will continue and
hopefully will result in better treatments and healthier
lives for patients with immunodeﬁciency.
References
Aaltonen J, Bjorses P. 1999. Cloning of the APECED gene provides
new insight into human autoimmunity. Ann Med 31:111–116.
Aghamohammadi A, Moin M, Farhoudi A, Rezaei N, Pourpak Z,
Movahedi M, Gharagozlou M, Nabavi M, Shahrokhi A. 2004.
Efﬁcacy of intravenous immunoglobulin on the prevention of
pneumonia in patients with agammaglobulinemia. FEMS
Immunol Med Microbiol 40:113–118.
Aiuti A. 2004. Gene therapy for adenosine–deaminase-deﬁcient
severe combined immunodeﬁciency. Best Pract Res Clin
Haematol 17:505–516.
Aiuti A, Slavin S, Aker M, Ficara F, Deola S, Mortellaro A, Morecki
S, Andolﬁ G, Tabucchi A, Carlucci F, Marinello E, Cattaneo F,
Vai S, Servida P, Miniero R, Roncarolo MG, Bordignon C.
2002. Correction of ADA–SCID by stem cell gene therapy
combined with nonmyeloablative conditioning. Science
296:2410–2413.
Aleman K, Noordzij JG, de Groot R, van Dongen JJ, Hartwig NG.
2001. Reviewing Omenn syndrome. Eur J Pediatr 160:718–725.
Alyanakian MA, Bernatowska E, Scherrmann JM, Aucouturier P,
Poplavsky JL. 2003. Pharmacokinetics of total immunoglobulin
G and immunoglobulin G subclasses in patients undergoing
replacement therapy for primary immunodeﬁciency syndromes.
Vox Sang 84:188–192.
Anonymous, 2000. Nlm: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man,
OMIM. Baltimore, MD and Bethesda, MD, McKusick–
Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University and National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine.
Antall PM, Meyerson H, Kaplan D, Venglarcik J, Hostoffer RW.
1999. Selective antipolysaccharide antibody deﬁciency associ-
ated with peripheral blood CD5 þ B-cell predominance.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 103:637–641.
Asao H, Okuyama C, Kumaki S, Ishii N, Tsuchiya S, Foster D,
Sugamura K. 2001. Cutting edge: The common gamma-chain is
an indispensable subunit of the IL-21 receptor complex.
J Immunol 167:1–5.
Ashman RF, Schaffer FM, Kemp JD, Yokoyama WM, Zhu ZB,
Cooper MD, Volanakis JE. 1992. Genetic and immunologic
analysis of a family containing ﬁve patients with common-
variable immune deﬁciency or selective IgA deﬁciency. J Clin
Immunol 12:406–414.
Auricchio L, Adriani M, Frank J, Busiello R, Christiano A, Pignata
C. 2005. Nail dystrophy associated with a heterozygous
mutation of the nude/SCID human FOXN1 (WHN) gene.
Arch Dermatol 141:647–648.
Bennett CL, Christie J, Ramsdell F, Brunkow ME, Ferguson PJ,
Whitesell L, Kelly TE, Saulsbury FT, Chance PF, Ochs HD.
2001. The immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, entero-
pathy, X-linked syndrome (IPEX) is caused by mutations of
FOXP3. Nat Genet 27:20–21.
Bennett CL, Ochs HD. 2001. IPEX is a unique X-linked syndrome
characterized by immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, and a variety of autoimmune phenomena. Curr
Opin Pediatr 13:533–538.
Blanco-Betancourt CE, Moncla A, Milili M, Jiang YL, Viegas-
Pequignot EM, Roquelaure B, Thuret I, Schiff C. 2004.
Defective B-cell-negative selection and terminal differentiation
in the ICF syndrome. Blood 103:2683–2690.
Bonilla FA, Bernstein IL, Khan DA, Ballas ZK, Chinen J, Frank
MM, Kobrynski LJ, Levinson AI, Mazer B, Nelson RP, Jr,
Orange JS, Routes JM, Shearer WT, Sorensen RU. 2005.
Practice parameter for the diagnosis and management of primary
immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 94:S1–63.
Bonilla FA, Geha RS. 2003. 12. Primary immunodeﬁciency
diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 111:S571–S581.
Bonilla FA, Geha RS. 2006. 2. Update on primary immunodeﬁ-
ciency diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 117:S435–S441.
Buckley RH. 1986. Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of
primary immunodeﬁciency diseases. Arch Intern Med
146:377–384.
Buckley RH. 2003a. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases. In:
AdkinsonNF, Jr, Bochner BS, Yunginger JW, Holgate ST,
Busse WW, Simons FER, editors. Middleton’s allergy principles
and practice. 6. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby. p 1015–1042.
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 255
Buckley RH. 2003b. Treatment options for genetically determined
immunodeﬁciency. Lancet 361:541–542.
Buckley RH, Schiff SE, Schiff RI, Markert L, Williams LW, Roberts
JL, Myers LA, Ward FE. 1999. Hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation for the treatment of severe combined immuno-
deﬁciency. N Engl J Med 340:508–516.
Buckley RH, Schiff SE, Schiff RI, Roberts JL, Markert ML, Peters
W, Williams LW, Ward FE. 1993. Haploidentical bone marrow
stem cell transplantation in human severe combined immuno-
deﬁciency. Semin Hematol 30(92–101):2–4.
Burks AW, Sampson HA, Buckley RH. 1986. Anaphylactic
reactions after gamma globulin administration in patients with
hypogammaglobulinemia. Detection of IgE antibodies to IgA.
N Engl J Med 314:560–564.
Buzi F, Notarangelo LD, Plebani A, Duse M, Parolini O,
Monteleone M, Ugazio AG. 1994. X-linked agammaglobuline-
mia, growth hormone deﬁciency and delay of growth and
puberty. Acta Paediatr 83:99–102.
Castigli E, Pahwa R, Good RA, Geha RS, Chatila TA. 1993.
Molecular basis of a multiple lymphokine deﬁciency in a patient
with severe combined immunodeﬁciency. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 90:4728–4732.
Cham B, Bonilla MA, Winkelstein J. 2002. Neutropenia associated
with primary immunodeﬁciency syndromes. Semin Hematol
39:107–112.
Chan AC, Kadlecek TA, Elder ME, Filipovich AH, Kuo WL,
Iwashima M, Parslow TG, Weiss A. 1994. ZAP-70 deﬁciency in
an autosomal recessive form of severe combined immunodeﬁ-
ciency. Science 264:1599–1601.
Chapel H, Geha R, Rosen F. 2003. Primary immunodeﬁciency
diseases: An update. Clin Exp Immunol 132:9–15.
Chinen J, Puck JM. 2004. Perspectives of gene therapy for primary
immunodeﬁciencies. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
4:523–527.
Clark JA, Callicoat PA, Brenner NA, Bradley CA, Smith DM, Jr.
1983. Selective IgA deﬁciency in blood donors. Am J Clin Pathol
80:210–213.
Cleveland WW. 1975. Immunologic reconstitution in the DiGeorge
syndrome by fetal thymic transplant. Birth Defects Orig Artic
Ser 11:352–356.
Conley ME, Notarangelo LD, Etzioni A. 1999. Diagnostic criteria
for primary immunodeﬁciencies. Representing PAGID (Pan–
American Group for Immunodeﬁciency) and ESID (European
Society for Immunodeﬁciencies). Clin Immunol 93:190–197.
Conley ME, Saragoussi D, Notarangelo L, Etzioni A, Casanova JL.
2003. An international study examining therapeutic options
used in treatment of Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome. Clin Immunol
109:272–277.
Corneo B, Moshous D, Gungor T, Wulffraat N, Philippet P, Le
Deist FL, Fischer A, de Villartay JP. 2001. Identical mutations in
RAG1 or RAG2 genes leading to defective V(D)J recombinase
activity can cause either T–B-severe combined immune
deﬁciency or Omenn syndrome. Blood 97:2772–2776.
Courtois G, Smahi A, Reichenbach J, Dofﬁnger R, Cancrini C,
Bonnet M, Puel A, Chable-Bessia C, Yamaoka S, Feinberg J,
Dupuis-Girod S, Bodemer C, Livadiotti S, Novelli F, Rossi P,
Fischer A, Israel A, Munnich A, Le Deist F, Casanova JL. 2003.
A hypermorphic IkappaBalpha mutation is associated with
autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and T cell
immunodeﬁciency. J Clin Invest 112:1108–1115.
Cunningham-Rundles C. 1989. Clinical and immunologic analyses
of 103 patients with common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Clin
Immunol 9:22–33.
Cunningham-Rundles C. 2001. Physiology of IgA and IgA
deﬁciency. J Clin Immunol 21:303–309.
Czarnetzki BM. 1989. Disorders of phagocyte killing and digestion
(CGD, G-6-PD and myeloperoxidase deﬁciencies). Curr Probl
Dermatol 18:101–105.
de la Calle-Martin O, Hernandez M, Ordi J, Casamitjana N,
Arostegui JI, Caragol I, Ferrando M, Labrador M, Rodriguez-
Sanchez JL, Espanol T. 2001. Familial CD8 deﬁciency due to a
mutation in the CD8 alpha gene. J Clin Invest 108:117–123.
de la Salle H, Hanau D, Fricker D, Urlacher A, Kelly A, Salamero J,
Powis SH, Donato L, Bausinger H, Laforet M, et al. 1994.
Homozygous human TAP peptide transporter mutation in HLA
class I deﬁciency. Science 265:237–241.
de Vries E, Koene HR, Vossen JM, Gratama JW, von dem Borne
AE, Waaijer JL, Haraldsson A, de Haas M, van Tol MJ. 1996.
Identiﬁcation of an unusual Fc gamma receptor IIIa (CD16) on
natural killer cells in a patient with recurrent infections. Blood
88:3022–3027.
de Weers M, Verschuren MC, Kraakman ME, Mensink RG,
Schuurman RK, van Dongen JJ, Hendriks RW. 1993. The
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase gene is expressed throughout B cell
differentiation, from early precursor B cell stages preceding
immunoglobulin gene rearrangement up to mature B cell stages.
Eur J Immunol 23:3109–3114.
Devriendt K, Kim AS, Mathijs G, Frints SG, Schwartz M, Van Den
Oord JJ, Verhoef GE, Boogaerts MA, Fryns JP, You D, Rosen
MK, Vandenberghe P. 2001. Constitutively activating mutation
in WASP causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia. Nat
Genet 27:313–317.
DiSanto JP, Bonnefoy JY, Gauchat JF, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G.
1993. CD40 ligand mutations in x-linked immunodeﬁciency
with hyper-IgM. Nature 361:541–543.
DiSanto JP, Keever CA, Small TN, Nicols GL, O’Reilly RJ,
Flomenberg N. 1990. Absence of interleukin 2 production in a
severe combined immunodeﬁciency disease syndrome with T
cells. J Exp Med 171:1697–1704.
Dofﬁnger R, Jouanguy E, Altare F, Wood P, Shirakawa T, Novelli F,
Lammas D, Kumararatne D, Casanova JL. 1999. Inheritable
defects in interleukin-12- and interferon-gamma-mediated
immunity and the TH1/TH2 paradigm in man. Allergy
54:409–412.
Dogu F, Ikinciogullari A, Babacan E. 2004. Transient hypogamma-
globulinemia of infancy and early childhood: Outcome of 30
cases. Turk J Pediatr 46:120–124.
Durandy A, Revy P, Fischer A. 2003. Hyper-immunoglobulin-M
syndromes caused by an intrinsic B cell defect. Curr Opin
Allergy Clin Immunol 3:421–425.
Eisenstein EM, Sneller MC. 1994. Common variable immunode-
ﬁciency: Diagnosis and management. Ann Allergy 73:285–292,
quiz 93–4.
Elder ME, Lin D, Clever J, Chan AC, Hope TJ, Weiss A, Parslow
TG. 1994. Human severe combined immunodeﬁciency due to a
defect in ZAP-70, a T cell tyrosine kinase. Science
264:1596–1599.
Farrant J, Spickett G, Matamoros N, Copas D, Hernandez M,
North M, Chapel H, Webster AD. 1994. Study of B and T cell
phenotypes in blood from patients with common variable
immunodeﬁciency (CVID). Immunodeﬁciency 5:159–169.
Farrington M, Grosmaire LS, Nonoyama S, Fischer SH,
Hollenbaugh D, Ledbetter JA, Noelle RJ, Aruffo A, Ochs HD.
1994. CD40 ligand expression is defective in a subset of patients
with common variable immunodeﬁciency. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 91:1099–1103.
Ferguson C, Larochelle A, Dunbar CE. 2005. Hematopoietic stem
cell gene therapy: Dead or alive? Trends Biotechnol
23:589–597.
Feske S, Muller JM, Graf D, Kroczek RA, Drager R, Niemeyer C,
Baeuerle PA, Peter HH, Schlesier M. 1996. Severe combined
immunodeﬁciency due to defective binding of the nuclear factor
of activated T cells in T lymphocytes of two male siblings. Eur J
Immunol 26:2119–2126.
Filipovich AH, Mathur A, Kamat D, Kersey JH, Shapiro RS. 1994.
Lymphoproliferative disorders and other tumors complicating
immunodeﬁciencies. Immunodeﬁciency 5:91–112.
A. Kumar et al.256
Fischer A, Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Cavazzana-Calvo M. 2004. Gene
therapy for immunodeﬁciency diseases. Semin Hematol
41:272–278.
Gadola SD, Moins-Teisserenc HT, Trowsdale J, Gross WL,
Cerundolo V. 2000. TAP deﬁciency syndrome. Clin Exp
Immunol 121:173–178.
Gaspar HB, Parsley KL, Howe S, King D, Gilmour KC, Sinclair J,
Brouns G, Schmidt M, Von Kalle C, Barington T, Jakobsen MA,
Christensen HO, Al Ghonaium A, White HN, Smith JL,
Levinsky RJ, Ali RR, Kinnon C, Thrasher AJ. 2004. Gene
therapy of X-linked severe combined immunodeﬁciency by use
of a pseudotyped gammaretroviral vector. Lancet
364:2181–2187.
Goldacker S, Warnatz K. 2005. Tackling the heterogeneity of CVID.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 5:504–509.
Grimbacher B, Holland SM, Gallin JI, Greenberg F, Hill SC,
Malech HL, Miller JA, O’Connell AC, Puck JM. 1999. Hyper-
IgE syndrome with recurrent infections–an autosomal dominant
multisystem disorder. N Engl J Med 340:692–702.
Grimbacher B, Holland SM, Puck JM. 2005. Hyper-IgE
syndromes. Immunol Rev 203:244–250.
Grimbacher B, Warnatz K, Peter HH. 2003. The immunological
synapse for B-cell memory: the role of the ICOS and its ligand
for the longevity of humoral immunity. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 3:409–419.
Gross TG, Filipovich AH, Conley ME, Pracher E, Schmiegelow K,
Verdirame JD, Vowels M, Williams LL, Seemayer TA. 1996.
Cure of X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) with
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT):
Report from the XLP registry. Bone Marrow Transplant
17:741–744.
Hammarstrom L, Vorechovsky I, Webster D. 2000. Selective IgA
deﬁciency (SIgAD) and common variable immunodeﬁciency
(CVID). Clin Exp Immunol 120:225–231.
Hermaszewski R, Ratnavel R, Webster AD, Denman AM. 1993.
Rheumatoid arthritis in a patient with primary hypogammaglo-
bulinaemia. Br J Rheumatol 32:636–639.
Javier FC, 3rd, Moore CM, Sorensen RU. 2000. Distribution of
primary immunodeﬁciency diseases diagnosed in a pediatric
tertiary hospital. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 84:25–30.
Kaneko H, Katagiri-Kawade M, Motoyoshi F, Tashita H, Teramoto
T, Kondo N. 1996. Abnormal B cell response of protein kinase C
in some common variable immunodeﬁciency. Exp Clin
Immunogenet 13:36–42.
Kaneko H, Kondo N. 2004. Clinical features of Bloom syndrome
and function of the causative gene, BLM helicase. Expert Rev
Mol Diagn 4:393–401.
Kilic SS, Tezcan I, Sanal O, Metin A, Ersoy F. 2000. Transient
hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy: Clinical and immunologic
features of 40 new cases. Pediatr Int 42:647–650.
Kim MS, Basson CT. 2001. Wrapping up DiGeorge syndrome in a
T-box? Pediatr Res 50:307–308.
Kung C, Pingel JT, Heikinheimo M, Klemola T, Varkila K, Yoo LI,
Vuopala K, Poyhonen M, Uhari M, Rogers M, Speck SH,
Chatila T, Thomas ML. 2000. Mutations in the tyrosine
phosphatase CD45 gene in a child with severe combined
immunodeﬁciency disease. Nat Med 6:343–345.
Lavilla P, Gil A, Rodriguez MC, Dupla ML, Pintado V, Fontan G.
1993. X-linked agammaglobulinemia and gastric adenocarci-
noma. Cancer 72:1528–1531.
Lee AH, Levinson AI, Schumacher Jr, HR. 1993. Hypogammaglo-
bulinemia and rheumatic disease. Semin Arthritis Rheum
22:252–264.
Levitt D, Haber P, Rich K, Cooper MD. 1983. Hyper IgM
immunodeﬁciency. A primary dysfunction of B lymphocyte
isotype switching. J Clin Invest 72:1650–1657.
Li L, Moshous D, Zhou Y, Wang J, Xie G, Salido E, Hu D, de
Villartay JP, Cowan MJ. 2002. A founder mutation in Artemis,
an SNM1-like protein, causes SCID in Athabascan-speaking
Native Americans. J Immunol 168:6323–6329.
Lilic D. 2002. New perspectives on the immunology of chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis. Curr Opin Infect Dis 15:143–147.
Lindegren ML, Kobrynski L, Rasmussen SA, Moore CA, Grosse
SD, Vanderford ML, Spira TJ, McDougal JS, Vogt RF, Jr,
Hannon WH, Kalman LV, Chen B, Mattson M, Baker TG,
Khoury M. 2004. Applying public health strategies to primary
immunodeﬁciency diseases: A potential approach to genetic
disorders. MMWR Recomm Rep 53:1–29.
Litwin SD. 1979. Immunodeﬁciency with thymoma: Failure to
induce Ig production in immunodeﬁcient lymphocytes cocul-
tured with normal T cells. J Immunol 122:728–732.
Mamishi S, Zomorodian K, Saadat F, Gerami-Shoar M, Tarazooie
B, Siadati SA. 2005. A case of invasive aspergillosis in CGD
patient successfully treated with Amphotericin B and INF-
gamma. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob 4:4.
Marone G, Albini F, di Martino L, Quattrin S, Poto S, Condorelli
M. 1986. The Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome: Studies of platelets,
basophils and polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Br J Haematol
62:737–745.
Matamoros Flori N, Mila Llambi J, Espanol Boren T, Raga Borja S,
Fontan Casariego G. 1997. Primary immunodeﬁciency
syndrome in Spain: First report of the National registry in
children and adults. J Clin Immunol 17:333–339.
Mellor DH. 1981. Virus infections of the central nervous system in
children with primary immune deﬁciency disorders. Dev Med
Child Neurol 23:807–810.
Minegishi Y, Coustan-Smith E, Wang YH, Cooper MD, Campana
D, Conley ME. 1998. Mutations in the human lambda5/14.1
gene result in B cell deﬁciency and agammaglobulinemia. J Exp
Med 187:71–77.
Minegishi Y, Rohrer J, Coustan-Smith E, Lederman HM, Pappu R,
Campana D, Chan AC, Conley ME. 1999. An essential role for
BLNK in human B cell development. Science 286:1954–1957.
Morell A. 1994. Clinical relevance of IgG subclass deﬁciencies. Ann
Biol Clin (Paris) 52:49–52.
Morimoto Y, Routes JM. 2005. Granulomatous disease in common
variable immunodeﬁciency. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep
5:370–375.
Morra M, Howie D, Grande MS, Sayos J, Wang N, Wu C, Engel P,
Terhorst C. 2001. X-linked lymphoproliferative disease:
A progressive immunodeﬁciency. Annu Rev Immunol
19:657–682.
Myers LA, Hershﬁeld MS, Neale WT, Escolar M, Kurtzberg J.
2004. Purine nucleoside phosphorylase deﬁciency (PNP-def)
presenting with lymphopenia and developmental delay: Success-
ful correction with umbilical cord blood transplantation. J Pediatr
145:710–712.
Niehues T, Reichenbach J, Neubert J, Gudowius S, Puel A, Horneff
G, Lainka E, Dirksen U, Schroten H, Dofﬁnger R, Casanova JL,
Wahn V. 2004. Nuclear factor kappaB essential modulator-
deﬁcient child with immunodeﬁciency yet without anhidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia. J Allergy Clin Immunol 114:1456–1462.
Nonoyama S, Farrington M, Ishida H, Howard M, Ochs HD. 1993.
Activated B cells from patients with common variable
immunodeﬁciency proliferate and synthesize immunoglobulin.
J Clin Invest 92:1282–1287.
Notarangelo L, Casanova JL, Fischer A, Puck J, Rosen F, Seger R,
Geha R. 2004. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases: An update.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 114:677–687.
Notarangelo LD, Mazza C, Giliani S, D’Aria C, Gandellini F,
Ravelli C, Locatelli MG, Nelson DL, Ochs HD, Notarangelo
LD. 2002. Missense mutations of the WASP gene cause
intermittent X-linked thrombocytopenia. Blood 99:2268–2269.
O’Connell AC, Puck JM, Grimbacher B, Facchetti F, Majorana A,
Gallin JI, Malech HL, Holland SM. 2000. Delayed eruption of
permanent teeth in hyperimmunoglobulinemia E recurrent
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 257
infection syndrome. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod 89:177–185.
Oda A, Ochs HD. 2000. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and
platelets. Immunol Rev 178:111–117.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM In Baltimore, MD
and Bethesda, MD, McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University and National Center for
Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
2000.
Orange JS. 2002. Human natural killer cell deﬁciencies and
susceptibility to infection. Microbes Infect 4:1545–1558.
Orange JS, Jain A, Ballas ZK, Schneider LC, Geha RS, Bonilla FA.
2004a. The presentation and natural history of immunodeﬁ-
ciency caused by nuclear factor kappaB essential modulator
mutation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113:725–733.
Orange JS, Levy O, Brodeur SR, Krzewski K, Roy RM, Niemela JE,
Fleisher TA, Bonilla FA, Geha RS. 2004b. Human nuclear
factor kappa B essential modulator mutation can result in
immunodeﬁciency without ectodermal dysplasia. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 114:650–656.
Paller AS. 1995. Immunodeﬁciency syndromes. X-linked agamma-
globulinemia, common variable immunodeﬁciency, Chediak–
Higashi syndrome, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, and X-linked
lymphoproliferative disorder. Dermatol Clin 13:65–71.
Perlman S, Becker-Catania S, Gatti RA. 2003. Ataxia–telangiecta-
sia: Diagnosis and treatment. Semin Pediatr Neurol
10:173–182.
Rane SG, Reddy EP. 2000. Janus kinases: Components of multiple
signaling pathways. Oncogene 19:5662–5679.
Resta R, Thompson LF. 1997. SCID: The role of adenosine
deaminase deﬁciency. Immunol Today 18:371–374.
Revy P, Muto T, Levy Y, Geissmann F, Plebani A, Sanal O, Catalan
N, Forveille M, Dufourcq-Labelouse R, Gennery A, Tezcan I,
Ersoy F, Kayserili H, Ugazio AG, Brousse N, Muramatsu M,
Notarangelo LD, Kinoshita K, Honjo T, Fischer A, Durandy A.
2000. Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) deﬁciency
causes the autosomal recessive form of the Hyper-IgM syndrome
(HIGM2). Cell 102:565–575.
Riminton DS, Limaye S. 2004. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases
in adulthood. Intern Med J 34:348–354.
Roper M, Parmley RT, Crist WM, Kelly DR, Cooper MD. 1985.
Severe congenital leukopenia (reticular dysgenesis). Immunolo-
gic and morphologic characterizations of leukocytes. Am J Dis
Child 139:832–835.
Rosefsky JB. 1990. Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy.
Acta Paediatr Scand 79:962–963.
Salzer U, Chapel HM, Webster AD, Pan-Hammarstrom Q,
Schmitt-Graeff A, Schlesier M, Peter HH, Rockstroh JK,
Schneider P, Schaffer AA, Hammarstrom L, Grimbacher B.
2005. Mutations in TNFRSF13B encoding TACI are associated
with common variable immunodeﬁciency in humans. Nat Genet
37:820–828.
Salzer U, Grimbacher B. 2005. TACItly changing tunes: Farewell to
a yin and yang of BAFF receptor and TACI in humoral
immunity? New genetic defects in common variable immuno-
deﬁciency. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 5:496–503.
Salzer U, Maul-Pavicic A, Cunningham-Rundles C, Urschel S,
Belohradsky BH, Litzman J, Holm A, Franco JL, Plebani A,
Hammarstrom L, Skrabl A, Schwinger W, Grimbacher B. 2004.
ICOS deﬁciency in patients with common variable immunode-
ﬁciency. Clin Immunol 113:234–240.
Sandler SG. 2006. How I manage patients suspected of having had
an IgA anaphylactic transfusion reaction. Transfusion 46:10–13.
Sandler SG, Mallory D, Malamut D, Eckrich R. 1995. IgA
anaphylactic transfusion reactions. Transfus Med Rev 9:1–8.
Sandler SG, Trimble J, Mallory DM. 1996. Coexistent IgG2 and
IgA deﬁciencies in blood donors. Transfusion 36:256–258.
Sandler SG, Zantek ND. 2004. Review: IgA anaphylactic
transfusion reactions. Part II. Clinical diagnosis and bedside
management. Immunohematology 20:234–238.
Sany J, Jorgensen CH, Anaya JM, Didry C, Andary M, Serre I,
Baldet P. 1993. Arthritis associated with primary agammaglo-
bulinemia: New clues to its immunopathology. Clin Exp
Rheumatol 11:65–69.
Sawada A, Takihara Y, Kim JY, Matsuda-Hashii Y, Tokimasa S,
Fujisaki H, Kubota K, Endo H, Onodera T, Ohta H, Ozono K,
Hara J. 2003. A congenital mutation of the novel gene LRRC8
causes agammaglobulinemia in humans. J Clin Invest
112:1707–1713.
Sayos J, Wu C, Morra M, Wang N, Zhang X, Allen D, van Schaik S,
Notarangelo L, Geha R, Roncarolo MG, Oettgen H, De Vries
JE, Aversa G, Terhorst C. 1998. The X-linked lymphoprolifera-
tive-disease gene product SAP regulates signals induced through
the co-receptor SLAM. Nature 395:462–469.
Seyama K, Nonoyama S, Gangsaas I, Hollenbaugh D, Pabst HF,
Aruffo A, Ochs HD. 1998. Mutations of the CD40 ligand gene
and its effect on CD40 ligand expression in patients with
X-linked hyper IgM syndrome. Blood 92:2421–2434.
Shackelford PG. 1993. IgG subclasses: Importance in pediatric
practice. Pediatr Rev 14:291–296.
Shackelford PG, Granoff DM, Madassery JV, Scott MG, Nahm
MH. 1990a. Clinical and immunologic characteristics of healthy
children with subnormal serum concentrations of IgG2. Pediatr
Res 27:16–21.
Shackelford PG, Granoff DM, Polmar SH, Scott MG, Goskowicz
MC, Madassery JV, Nahm MH. 1990b. Subnormal serum
concentrations of IgG2 in children with frequent infections
associated with varied patterns of immunologic dysfunction.
J Pediatr 116:529–538.
Shemer A, Weiss G, Conﬁno Y, Trau H. 2001. The hyper-IgE
syndrome. Two cases and review of the literature. Int J Dermatol
40:622–628.
Sole D, Leser PG, Soares D, Naspitz CK. 1993. Cartilage-hair
hypoplasia syndrome: Immunological evaluation of two cases.
Rev Paul Med 111:314–319.
Spickett GP, Webster AD, Farrant J. 1990. Cellular abnormalities in
common variable immunodeﬁciency. Immunodeﬁc Rev
2:199–219.
Steimle V, Durand B, Barras E, Zufferey M, Hadam MR, Mach B,
Reith W. 1995. A novel DNA-binding regulatory factor is
mutated in primary MHC class II deﬁciency (bare lymphocyte
syndrome). Genes Dev 9:1021–1032.
Stiehm ER. 1993. New and old immunodeﬁciencies. Pediatr Res
33:S2–S7, discussion S-8.
Stray-Pedersen A, Abrahamsen TG, Froland SS. 2000. Primary
immunodeﬁciency diseases in Norway. J Clin Immunol
20:477–485.
Sullivan KE. 2004. The clinical, immunological, and molecular
spectrum of chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and
DiGeorge syndrome. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
4:505–512.
Tangsinmankong N, Bahna SL, Good RA. 2001. The immunologic
workup of the child suspected of immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 87:362–369, quiz 70, 423.
Tarzi MD, Jenner M, Hattotuwa K, Faruqi AZ, Diaz GA,
Longhurst HJ. 2005. Sporadic case of warts, hypogammaglo-
bulinemia, immunodeﬁciency, and myelokathexis syndrome.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 116:1101–1105.
Tchilian EZ, Wallace DL, Wells RS, Flower DR, Morgan G,
Beverley PC. 2001. A deletion in the gene encoding the CD45
antigen in a patient with SCID. J Immunol 166:1308–1313.
Thong YH, Robertson EF, Rischbieth HG, Smith GJ, Binns GF,
Cheney K, Pollard AC. 1978. Successful restoration of
immunity in the DiGeorge syndrome with fetal thymic epithelial
transplant. Arch Dis Child 53:580–584.
A. Kumar et al.258
Timmers E, de Weers M, Alt FW, Hendriks RW, Schuurman RK.
1991. X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Clin Immunol Immuno-
pathol 61:S83–S93.
Timon M, Arnaiz-Villena A, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Perez-Aciego P,
Pacheco A, Regueiro JR. 1993. Selective disbalances of
peripheral blood T lymphocyte subsets in human CD3 gamma
deﬁciency. Eur J Immunol 23:1440–1444.
Tsukada S, Saffran DC, Rawlings DJ, Parolini O, Allen RC, Klisak
I, Sparkes RS, Kubagawa H, Mohandas T, Quan S, et al. 1993.
Deﬁcient expression of a B cell cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase in
human X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Cell 72:279–290.
Uribe L, Weinberg KI. 1998. X-linked SCID and other defects of
cytokine pathways. Semin Hematol 35:299–309.
Vetrie D, Vorechovsky I, Sideras P, Holland J, Davies A, Flinter F,
Hammarstrom L, Kinnon C, Levinsky R, Bobrow M, et al.
1993. The gene involved in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia is a
member of the src family of protein–tyrosine kinases. Nature
361:226–233.
ImmunoDeﬁciency Resource (IDR). In Turku, Finland, Institute of
Medical Technology, University of Tampere. Vihinen M. 2004.
A comprehensive Web and WAP accessible knowledge base of
primary immunodeﬁciencies.
Vihinen M, Arredondo-Vega FX, Casanova JL, Etzioni A, Giliani S,
Hammarstrom L, Hershﬁeld MS, Heyworth PG, Hsu AP,
Lahdesmaki A, Lappalainen I, Notarangelo LD, Puck JM, Reith
W, Roos D, Schumacher RF, Schwarz K, Vezzoni P, Villa A,
Valiaho J, Smith CI. 2001. Primary immunodeﬁciency mutation
databases. Adv Genet 43:103–188.
Villa A, Santagata S, Bozzi F, Imberti L, Notarangelo LD. 1999.
Omenn syndrome: a disorder of Rag1 and Rag2 genes. J Clin
Immunol 19:87–97.
Villard J, Mach B, Reith W. 1997. MHC class II deﬁciency:
Deﬁnition of a new complementation group. Immunobiology
198:264–272.
Villasenor J, Benoist C, Mathis D. 2005. AIRE and APECED:
Molecular insights into an autoimmune disease. Immunol Rev
204:156–164.
Walport MJ. 2001a. Complement. First of two parts. N Engl J Med
344:1058–1066.
Walport MJ. 2001b. Complement. Second of two parts. N Engl J
Med 344:1140–1144.
Wang Y, Kanegane H, Sanal O, Tezcan I, Ersoy F, Futatani T,
Miyawaki T. 2002. Novel Igalpha (CD79a) gene mutation in a
Turkish patient with B cell-deﬁcient agammaglobulinemia. Am J
Med Genet 108:333–336.
Webster AD, Barnes DE, Arlett CF, Lehmann AR, Lindahl T. 1992.
Growth retardation and immunodeﬁciency in a patient with
mutations in the DNA ligase I gene. Lancet 339:1508–1509.
Wildin RS, Smyk-Pearson S, Filipovich AH. 2002. Clinical and
molecular features of the immunodysregulation, polyendocrino-
pathy, enteropathy, X linked (IPEX) syndrome. J Med Genet
39:537–545.
Yabe T, Kawamura S, Sato M, Kashiwase K, Tanaka H, Ishikawa Y,
Asao Y, Oyama J, Tsuruta K, Tokunaga K, Tadokoro K, Juji T.
2002. A subject with a novel type I bare lymphocyte syndrome
has tapasin deﬁciency due to deletion of 4 exons by Alu-
mediated recombination. Blood 100:1496–1498.
Yel L, Minegishi Y, Coustan-Smith E, Buckley RH, Trubel H,
Pachman LM, Kitchingman GR, Campana D, Rohrer J, Conley
ME. 1996. Mutations in the mu heavy-chain gene in patients
with agammaglobulinemia. N Engl J Med 335:1486–1493.
Zegers BJ, Stoop JW. 1983. Therapy in adenosine deaminase and
purine nucleoside phosphorylase deﬁcient patients. Clin
Biochem 16:43–47.
Zhang JG, Morgan L, Spickett GP. 1996. L-selectin in patients with
common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID): A comparative
study with normal individuals. Clin Exp Immunol
104:275–279.
Zhou H, Glimcher LH. 1995. Human MHC class II gene
transcription directed by the carboxyl terminus of CIITA, one
of the defective genes in type II MHC combined immune
deﬁciency. Immunity 2:545–553.
zur Stadt U, Schmidt S, Kasper B, Beutel K, Diler AS, Henter JI,
Kabisch H, Schneppenheim R, Nurnberg P, Janka G, Hennies
HC. 2005. Linkage of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistio-
cytosis (FHL) type-4 to chromosome 6q24 and identiﬁcation of
mutations in syntaxin 11. Hum Mol Genet. 14:827–834.
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases 259
