Determinants of Vessel Targeting in Vasculitis*
GARY S. HOFFMAN†
Harold C. Schott Chair of Rheumatic and Immunologic Diseases, Director, Center for Vasculitis Care and Research, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation A50, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA
Studies of autoimmune diseases have not yet elucidated why certain organs or vessels become the
objects of injury while others are spared. This paper will explore the hypothesis that important
differences exist in regions of the aorta that determine vulnerability to diseases, such as atherosclerosis,
aortitis, giant cell arteritis and Takayasu’s disease. The reader is invited to reassess; (1) whether the
aorta is indeed a single homogeneous structure, and (2) whether the initial stage of aortitis (and indeed
other diseases considered “autoimmune”) may be primarily due to acquired alterations of substrate, that
inﬂuence unique immune proﬁles, which by themselves may not be pathogenic. Disease susceptibility
and patterns are inﬂuenced by many factors that are inborn and acquired. Examples include genetic
background, gender, ethnicity, aging, prior and concomitant illnesses, habits, diet, toxin and
environmental exposures. Studies of vascular diseases must assess how such variables may affect
regional differences in endothelial cells, subendothelial matrix, vascular smooth muscle and the
response of each to a variety of stimuli.
GIANT CELL, TAKAYASU’S ARTERITIS
AND IDIOPATHIC AORTITIS
Giant cell (GCA) and Takayasu’s arteritis (TA) are
granulomatous inﬂammatory diseases of large arteries that
share a similar, and some would argue, the same proﬁle of
targets in regard to vessel size and distribution. Both may
be complicated by inﬂammatory aneurysms that are
predominantly thoracic (Hoffman, 2003). However, in one
illness (GCA) the mean age at presentation is .70 years,
while in the other (TA) it is about 25 years (Kerr et al.,
1994). In patients with idiopathic aortitis (IA), which may or
may not have granulomatous histopathology, age is less
polarized and there is often absence of systemic illness
(Rojo-Leyva et al., 2000). Such patients may only come
to attention because of the hemodynamic effects of
aortic regurgitation and root dilatation. Aortitis may be
recognized only after specimens are reviewed from
aortic aneurysm surgeries (Fig. 1). We have reported the
characteristics of patients with IA and compared them to
patients with atherosclerosis, cystic medial necrosis, GCA
and TA. Of 48 inﬂammatory aneurysms in our IA cohort,
96% were thoracic. In contrast, among 798 non-inﬂam-
matory aortic aneurysms, 69% were in the abdominal
region and were due principally to atherosclerosis
(i.e. inﬂammation only around atheromatous plaque, not
diffuse). This striking trend for inﬂammatory aneurysms to
be located in the thoracic region has been conﬁrmed in
surveys of large vessel pathology from post-mortem
examinations. Aortitis of uncertain etiology is recognized
in up to 8% of all post-mortems. When authors
have restricted analyses to aortitis with aneurysms,
inﬂammatory aneurysms were almost always noted in
the thoracic region (Ostberg, 1973; Bickerstaff et al.,
1982; Svensjo et al., 1996).
The most common cause of thoracic aortic aneurysms is
not aortitis; it is cystic medionecrosis (Pomerance et al.,
1997). Cystic medionecrosis, in the absence of athero-
sclerosis, is far more common in the thoracic than the
abdominal aorta, where it generally co-exists with and
may result, in part, from atherosclerotic injury. Patchy
atherosclerosis may be common in post-mortem thoracic
aorta specimens in the elderly, however, atherosclerosis
alone is an uncommon cause of thoracic aneurysm
formation.
These observations emphasizevariations invulnerability
to different diseases, within the same vessel, which we
will go on to see is not homogenous throughout its course.
ISSN 1740-2522 print/ISSN 1740-2530 online q 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/17402520400001652
*Supported in part by the HCS Foundation.
†
Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 (216) 445 6996. Fax: +1 (216) 445 7569.
Clinical & Developmental Immunology, September/December 2004, Vol. 11 (3/4), pp. 275–279
HOW IS THE AORTA DIFFERENT THROUGHOUT
ITS REGIONS?
The foregoing discussion implies that this single tubular
structure, the aorta, must have inherent variations in its
content and/or responsiveness to injury to account for
regional differences in disease patterns. In addition, apart
from Takayasu’s arteritis, inﬂammatory aortic aneurysms
are found in older adults. Does age provide opportunities
for change within regions of the aorta that make it more
vulnerable to inﬂammatory injury? Are there elements of
immunological senescence that may respond to altered
substrate to produce aortitis? What are the implications for
younger patients with aortitis? Although answers to
these questions are not readily available, regional
differences within the aorta are well known and will be
considered (Table I).
Anatomic differences
The thoracic aorta is wider and has a thicker wall diameter
than that of more distal regions. In man, the aortic arch
wall is about 1.5 mm thick, whereas the abdominal aortic
wall is #1 mm thick (Okuyama et al., 1988).
Vessel wall perfusion, the vasa vasorum
The concentration of aortic vasa vasorum is about
9.4 vessels/mm2
in the thick-walled thoracic region and
only 1.9 vessels/mm2
in the abdominal region (Fig. 2).
FIGURE 1 Aortitis was discovered after surgery in a 67-year-old man who did not have symptoms of a systemic inﬂammatory illness.
Surgical intervention was required for aortic root dilatation and consequent severe aortic regurgitation (300 £ mag).
TABLE I Relative differences between the thoracic and abdominal
aorta
Feature Thoracic region Abdominal region
Wall thickness Greater
Wall diameter 30–40% greater
Elastic ﬁber
concentration
Greater
(decreases
distal to root)
Derivation of SMCs* Neural crest
ectoderm
Mesoderm
Smooth muscle
cells-mediainner
Greater
concentration
Vasa vasorum (media) Numerous Few to absent
Disease predilections Inﬂammatory
cystic medial necrosis
Diffuse
atherosclerosis
*Smooth muscle cells.
FIGURE 2 In concert with decreased thickness of the aortic wall, vasa
vasorum (vv) become less dense from proximal to distal aorta (from
Okuyama et al., 1988).
G.S. HOFFMAN276
As wall thickness increases with disease, especially in the
example of atherosclerosis, there is concordant penetration
of the vasa vasorum into the vascular media and even into
the intima (Schutte, 1968; Okuyama et al., 1988).
Aorta collagen and elastin
The synthesis of collagen and elastin (Fisher et al., 1980),
as well as thickness of elastic membranes and number of
elastic laminae (Sokolis et al., 2002), diminish with
increased distance from the aortic root. Elastin, the main
extracellular matrix component in arteries, is synthesized
by vascular smooth muscle cells and plays both a
structural and developmental role in arterial morphogen-
esis. Animals that lack the gene for elastin have abnormal
vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation and
neointimal thickening. Elastin is therefore a regulatory
protein, inﬂuencing proliferation and migration of its cell
of origin (SMC) (Karnik et al., 2003). With aging, the
aorta develops increasing degrees of elastin fragmentation
and degeneration, concurrent with increased collagen
content. The functional consequences are well understood.
The result is loss of elasticity and stiffening (Schlatmann
and Becker, 1977). Whether changes in elastin inﬂuence
immunogenicity is less certain.
Animal model of atherosclerosis
In a study reported in 1966, Haimovici and Maier
(Haimovici and Maier, 1966) addressed the issue of aortic
heterogeneity in a study of dogs given a diet intended to
induce atherosclerosis, a process that is most obvious in the
abdominal aorta. Prior to providing the atherogenic diet, the
authors switched segments of thoracic and abdominal aorta
between these inbred dogs. The abdominal-located thoracic
aorta did not develop atherosclerosis and the thoracic-
located abdominal aorta still developed atherosclerosis.
Thus, apart from location and properties of ﬂow, inherent
differences in aortic wall anatomy and physiology
determined disease vulnerability.
Embryologic differences
Studies of aortic embryogenesis in animals reveal that
neural crest cells contribute to the formation of smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) in the aortic trunk, proximal arch,
pulmonary artery trunk, but not in the more distal parts of
the aorta. In contrast, abdominal aortic SMCs are
primarily derived from mesoderm. These basic differences
imply that unique genetic programs may be responsible
for variable responses of SMCs to cytokine stimulation in
the thoracic and abdominal aorta (Gadson et al., 1997).
Understanding differences at a genetic level
Absi et al. recently utilized gene expression techniques to
more fully explore this issue. They asked why aortic
aneurysms in the thoracic region are usually due to cystic
medial necrosis, while atherosclerosis is the primary cause
of abdominal aortic aneurysms? Striking differences in gene
expression patterns were identiﬁed between areas of
unaffected thoracic and abdominal aorta, as well as between
segmentsofaneurysmsfrombothregions(Absi etal.,2003).
Role of exogenous pathogens
The possible role of undiscovered infection in GCA, TA and
IA is an area of great controversy. Nonetheless, in other
settings infection is a known cause of aortitis and
demonstrates site selectivity. Aortitis may result from
Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella, fungi, tuberculous or
other organisms (Oz et al., 1989). The patterns of idiopathic
aortitis and infectious aortitis are often similar. For example,
syphilitic aortitis involves the thoracic aorta in ,75% of
cases (ascending 46%, transverse arch 25%), while
infrequently affecting the aorta distal to the renal arteries
(Heggtveit, 1964).
Pathogens possess adhesion molecules and may produce
unique products with selective tissue afﬁnities. Selective
adhesion may account for differences in targeting end-
organs (Patti et al., 1994). The fact that products of
pathogensmayactatsitesremotefromtheiroriginallowsfor
injury to occur in the absence of the pathogen itself.
Alternatively, pathogens may be effectively cleared, but
have induced a response to self-Ag (molecular mimicry) or
caused alterations of self-Ag, that lead it to be perceived as
foreign (neoantigen). It is also possible that if autoimmunity
were triggered by an infectious agent, the critical factor
leading to illness may not be one’s ability to clear the agent,
but the inability to down-regulate the immune response.
Variations in immune response are likely to explain the
broad range of outcomes observed following a variety
infections. Hepatitis viruses, parvovirus B19 and Epstein-
Barr virus (EBV) are well known for the diversity of illness
phenotypes. For example, in children, parvovirus B19 may
cause erythema infectiosum, but in other individuals
produce red-cell aplasia, aplastic anemia, a Still’s disease-
like illness, a rheumatoid arthritis-like illness, or hydrops
fetalis during pregnancy. The virus appears to be the same,
but the end result is extraordinarily different.
IMMUNE FUNCTION CHANGES WITH AGE
Whileitislikelythatacquiredchangesinthevesselwallplay
a role in determining patterns of vasculitis, it is also likely
that acquired changes in immune function may be required
for disease expression. Certain vasculitides are clearly age
and gender biased. Age and gender factors include changes
in hormonal function. Eighty per cent of patients with
Kawasaki disease are less than 5 years old, and boys are
affected 1.5 times as often as girls. TA affects mostly women
of reproductive age and GCA is seen in individuals whose
meanageis74years,withwomenbeingaffectedabouttwice
as often as men. Immune senescence may be especially
relevant to GCA. Increasing age is associated with decline in
thymic function, impairment of T cell activation, defective
VESSEL TARGETING IN VASCULITIS 277
generation of T cell memory, decline in speciﬁc antibody
responses, defects in apoptosis and defects in antigen
presentation and processing (Weyand and Goronzy, 1997).
CONCLUSIONS
Certain basic pathogenic components of “vasculitis”
require greater study. There is a need to acquire more
complete knowledge of thesites that are theobject ofinjury,
before injury actually occurs. While it is important to study
the immune reactive/inﬂammatory cells and their products
within the affected site, it is unlikely that that approach
alone will reveal the etiology of these disorders. Studies of
the “target” might include distinguishing molecular and
genetic differences between controls and patients in
regards to elements of tissue structure, antigens and
response to injury. It is likely that wewill ﬁnd differences in
the form of mosaic patterns, and not single genes or
molecules within the affected sites (Fig. 3).
If the initial events in the pathogenesis of certain
vasculitides are related to changes in the vessel wall and
not due primarily to aberrations in immune function,
microarray and proteomic techniques may provide unique
insights into susceptibility factors imparted by age,
ethnicity and gender. For example, GCA is frequent
among people whose origins are Northern European
or Icelandic. However, it is relatively uncommon
in African-Americans and Asians. Important differences
in the “targeted” vessels in these groups may enhance or
determinedisease susceptibility. Microarray and proteomic
techniques are also currently being applied to study pattern
variation within temporal arteries in GCA and normal
controls. These tools are providing opportunities to better
understand the role of the targeted tissue in vasculitis.
References
Absi, T.S., Sundt, T.M., III, Tung, W.S., Moon, M., et al. (2003) “Altered
patterns of gene expression distinguishing ascending aortic
aneurysms from abdominal aortic aneurysms: complementary DNA
expression proﬁling in the molecular characterization of aortic
disease”, J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 126, 344–357.
Bickerstaff, L.K., Pairolero, P.C., Hollier, L.H., Melton, J., et al. (1982)
“Thoracic aortic aneurysms: A population based study”, Surg 92,
1103–1108.
Fisher, G.M., Swain, M.L. and Cherian, K. (1980) “Increased collagen
and elastin synthesis in experimental atherosclerosis in the rabbit.
Variationinsynthesisamongmajorvessels”,Atherosclerosis35,11–20.
Gadson, P.F., Dalton, M.L., Patterson, E., Svoboda, D.D., et al. (1997)
“Differential response of mesoderm- and neural crest-derived smooth
muscle to TGF-beta1: regulation of c-myb and alpha1 procollagen
genes”, Exp. Cell Res. 230, 169–180.
Haimovici, H. and Maier, N. (1966) “Role of arterial tissue susceptibility
in experimental canine atherosclerosis”, J. Atherosclerosis Res.
6, 62–74.
Heggtveit, H.A. (1964) “Syphilitic aortitis. A clinicopathologic autopsy
study of 100 cases, 1950–1960”, Circulation 29, 346–355.
Hoffman, G.S. (2003) “Large vessel vasculitis: unresolved issues”,
Arthritis Rheum. 48, 2406–2414.
Karnik, S.K., Brooke, B.S., Bayes-Genes, A., Sorensen, L., Wythe, J.D.,
Schwartz, R.S., Keating, M.T. and Li, D.Y. (2003) “A critical role
for elastin signaling in vascular morphogenesis and disease”,
Development 130, 411–423.
Kerr, G.S., Hallahan, C.W., Giordano, J., Leavitt, R.Y., Fauci, A.S.,
Rottem, M. and Hoffman, G.S. (1994) “Takayasu arteritis”,
Ann. Intern. Med. 120, 919–929.
Okuyama, K., Yaginuma, G., Takahashi, T., Sasaki, H. and Mori, S.
(1988) “The development of vasa vasorum of the human aorta in
various conditions. A morphometric study”, Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med.
112, 721–725.
Ostberg, G. (1973) “An arteritis with special reference to polymyalgia
rheumatica”, ACTA Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. 237(Suppl.), 1–59.
Oz, M.C., Brener, B.J., Buda, J.A., Todd, G., Brenner, R.W., et al. (1989)
“A ten year experience with bacterial aortitis”, J. Vasc. Surg. 10,
439–449.
Patti, J.M., Allen, B.L., McGavin, M.J. and Hook, M. (1994)
“MSCRAMM-mediated adherence of microrganisms to host
tissues”, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 585–617.
Pomerance, A., Yacoub, M.H. and Gula, G. (1997) “The
surgical pathology of thoracic aortic aneurysms”, Histopathology 1,
257–276.
FIGURE 3 Conceptual mosaic for organ targeting. Pathogenic factors in immune-mediated diseases may be endogenous and/or exogenous. Whether
disease results, may in part be related to general or tissue-speciﬁc host susceptibility factors. Determinants of organ targeting may reside within the target
itself, and include unique native or acquired characteristics (e.g. ligands for pathogens, age-related changes, post-infectious changes etc), that inﬂuence a
pathogen’s (organisms or molecules) adhesion, retention, and penetration. In health, pathogenic factors would be cleared, the immune response would be
appropriately down-regulated and normal structure and function would be restored (reprinted from Hoffman, 2003; with permission of Wiley and Sons).
G.S. HOFFMAN278
Rojo-Leyva, F., Ratliff, N.B., Cosgrove, D.M., III and
Hoffman, G.S. (2000) “Study of 52 patients with idiopathic aortitis
from a cohort of 1,204 surgical cases”, Arthritis Rheum. 43,
901–907.
Schlatmann, T. and Becker, A. (1977) “Pathogenesis of dissecting
aneurysm of the aorta. Comparartive histopathologic study of
signiﬁcance of medial changes”, Am. J. Cardiol. 39, 21–26.
Schutte, H.E. (1968) “Changes in the vasa vasorum of the atherosclerotic
aortic wall”, Angiologica 5, 210–222.
Sokolis, D.P., Boudoulas, H., Kavantzas, N.G., Kostomitsopulous, N.,
Agapitos, E.V. and Karayannacos, P.E. (2002) “A morphometric study
of the structural characteristics of the aorta in pigs using an image
analysis method”, Anat. Histol. Embryol. Vet. Med. Series C 31, 21–30.
Svensjo, S., Bengtsson, H. and Bergqvist, D. (1996) “Thoracic and
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm and dissection: Investigation
based on autopsy”, Br. J. Surg. 83, 68–71.
Weyand, C.M. and Goronzy, J.J. (1997) “Multisystem interactions in the
pathogenesis of vasculitis”, Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 9, 3–11.
VESSEL TARGETING IN VASCULITIS 279
