© 2010 Swenson andTheise, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3 1–10
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology

r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Stem cell therapeutics: potential in the treatment
of inflammatory bowel disease
ES Swenson1
ND Theise2
1
Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Digestive Diseases,
Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA; 2
Departments
of Pathology and Medicine (Division
of Digestive Diseases), Beth Israel
Medical Center – Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA
Correspondence: ND Theise
Beth Israel Medical Center, Division
of Digestive Diseases, First Avenue at
16th Street, NewYork, NY 10003, USA
Email ntheise@chpnet.org
Abstract: Stem cell therapies may be valuable in treatment of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). Here we focus on two very different types of stem cells – hematopoietic stem cells
and mesenchymal stem cells. Myeloablation and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
alter host immune response by reconstituting the recipient’s blood cell lines with donor cells.
Autologous hematopoietic reconstitution may “reboot” mucosal immunity to a normal baseline
state, but does not alter any underlying genetic predisposition to IBD. In contrast, allogeneic
hematopoietic transplantation reconstitutes all blood lineages from a tissue-matched donor
who presumably does not have a genetic predisposition to IBD. Compared with autologous
hematopoietic transplantation, allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation carries a much greater
risk of complications, including graft-versus-host disease. Mesenchymal stem cells can give rise
to cartilage, bone and fat in vitro, but do not reconstitute hematopoiesis after transplantation.
Systemically infused mesenchymal stem cells appear to favorably downregulate host immune
responses through poorly understood mechanisms. In addition, mesenchymal stem cells may
be applied topically to help close fistulas associated with Crohn’s disease. For all of these stem
cell therapy applications for IBD, only cases and small series have been reported. Larger clinical
trials are planned or ongoing.
Keywords: inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn’s disease, stem cell therapy, bone marrow
transplant, mesenchymal stem cell
Introduction
Stem cells are defined by asymmetric cell division, self-renewal, and multilineage
differentiation. Stem cell-based therapies hold great promise for many diseases.
Embryonic stem cells (ES) are pluripotent cells derived from the preimplantation
embryo, capable of forming tissues from all three germ layers in vitro and in vivo.The
ability of ES cells to expand in culture and differentiate to specific phenotypes under
various culture and growth factor conditions makes them an attractive source of cells
for therapy. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) can be derived from adult somatic
cells forced to reprogram to an ES-like state in culture. Like ES cells, iPS cells can be
redirected toward other phenotypes under specific culture conditions. iPS cells are not
derived from embryos, avoiding ethical concerns regarding the use of human embryos.
iPS cells can also be made from any patient, allowing the production of patient-specific
and disease-specific cells for research and treatment. Undifferentiated ES and iPS
cells can both give rise to teratomas after transplantation, so complete eradication of
undifferentiated cells is a critical step toward the clinical use of cell therapy when ES
or iPS cells are used to produce differentiated cells for therapy.
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology
16 January 2010
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3
Swenson and Theise Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
In contrast, adult stem cells are derived from mature
organs and are much more limited in differentiation potential
compared with ES or iPS. As such, adult stem cells might
be better considered as multipotent “progenitor” cells rather
than stem cells. However, the language of “adult stem cells”
is well established so we will follow this convention.The best
understood adult stem cells are hematopoietic stem cells,
which can be enriched from the bone marrow or collected
from peripheral blood. After transplantation into properly
conditioned recipients, hematopoietic stem cells reconstitute
and maintain all the mature blood lineages. Bone marrow
transplantation has become an accepted treatment for leuke-
mias, lymphomas, and other blood diseases. For patients fac-
ing otherwise incurable and fatal blood diseases, the potential
benefits of bone marrow transplantation outweigh the risks
of infection, hemorrhage and graft-vs-host disease.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are an entirely different
type of adult stem cell. MSC can be derived from bone mar-
row, fat, or other tissues. MSC are perhaps more restricted in
their differentiation potential to mesodermal tissues such as
fat, cartilage and bone. Transplanted MSC do not reconsti-
tute hematopoietic lineages, but can alter the host immune
response. In this review we will consider cell therapy based
on hematopoietic stem cell transplantation or MSC infusion
for the treatment of Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative
colitis (UC). To date, there are no reports of therapeutic
interventions for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) using
ES or iPS-derived cells.
In patients with IBD, mucosal ulceration and inflamma-
tion may cause abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea, anemia
and malnutrition. In UC, the inflammation is generally
limited to the mucosa of the colon. In contrast, the inflam-
mation in CD affects all layers of the bowel wall and is
not limited to the colon. The transmural inflammation
of CD may lead to bowel obstruction or fistula forma-
tion requiring surgical intervention. In both conditions,
chronic inflammation is associated with an increased
risk of intestinal malignancy. IBD may be considered an
autoimmune disease, resulting from inappropriate immune
reactivity against one’s own tissues in the digestive tract.
The mainstay of clinical treatment is a combination of
anti-inflammatory agents such as 5-aminosalicylates and
immunosuppressive medications, including corticoste-
roids and immunomodulators such as azathioprine. Newer
agents, including monoclonal antibodies directed against
tumor necrosis factor or alpha-4-integrin, are available for
patients who are unable to achieve remission with standard
immunosuppression. Despite treatment, the morbidity and
cost of IBD remain high. Corticosteroids are not effective
for maintaining remission of IBD and induce well-known
adverse side effects, including weight gain, diabetes and
osteoporosis. Immunosuppression carries significant risk
for infection by opportunistic pathogens. New treatment
approaches are needed.
Recent advances reveal a primary role of dysregula-
tion of the immune system in the pathogenesis of IBD.
Sophisticated genome-wide association studies implicate
maladaptive signaling of a number of cytokines and their
receptors.1
Examples include variants in genes encoding
NOD2/CARD15, IL23R, TNFSF152,3
and IL-10R.4
Mouse
models of IBD may be categorized as chemical, genetic,
immunologic, and spontaneous.5
Each approach offers
different strengths and limitations, but it is now clear that
the mucosal immune response to luminal antigens plays a
central role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Genetically suscep-
tible mice reared under germ-free conditions fail to develop
disease, demonstrating the essential role of luminal flora.
Classic experiments demonstrated that IBD-like illness can
be transmitted by adoptive transfer of pathogenic T cells in
mice.6
In a susceptible host, inappropriate and prolonged
immunologic response to mucosal flora results from failure
of regulatory T cells to restrict the activity of self-reactive
effectorT cells.7–9
While bone marrow transplant from IL-10
knockout mice into wild-type recipients does not transfer
IBD, colitis can be markedly ameliorated in IL-10 knockout
mice after bone marrow transplantation with normal bone
marrow. The improvement of colitis after transplantation of
normal bone marrow into IL-10 deficient mice appears to be
due to engraftment of donor-derived subepithelial myofibro-
blasts.10
A possible human case of adoptive transfer of IBD
was reported in a patient undergoing allogeneic bone marrow
transplant (BMT) for Hodgkin’s disease. Though the patient
had no prior history of IBD, she developed acute fulminant
Crohn’s colitis 6 months after allogeneic BMT.While the stem
cell donor had no personal or family history of IBD, genomic
analysis showed that the donor, but not the recipient, carried
a CD-associated polymorphism in the NOD2/CARD15
gene. Donor and recipient also had numerous HLA class III
haplotype mismatches at the IBD3 locus.11
While immunosuppression can reduce and control inflam-
mation, it fails to fundamentally interrupt the underlying
disease process. Advances in bone marrow transplantation
now allow the ablation and replacement of the hematopoietic
system with autologous or allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cells. In some cases, this appears to effectively interrupt the
cycle of inflammation by “resetting” the immune system with
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3 
Stem cell therapeutics for IBDDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
naïve cells. Another novel treatment approach is the use of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), typically derived from bone
marrow or fat, as immunosuppressive agents to downregulate
mucosal immune reactivity.
There are many case reports and small retrospective
series of patients experiencing dramatic improvement in
chronic non-IBD autoimmune conditions following autolo-
gous or allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
for unrelated malignancies. These unexpected successes led
to trials of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (mostly
autologous) as a salvage therapy for autoimmune diseases
refractory to standard immunosuppressive therapy.12
Simi-
larly, unexpected remission of IBD in patients undergoing
BMT for other reasons inspired examination of BMT as a
therapy for IBD.
This review will focus on two “stem cell therapy”
approaches to treating IBD by fundamentally altering the
mucosal immune response: bone marrow hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation and mesenchymal stem cell
transplantation.13
Autologous bone marrow stem cell
transplantation for IBD
The first report of remission of IBD after autologous hema-
topoietic stem cell transplantation was that of a 41-year-old
woman with more than 20 years of fistulizing CD, who
subsequently developed non-Hodgkins’ lymphoma (NHL).
Her NHL was treated with chemotherapy and autologous
bone marrow stem cell rescue. Six months after BMT, the
lymphoma was in remission and she was free of CD symp-
toms for the first time in many years.The authors speculated
that the improvement in her CD resulted from the BMT, and
concluded that CD need not be an absolute contraindication
to autologous BMT.14
Several more anecdotal reports
of clinical remission of IBD in patients who underwent
chemotherapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell rescue
for coincidental malignancies followed (Table 1).
Based in part on the successful treatment of patients with
CD and coincident malignancies using stem cell mobiliza-
tion, myeloablation, and autologous stem cell rescue, this
approach has been attempted as salvage therapy for IBD
in patients who did not have malignancies (Table 2). The
patients reported in those studies had active, refractory CD
with multiple complications. Oyama et al15
reported clinical
remission in 11 of 12 patients, while Cassinotti et al16
reported
remission in 3 of 4 patients. This approach effectively takes
immunosuppression to the extreme, completely ablating the
immune system and reconstituting it with hematopoietic
stem cells which give rise to naïve lymphoid and myeloid
cells.The effectiveness of this approach is consistent with the
model that dysregulation of T cell activity against mucosal
self antigens plays a major role in the pathogenesis of IBD.
The lack of recurrent disease after autologous BMT indicates
that interruption of the pro-inflammatory T cell response is
sufficient to break the maladaptive cycle of self-reactivity.
However, the number of patients reported is very small and
there were no controls. The success of this approach might
be overestimated by reporting bias, since therapeutic failures
and treatment-related adverse events may be less frequently
reported. One patient with remission of CD following autolo-
gous BMT for NHL experienced relapsed of her CD 8 years
later, indicating that long-term follow up is essential.17
Despite these limitations, the clinical improvements are
very impressive in a group of patients refractory to even the
best available standard treatment. While the risk of morbidity
and mortality from sepsis and hemorrhage during the interval
betweenmyeloablationandautologoushematopoieticreconsti-
tution is significant, a carefully designed, prospective clinical
Table 1 Case reports of IBD outcomes after myeloablation and autologous stem cell transplantation for coincidental malignancy
Disease (n) Indication Conditioning Graft IBD outcome Ref
CD (n = 1) NHL Chemo BMSC 3 × 10e8/kg Remission at 6 mos
Off immunosuppression
14
UC (n = 1) Breast cancer Chemo mPBSC ?dose Remission  2 yrs 67
CD (n = 1) Breast cancer Chemo mPBSC ?dose Remission  2 yrs 67
CD (n = 1) T cell NHL Chemo mPBSC 9.8 × 10e8/kg Remission 7 yrs
Off immunosuppression
68
CD (n = 1) Hodgkin’s Chemo mPBSC ?dose Remission  3 yrs
Off immunosuppression
69
CD (n = 1) AML Chemo TBI BMSC, mPBSC ?dose Remission  6 yrs
Off immunosuppression
70
Abbreviations: See list in text.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3
Swenson and Theise Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
trial is warranted for patients who have failed conventional
therapy and are willing to accept the risk of autologous
BMT. A multicenter, prospective, randomized Phase III trial,
“Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation in Crohn’s Disease
(ASTIC)” is underway in Europe.All patients enrolled in this
trial will undergo stem cell mobilization and leukapheresis.
Patients will then be randomized to undergo either immediate
or delayed (one year) immunoablation and autologous stem
cell transplantation. Patients in the delayed transplant group
will continue to receive optimal conventional care for CD.
This design allows all patients in the trial the opportunity to
undergo autologous BMT, with the delayed transplant group
serving as controls. The immediate transplant group will be
compared with the delayed transplant group in terms of disease
remission, defined as a CD activity index of 150 without
steroids or immunosuppressive drugs and no mucosal erosion
or ulceration at ileocolonoscopy, and no definite evidence of
small bowel Crohn’s Disease on barium studies. A total of
48 patients will be recruited.As of July, 2009, 14 patients had
been enrolled, 7 of whom have undergone autologous BMT.
Additional details are available at http://www.nottingham.
ac.uk/icr/astic/index.php. It is not clear whether autologous
BMT will benefit patients with germline polymorphisms
in CD-susceptibility genes, which will not be altered by
autologous BMT. This issue will need to be considered in the
outcome analysis of the clinical trials.
Allogeneic bone marrow stem cell
transplantation
There have been numerous reports of fortuitous resolution of
non-IBD autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis
and psoriasis in patients who underwent allogeneic BMT
for leukemias.18–21
The first reported case of a patient with
UC undergoing allogeneic BMT was a 39-year-old woman
with a 12-year history of UC, who subsequently developed
AML. Following induction and consolidation treatment with
chemotherapy, she received an allogeneic BMT from her
HLA-matched brother. Four years later, her AML remained
in remission and her UC was clinically inactive.20
The first
reported case of a patient with CD undergoing allogeneic
BMT was a 35-year-old man with stricturing CD who sub-
sequently developed acute myelocytic leukemia (AML).The
AML was treated with multiagent chemotherapy and the
patient underwent allogeneic BMT from his HLA-matched
brother. His post-transplant course was complicated by mild
GVHD of the skin, which responded to corticosteroids. All
immunosuppression was tapered off over the next 7 months
and he remained in remission of both AML and CD for at
least 8 years.22
Two retrospective series of patients with both IBD
and leukemia who underwent allogeneic BMT reported
a substantial number of remissions from IBD (Table 3).
Lopez-Cubero23
reported 6 CD patients who underwent
allogeneic BMT for CML or AML. All were treated with
multiagent chemotherapy for leukemia. Transplant condi-
tioning regimens included cyclophosphamide and total body
irradiation. Allogeneic donor cells were HLA-matched in
all but one case and were not T cell-depleted. CD activity
could not be assessed in the patient with AML, who died
from sepsis 97 days after transplant. Of the five survivors,
four achieved symptomatic remission from CD over 4 to
15 years of follow-up. Both acute and chronic GVHD of the
Table 2 Case reports and small series of inflammatory bowel disease outcomes after myeloablation and autologous stem cell
transplantation for Crohn’s disease
Disease (n) Conditioning Graft IBD outcome Ref
CD (n = 1) Cyc T-cell depleted
CD34+ mPBSC
6.4 × 10e6/kg
Remission for 9 mos
Recurrent aphthous ulcers
Maint. corticosteroids and MTX
71
CD (n = 1) Cyc ATG T cell-depleted
CD34+ mPBSC
3.4 × 10e6/kg
Symptomatic remission for 5 mos
Endoscopic and pathologic improvement, off
immunosuppression
72
CD (n = 12) Cyc ATG T-cell depleted
CD34+ mPBSC
2 × 10e6/kg
Remission in 11 of 12
7–37 mos follow-up
Corticosteroids tapered over 2–6 mos
15
[*2 of these subjects were already reported by Burt et al in 2003]
CD (n = 1) Not stated Not stated Remission for 8 yrs followed by relapse 17
CD (n = 1) Not stated Not stated Remission for 6 yrs 73
CD (n = 4) Cyc ATG mPBSC ?dose Remission in 3 of 4 11–20 mos follow-up
Off immunosuppression
16
Abbreviations: See list in text.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3 
Stem cell therapeutics for IBDDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
skin and/or liver were noted in the same four patients who
achieved remission from CD.
Ditschkowski and colleagues24
reported a retrospective
review of 7 CD patients and 4 UC patients who underwent
allogeneic BMT for AML, CML or myelofibrosis. Five of
the CD patients had a history of fistula or luminal stenosis.
Prior to BMT, five patients had inactive IBD, while six were
described as having mild or low activity based on symp-
toms, endoscopic findings, or histology. The chemotherapy,
myeloablative conditioning regimen and transplantation
protocols varied. One patient died within the first year after
transplant from pulmonary fungal infection. Of the 10 sur-
vivors, only 1 had mild CD after transplant, while the other
9 achieved remission from IBD during a median followup
period of 34 months (range 3 to 117 months). Eight patients
developed Grade I or II GVHD, which was managed success-
fully with steroids. None developed severe or chronic GVHD.
A very recent report identified loss-of-function mutations in
IL10-RA and IL-10RB in patients with early onset, severe
enterocolitis.4
One patient with a mutation in the IL1-10RB
gene suffered from severe anocutaneous fistula, refractory
to standard therapy. He underwent allogeneic BMT from
an HLA-matched sibling who did not carry the IL-10RB
mutation. He achieved full donor hematopoietic chimerism,
and his post-transplant course was marked by mild GVHD,
treated successfully with corticosteroids. More than 1 year
after transplantation, his IBD was fully in remission.4
In
the case where the genetic mutation underlying IBD could
be clearly identified, autologous transplantation would not
have been helpful. An HLA-matched sibling donor without
that mutation was available, so allogeneic transplantation
was both ethical and practical. To our knowledge, there are
no planned prospective clinical trials of allogeneic BMT in
IBD, presumably due to concerns for the greater incidence of
transplant-related complications in allogeneic BMT recipi-
ents compared with autologous BMT.
Immunomodulatory stem cell
therapy with MSC
MSC are a fibroblast-like cell population, first recognized as
a population of non-hematopoietic bone marrow cells which
adhere to plastic tissue culture dishes.25
MSC are a multi-
potent stem cell population, capable of differentiating into
osteocytes, chondrocytes and adipocytes under appropriate
culture conditions.26
In an attempt to standardize the definition
of MSC, minimal criteria were proposed (Table 4).27
MSC
have now been isolated from a wide variety of adult tissues,28
though most attention has focused on MSC derived from bone
marrow or fat. A great deal of interest has focused on poten-
tial therapeutic uses for MSC due to their reported ability to
suppress inflammation and promote tissue healing.29
Several potential mechanisms have been proposed for
the potential immunomodulatory effects of MSC, including
release of soluble factors (cytokines, chemokines, growth
factors), induction of cell cycle arrest in pro-inflammatory
Table 4 Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal
stem cells27
1. Adherent to plastic under standard culture conditions
2.  Express CD105, CD73 and CD90
3. Lack expression of CD45, CD34, CD14 or CD11b, CD79a or CD19
and HLA-DR
4.  Differentiate to osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondroblasts in vitro
Abbreviations: See list in text.
Table 3 Case reports and small series of inflammatory bowel disease outcomes after myeloablation and allogeneic stem cell
transplantation
Disease (n) Indication Conditioning Graft IBD outcome Ref
UC (n = 1) AML Not stated Not stated Remission 4 yrs 20
CD (n = 1) AML Chemo AlloBMT CSA
for 7 mos
Steroids for 2 mos
Remission 7 years off
immunosuppression
22
CD (n = 5) CML Chemo TBI AlloBMT, varied Remission in 4 of 5
patients followed for
4–15 yrs
23
(A sixth CD patient with AML died 97 days after alloBMT; recurrent CD could not be evaluated)
CD (n = 7)
UC (n = 4)
AML, CML, MF Varied AlloBMT, varied Remission in 9 of 10
survivors
24
CD (n = 1) IBD, IL-10RB mutation Chemo Sibling AlloBMT Remission 1 yr 4
Abbreviations: See list in text.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3
Swenson and Theise Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
lymphocytes, and induction of T cell apoptosis.30
A likely
role for nitric oxide in MSC-mediated immunosuppression
has been recently identified.31
In addition to modulating
immune activity, MSC may also regulate wound healing
through direct or indirect interactions with resident tissue-
committed stem cells.32
The immunomodulatory and wound
healing effects of MSC provide the rationale for investigation
of their therapeutic value in autoimmune and inflammatory
disease conditions.
Efforts to improve the engraftment of transplanted
human hematopoietic stem cells by coinfusion of MSC
met with variable success but little persistent stromal
chimerism, so the mechanism of benefit is unclear.33–36
Many reports claim that donor MSC need not be immu-
nologically compatible with the recipient because they are
non-immunogenic,37
though there is some evidence to the
contrary.38
Much of the evidence for immunosuppressive
effects of MSC is based on in vitro work, which may not
translate to in vivo efficacy.
Nonetheless, there are numerous reports of beneficial
effects of MSC in animal models of autoimmune disease.39,40
The mouse myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 35–55
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model
shares features with human multiple sclerosis. Using the EAE
model, syngeneic MSC administration was shown to ame-
liorate neurologic and histologic abnormalities by inducing
T cell anergy, but only when the MSC were administered early
in the course of disease.41
In a similar model of EAE, MSC
administration reduced inflammation and demyelination
through induction of T cell anergy. The infused MSC were
not found in the central nervous system, indicating that the
beneficial effect may have been achieved through immuno-
modulation rather than engraftment.42
MSC therapy has also
been reported to exert a protective effect in mouse models of
rheumatoid arthritis43,45
and diabetes.46,47
What is the fate of transplanted
MSC in vivo?
Systemically infused MSC appear to migrate toward sites
of injury and inflammation. The mechanism by which MSC
find their way is not fully understood and likely varies among
tissues, but involves interactions between chemokines and
their receptors (reviewed in).29,48
The goal of developing
MSC for therapy requires understanding of the fate of
transplanted cells, which depends on the dose and route of
administration. Few studies have addressed this concern
directly. Systemic administration may be sufficient if MSC
can home to damaged tissues, but local administration may
be necessary if high level tissue engraftment is required for
therapeutic effect.
To investigate this issue, 111
In-labeled syngeneic rat bone
marrow MSC were expanded in culture, delivered to normal
rats by intraarterial, intravenous or intraperitoneal injection,
and followed by whole-body gamma imaging. Immediately
after administration, tracer localized mostly in lungs and
liver.After 48 hours, most of the tracer appeared in the liver.49
Major limitations of this approach are that individual organs
were not examined in detail, and live donor cells were not
distinguished from dead cell debris being cleared by the
reticuloendothelial system.
Using a very sensitive PCR DNA ELISA assay, Devine
et al50
showed that gene-marked autologous or allogeneic
bone marrow MSC could be detected in baboon bone
marrow for as long as one year after systemic infusion.
In subsequent investigations, gene-marked bone mar-
row MSC could also be detected by PCR in the digestive
tract, liver, pancreas, lung kidney and skin of recipient
baboons from 9 to 21 months after intravenous infusion.
The engraftment of gene-marked cells was estimated from
0.1% to 2.7%, but histologic localization of MSC-derived
cells was not reported.51
Another approach to monitoring MSC trafficking after
transplantation is to label cells in culture with iron par-
ticles and follow their distribution in vivo using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). Iron particles are phagocytosed
by MSC or hepatocytes and stably retained without overt
toxicity. Iron-labeled cells can be directed to desired sites of
engraftment, such as the liver, using an externally-applied
magnetic field.52
Using this approach, single MSC can be
detected by MRI in the liver after intrasplenic injection.53
Tracking of infused MSC using MRI has not been reported
in models of IBD.
Human MSC therapy for GVHD
Graft versus host disease (GVHD) in recipients of allogeneic
BMT results from response of the donor-derived immune
cells to host antigens. GVHD typically affects the skin,
GI tract and liver, and often requires immunosuppression.
Evidence from animal models suggests that MSC derived
from adipose tissue can reduce GVHD.54
Coinfusion of
human MSC with HLA-identical hematopoietic stem cells
at the time of transplantation may reduce acute and chronic
GVHD.55
The immunomodulatory effects of MSC may
therefore provide beneficial effects on acute GVHD and also,
thereby, points to the possibility that similar mechanisms
might improve immune-mediated injury in IBD or modulate
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3 
Stem cell therapeutics for IBDDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
GVHD if administered to IBD patients receiving allogeneic
transplants for that disease.
The first reported case of MSC therapy for severe acute
GVHD was that of a 9 year-old boy with ALL, who under-
went BMT from an unrelated HLA-matched donor. His
course was complicated by Grade IV GVHD, refractory to
immunosuppression. He was treated with unmatched bone
marrow MSC from his mother, administered in two separate
systemic infusions. The patient experienced a gradual but
dramatic clinical improvement over the next several months
and remained asymptomatic of gastrointestinal GVHD 1 year
after transplantation.56
In September, 2009 Osiris Therapeutics reported in a
press release preliminary results of a Phase III double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of human MSC for steroid-refractory
GVHD or as a first-line therapy for GVHD after allogeneic
BMT. Among the patients with steroid-refractory GVHD
of the gastrointestinal tract or liver, there was a significant
improvement in GVHD. However, the primary end point
(durable complete response) was not met.
Potential benefit of MSC in animal
models of colitis
The ability of MSC to induce tolerance has been investigated
in animal models of immune-mediated inflammatory bowel
diseases. Foxp3 mutant mice develop autoimmune disease
affecting the small bowel due to failure to regulatory T cells
to eliminate self-reactiveT cell clones.Administration of syn-
geneic MSC ameliorated inflammatory disease in the ileum.
Donor cells were detected in lymphoid tissue in the gut rather
thanintheepithelium,consistentwithamodelofimmunoregu-
lation by infused MSC, rather than epithelial engraftment.57
In the trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) model of
colitis, intraperitoneal delivery of human or murine adipose-
derived MSC improved diarrhea, body weight, histology
and survival, in part by downregulating inflammatory cyto-
kines and upregulating IL-10.58
Similarly, human or murine
adipose-derived MSC abrogated diarrhea, weight loss, while
improving histology and survival in the dextran sulfate
mouse model of colitis, also through downregulation of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and upregulation of IL-10.59
Human MSC therapy for IBD
Modest improvements in CD activity index and endoscopic
appearance of CD were reported in abstract form in a small
series of patients undergoing autologous systemic MSC
treatments. Adverse effects were minimal, so the authors
concluded that MSC therapy is at least safe and feasible.60
The trial is ongoing.
Osiris Therapeutics is testing an allogeneic human MSC
product (OTI-010, Prochymal) for use in stem cell therapy
treatments for GVHD and CD.A Phase II, randomized, mul-
ticenter, open-label pilot trial of OTI-010 for CD refractory
to standard therapy began in 2005. Patients continued their
standard treatment regimen for CD during the trial. In 2006,
Osiris reported in a press release that CD patients treated
with intravenous MSC (n = 9) had a significant decrease
in CD activity index, from 341 to 236, 4 weeks after treat-
ment. Three of the 9 patients had clinical response within
14 days. The trial was very small and lacked controls, but
the MSC treatment was safe and well tolerated. A Phase III
trial is planned.
Local MSC delivery to enhance
healing of enterocutaneous fistula
Perianal fistulae resulting from CD can be very difficult to
treat effectively, leading to pain, distressing leakage, abscess
formation and reduced quality of life. Medical treatment
with 6-mercaptopurine, metronidazole or Infliximab is
often unsuccessful. Surgical treatment may be complicated
by recurrence or anal incontinence. The ability of MSC to
differentiate to a stromal phenotype led to investigation of
adipose-derived autologous MSC to enhance healing of peri-
anal fistula. In a Phase I study, 8 fistulae in 4 CD patients were
treated with local injection of adipose-derived autologous
MSC and fibrin glue. After 8 weeks, 6 of the 8 fistulae had
epithelialized, while two continued to drain.61
In a Phase II study, 49 patients with perianal fistula were
randomized to undergo attempted fistula closure using fibrin
glue, with or without adipose-derived MSC. Fistula healing
occurred in 71% of the patients receiving MSC with fibrin
glue, compared with just 16% of patients treated with fibrin
glue alone.62
Whether the MSC directly engraft the fistula
tract or simply promote closure could not be assessed because
the cells were autologous. Adverse events were generally
unrelated to the treatment, except in the case of one non-IBD
patient who developed a perianal abscess after application
of fibrin glue without MSC. Phase III trials are under way
in Europe.63
Potential risks of stem cell therapies
The risks of autologous or allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation are well known, and include hemorrhage,
sepsis and graft-vs-host disease. Allogeneic bone marrow
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3
Swenson and Theise Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
donors are thoroughly screened to prevent transmission of
infectious diseases, though acute infections may be missed
and laboratory errors are always possible.The production of
clinical-grade human MSC for therapy also requires rigorous
exclusion of infectious bacterial and viral diseases. Unlike
hematopoietic cells, MSC must be expanded in culture under
Good Manufacturing Process conditions, with rigorous
quality controls. In published reports, human MSC were
prepared from autologous donors or from “normal” alloge-
neic donors without further description. It would appear that
the risk of infectious disease or malignancy with autologous
MSC therapy should be low. As with allogeneic hematopoi-
etic or whole-organ transplantation, there is a small risk of
transmission of malignancy from donor to recipient. MSC
themselves may give rise to tumors, though evidence for this
is limited. In one report, mouse bone marrow MSC trans-
duced with nonviral transposons endoding firefly luciferase
or DsRed2 for the purpose of cell tracking were infused
along with whole bone marrow into irradiated recipients.
Unexpectedly, several of the mice developed sarcomas
of MSC origin in the lung or extremity.64
Human MSC
transduced with telomerase acquired a malignant phenotype
during long-term culture, through loss of Ink4a locus
and acquisition of activating mutations in K-ras.65
Mouse
MSC spontaneously transform in culture and contribute to
fibrosarcomas in vivo, in part through acquisition of point
mutations in p53.66
These reports suggest that MSC-derived
tumor formation may be a concern, and long-term MSC
culture is best avoided. Suppression of GVHD by allogeneic
MSC may also be coincident with reduction in the beneficial
graft-vs-tumor effect, therefore it is essential to follow the
long-term incidence of hematologic disease recurrence in
patients treated with MSC.
Conclusions
Autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplant therapy
for refractory IBD remains experimental. This approach
should be limited to patients with severe disease who have
exhausted standard treatment options, and is best performed
in the context of an appropriately designed clinical trial.
Systemic immunomodulatory MSC therapy does not appear
to establish long-term engraftment in the recipient, and does
not require additional immunosuppression.Whether systemic
MSC therapy provides long-term remission of IBD remains
to be determined in a clinical trial. Phase I and II studies
have not raised concerns for safety, particularly with regard
to tumor formation. Local or topical application of MSC to
enhance healing appears to be a promising approach to the
very difficult clinical management of CD fistula which should
be investigated further in clinical trials.
Abbreviations
ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia;AML, acute myelogenous
leukemia; ATG, antithymocyte globulin; BMSC, bone mar-
row stem cells; BMT, bone marrow transplant; CD, Crohn’s
disease; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; Cyc, cyclo-
phosphamide; EAE, experimental autoimmune encephalo-
myelitis; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; ES,
embryonic stem cell; GVHD, graft versus host disease; HLA,
human leukocyte antigen; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease;
iPS, induced pluripotent stem cell; mPBSC, mobilized periph-
eral blood stem cells; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MTX, methotrexate; NHL,
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; PCR, polymerase chain reaction;
TBI, total body irradiation; TNBS, trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid; UC, ulcerative colitis.
Acknowledgment
Swenson – NIH/NIDDK – 1K08-DK073404-04.
Disclosures
The authors report no conflicts of interest.
References
	 1.	 Abraham C, Cho JH. Inflammatory Bowel Disease. N Engl J Med.
2009;361(21):2066–2078.
	 2.	 Van Limbergen J, Russell RK, Nimmo ER, Satsangi J. The genetics
of inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102(12):
2820–2831.
	 3.	 Heap GA, van Heel DA.The genetics of chronic inflammatory diseases.
Hum Mol Genet. 2009;18(R1):R101–R106.
	 4.	 Glocker EO, Kotlarz D, Boztug K, Gertz EM, Schaffer AA, Noyan F,
et al. Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Mutations Affecting the
Interleukin-10 Receptor. N Eng J Med. 2009;361(21):2033–2045.
	 5.	 Pizarro TT, Arseneau KO, Bamias G, Cominelli F. Mouse models for
the study of Crohn’s disease. Trends Mol Med. 2003;9(5):218–222.
	 6.	 Morrissey PJ, Charrier K, Braddy S, Liggitt D, Watson JD. CD4+
T cells that express high levels of CD45RB induce wasting disease
when transferred into congenic severe combined immunodeficient
mice. Disease development is prevented by cotransfer of purified CD4+
T cells. J Exp Med. 1993;178(1):237–244.
	 7.	 Simpson SJ, Mizoguchi E,Allen D, BhanAK,Terhorst C. Evidence that
CD4+, but not CD8+ T cells are responsible for murine interleukin-2-
deficient colitis. Eur J Immunol. 1995;25(9):2618–2625.
	 8.	 Breban M, Fernandez-Sueiro JL, Richardson JA, Hadavand RR,
Maika SD, Hammer RE, et al. T cells, but not thymic exposure to
HLA-B27, are required for the inflammatory disease of HLA-B27
transgenic rats. J Immunol. 1996;156(2):794–803.
	 9.	 Aranda R, Sydora BC, McAllister PL, Binder SW,Yang HY,Targan SR,
et al. Analysis of intestinal lymphocytes in mouse colitis mediated by
transfer of CD4+, CD45RBhighT cells to SCID recipients. J Immunol.
1997;158(7):3464–3473.
10.	 Bamba S, Lee CY, Brittan M, Preston SL, Direkze NC, Poulsom R, et al.
Bone marrow transplantation ameliorates pathology in interleukin-10
knockout colitic mice. J Pathol. 2006;209(2):265–273.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3 
Stem cell therapeutics for IBDDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
11.	 Sonwalkar SA, James RM, Ahmad T, Zhang L, Verbeke CS,
Barnard DL, et al. Fulminant Crohn’s colitis after allogeneic stem
cell transplantation. Gut. 2003;52(10):1518–1521.
12.	 Tyndall A, Walker UA, Cope A, Dazzi F, De Bari C, Fibbe W, et al.
Immunomodulatory properties of mesenchymal stem cells: a review
based on an interdisciplinary meeting held at the Kennedy Institute of
Rheumatology Division, London, UK, 31 October 2005. Arthritis Res
Ther. 2007;9(1):301.
13.	 Theise ND. Stem cell plasticity: tools for investigation and repair.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2005;40 Suppl 1:S48–S49.
14.	 Drakos PE, Nagler A, Or R. Case of Crohn’s disease in bone marrow
transplantation. Am J Hematol. 1993;43(2):157–158.
15.	 OyamaY, Craig RM,TraynorAE, Quigley K, Statkute L, HalversonA,
et al.Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with
refractory Crohn’s disease. Gastroenterology. 2005;128(3):552–563.
16.	 Cassinotti A, Annaloro C, Ardizzone S, Onida F, Della Volpe A,
Clerici M, et al. Autologous haematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion without CD34+ cell selection in refractory Crohn’s disease. Gut.
2008;57(2):211–217.
17.	 Anumakonda V, Hayee B, Chung-Faye G. Remission and relapse of
Crohn’s disease following autologous haematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Gut. 2007;56(9):1325.
18.	 Jacobs P, Vincent MD, Martell RW. Prolonged remission of severe
refractory rheumatoid arthritis following allogeneic bone marrow trans-
plantation for drug-induced aplastic anaemia. Bone MarrowTransplant.
1986;1(2):237–239.
19.	 Eedy DJ, Burrows D, Bridges JM, Jones FG. Clearance of severe
psoriasis after allogenic bone marrow transplantation. BMJ. 1990;
300(6729):908.
20.	 Yin JA, Jowitt SN. Resolution of immune-mediated diseases following
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for leukaemia. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 1992;9(1):31–33.
21.	 Lowenthal RM, Cohen ML, Atkinson K, Biggs JC. Apparent cure of
rheumatoid arthritis by bone marrow transplantation. J Rheumatol.
1993;20(1):137–140.
22.	 Talbot DC, Montes A, Teh WL, Nandi A, Powles RL. Remission of
Crohn’s disease following allogeneic bone marrow transplant for acute
leukaemia. Hosp Med. 1998;59(7):580–581.
23.	 Lopez-Cubero SO, Sullivan KM, McDonald GB. Course of Crohn’s
disease after allogeneic marrow transplantation. Gastroenterology.
1998;114(3):433–440.
24.	 Ditschkowski M, Einsele H, Schwerdtfeger R, Bunjes D, Trenschel R,
Beelen DW, et al. Improvement of inflammatory bowel disease after
allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. Transplantation. 2003;75(10):
1745–1747.
25.	 FriedensteinAJ, Petrakova KV, KurolesovaAI, Frolova GP. Heterotopic
of bone marrow. Analysis of precursor cells for osteogenic and hema-
topoietic tissues. Transplantation. 1968;6(2):230–247.
26.	 Pittenger MF, MackayAM, Beck SC, Jaiswal RK, Douglas R, Mosca JD,
et al. Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells.
Science. 1999;284(5411):143–17.
27.	 Dominici M, Le Blanc K, Mueller I, Slaper-Cortenbach I, Marini F,
Krause D, et al. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal
stromal cells. The International Society for Cellular Therapy position
statement. Cytotherapy. 2006;8(4):315–317.
28.	 da Silva Meirelles L, Chagastelles PC, Nardi NB. Mesenchymal stem
cells reside in virtually all post-natal organs and tissues. J Cell Sci.
2006;119(Pt 11):2204–2213.
29.	 Chamberlain G, Fox J, Ashton B, Middleton J. Concise review:
mesenchymal stem cells: their phenotype, differentiation capac-
ity, immunological features, and potential for homing. Stem Cells.
2007;25(11):2739–2749.
30.	 Keating A. Mesenchymal stromal cells. Curr Opin Hematol.
2006;13(6):419–425.
31.	 Ren G, Zhang L, Zhao X, Xu G, ZhangY, RobertsAI, et al. Mesenchymal
stem cell-mediated immunosuppression occurs via concerted action of
chemokines and nitric oxide. Cell Stem Cell. 2008;2(2):141–150.
32.	 Stappenbeck TS, Miyoshi H. The role of stromal stem cells in tissue
regeneration and wound repair. Science. 2009;324(5935):1666–1669.
33.	 Fouillard L, Bensidhoum M, Bories D, Bonte H, Lopez M, MoseleyAM,
et al. Engraftment of allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells in the bone
marrow of a patient with severe idiopathic aplastic anemia improves
stroma. Leukemia. 2003;17(2):474–476.
34.	 Lazarus HM, Haynesworth SE, Gerson SL, Rosenthal NS, Caplan AI.
Ex vivo expansion and subsequent infusion of  human bone mar-
row-derived stromal progenitor cells (mesenchymal progenitor cells):
implications for therapeutic use. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1995;16(4):
557–564.
35.	 Lazarus HM, Koc ON, Devine SM, Curtin P, Maziarz RT, Holland HK,
et al. Cotransplantation of HLA-identical sibling culture-expanded
mesenchymal stem cells and hematopoietic stem cells in hemato-
logic malignancy patients. Biol Blood MarrowTransplant. 2005;11(5):
389–398.
36.	 Koc ON, Gerson SL, Cooper BW, Dyhouse SM, Haynesworth SE,
Caplan AI, et al. Rapid hematopoietic recovery after coinfusion of
autologous-blood stem cells and culture-expanded marrow mesenchy-
mal stem cells in advanced breast cancer patients receiving high-dose
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(2):307–316.
37.	 Ryan JM, Barry FP, Murphy JM, Mahon BP. Mesenchymal stem cells
avoid allogeneic rejection. J Inflamm (Lond). 2005;26(2):8.
38.	 Nauta AJ, Westerhuis G, Kruisselbrink AB, Lurvink EG, Willemze R,
Fibbe WE. Donor-derived mesenchymal stem cells are immunogenic
in an allogeneic host and stimulate donor graft rejection in a nonmy-
eloablative setting. Blood. 2006;108(6):2114–2120.
39.	 Tyndall A, Gratwohl A. Adult stem cell transplantation in autoimmune
disease. Curr Opin Hematol. 2009;16(4):285–291.
40.	 Tyndall A, Uccelli A. Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells for
autoimmune diseases: teaching new dogs old tricks. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 2009;43(11):821–828.
41.	 Zappia E, Casazza S, Pedemonte E, Benvenuto F, Bonanni I, Gerdoni E,
etal.Mesenchymalstemcellsameliorateexperimentalautoimmuneenceph-
alomyelitis inducing T-cell anergy. Blood. 2005;106(5):1755–1761.
42.	 Gerdoni E, Gallo B, Casazza S, Musio S, Bonanni I, Pedemonte E,
et al. Mesenchymal stem cells effectively modulate pathogenic immune
response in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Ann Neurol.
2007;61(3):219–227.
43.	 Choi JJ,Yoo SA, Park SJ, KangYJ, KimWU, Oh IH, et al. Mesenchymal
stem cells overexpressing interleukin-10 attenuate collagen-induced
arthritis in mice. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008;153(2):269–276.
44.	 Augello A, Tasso R, Negrini SM, Cancedda R, Pennesi G. Cell
therapy using allogeneic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells pre-
vents tissue damage in collagen-induced arthritis. Arthritis Rheum.
2007;56(4):1175–1186.
45.	 Zheng ZH, Li XY, Ding J, Jia JF, Zhu P. Allogeneic mesenchymal stem
cell and mesenchymal stem cell-differentiated chondrocyte suppress the
responses of type II collagen-reactive T cells in rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008;47(1):22–30.
46.	 Lee RH, Seo MJ, Reger RL, Spees JL, Pulin AA, Olson SD, et al.
Multipotent stromal cells from human marrow home to and promote
repair of pancreatic islets and renal glomeruli in diabetic NOD/scid
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103(46):17438–17443.
47.	 Urban VS, Kiss J, Kovacs J, Gocza E, Vas V, Monostori E, et al. Mes-
enchymal stem cells cooperate with bone marrow cells in therapy of
diabetes. Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio). 2008;26(1):244–253.
48.	 Fox JM, Chamberlain G,Ashton BA, Middleton J. Recent advances into
the understanding of mesenchymal stem cell trafficking. Br J Haematol.
2007;137(6):491–502.
49.	 Gao J, Dennis JE, Muzic RF, Lundberg M, Caplan AI. The dynamic
in vivo distribution of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
after infusion. Cells Tissues Organs. 2001;169(1):12–20.
50.	 Devine SM, Bartholomew AM, Mahmud N, Nelson M, Patil S,
Hardy W, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells are capable of homing to the
bone marrow of non-human primates following systemic infusion.
Exp Hematol. 2001;29(2):244–255.
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology 2010:3
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-and-experimental-gastroenterology-journal
Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology is an international, peer-
reviewed, open access journal, publishing all aspects of gastroenterol-
ogy in the clinic and laboratory, including: Pathology, pathophysiology
of gastrointestinal disease; Investigation and treatment of gastointes-
tinal disease; Pharmacology of drugs used in the alimentary tract;
Immunology/genetics/genomics related to gastrointestinal disease.
This journal is indexed on CAS. The manuscript management system
is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review
system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real
quotes from published authors.
10
Swenson and Theise Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
51.	 Devine SM, Cobbs C, Jennings M, Bartholomew A, Hoffman R.
Mesenchymal stem cells distribute to a wide range of tissues follow-
ing systemic infusion into nonhuman primates. Blood. 2003;101(8):
2999–3001.
52.	 Arbab AS, Jordan EK, Wilson LB, Yocum GT, Lewis BK, Frank JA.
In vivo trafficking and targeted delivery of magnetically labeled stem
cells. Hum Gene Ther. 2004;15(4):351–360.
53.	 Shapiro EM, Sharer K, Skrtic S, KoretskyAP. In vivo detection of single
cells by MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2006;55(2):242–249.
54.	 Yanez R, Lamana ML, Garcia-Castro J, Colmenero I, Ramirez M,
Bueren JA. Adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells have
in vivo immunosuppressive properties applicable for the control of the
graft-versus-host disease. Stem Cells. 2006;24(11):2582–2591.
55.	 Frassoni F, Labopin M, BacigalupoA. Expanded mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC), coinfused with HLA identical hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plants, reduce acute and chronic graft-verus-host disease: a matched
pair analysis. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2002;29(Suppl 2):S2.
56.	 Le Blanc K, Rasmusson I, Sundberg B, Gotherstrom C, Hassan M,
Uzunel M, et al. Treatment of severe acute graft-versus-host disease
with third party haploidentical mesenchymal stem cells. Lancet. 2004;
363(9419):1439–1441.
57.	 Parekkadan B, Tilles AW,Yarmush ML. Bone marrow-derived mesen-
chymal stem cells ameliorate autoimmune enteropathy independently
of regulatory T cells. Stem Cells. 2008;26(7):1913–1919.
58.	 Gonzalez MA, Gonzalez-Rey E, Rico L, Buscher D, Delgado M.
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells alleviate experimental
colitis by inhibiting inflammatory and autoimmune responses.
Gastroenterology. 2009;136(3):978–989.
59.	 Gonzalez-Rey E, Anderson P, Gonzalez MA, Rico L, Buscher D,
Delgado M. Human adult stem cells derived from adipose tissue protect
against experimental colitis and sepsis. Gut. 2009;58(7):929–939.
60.	 Duijvestein M,Verwey MH, Fidder HH, van den Brink GR, Roelefs H,
Zwaginga J, et al.Autologous mesenchymal stem cell therapy in patients
with refractory Crohn’s disease. Journal of Crohn’s and Colitis. 2009;
3(1):S46–S47.
61.	 Garcia-Olmo D, Garcia-Arranz M, Herreros D, Pascual I, Peiro C,
Rodriguez-Montes JA.A phase I clinical trial of the treatment of Crohn’s
fistula by adipose mesenchymal stem cell transplantation. Dis Colon
Rectum. 2005;48(7):1416–1423.
62.	 Garcia-Olmo D, Herreros D, Pascual I, Pascual JA, Del-Valle E,
Zorrilla J, et al. Expanded adipose-derived stem cells for the treatment
of complex perianal fistula: a phase II clinical trial. Dis Colon Rectum.
2009;52(1):79–86.
63.	 Garcia-Olmo D, Garcia-Arranz M, Herreros D. Expanded adipose-derived
stem cells for the treatment of complex perianal fistula including
Crohn’s disease. Exp Opin Biol Ther. 2008;8(9):1417–1423.
64.	 Tolar J, Nauta AJ, Osborn MJ, Panoskaltsis Mortari A, McElmurry RT,
Bell S, et al. Sarcoma derived from cultured mesenchymal stem cells.
Stem Cells. 2007;25(2):371–379.
65.	 Serakinci N, Guldberg P, Burns JS, Abdallah B, Schrodder H, Jensen T,
et al. Adult human mesenchymal stem cell as a target for neoplastic
transformation. Oncogene. 2004;23(29):5095–5098.
66.	 Li H, Fan X, Kovi RC, Jo Y, Moquin B, Konz R, et al. Spontaneous
expression of embryonic factors and p53 point mutations in aged mes-
enchymal stem cells: a model of age-related tumorigenesis in mice.
Cancer Res. 2007;67(22):10889–10898.
67.	 Castro J, Bentch HL, Smith L, Kalter S, Bachier C, Meneghetti C,
et al. Prolonged clinical remission in patients with inflammatory bowel
disease after high dose chemotherapy and autologous blood stem cell
transplantation. Blood. 1996;88:133a.
68.	 Kashyap A, Forman SJ. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma resulting in long-term remission of coinci-
dental Crohn’s disease. Br J Haematol. 1998;103(3):651–652.
69.	 Musso M, Porretto F, Crescimanno A, Bondì F, Polizzi V, Scalone R.
Crohn’s disease complicated by relapsed extranodal Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma: prolonged complete remission after unmanipulated PBPC
autotransplant. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2000;26(8):921–923.
70.	 Söderholm JD, Malm C, Juliusson G, Sjödahl R. Long-term endoscopic
remission of crohn disease after autologous stem cell transplantation for
acute myeloid leukaemia. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(5):613–616.
71.	 Kreisel W, Potthoff K, Bertz H, Schmitt-Graeff A, Ruf G, Rasenack J,
et al. Complete remission of Crohn’s disease after high-dose cyclo-
phosphamide and autologous stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 2003;32(3):337–340.
72.	 Scimè R, CavallaroAM,Tringali S, SantoroA, RizzoA, Montalbano L,
et al. Complete clinical remission after high-dose immune suppres-
sion and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in severe
Crohn’s disease refractory to immunosuppressive and immunomodula-
tor therapy. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2004;10(6):892–894.
73.	 Fortun PJ, Hawkey CJ. The role of stem cell transplantation in inflam-
matory bowel disease. Autoimmunity. 2008;41(8):654–659.
