© 2009 Ria et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4 413–423
Clinical Interventions in Aging
413
r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Managing myelodysplastic symptoms
in elderly patients
R Ria
M Moschetta
A Reale
G Mangialardi
A Castrovilli
A Vacca
F Dammacco
Department of Biomedical Sciences
and Human Oncology, Section
of Internal Medicine and Clinical
Oncology, University of Bari Medical
School, Bari, Italy
Correspondence: Roberto Ria
Department of Internal Medicine
and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari
Medical School, Policlinico – Piazza Giulio
Cesare, 11 I-70124 Bari, Italy
Tel +39-080-547-83-87
Fax +39-080-547-88-59
Email ria@dimo.uniba.it
Abstract: Most patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are elderly (median age
range 65 to 70 years); as a consequence, the incidence and prevalence of these diseases are
rising as the population ages. Physicians are often uncertain about how to identify patients who
may benefit from specific treatment strategies. The International Prognostic Scoring System
is a widely used tool to assess the risk of transformation to leukemia and to guide treatment
decisions, but it fails to take into account many aspects of treating elderly patients, including
comorbid illnesses, secondary causes of MDS, prior therapy for MDS, and other age-related
health, functional, cognitive, and social problems that affect the outcome and managing of
myelodysplastic symptoms. Patients with low-risk disease traditionally have been given only
best supportive care, but evidence is increasing that treatment with novel non-conventional drugs
such as lenalidomide or methyltransferase inhibitors may influence the natural history of the
disease and should be used in conjunction with supportive-care measures. Supportive care of
these patients could also be improved in order to enhance their quality of life and functional
performance. Elderly patients commonly have multiple medical problems and use medica-
tions to deal with these. In addition, they are more likely to have more than one health care
provider.These factors all increase the risk of drug interactions and the consequent treatment of
toxicities. Manifestations of common toxicities or illnesses may be more subtle in the elderly,
owing to age-associated functional deficits in multiple organ systems. Particularly important to
the elderly MDS patient is the age-related decline in normal bone marrow function, including
the diminished capacity of response to stressors such as infection or myelosuppressive treat-
ments. Through the integration of geriatric and oncological strategies, a personalized approach
toward this unique population may be applied. As with many diseases in the elderly, reliance
on family members or friends to maintain the prescribed treatments, including travel to and
from appointments, may place additional stressors on the patient and his/her support network.
Careful evaluation and knowledge of functional status, ability to tolerate treatments, effect of
disease progression, and general overall health conditions can provide the best opportunity to
support these patients. Immediate assessment of daily living activities may detect deficiencies
or deficits that often require early interventions.
Keywords: elderly, myelodysplastic syndromes, novel agents, supportive-care, treatment
strategies
Introduction
Aging is associated with a higher risk of developing malignant diseases in general
together with increased vulnerability to other age-related health, functional, and
social problems. The majority of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
are older than 55 years of age. Aging is an important risk factor for the development
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Interventions in Aging
14 October 2009
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4414
Ria et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
of these diseases. Uncertainty persists about how to identify
patients who would benefit most from intensive curative
treatment such as hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) or from no or low-intensity treatment with growth
factors, immunomodulating agents, or low-intensity
chemotherapy for managing disease symptoms. Some
patients may do best with supportive care alone or may not
be candidates for any treatment at all. As the proportion of
older persons in the population increases, it will become
extremely important to identify which older patients are most
suitable for different types of therapy.
Epidemiology
MDS comprise a heterogenous group of disorders which are
the most common hematologic diseases in elderly patients.
The incidence of MDS from 2001 to 2003 was 3.3 per
100,000.1
The overall 3-year survival rate was 45%; lower
for males than for females. In 2004 it was estimated that
there were about 9,700 patients with MDS in the United
States, a number that may underestimate its prevalence. MDS
incidence rates significantly increased with each calendar
year from 2001 to 2004 and only 4% of patients were reported
to registries by physicians’offices.1
Data to support a higher
incidence of MDS in the United States can be inferred
from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES III).2
These show that the prevalence of
anemia rose sharply in adults over 50, exceeding 20% for
those aged 85 and older. Overall, 11% of men and 10.2% of
women 65-years or older were anemic. One-third of those
with anemia presented evidence of nutrient deficiency,
another third presented anemia of chronic disease and/or
renal insufficiency, and those remaining were diagnosed
with unexplained anemia. MDS is likely to be a more precise
diagnosis for many patients classified as having unexplained
anemia. Among them, 17.2% (5.8% of the total population
with anemia) had macrocytosis accompanied by neutropenia
or thrombocytopenia, suggesting that the population of
patients with MDS may be higher than estimated.2
Clinical features
MDS constitutes a heterogenous group of hematopoietic stem
cell disorders (Table 1) which are characterized by various
degrees of anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia,
as well as an increased risk for developing acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Hematopoietic progenitors in MDS show
a decreased capacity for differentiation and an increased
tendency for apoptosis leading to ineffective hematopoiesis.
Cytogenetic and molecular data provide evidence for a
clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorder in the majority of
cases. Cause, unless associated with prior chemotherapy,
radiation, or toxic exposure, eludes discovery.4,5
In most cases,
ineffective hematopoiesis leads to compensatory bone marrow
hyperplasia. Over time many patients develop an increase in
bone marrow blasts, about 30% developing AML.
The clinical variation MDS presents ranges from
indolent to life-threatening. Up to 10% of patients with MDS
experience serious bleeding, including hematuria and gastro-
intestinal, retinal, and central nervous system hemorrhage.
They may also develop Sweet’s syndrome, splenomegaly
(in 10% to 20% of patients), and hepatomegaly (5% to 26%).
In chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, however, the incidence
of splenomegaly and hepatomegaly increases to 30% to 50%,
and the spleen may be massively enlarged. In general, lymph
node enlargement is seen in 5% to 15% of these cases.
To assist in decision making regarding treatment, a risk-
adapted approach has been adopted and is widely accepted.
The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) (Table 2)
is based on karyotype, number of significantly cytopenias,
and percentage of bone marrow myeloblasts. It provides a tool
to measure the probability of survival and risk for progression
towards AML in untreated patients with MDS. The IPSS
is widely accepted as a valid tool to measure prognosis, and
the cytogenetic risk stratification system of the IPSS has
proven to be an independent prognostic marker in studies
of high-risk MDS and AML following MDS.6
According to recommendations of an International
Working Group, the major goal of therapy for patients with
lower-risk disease (low-risk and intermediate-1 categories,
as defined by the IPSS) is hematologic improvement and
management of symptoms with the aim of improving the
quality of life.7
For higher-risk patients (intermediate-2 and high-risk
categories), the focus turns to modifying the natural history
of the disease and extending survival.8
These prognostically
distinct therapeutic achievements have only recently been
identified as new data demonstrate certain therapies for
lower-risk may modify the overall course of the disease
improving survival and quality of life. Supportive care
for MDS includes red blood cell transfusion, platelet
transfusion, iron chelation therapy to reduce transfusional
hemosiderosis, and hematologic growth factors (when
appropriate) to raise neutrophil and hemoglobin levels.
New therapies for this disease, including low-intensity
chemotherapies and immunomodulators, may enhance
hematologic improvement, decrease the rate of leukemic
transformation, and improve overall survival; they are now
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4 415
MDS in the elderlyDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
being used to treat low-risk disease.9
For patients with
high-risk disease, high-intensity treatments such as leukemia-
type induction therapy and HSCT are used and are briefly
taken into consideration in this review.
As more low-risk patients are being treated with low-
intensity chemotherapy and immunomodulating agents, with
the aim of altering the trajectory of the disease, the IPSS
classificationsystem,whichemphasizespretreatmentprognos-
tic factors, becomes more difficult to apply and is becoming an
outdated measuring tool. Several investigators have proposed
alternative prognostic tools including serial application and
incorporatingWorld Health Organization criteria into the IPSS
(becoming WPSS),10
adding serum lactate dehydrogenase as
a prognostic variable,11
and more risk stratification of low-risk
disease.12
Newprognosticscoringmethodshavebeenproposed
by the M.D. Anderson group, taking into account prior low-
intensitytreatment,secondarydisease,performancestatus,and
transfusion requirements, in addition to measurements used in
Table 1 WHO classification and criteria for the myelodysplastic syndromes3
Disorder Peripheral blood Bone marrow
Refractory anemia (RA) Anemia Erythroid dysplasia only
No or rare blasts 5% blasts
15% ringed sideroblasts
Refractory anemia with ringed
sideroblasts (RARS)
Anemia Erythroid dysplasia only
No blasts 5% blasts
15% ringed sideroblasts
Refractory cytopenia with multilineage
dysplasia (RCMD)
Bi- or pan-cytopenia Dysplasia in 10% of cells in 2 or more
myeloid cell lines
No or rare blasts No Auer rods
No Auer rods 5% blasts
Monocytes 1,000/µL 15% ringed sideroblasts
Refractory cytopenia with multilineage
dysplasia and ringed sideroblasts
(RCMD-RS)
Bi- or pan-cytopenia Dysplasia in 10% of cells in 2 or more
myeloid cell lines
No or rare blasts No Auer rods
No Auer rods 5% blasts
Monocytes 1,000/µL 15% ringed sideroblasts
Refractory anemia with excess blasts-1
(RAEB-1)
Cytopenias Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia
5% blasts 5% to 9% blasts
No Auer rods No Auer rods
Monocytes 1,000/µL
Refractory anemia with excess blasts-2
(RAEB-2)
Cytopenias Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia
5% to 19% blasts 10% to 19% blasts
Auer rods ± Auer rods ±
Monocytes 1,000/µL
MDS-unclassified (MDS-U) Cytopenias Unilineage dysplasia in granulocytes
or megakaryocytes
No or rare blasts No Auer rods
No Auer rods 5% blasts
MDS with del (5q) “5q-syndrome” Anemia Normal to increased megakaryocytes with
hypolobulated nuclei
5% blasts No Auer rods
Platelets usually normal
or increased
5% blasts Isolated del (5q)
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4416
Ria et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
the IPSS.13
In addition to the biologic and clinical properties
of MDS, however, the treatment becomes significantly com-
plicated due to the older population, their co-morbid illnesses,
difficulties of access to care, social situations, cognitive status,
and the large variation in functional status. Given these fac-
tors, decision making about treatment for elderly patients is
extremely complex and geriatric factors need to be incorpo-
rated into prognostic scoring for MDS.
Quality of life in MDS patients
When treatments are unsatisfactory there are two main areas to
be taken into consideration. In the first, therapeutic approaches
which alleviate symptoms but do not affect the underlying
disease or prognosis are taken into account. In the second a
therapeutic benefit in terms of prognosis is achieved, but a
considerable price of toxicity or hospitalization is expected.
Quality of life could be defined as a multidimensional
construct based on somatic, emotional, mental, social and
behavioral components of well-being and function from the
point of view of the patient and/or external observers.14
MDS seriously affect the quality of life of patients.
Although there have been considerable improvements in
available therapies, once diagnosed, the disease will dominate
much of the remaining time of the patient and potentially
be the cause of death unless competing co-morbidities are
present or allogeneic stem cell transplant is possible.
Suffering from MDS causes a substantial and persistent
functional decrement in a variety of areas, including the
above mentioned, partially due to fatigue (81% of patients).
A negative impact on quality of life results from the time
and effort required to cope with the disease such as frequent
visits to doctors, administering therapy, and managing side
effects. Patients have often viewed the emotional impact of
MDS (shock, anger, depression, and anxiety) as being more
problematic than the physical consequences.
Among the cytopenias which define MDS, anemia has
the most prominent influence. Low hemoglobin values
are a key determinant of fatigue, a key determinant of
quality of life. Although frequent and unusual infections
may contribute to physical complaints, this is rarely a
major issue in the early stages of the disease. MDS related
thrombocytopenic bleeding is usually confined to later
stages and progression to leukemia. Moreover, there may
be other physiological (rather than psychological) reasons.
For other neoplastic diseases, it has been shown that altered
cytokine levels contribute to alterations of physical and
psychological well-being,15
which may be the case in patients
with MDS/leukemia;16,17
in polytransfused patients the
evolving secondary hemochromatosis may also contribute
to the number of symptoms MDS patients have to bear.
Manifestations may range from increased fatigue to overt
heart failure, but due to the underlying disease and the high
rate of co-morbidity in the elderly patients, it remains difficult
to ascertain the contribution of the various etiologies to the
respective symptom.18
Management
Observation (‘watch and wait’)
Observation with periodic blood counts, also called
‘watch and wait’, is generally recommended for a patient
Table 2 International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS)7
Factor Value IPSS score Notes
Blasts 5% or less 0
5% to 10% 0.5
11% to 20% 1.5
21% to 30% 2.0
Cytogenetics = Good 0 Normal; -Y only; 5q- only; or 20q- only
= Intermediate 0.5 Abnormalities other than good or poor
= Poor 1.0 Complex; 3 or more abnormalities or abnormal chromosome 7
Cytopenias 0/1
2/3
0
0.5
Hemoglobin 10 g/dL; absolute neutrophil count (ANC) 1,500/µL;
platelet count 100,000/µL; each count as a value of 1.
Notes: The numeric scores for the blast %, the cytogenetic changes and the cytopenias are combined to give the total numeric score.  The scores equal a risk category:
  •  Low.
  •  Intermediate-1.
  •  Intermediate-2.
  •  High.
The risk categories are sometimes combined as
  •  Low and intermediate-1 = low-risk MDS.
  •  Intermediate-2 and high = high-risk MDS.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4 417
MDS in the elderlyDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
with a low or intermediate-1 risk hemoglobin level
greater than 10 g/dL and platelet counts of 50,000/µL to
100,000/µL, without need for transfusion. These patients
may be able to maintain their usual activity levels without
therapy.
Some patients have little change in status for years.
However, regular check-ups are important, in that there
is a risk of progression to more severe forms of MDS or
AML. It is therefore important for a patient to have an MDS
specialist do periodic health status evaluations and monitor
blood cell counts on a regular basis.
Anemia in MDS: its importance
in the geriatric patient
Recent, extended, observational epidemiologic studies have
consistently documented that anemia, even if not severe, is
strongly and independently associated with major adverse
functional outcomes in community-dwelling of older
adults, including the decline in physical and cognitive
function, frailty, and disability.19
Evidence has also shown
that anemia interacts with common co-morbidities to
synergistically increase the risk of outcomes such as frailty
and mortality.20,21
Anemia is most often defined by World
Health Organization criteria (hemoglobin 12 g/dL for
women and 13 g/dL for men), but these criteria do not
consider the debilitating effects of mild anemia on the
elderly population. It is not clear if a lower hemoglobin
concentration for post-menopausal women is valid or
whether the same threshold should be used for both men and
women.22
Racial differences may be important in assessing
optimal hemoglobin concentration, and this research will
be important in determining the best supportive care for
MDS patients. More research involving the community-
dwelling of the elderly population is needed to determine
optimal hemoglobin levels for elderly patients and the effect
of treatment for mild anemia on outcome. Patients with
MDS often have severe anemia, which contributes to their
overall prognosis, exacerbating the symptoms of co-morbid
illnesses and influencing functional, cognitive, and social
deterioration in their lives. Using current prognostic scales,
anemia in all MDS patients should be aggressively treated to
improve functional and cognitive status in order to improve
quality of life.
Anemia in MDS: supportive care strategies
Red blood cell transfusion
Initiation of transfusion therapy should be based on clinical
evaluation of anemia-related symptoms and co-morbid
illness rather than on a defined hemoglobin level, especially
because optimal hemoglobin levels have not been defined for
the elderly population.23
In clinical practice, pre-transfusion
hemoglobin levels in MDS are generally maintained
between 8 and 10 g/dL, but all quality of life studies show
significantly greater fatigue and dyspnea in MDS patients
rather than in healthy controls, and it is not known whether
a more liberal transfusion strategy can improve quality of
life or outcome.24
Iron chelation therapy
Chronically transfused MDS patients invariably develop iron
overload, which can lead to organ damage and dysfunction.
Evidence of the direct role of iron in organ damage in MDS
is still limited, and clinical information is usually inferred
from other transfusion-dependent anemias, especially
thalassemia. The time from onset of transfusion to the
development of organ damage caused by iron overload is
well defined in the thalassemia cohort, but this time may not
apply to the elderly MDS patient.
There is evidence from a small-scale study that iron
chelation has efficacy in elderly MDS patients. The
administration of oral deferasirox (Exjade®
: 20 to 40 mg/kg
per day) in transfusion-dependent MDS patients induces
a significant decrement of the mean serum ferritin after
12 months of therapy. The labile plasma iron concentration
normalized in all patients within 3 months and was sustained
throughout the first year of treatment. Reversible elevation in
serum creatinine occurred in 25% of the patients.25
Moreover, in patients who received standard chelation
therapy with subcutaneous deferoxamine (Desferal®
),
deferiprone (Ferriprox®
), or deferasirox, or low-dose
chelation with subcutaneous bolus deferoxamine or
intravenous deferoxamine after transfusions the median
overall survival from the time of diagnosis was better
than in nonchelated patients (115 months vs 51 months;
P  0.0001). After stratification by prognostic variables
including IPSS category, age, sex, and transfusion require-
ments, the survival difference favoring the chelated group
remained significant.26
Although these studies suggest that iron chelation
treatment is beneficial, there are still uncertainties. More
research needs to be done to determine the best time to initiate
treatment. Oral iron chelation therapy is expensive and is
linked to renal insufficiency.This therapy may be difficult for
older patients to tolerate. More intense studies are needed to
determine the survival benefit, cost feasibility, and the right
moment to begin the therapy.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4418
Ria et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents
Recombinant human erythropoietins in doses ranging from
30,000 to 60,000 units/week can be effective in MDS.
A meta-analysis of more than 200 patients from 17 studies
showed that treatment rHuEpo as monotherapy induced
erythroid responses in about 15% of patients with MDS.27
Two phase 3, randomized controlled trials evaluated the
use of rHuEpo vs placebo. The larger of these studies
enrolled 87 patients with hemoglobin less than 9 g/dL and
bone marrow blasts less than 10%. The response rate was
37%. Patients with refractory anemia (RA) in the French-
American-British (FAB) classification system had a higher
probability of response, but in patients with refractory
anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RAS) and refractory
anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), the responses were not
significantly different from those with placebo. A higher
response rate was observed in patients without prior trans-
fusions and in those with low pretreatment erythropoietin
levels (150 to 200 U/L).28
The most widely adopted response criteria are those
of the Nordic and French MDS Groups, which define a
complete erythroid response as an increase in hemoglobin
level to at least 11.5 g/dL without red blood cell transfusions;
a partial erythroid response is defined as no transfusion
requirement or an increased hemoglobin level of more than
1.5 g/dL for patients with non-transfused anemia.29
There is
no consistent information on the length of treatment before
assessing response. Most often, responses occur between
12 and 16 weeks, but additional responses may be observed
if treatment is continued as long as 6 months. In a phase II
trial in 281 MDS patients conducted for The Greek MDS
Study Group Terpos et al prolonged administration of
rHuEpo produces high and long-lasting erythroid response
rete in MDS patients with low blast counts, particularly in
those with pretreatment serum Epo levels of  150 U/L and
good cytogenetic prognosis.30
They evaluated the response to
treatment after 12 and 26 weeks of therapy with a significant
increase in response rate observed at week 26 in RA, RARS
and RAEB-I patients, as the response probability increased
with treatment duration.
Treatment with darbepoetin alpha, a highly glycosylated
erythropoiesis-stimulating agent with a longer half-life than
epoetin alpha, has produced comparable response rates at
dosing intervals ranging from 1 to 3 weeks.31
Treatment with
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents may improve quality of life
in patients and reduce the need for transfusion support.
Golshayan et al conducted a pooled analysis in 1,869
MDS patients with low-risk disease according to treatment
with erythropoiesis-stimulating agents.32
A survival benefit
was observed in patients who received an erythropoiesis-
stimulating agent, and this difference was maintained even
after outcomes were corrected for FAB type, baseline
transfusion requirements, IPSS category, prior treatments,
and interval from diagnosis.
Treatment with erythropoiesis-stimulating agents has
come under scrutiny during the past year. The US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has strengthened safety
warnings based on concerns in solid-tumor trials showing
increased mortality from the underlying disease and increased
risk for thromboembolism, particularly in studies targeting
higher hemoglobin levels (12 mg/dL). This information
prompted the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
to limit coverage for erythropoiesis-stimulating agents for the
treatment of chemotherapy-induced anemia, but they have
elected to exclude MDS from the national coverage decision.
Available data involving the use of erythropoiesis-stimulating
agents in MDS show that these agents improve symptoms
and decrement transfusion requirements.The extent to which
they improve functional and cognitive symptoms associated
with anemia in MDS patients has not been documented and
should be a focus for further research.
Treatment of other cytopenias
Neutropenia and secondary infections
Severe neutropenia in low-risk MDS usually occurs in the
setting of pancytopenia, but can be an isolated clinical
problem. There is no indication for prophylactic use of
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in MDS,
but this drug can be an option for individual patients with
severe neutropenia and recurrent infections. Prophylactic
antibiotics are also used in MDS patients with neutropenia.
Many studies document the efficacy of using prophylactic
fluoroquinolone antibiotics in neutropenic patients to prevent
febrile neutropenia and bacteremia and to reduce days of
hospitalization.33
Prophylaxis in elderly MDS patients has drawbacks
that need to be considered. Numerous reports have linked
the use of prophylactic antibiotics to the emergence
of resistant organisms, an important consideration for
patients who may be expected to have neutropenia for a
long period.
Where there are high levels of resistance to fluoro-
quinolones (such as in some nursing homes and assisted
living communities), the resistance pattern should prompt a
reconsideration of prophylactic strategies. It is also important
to ensure that prophylactic antibiotics and antifungals do
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4 419
MDS in the elderlyDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
not interact with other medications in patients using large
numbers of prescription drugs to treat co-morbid illnesses.
These patients may also need assistance to administer
medications.
Thrombocytopenia and bleeding-related disorders
Severe thrombocytopenia with chronic bleeding is a serious
clinical problem in MDS and is associated with shortened
survival and impaired quality of life. Platelet transfusions
may provide short-term relief for bleeding tendencies but
cannot prevent long-term symptoms.
Megakaryocytopoiesis has been difficult to stimulate
in vivo. The FDA recently approved a drug for treatment of
immune thrombocytopenia, namely AMG 531. This drug is
currently in clinical trial for MDS patients and may prove
beneficial to elderly patients with this disease.34
Treatment strategies
Curative therapy for MDS
High-dose chemotherapy followed by HSCT is presently the
only treatment with curative potential in MDS. Historically,
experience has demonstrated that about 40% of patients
may be cured with hematopoietic stem cell transplant, but
advanced age, co-morbid medical problems, procedure
morbidity and mortality, and lack of donor availability limit
the procedure to a small, select minority.35,36
In particular
subjects older than 50 years, age and blast percentage
at HSCT are the most important factors for outcome of
trasplanted patients37,38
and for the choice of myeloablative or
non-myeloablative conditioning regimen.39
Moreover, due to
increasing age that non-myeloablative transplant will be done,
the availability of transplant for elderly MDS is expanding.
Decision models are available to assist in determining
which MDS patients should undergo hematopoietic stem cell
transplant and whether they are fit.40,41
However, these models
do not consider functional, cognitive, and social situations that
affect elderly patients’long-term ability to lead independent,
functional lives and to maintain an acceptable quality of life
after transplantation. Optimal models for selection of older
patients for aggressive therapy with hematopoietic stem cell
transplant have not been developed.
Non-curative therapy for MDS
Growth factors can be an effective tool in treating low risk
MDS, but the vast majority of MDS patients with transfu-
sion requirements of two units of red blood cells per month
or elevated erythropoietin levels are unlikely to respond to
this treatment.
In the past decades many attempts to improve survival of
MDS patients have been made, but the results have always
been disappointing.
Hormonal therapy
Hormone therapy has been used to improve hematologic
parameters in MDS patients.Androgens have been suggested
to improve anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, but
results from trials have been inconsistent.42
Differentiating agents
Low-dose cytarabine has been reported to possess the ability
to induce differentiation of the leukemic cell line in vitro,
and trials have been done on patients with MDS.43–45
Retinoid
differentiating activity has been established in studies of
promyelocytic leukemia, but trials in MDS, however, have
failed to show any impact.46
Retinoic acid may also accelerate
the transformation of MDS toAML,47
but again studies on the
treatment of MDS patients with other differentiating agents
such as vitamin D3, interferon alpha, and interferon gamma
are quite disappointing.48
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy trials for MDS using standard antileukemic
drugs in different dosages and combinations using daunoru-
bicin, cytosine arabinoside (ara-C), 6-thioguanine indicate
that CRs have occurred (8% to 56%) but at the cost of a high
incidence of deaths from toxicity (24% to 64%).48
While the majority of MDS and MDS/AML patients
have hypercellular bone marrow, 10% to 15% have marrow
hypocellularity. Hypocellular MDS patients may have
longer survival and may progress to AML less frequently.
These hypocellular MDS/AML patients represent the best
candidates to observation or growth factors administration
also because with chemotherapy they may have more
complications and less chance of achieving remission.49
New strategies
There is evidence that treating patients with immunomodu-
latory therapy or low-intensity therapy may alter the long-
term course of the disease and improve quality of life and
survival.
Lenalidomide (Revlimid®
)
The pathogenesis of MDS involves a complex biologic
interaction that fosters increased angiogenesis, overproduc-
tion of proinflammatory cytokines, accelerated apoptosis
of hematopoietic progenitors, and autocrine stimulation by
vascular endothelial growth factor. Immunomodulatory drugs
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4420
Ria et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
such as lenalidomide can alter the bone marrow environment
and can potentially interfere with this complex series of
events. Lenalidomide is a second-generation immunomodu-
latory drug; it is more potent and less neurotoxic than its
predecessor, thalidomide.The MDS-003 clinical trial was the
pivotal study evaluating the efficacy of lenalidomide in lower-
risk, transfusion-dependent patients with a chromosome 5q31
deletion, with or without other cytogenetic abnormalities.
The clinical trial showed that 76% of patients who received
lenalidomide had a 50% or greater reduction in transfusion
requirements; 67% became transfusion-independent, with a
rise in hemoglobin of 1 g/dL or more. The median duration
of transfusion independence was 2 years.The most common
adverse events were neutropenia and thrombocytopenia.50
Lenalidomide has also been evaluated in low-risk
patients without del(5q). In a large, multicenter trial, 56 of
214 patients achieved red blood cell transfusion indepen-
dence with a rise in hemoglobin of 1 g/dL or more, and an
additional 17% had a 50% or greater reduction in transfusion
requirements.51
An advantage of using this agent to treat elderly patients
with MDS is that it is an oral agent that can be easily managed
in the outpatient setting. Patients need careful monitoring of
blood counts and supportive transfusion, but they do not need
to come to the physician’s office to receive infusional therapy
and do not need any inpatient monitoring.
Methyltransferase inhibitors
Hypermethylation of cytoside residues on DNA and
consequent chromatin condensation are key features of the
malignant phenotype that lead to epigenetic silencing of
genes involved in the control of normal cell growth and differ-
entiation. Methyltransferase inhibitors are a class of medica-
tions that deplete nuclear DNA methyltransferase, the enzyme
responsible for methylation of the DNA; as a consequence,
they promote demethylation in newly synthesized DNA.
Two Methyltransferase inhibitors are approved for treat-
ment of MDS: azacitidine and decitabine. Both are cytosine
analogues that are distinguished by their sugar moieties,
which may account for different activity.
Azacitidine (Vidaza®
)
Encouraging results from the phase 2 trials of azacitidine,
initiated by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B, led to a phase
3 study that compared treatment with azacitidine vs best
supportive care in patients with MDS (any FAB subtype).
Patients in the best supportive care arm were allowed to cross
over to azacitidine if they experienced progression of disease.
Responses to azacitidine were observed in all FAB subtypes,
with a complete response (CR) plus partial response (PR)
in 22% and hematologic improvement in 37% of patients.
Median time to AML transformation was 13 months in the
best supportive care group compared with 21 months in the
azacitidine arm (P = 0.007).52
A phase 3, randomized, multicenter trial (AZA-001)
compared azacitidine treatment using the FDA-approved
dosing schedule with conventional care regimens in
previously untreated patients having IPSS intermediate-2
or high-risk RAEB, RAEB in transformation (RAEB-t),
or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.53
Before randomiza-
tion, patients selected three Conventional Care Regimens
strategies: a) best supportive care; b) low-dose cytarabine;
c) standard AML-type induction therapy with consolidation
chemotherapy. Azacitidine was continued until evidence of
disease progression or treatment intolerance. In this study,
358 patients were randomized to either azacitidine (n = 179)
or conventional care regimens (n = 179) with a primary
endpoint of overall survival. Azacitidine was administered
for a median of nine cycles. There was a significantly
improvement in overall survival (median, 24.4 months vs
15 months with conventional care regimens; P = 0.0001,
hazard ratio = 0.058) across all IPSS categories. Survival
after 2 years was nearly doubled with azacitidine (51% vs
26%, P  0.0001). Azacitidine treatment was superior to all
conventional care regimens, with corresponding extension
in median overall survival of 12.9 months vs best supportive
care, 9.1 months vs low-dose cytarabine, and 8.7 months
vs standard induction therapy. Response rates also favored
azacitidine; more patients achieved major and minor
responses with azacitidine than with any conventional care
regimens.53
The improvement in overall survival despite
a modest CR rate of 17% indicates that azacitidine acts
in a distinctive way that differs from that of conventional
cytotoxic drugs and leads to reduced leukemic potential.
Decitabine (Dacogen®
)
A phase 3 trial of another MTI, decitabine, led to FDA
approval for this drug for the treatment of AML and MDS
(intermediate-1, intermediate-2, and high-risk IPSS).
Patients were randomized to receive best supportive care
or decitabine (15 mg/m2
), given intravenously over 3 hours
every 8 hours for 3 days and repeated every 6 weeks for
up to 6 cycles. Patients who received best supportive care
could cross over and receive decitabine after transformation
to AML. End points for the trial were CR and PR, time into
AML transformation, or death.The overall response rate was
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4 421
MDS in the elderlyDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
30% (CR 9%, PR 8%, hematologic improvement 13%), but
there was no difference between treatment arms in the median
time to death or transformation intoAML. Overall mortality
in patients treated with decitabine was 10%; neutropenia
developed in 87% of these patients and grade 3 or 4 throm-
bocytopenia occurred in 85%.54
Apparently the two phase III trials on methyltransferase
inhibitors have different results, but they cannot be correctly
compared because of the different design of the 2 studies.
In fact, the control harm are quite different: in the study of
azacitidine the control harm is composed by best supportive
care, low-dose cytarabine, or intensive chemotherapy as
selected by investigators before randomization, while in the
decitabine study the control harm is only best supportive care.
However, the comparison of results obtained in decitabine
trial with the group received only best supportive care in the
control harm of azacitidine study gave similar results.
Antithymocyte globulin
(ATG;  Thymoglobuline®
;  Atgam®
)
Some MDS patients have disease characterized by lympho-
cytes that destroy precursors of normal red cells, neutrophils
and platelets. ATG is an immune globulin that is obtained
from rabbits or horses and is given intravenously, destroys
lymphocytes and improves blood counts in some MDS
patients. A single course of ATG restored hemopoiesis in
some patients with MDS, particularly in patients with RA
and RAEB with a median response duration of 10 months
and is well tolerated with only immediate fever and chills as
common side effects after ATG administration.55
It is possible to identify patients with better or worse
chances of responding to ATG or other immunosuppressive
agents such as cyclosporine.56–58
These are those with low
or intermediate-1 IPSS risk or that express HLA-DR15
antigen.
Current clinical trials in MDS
The goal of clinical trials for MDS is to improve treatment and
quality of life and to increase survival. Patients’participation
in clinical trials is needed to improve standard therapies, so
that all MDS patients can one day be cured of this disease.
Some clinical trials are for all MDS-risk types; others are for
either lower-risk or higher-risk MDS. Patients should speak
to their doctors about the benefits of treatment in a specific
clinical trial. Eligibility for a trial may depend on the patient’s
age, risk type and previous treatment for MDS.
There are several clinical trials to study treatment with
combinations of FDA-approved drugs, such as azacitidine
or decitabine, and AML-type chemotherapy. The idea of
combining agents is that, since each works in different ways
to kill cancer cells, using them together may kill more MDS
cells or be as effective as standard MDS therapies, but with
less-toxic side effects.
Trials are currently estimating: i) the effectiveness of
arsenic trioxide (Trisenox®
) in combination with azaciti-
dine or with tipifarnib (Zarnestra®
), a farnesyl transferase
inhibitor, and gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg®
); ii) if the
duration of response improves with azacitidine maintenance
for patients who achieve a complete or partial remission after
intensive chemotherapy; iii) the effectiveness of clofarabine
(Clolar®
) in combination with AML-type chemotherapy;
iv) the effect of lonafarnib (Sarasar®
) and tipifarnib
(Zarnestra®
) on transfusion independence for patients
who receive between 1 to 8 platelet transfusions every
4 weeks; v) the effectiveness of valproic acid (Depakene®
)
in combination with decitabine; vi) the effectiveness of
vorinostat (Zolinza®
) in combination with azacitidine.
Conclusions
There are many complex variables in the treatment of elderly
patients with MDS. As the elderly population increases
worldwide, the proportion of elderly patients with MDS
will also rise and the costs of treating this disease will
be substantial. Evidence-based strategies are needed to
determine which patients are best suited to low-intensity
treatment, high-intensity treatment with hematopoietic stem
cell transplant, best supportive care, or no treatment. These
stratification methods should consider biologic factors of
the disease, co-morbid illness, depression, functional status,
cognitive status, and social situation.
TomakeachoiceofmanagementinolderMDSpatientsthe
first step must be an integrating geriatric and oncology nursing
strategiesallowsanindividualizedapproachtowardthisunique
population. All the factors influence the potential inability of
the older patient to tolerate certain intensive forms of therapy
mustbeconsideredandparticularlymultiplemedicalproblems
affect older population and use medications to manage them.
Particularly important in the elderly MDS patient is the evalua-
tionoftheage-relateddeclineinnormalbonemarrowfunction,
including diminished capacity for response to stressors such
as infection or myelosuppressive treatments. Further observa-
tion may be useful to determine if the patient has an indolent
or progressive course, to evaluate if the MDS is presented as
isolated but persistent mild anemia or as a more progressive
and aggressive anemia state that accumulates excess blasts
in the marrow and leads to fatal AML. So, patients may be
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4422
Ria et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
categorized by age, co-morbidities and by stable vs unstable
disease before suggesting specific treatment approaches.
To improve access to treatment, emphasis must be placed
on oral therapies, which can be easily administered in the
outpatient setting with growth-factor support to minimize
transfusion. Intensive efforts are needed to find strategies that
keepelderlypatientsfunctionalandintheirhomesduringtreat-
ment, minimizing time in the physician’s office and hospital.
In conclusion, careful evaluation of functional status,
ability to tolerate treatments, effect of disease progression,
and general overall health can provide the best opportunity
for support of older patients, considering that palliation
and supportive care represent important components to
maximizing quality of life.
Disclosures
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Associazione Italiana per la
Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC), Milan; the Ministry of Education,
Universities and Research (MIUR, PRIN Projects 2008); the
Ministry of Health, Progetto Oncologia 2006, Humanitas
Mirasole S.p.A., Rome, Italy.
The authors would like to thank Prof C Perillo for English
editing of the manuscript.
References
	 1.	 Rollison DE, Howlader N, Smith MT, et al. Epidemiology of
myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myeloproliferative disorders
in the United States 2001–2004, using data from the NAACCR and
SEER programs. Blood. 2008;112:45–52.
	 2.	 Guralnik JM, Eisenstaedt RS, Ferrucci L, et al. Prevalence of anemia
in persons 65 years and older in the United States: evidence for a high
rate of unexplained anemia. Blood. 2004;104:2263–2268.
	 3.	 Howe RB, Porwit-MacDonaldA,Wanat R, et al.TheWHO classification
of MDS does make a difference. Blood. 2004;103:3265–3270.
	 4.	 Alessandrino EP, Amadori S, Cazzola M, et al. Myelodysplastic
syndromes: recent advances. Haematologica. 2001;86:1124–1157.
	 5.	 Hellström-Lindberg E, Willman C, Barrett J, Saunthararajah Y.
Achievements in understanding and treatment of myelodysplastic
syndromes. American Society of Hematology Education Program Book.
2000:110–132.
	 6.	 De WitteT, Suciu S,Verhoef G, et al. Intensive chemotherapy followed
by allogeneic or autologous stem cell transplantation for patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) and acute myeloid leukemia
following MDS. Blood. 2001;98:2326–2331.
	 7.	 Greenberg P, Cox C, LeBeau MM, et al. International scoring system
for evaluating prognosis in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood.
1997;89:2079–2088.
	 8.	 Cheson BD, Bennett JM, Kantarjian H, et al. Report of an international
working group to standardize response criteria for myelodysplastic
syndromes. Blood. 2000;96:3671–3674.
	 9.	 Adès L, Boehrer S, Prebet T, et al. Efficacy and safety of lenalidomide
in intermediate-2 or high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes with 5q
deletion: results of a phase 2 study. Blood. 2009;113:3947–3952.
10.	 Malcovati L, Germing U, KuendgenA, et al.Time-dependent prognostic
scoring system for predicting survival and leukemic evolution in
myelodysplastic syndromes. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3503–3510.
11.	 Germing U, Hildebrandt B, Pfeilstöcker M, et al. Refinement of the
international prognostic scoring system (IPSS) by including LDH
as an additional prognostic variable to improve risk assessment in
patients with primary myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Leukemia.
2005;19:2223–2231.
12.	 Garcia-Manero G, Shan J, Faderl S, et al. A prognostic score for patients
with lower risk myelodysplastic syndrome. Leukemia. 2008;22:538–543.
13.	 Kantarjian H, O’Brien S, Ravandi F, et al. Proposal for a new risk model
in myelodysplastic syndrome that accounts for events not considered
in the original International Prognostic Scoring System. Cancer.
2008;113:1351–1361.
14.	 Bullinger M, Hasford J. Evaluating quality-of-life measures for clinical
trials in Germany. Control Clin Trials. 1991;12:91S–105S.
15.	 Rich T, Innominato PF, Boerner J, et al. Elevated serum cytokines
correlated with altered behavior, serum cortisol rhythm, and dampened
24-hour rest-activity patterns in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:1757–1764.
16.	 Meyers CA, Albitar M, Estey E. Cognitive impairment, fatigue, and
cytokine levels in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia or myelo-
dysplastic syndrome. Cancer. 2005;104:788–793.
17.	 Hsu HC, LeeYM, Tsai WH, et al. Circulating levels of thrombopoietic
and inflammatory cytokines in patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome. Oncology. 2002;63:64–69.
18.	 Tefferi A. Iron chelation therapy for myelodysplastic syndrome: If and
when. Mayo Clin Proc. 2006;81:197–198.
19.	 Chaves PH: Functional outcomes of anemia in older adults. Semin
Hematol. 2008;45:255–260.
20.	 Fried LP,Tangen CM,Walston J, et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for
a phenotype. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56:M146–M156.
21.	 Zakai NA, Katz R, Hirsch C, et al. A prospective study of anemia
status, hemoglobin concentration, and mortality in an elderly cohort: the
Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:2214–2220.
22.	 Chaves PH, Xue QL, Guralnik JM, et al. What constitutes normal
hemoglobin concentration in community-dwelling disabled older
women? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004;52:1811–1816.
23.	 Bowen D, Culligan D, Jowitt S, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and therapy of adult myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol.
2003;120:187–200.
24.	 Jansen AJ, Essink-Bot ML, Beckers EA, et al. Quality of life
measurement in patients with transfusion-dependent myelodysplastic
syndromes. Br J Haematol. 2003;121:270–274.
25.	 List AF, Baer MR, Steensma D, et al. Deferasirox (ICL670; Exjade)
reduces serum ferritin (SF) and labile plasma iron (LPI) in patients
with myelodysplastic syndrome [abstract 1470]. Blood (ASH Annual
Meeting Abstracts). 2007;110:440a.
26.	 Rose C, Brechignac S, Vassilief D, et al. Positive impact of iron
chelation therapy (CT) on survival in regularly transfused MDS patients;
a prospective analysis by the GFM [abstract 249]. Blood (ASH Annual
Meeting Abstracts). 2007;110:80a.
27.	 Hellström-Lindberg E: Efficacy of erythropoietin in the myelodysplastic
syndromes: a meta-analysis of 205 patients from 17 studies.
Br J Haematol. 1995;89:67–71.
28.	 A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study with subcutaneous
recombinant human erythropoietin in patients with low-risk myelo-
dysplastic syndromes. Italian Cooperative Study Group for rHuEpo in
Myelodysplastic Syndromes. Br J Haematol. 1998;103:1070–1074.
29.	 Hellström-Lindberg E, Negrin R, Stein R, et al. Erythroid response to
treatment with G-CSF plus erythropoietin for the anaemia of patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes: proposal for a predictive model.
Br J Haematol. 1997;99:344–351.
30.	 Terpos E, Mougiou A, Kouraklis A, et al. Prolonged administration
of erythro­poietin increases erythroid response rate in myelodys-
plastic syndromes: a phase II trial in 281 patients. Br J Haematol.
2002;118:174–180.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2009:4
Clinical Interventions in Aging
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-interventions-in-aging-journal
Clinical Interventions in Aging is an international, peer-reviewed
journal focusing on evidence-based reports on the value or lack thereof
of treatments intended to prevent or delay the onset of maladaptive cor-
relates of aging in human beings. This journal is indexed on PubMed
Central, MedLine, the American Chemical Society’s ‘Chemical
Abstracts Service’ (CAS), Scopus and the Elsevier Bibliographic
databases. The manuscript management system is completely online
and includes a very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all
easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read
real quotes from published authors.
423
MDS in the elderlyDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
31.	 Giraldo P, Nomdedeu B, Loscertales J, et al. Darbepoetin alpha for
the treatment of anemia in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Cancer. 2006;107:2807–2816.
32.	 Golshayan AR, Jin T, Maciejewski J, et al. Efficacy of growth factors
compared to other therapies for low-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.
Br J Haematol. 2007;137:125–132.
33.	 NCCN practice guidelines for the myelodysplastic syndromes. National
Comprehensive Cancer Network. Oncology. 1998;12:53–80.
34.	 Tiu RV, Sekeres MA.The role ofAMG-531 in the treatment of thrombo-
cytopenia in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and myelodysplastic
syndromes. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2008;8:1021–1030.
35.	 Galili N, Cerny J, Raza A. Current treatment options: impact of
cytogenetics on the course of myelodysplasia. CurrTreat Options Oncol.
2007;8:117–128.
36.	 De Witte T, Zwaan F, Hermans J, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow trans-
plantation for secondary leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome:
a survey by the LeukaemiaWorking Party of the European Bone Marrow
Transplantation Group (EBMTG). Br J Haematol. 1990;74:151–155.
37.	 Kuendgen A, Strupp C, Aivado M, et al. Myelodysplastic syndromes
in patients younger than age 50. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5358–5365.
38.	 Sierra J, Pérez WS, Rozman C, et al. Bone marrow transplantation
from HLA-identical sibvling as treatment for myelodysplasia. Blood.
2002;100:1997–2004.
39.	 Warlick ED, CiocA, DeforT, et al.Allogeneic stem cell transplantation
for adults with myelodysplastic syndromes: importance of pretransplant
disease burden. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009;15:30–38.
40.	 Appelbaum FR, Anderson J. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
for myelodysplastic syndrome: outcomes analysis according to IPSS
score. Leukemia. 1998;12(Suppl 1):S25–S29.
41.	 Cutler CS, Lee SJ, Greenberg P, et al. A decision analysis of alloge-
neic bone marrow transplantation for the myelodysplastic syndromes:
delayed transplantation for low-risk myelodysplasia is associated with
improved outcome. Blood. 2004;104:579–585.
42.	 Baccarani M, Tura S. Differentiation of myeloid leukaemic cells: new
possibilities for therapy. Br J Haematol. 1979;42:485–487.
43.	 Wisch JS, Griffin JD, Kufe DW. Response of preleukemic syndromes to
continuous infusion of low-dose cytarabine. N Engl J Med. 1983;309:
1599–1602.
44.	 Miller KB, Kim K, Morrison FS, et al. The evaluation of low-dose
cytarabine in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes: a phase-III
intergroup study. Ann Hematol. 1992;65:162–168.
45.	 Clark RE, Ismail SA, Jacobs A, et al. A randomized trial of 13-cis
retinoic acid with or without cytosine arabinoside in patients with the
myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J Haematol. 1987;66:77–83.
46.	 Garewal H, Greenberg P, ListA, et al. N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide
[4-HPR] therapy in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS): possible disease
acceleration by retinoids. Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts).
1987;70:228a.
47.	 Cheson BD. The myelodysplastic syndromes: current approaches to
therapy. Ann Intern Med. 1990;112:932–941.
48.	 Saba HI, Shamim F, Ismail R, et al. Acute leukemic transformation in
myelodysplastic syndrome. [abstract]. Blood (ASH Annual Meeting
Abstracts). 1992;80:459a.
49.	 Gafter-GviliA, FraserA, Paul M, Leibovici L. Meta-analysis: antibiotic
prophylaxis reduces mortality in neutropenic patients. Ann Intern Med.
2005;142:979–995.
50.	 ListA, Dewald G, Bennett J, et al. Lenalidomide in the myelodysplastic
syndrome with chromosome 5q deletion. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:
1456–1465.
51.	 Raza A, Reeves JA, Feldman EJ, et al. Phase 2 study of lenalidomide
in transfusion-dependent, low-risk, and intermediate-1 risk myelo-
dysplastic syndromes with karyotypes other than deletion 5q. Blood.
2008;111:86–93.
52.	 Silverman LR, Demakos EP, Peterson BL, et al. Randomized controlled
trial of azacitidine in patients with the myelodysplastic syndrome:
a study of the cancer and leukemia group B. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:
2429–2440.
53.	 Fenaux P, SantiniV, Hellstrom-Lindberg E, et al. Efficacy of azacitidine
compared with that of conventional care regimens in the treatment of
higher-risk myelodysplastic syndromes: a randomised, open-label,
phase III study. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:223–232.
54.	 Kantarjian H, Issa JP, Rosenfeld CS, et al. Decitabine improves
patient outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes: results of a phase III
randomized study. Cancer. 2006;106:1794–1803.
55.	 Molldrem JJ, Caples M, Mavroudis D, et al. Antithymocyte globulin
for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J Haematol. 1997;99:
699–705.
56.	 Sorror ML, Sandmaier BM, Storer BE, et al. Comorbidity and disease
status based risk stratification of outcomes among patients with acute
myeloid leukemia or myelodysplasia receiving allogeneic hematopoietic
cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4246–4254.
57.	 Sloand EM, Wu CO, Greenberg P, et al. Factors affecting response and
survival in patients with myelodysplasia treated with immunosuppressive
therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:2505–2511.
58.	 Saunthararajah Y, Nakamura R, Nam JM, et al. HLA-DR15 (DR2) is
ovvererepresented in myelodysplastic syndrome and aplastic anemia
and predicts a response to immunosuppression in myelodysplastic
syndrome. Blood. 2002;100:1570–1574.
