© 2008 Dove Medical Press Limited. All rights reserved
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1) 111–120 111
R E V I E W
Pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain
in older persons
Clair Haslam1
Turo Nurmikko2
1
The Walton Centre for Neurology
and Neurosurgery, Liverpool, England,
UK; 2
The Pain Research Institute,
Division of Neurological Science,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
England, UK
Correspondence: Clair Haslam
The Walton Centre, Lower Lane,
Fazakerley, Liverpool, England L9 7LJ, UK
Tel +44 151 529 5647
Email clair.haslam@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk
Abstract: Interest and research into the mechanisms and treatment of neuropathic pain have
increased during recent years, but current treatment is still far from satisfactory (Dworkin et al
2003; Attal et al 2006). The European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS) Task Force
recently published guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain (Attal et al
2006). However, no particular consideration is given as to how the recommendations are appli-
cable to the elderly population. This paper will review the guidelines in relation to this population
and evaluate the existing evidence relating to the use of these drugs in older persons.
Keywords: neuropathic pain, elderly, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, opioids, tramadol,
lidocaine patch/plaster, capsaicin
Background
There is currently a major shift occurring in the age distribution of the world’s
population. In developed countries, the proportion of the population aged over 65
will rise from 17.5% to 36.3% by 2050 and the over-80 age segment will more than
triple (US Bureau of the Consensus, International Data, 2002). There is no clear
consensus as to the deﬁnition of an “older person”. However, it is suggested that fur-
ther categorization of those over 65 may be useful: the young old can be deﬁned as
65–74 years, the middle old as 75–84 years and the oldest old as 85 and older (Leppik
2006). However, there can be vast differences in people of the same chronological age.
Therefore, there are also suggestions that each age group should be further sub-divided
into: healthy, multiple medical problems and frail (Leppik 2006).
Pain is known to be a common problem in the elderly population, but it frequently
goes unrecognized and under-treated (Helme and Gibson 1999; IASP 2006). The
situation is complicated further by the increased potential for cognitive impairment
and communication problems in the elderly (IASP 2006). Such is the concern about
this issue that the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) made
2006/07 the IASP “Global Year Against Pain in Older Persons” in an attempt to raise
awareness and improve treatment. This subject is also part of their Core Curriculum
for pain education. It has been identiﬁed that there is an age-related increase in
the prevalence of chronic pain at least until the seventh decade of life (Helme and
Gibson 2001). Studies suggest that chronic pain affects over 50% of older persons
living in the community setting and over 80% of nursing home residents (Ferrell
1995; Helme and Gibson 2001).
Neuropathic pain results from disease or injury affecting the peripheral nerve,
nerve root, spinal cord or brain. A large number of pathophysiological mechanisms
have been delineated, and there is general agreement that in many persistent cases
several of them are operant in maintaining the pain. Pain is commonly described as
burning, shooting, smarting or aching, and local tenderness to mechanical and cool
stimuli is common. The hallmark signs of neuropathic pain are reduced sensibility
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1)112
Haslam and Nurmikko
and increased sensitivity corresponding to the site of pain
(Treede et al 2007). The newly formulated deﬁnition of
neuropathic pain, “pain arising as a direct consequence of
a lesion or disease affecting the somatosensory system”
encompasses the important pathophysiological aspect
that because of impairment of sensory pathways at some
level the clinical examination is likely to show sensory
abnormalities (Treede et al 2007). The diagnosis of
neuropathic pain is based on evidence of a lesion present
corresponding to the site of pain, and irrespective of
commencement of treatment, etiological investigations
are sometimes required.
Speciﬁc epidemiological data on neuropathic pain is
limited. However, there is an estimated prevalence of 1.5%
(Taylor 2006). In addition, there is a wide range of prevalence
estimates reported in the literature for speciﬁc conditions.
Between 8% and 50% of diabetics are estimated to have
symptoms of diabetic neuropathy (Duck et al 1993; Partanen
et al 1995). In a community survey of over 300 patients with
diabetes the prevalence of painful neuropathy was 16%
(Daousi et al 2004). Between 10% and 19% of back pain
sufferers are estimated to have neuropathic pain (Carey et al
1996; Loney and Stratford 1999). In a study of 916 patients
with shingles, 18% of patients in their 50s experienced
symptoms of post-herpetic neuralgia for 1 year or longer.
However, in patients aged 70 or above this increased to 48%
(Oaklander and Rissmiller 2002).
Treatment of neuropathic pain
in the elderly
The treatment of neuropathic pain in the older person can
be challenging and complex. The old are more vulnerable
than younger persons since they often suffer from multiple
medical and nutritional problems. This can limit treatment
options with analgesic agents due to an increased risk of
adverse effects and problems with complex drug interactions
(Perucca et al 2006). In addition, older persons may have
substantial differences in the absorption and clearance of
drugs. Due to these factors there is an increased risk of
excess sedation, confusion, constipation and urinary retention
(Burris 2004).
A detailed literature review of pharmacokinetics in
older persons found that changes occur due to age-related
physiologic perturbations (Cusack 2004). However,
the review suggests that age-related changes may be
overshadowed by individual variation in disease, frailty
and stress. It is also acknowledged that older persons take
more medications and are more likely to have multiple
medical problems, and this increases the risk of drug-drug
and drug-disease interactions (Cusack 2004). It is suggested
that the rate of drug metabolism, which occurs mainly in
the liver, is often reduced with advancing age. In drugs that
are mainly excreted by the kidney the rate of elimination is
also generally reduced in the elderly. Therefore, the dose
requirement for these types of drugs may be lower in many
older patients (Cusack 2004).
Despite the fact the chronic pain is more common
in older persons, the majority of pain treatment studies
and trials have been conducted in young adult popula-
tions (IASP 2006). Until recently older subjects were
routinely excluded from randomized controlled trials
of pharmacotherapy. Even now, older people with
co-morbid disease or those taking other medication are
usually excluded (IASP 2006). Therefore, it is possible
to suggest that there is signiﬁcant selection bias and that
the “healthy” elderly subjects who are included in studies
are not representative of the general elderly population. In
particular it is acknowledged that most gerontologic studies
of pharmacokinetics fail to include the very old (age 85 and
over) and therefore the understanding of pharmacokinetics
in this age group is very limited (Cusack 2004).
Several recent systematic reviews provide convergent
guidance on pharmacological management of neuropathic
pain (Dworkin, Backonja et al 2003; Finnerup et al 2005;
Attal et al 2006; Moulin et al 2007). The recommendations
based on these reviews come from randomized controlled
trials from which it is usually difﬁcult to extract information
speciﬁc to elderly patients. The general recommendation
is to commence treatment with gabapentin/pregabalin or a
tricyclic antidepressant (eg, amitriptyline or nortriptyline)
and, in case of focal neuropathy, topical lidocaine. The
choice between a gabapentinoid and a tricyclic is based on
considerations on tolerability rather than quality or intensity
of pain. Second line treatments include SNRIs (duloxetine
and venlafaxine), some antiepileptic drugs (eg, lamotrigine),
tramadol and topical capsaicin. Reservations are expressed
in relation to strong opioids which feature as second or third
line choices. Despite the general agreement between the three
Task Force generated guidelines (Dworkin, Backonja et al
2003; Attal et al 2006; Moulin et al 2007), there are some
differences as shown in Table 1.
The EFNS Guidelines (Attal et al 2006) discuss treat-
ment options in speciﬁc neuropathic conditions, ie, painful
polyneuropathies, post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN), trigeminal
neuralgia (TN) and central pain (including spinal cord injury
pain, post-stroke pain and multiple sclerosis). In addition,
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1) 113
Pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain in older persons
other less studied neuropathic conditions are included:
post-traumatic/post-surgical nerve lesions, phantom limb
pain and Guillain-Barré syndrome. In general, because of
the few condition-speciﬁc controlled trials published, the
authors suggest management along the same lines as those
used in diabetic neuropathy and post-herpetic neuralgia
for which ample data are available. Notable exceptions are
lamotrigine in post-stroke pain, pregabalin in spinal cord
injury pain, carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine in trigeminal
neuralgia and cannabinoids in central pain related to multiple
sclerosis (Attal et al 2006). In none of the comprehensive
reviews are there age-speciﬁc recommendations, although
reference to poorer tolerability in the elderly is occasionally
made. The authors have generated their own approach to
pharmacotherapy for the elderly with neuropathic pain
(Table 2). It is a compilation of systematic reviews and guide-
lines with some modiﬁcations that reﬂect safety concerns in
this patient population.
Currently, the best evidence available suggests that
the choice of medication in the elderly with neuropathic
pain should be similar to that in the younger age group but
commenced more cautiously and with particular attention to
problems that may arise in the elderly. In this review we will
discuss each drug in relation to the information and evidence
available for its use in the elderly. We have drawn from two
sources: from studies focusing on the elderly with other
indications (eg, depression, epilepsy) or extrapolating from
studies on postherpetic neuralgia in which the mean age of
the participating patients has been >70 years.
Antidepressants
A recent review of the literature on the extent to which
the elderly are represented in clinical trials of potential
antidepressants found that elderly subjects aged 75 years and
over were clearly under-represented (Giron et al 2005). The
maximum age for inclusion for the majority of the clinical
Table 1 Commonly used agents in neuropathic pain: choice of treatment as recommended by three task forces
Drug Dworkin et al 2003 Attal et al 2006 Moulin et al 2007 Comment
TCA 1 1 1
Gabapentin 1 1 1
Pregabalin 1 1 1
Tramadol 1 2 3
Duloxetine NR 2 2
Venlafaxine 2 2 2
Lamotrigine 2 2 4
Opioids 1 2 31 1
Except methadone
Lidocaine 5% 1 22
2 2
First-line in focal
plaster neuropathy with
allodynia
Topical capsaicin 3 23
3 3
PHN only
Valproate NR 2 4
Topiramate NR NE 4
Bupropion 2 NR NR
Paroxetine 2 NR4
NR 4
+ve RCT
acknowledged
Citalopram 2 NE 4
Mexiletine 3 NE 4
Clonidine 3 NE 4
NMDA 3 NE NR
antagonists
Methadone as other opioids As other opioids 4
Speciﬁc indications
Carbamazepine for TGN 1 1 1 No guideline
recommends for
other NPs
Oxcarbazepine for TGN NR 1 NR
Cannabinoids for central NR 3 4
pain in MS
Note: 1
ﬁrst-line treatment, 2
second-line treatment, 3
third-line treatment, 4
fourth-line treatment. Note that only Moulin et al (2007) use the category of “fourth-line”.
NR, no recommendation or no discussion; NE, considered not effective.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1)114
Haslam and Nurmikko
trials identiﬁed was 65 years. There was no clear consensus
on the deﬁnition of elderly; clinical trials that were reported
to have been conducted in the elderly included subjects who
were 50, 55, or 60 years and over. The highest age reported
for a subject was 90 years. Pharmacological studies on
healthy subjects were mainly done on young adults ranging
from 18 to 65 years. Therefore, there is minimal evidence
available in the literature about the safety and efﬁcacy of
antidepressants in older persons, whether they are being used
to treat depression and/or pain. The authors of the review
(Giron et al 2005) recommend that regulatory bodies such
as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European
Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (EMEA)
should have special requirements relating to the elderly. For
example, the inclusion of at least 25% of subjects aged 75
years and over in studies of drugs that will be registered for
use in the elderly.
Duetothefactthatthemajorityofstudiesofantidepressants
use a highly selective trial population, without signiﬁcant
co-morbidity and with minimum numbers of elderly subjects,
there are fundamental problems extrapolating the results to
the elderly population as a whole (Parikh 2000). However,
despite the lack of evidence, there are some recommendations
in the literature relating to the use of antidepressants in the
elderly. It is widely reported that older patients are more
prone to side-effects and have greater difﬁculty tolerating
doses of antidepressants that are likely to be of therapeutic
value (Parikh 2000; ANZCA 2005). Older adults often
require lower initial doses with slow titration and the initial
dose should be one-half or lower than the normal starting
dose (Antai-Otong 2006).
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
A recent study found a slight increase in sudden car-
diac death with TCA doses greater than 100 mg per day
(Ray et al 2004). The study examined a retrospective cohort
of 1487 patients with conﬁrmed sudden cardiac death in
the community. Current users of TCAs had a dose-related
increase in the risk of sudden cardiac death when compared
with non-users of antidepressants. Rate ratios increased
from 0.97 (95% conﬁdence interval (CI), 0.72–1.29) for
doses lower than 100mg (amitriptyline or equivalent) to
2.53 (95% CI, 1.04–6.12) for doses of 300 mg or more. The
rate for SSRIs was 0.95 (95% CI, 0.42–2.15). There was
no evidence that TCA doses lower than 100mg increased
the risk of sudden cardiac death in subgroups deﬁned by
pre-existing cardiovascular disease, female sex, age 65 or
older or use of amitriptyline. Although from this study the
conclusion is that low doses of amitriptyline (or equivalent)
may be used with a maximum dose of 100 mg, other well
known anticholinergic, hypotensive and sedative side
effects may pose a relative contraindication to tricyclic
antidepressants, and a safer alternative in the very old may
be gabapentin or pregabalin (Attal et al 2006) . Due to the
risk of potential life-threatening side-effects some authors
recommend baseline and follow-up electrocardiograms
(ECGs) throughout treatment with tricyclic antidepressants
(Dworkin, Backonja et al 2003). In Parikh’s (2000) advice
on the posology of antidepressants in the elderly a lower
starting and maintenance dose is advised for amitrip-
tyline, but no speciﬁc recommendations are made for
nortriptyline.
In a head-to-head cross-over comparison study of
tricyclic antidepressants and strong opioids for the treatment
of PHN, 71 evaluable patients (mean age (SD) 71 (12) y)
were allowed to self-titrate to maximum tolerated dose of
160mg nortriptyline per day. A mean (SD) dose 89 (27)
mg per day was better tolerated than morphine 91 (49) mg
per day (Raja et al 2002). Two patients withdrew during
nortriptyline treatment as opposed to seven during morphine
treatment, and constipation, nausea and drowsiness were
less common. However, 17% reported dizziness, signiﬁ-
cantly more than when receiving morphine. Nortriptyline,
however, showed a trend toward lesser efﬁcacy compared
with morphine.
Due to the potential toxicity and adverse effects of TCAs,
especially in the elderly population, consideration of dosing
Table 2 Drug treatment of older persons with neuropathic pain
First line treatment
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, nortriptyline)1
Gabapentinoids (gabapentin, pregabalin)
Lidocaine plaster 5%
Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine in TN2
Second line treatment
Tramadol
Lamotrigine
SNRIs (venlafaxine, duloxetine)
Third line treatment
Opioids (morphine, oxycodone, methadone)3
Cannabinoids in MS4
Citalopram and paroxetine5
Capsaicin
Note: 1
In patients with no or stable cardiac conditions only
2
Trigeminal neuralgia
3
Despite efﬁcacy, concerns regarding tolerability make these drugs third line only
4
Data on elderly patients extremely limited
5
In peripheral neuropathies only
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1) 115
Pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain in older persons
levelsisimportant.Dose-effectandserumconcentration-effect
relationships have been reported in the literature. However,
it is suggested that serum concentration-effect relationships
may be more appropriate due to the large inter-individual
variations in pharmacokinetics (Sindrup 2003). In a random-
ized, controlled trial of amitriptyline and carbamazepine in
central post-stroke pain it was found that total plasma levels
of amitriptyline varied greatly (56–925 nmol/l) despite the
fact that all patients had tolerated the planned ﬁnal dose of
75 mg/day (Leijon and Boivie 1989). The pain-relieving effect
ofamitriptylineappearedtocorrelatewellwiththetotalplasma
concentration. Of patients with plasma concentration exceed-
ing 300 nmol/l, 70% were responders on the daily rating of
the effect and 90% were responders on the global rating. This
is compared to only 20% responders at plasma concentrations
below 300 nmol/l. This would indicate that a total plasma
concentration of 300 nmol/l should be used as a cut off point
for the lowest effective drug level of amitriptyline when it is
being used to treat neuropathic pain. This is lower than the
reported corresponding level for the treatment of depression
which is 500 nmol/l (Sindrup 2003).
Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs)
There is general agreement that SNRIs such as duloxetine
and venlafaxine are safer to use than TCAs and are a better
option in patients with cardiac disease. However, the risk of
hyponatraemia due to the syndrome of inappropriate secretion
of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) is thought to be greater in
elderly patients using selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)/SNRIs than those using TCAs (Antai-Otong 2006).
Therefore, it is recommended that baseline electrolyte levels
are checked and that sodium levels are closely monitored
throughout treatment. The Committee on Safety of Medicines
(CSM) has advised that hyponatremia should be considered in
all patients who develop drowsiness, confusion or convulsions
while taking an antidepressant (BNF 2007).
In a recent observational, naturalistic, multicenter, pro-
spective, open-label study of 97 patients older than 80 years
with depressive syndrome, extended-release venlafaxine was
found to be safe and effective (Baca et al 2006). At baseline,
90.7% of the patients had additional medical conditions and
83.5% were receiving concomitant medications. Adverse
events were reported by 7 (7.2%) patients, but no serious
adverse events were reported. The most frequent adverse
events were dizziness, gastric pain and nausea. Treatment with
venlafaxine over 24 weeks did not produce any clinically sig-
niﬁcant changes in blood pressure, heart rate or other variables
such as weight. Baca et al (2006) suggest that venlafaxine is
particularly useful in the treatment of the elderly due to a low
potential for drug-drug interaction. This study provides valu-
able information because the study sample more accurately
reﬂects the typical elderly population.
Antiepileptic drugs
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) form an important part of the
pharmacological management of neuropathic pain, but as
is the case with TCAs they require a good deal of vigilance
on the part of the prescribing clinician. Sodium channels
blockers, especially carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are
effective in trigeminal neuralgia, but have well known major
side effects. Their usefulness is limited in other neuropathic
conditions (Attal et al 2006). A particular area of concern in
the elderly is the risk of hyponatraemia with carbamazepine
and oxcarbazepine. It is recommended that sodium levels
should be monitored in the ﬁrst few months of treatment
and that both drugs should be initiated with low dosages
and slowly increased.
Further information on the use of AEDs in the elderly
comes from studies on the treatment of epilepsy. AEDs are
one of the main classes of drugs most commonly implicated
as causing adverse drug reactions in the elderly (Perucca
et al 2006). Available information on the pharmacokinetic
properties of AEDs refers mainly to patients aged 70 or less,
despite the fact that there is a high prevalence of AED use
among elderly patients, for both the treatment of epilepsy
and other indications such as neuropathic pain (Perucca
et al 2006).
A recent paper reviewed two completed studies of AED
use in the elderly and one still in progress (Leppik et al
2006). The ﬁrst was a multicenter, randomized, double-
blind comparison between carbamazepine and lamotrigine
in elderly patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy (Brodie
at al 1999). No difference was noted between the drugs in
time to ﬁrst seizure. However, in relation to the use of these
drugs in neuropathic pain it is the additional data on adverse
events that is of interest. Fewer patients taking lamotrigine
(18%) dropped out of the study due to adverse events,
compared to the patients taking carbamazepine (42%).
Somnolence was reported signiﬁcantly more often in patients
taking carbamazepine (29%) than those taking lamotrigine
(12%, p < 0.01).
The other completed study was a three-arm, double-
blind, randomized clinical trial in patients aged 65 years or
older with new-onset seizures, comparing the newer AEDs,
gabapentin and lamotrigine, to old standard AED therapy
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1)116
Haslam and Nurmikko
with carbamazepine (Rowan et al 2005). 593 patients met
the inclusion criteria, but 570 of those were male because the
sample was taken from the United States Veterans Affairs
(VA) system. This means that there is a signiﬁcant male
gender bias in the study sample and therefore the results may
not be generalizable to the elderly female population. Differ-
ences in early discontinuation among the drugs were apparent
by 7 weeks. The most frequent discontinuations were with
carbamazepine (27.3%), followed by gabapentin(17.4%,
p < 0.01) and then by lamotrigine (10%, p < 0.00003). The
primary outcome measure was retention in the study at
52 weeks. Two hundred and seventy six patients (46.5%)
completed the trial. Of those patients who withdrew from the
study, 131 (41.3%) discontinued treatment due to adverse
reactions to the study drug, and 33 (10%) due to uncontrolled
seizures. These results concur with the ﬁndings of a previous
multi-centre double-blind trial in 150 elderly patients with
newly diagnosed epilepsy, which found that lamotrigine
was better tolerated than carbamazepine (Brodie et al 1999).
These results provide some justiﬁcation for the choice of
gabapentin and lamotrigine in elderly patients in certain
neuropathic pain conditions in which efﬁcacy is shown.
However, in case of trigeminal neuralgia, which commonly
affects people over 65, the superior efﬁcacy of carbamaze-
pine over gabapentin and lamotrigine dictates its choice as
ﬁrst line treatment.
Leppik (2005) suggests that for an AED to be ideal for
the elderly it should have the following characteristics: no
side effects or toxicity, complete oral absorption (related to
water solubility), no drug-drug interactions, long half-life, no
hepatic metabolism or enzyme induction/inhibition, no active
metabolites, minimal protein binding, no effects on bone loss
and a reasonable price. In general, the early AEDs available
before 1980 have signiﬁcant potential for side-effects because
they deviate from the ideal (Leppik 2005). Gastrointestinal
drug absorption is altered with aging and AEDs that are
highly insoluble (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine) are gener-
ally poorly absorbed and complicate dosing regimes (Leppik
2005). Lamotrigine is more soluble than the early AEDs and
gabapentin is water soluble, but it relies on a rate-limiting
transport system for absorption and has dose-dependent
oral absorption (Leppik 2005). However, it is possible to
suggest that both these drugs are closer to the ideal than the
early AEDs.
Recommendations have been made in relation to the
selection of AEDs for older patients with epilepsy and
these can be applied to the treatment of older patients with
neuropathic pain. Gabapentin and pregabalin are identiﬁed as
two of the newer AEDs that have the fewest drug interactions.
These drugs exert no signiﬁcant effects on other medica-
tions likely to be used by the elderly and are not affected by
other medications in terms of their serum levels or rate of
metabolism (Leppik 2005). This is important because many
elderly patients are on multiple medications and this increases
the risk of drug-drug interactions. However, lamotrigine is
metabolized by the liver and may have reduced levels when
given with enzyme inducers (Leppik 2005).
Many newer AEDs also have better safety proﬁles than
the older agents and gabapentin, pregabalin and lamotrigine
have not had associated liver or bone marrow toxicity
(Leppik 2005). Oxcarbazepine is considered to be safer
than carbamazepine in relation to the fact it has no epoxide
metabolite, has less hepatic induction and it does not depress
white cell counts. The aplastic anemia and agranulocytosis
that can be seen with carbamazepine may also not occur
(Leppik 2005). However, the incidence of hyponatremia
is higher with oxcarbazepine than carbamazepine (Bergey
2004; Leppik 2005). It is suggested that oxcarbazepine
should be avoided in elderly patients taking sodium-
depleting agents (eg, diuretics) (Bergey 2004). Gabapentin
and pregabalin are both renally excreted and dose reductions
should be made if there is signiﬁcant renal insufﬁciency
(Bergey 2004).
Cognitive side-effects are also of particular concern in
the elderly because they may be more sensitive to small
changes due to pre-existing cognitive dysfunction, multiple
medications and concomitant medical problems (Leppik
2005). Gabapentin, pregabalin and lamotrigine are classed
as some of the newer AEDs that appear to have particularly
favorable cognitive profiles compared with the older
drugs (Leppik 2005). However, even these drugs do cause
signiﬁcant central nervous system side effects, especially
dizziness and drowsiness, which not infrequently lead to
discontinuation of treatment. In older individuals the ﬁrst-
line AED should be one that causes less cognitive side-
effects, because these effects may often go unrecognized,
particularly in patients with communication problems, or they
may be attributed to other problems such as Alzheimer’s or
cerebrovascular disease (Bergey 2004). Both gabapentin and
pregabalin have been studied in PHN (Rowbotham et al 1998;
Rice et al 2001; Dworkin, Corbin et al 2003; Sabatowski
et al 2004). The mean age in these studies varied between
71 and 76 years, with the oldest participants in their 90s.
In one study 81% of the patients were over 65. The highest
doses for gabapentin were 3600mg/day and for pregabalin
600 mg/day. In the study by Rowbotham et al (1998), 83%
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1) 117
Pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain in older persons
tolerated a dose of at least 2400mg/day, and 13.3% in the
gabapentin group withdrew from the study versus 9.5% in
the placebo group. Pregabalin at doses of 300mg/day and
higher led to withdrawal of 32% due to adverse effects (as
opposed to 5% in the placebo group) but no drug-related
serious adverse effects were reported (Dworkin, Corbin,
et al 2003). It is unclear from these reports if the frequency
and intensity of side effects correlated with age. Both gaba-
pentin and pregabalin are effective in reducing pain in PHN
with numbers-needed-to-treat (50%) estimated at 4.6 (95%
CI 3.7–6.0) (Finnerup et al 2005).
Tramadol
Tramadol hydrochloride is a synthetic analgesic that has a
dual mechanism of action. It has a central analgesic effect
with a weak afﬁnity for the µ-opioid receptor and also
causes spinal inhibition of the reuptake of noradrenaline
and serotonin (Budd 1999; Schnitzer 1999). The EFNS
Guidelines (Attal et al 2006) recommend that tramadol
should be initiated at low dosages of 50 mg once daily
in elderly patients and then titrated as tolerated. A dose
adjustment is not usually necessary in elderly patients (up
to 75 years) without clinically manifest hepatic or renal
insufﬁciency (Schnitzer 1999). In elderly patients (over
75 years) elimination may be prolonged. Therefore, if
necessary, the dosage interval is to be extended according to
the patients requirements. Tramadol can induce convulsions
and increase the potential for SSRIs, TCAs, anti-psychotics
and other seizure threshold-lowering medicinal products to
cause convulsions. In isolated cases there have been reports
of serotonin syndrome in a temporal connection with the
therapeutic use of tramadol in combination with other
serotonergic medicinal products such as selective serotonin
SSRIs or with MAO inhibitors (Grunenthal 2006). It is
essential that these precautions are taken into consideration
when tramadol is being used in elderly patients because they
are often taking multiple medications which increase the risk
of drug-drug interactions and adverse effects.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
was recently carried out to evaluate the efﬁcacy and safety
of a combined paracetamol 325 mg and tramadol 37.5 mg
tablet for the treatment of ﬂare-ups of osteoarthritis pain in
elderly patients (aged 65 and older) (Rosenthal et al 2004).
The patients were permitted to take one to two tablets four
times daily. The combination was found to be signiﬁcantly
superior to placebo for average daily pain intensity and pain
relief. The most common treatment related adverse events
in the tramadol/paracetamol group were nausea (18.8%),
vomiting (13%), dizziness (11.6%) and constipation (4.3%).
The low incidence of constipation (4.3% vs 2.3% in placebo
group) and somnolence (2.9% vs 2.3% in placebo group)
were worthy of note. The study concludes that the tolerability
proﬁle of this combination medication, especially the low
rates of constipation and somnolence, make it an attrac-
tive alternative to traditional opioid analgesics for elderly
patients. However, the duration of the study was only 10 days
and therefore one must exercise caution in extrapolating these
results to long-term use in chronic pain conditions.
Strong opioids
Strong opioids are increasingly being used for patients with
chronic benign pain. In 2005 the British Pain Society pub-
lished recommendations for the appropriate use of opioids
for persistent non-cancer pain, but no speciﬁc guidance is
offered in relation to elderly patients. Strong opioids have
also been shown to be effective in the treatment of chronic
neuropathic pain (Gimbel et al 2003; Watson et al 2003).
The EFNS guidelines (Attal et al 2006) recommend their
use as second-line treatment in a number of neuropathic
pain conditions, but again no speciﬁc guidance is provided
for their use in elderly patients. It is suggested that elderly
patients may require less opioid than younger patients and in
the post-operative setting there is evidence of an age-related
2–4 fold decrease in morphine and fentanyl requirements
(Macintyre and Jarvis 1996; Woodhouse and Mather 1997;
Gagliese et al 2000).
Elderly patients who are commenced on strong opioids
require regular monitoring because reduced renal function
can lead to a more rapid accumulation of active opioid
metabolites (ANZCA 2005). Both morphine and oxycodone
produce active metabolites that can accumulate causing
increased therapeutic and adverse effects (Johnson 2007).
It is recommended that both drugs are used cautiously in
patients with renal dysfunction, with careful monitoring
and dose adjustment if necessary. Fentanyl has no active
metabolites, but a dose reduction is still advised because
clearance is reduced in patients with moderate to severe
uremia (Johnson 2007).
There is a paucity of research in the literature on the
use of strong opioids in elderly patients with chronic pain.
However, one recent longitudinal study of 10,372 nurs-
ing home residents concluded that the use of long-acting
opioids may be a relatively safe option in the management
of persistent, non-malignant pain, yielding beneﬁts in
functional status and social engagement (Won et al 2006).
A signiﬁcantly higher rate of improvement in activities
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1)118
Haslam and Nurmikko
of daily living (ADL) status and social engagement was
observed in patients taking long-acting opioids compared
to those taking non-opioids. There were no signiﬁcant
declines in cognitive function, ADL status, mood status
or social engagement over 6 months with the use of any
analgesics. Overall, a trend towards a decreased risk for
falls over 6 months was seen with the use of any analgesics.
Long-term use of opioids did not signiﬁcantly increase the
risk of falls. The authors acknowledge that the study has
limitations because it was necessary to restrict the sample
to persons taking analgesics in only one class for 6 months;
whereas in reality, many patients may take analgesics from
a number of different classes. However, this is the only
study identiﬁed that examines quality of life outcomes of
chronic analgesic use in frail elderly persons.
In the two studies published on the efﬁcacy of morphine
and oxycodone, the beneﬁt from moderately high doses
(mean dose 89 mg of morphine and 45mg of oxycodone)
of both drugs was well documented with a joint NNT of
2.6 (95% CI 2.0–3.8) (Finnerup et al 2005). Common side
effects included constipation nausea, drowsiness, and loss
of appetite but no cognitive impairment was reported (Wat-
son and Babul 1998; Raja et al 2002). Side effects led to
withdrawal in over one-quarter of patients (mean age (SD)
71 (12) years) on morphine despite its apparent superiority
over placebo and nortriptyline. While tolerability in studies
with long up-and-down titration protocols and a short (2-
week) maintenance period give some insight of the efﬁcacy
(Raja et al 2002), it is not well known if effectiveness con-
tinues long-term in this condition and to what extent dose
adjustment is needed.
Topical agents
Topical capsaicin is seen as a modestly effective treatment in
PHN and diabetic neuropathy (Bernstein et al 1989; Watson
et al 1993). To maintain the effect, the cream must be applied
over the painful area several times a day and initially causes
severe burning, leading to at least 30% of patients stopping
treatment prematurely. It is possible to suggest that the use of
capsaicin in elderly frail patients with cognitive impairments
may not be advisable due to the potential for inadvertent expo-
sure of other areas of the body. If capsaicin was accidentally
rubbed into the eyes or onto other mucous membranes signiﬁ-
cant irritation and discomfort/distress would be caused.
A topical agent recently licensed in the United Kingdom
(UK) for the treatment of PHN is the 5% lidocaine plaster.
Due to its low systemic absorption this treatment is considered
safe and only local adverse effects (mild skin reactions)
have been reported. Several authors recommend it is used as
ﬁrst-line treatment in patients with PHN with a small area of
pain / allodynia and state that it may be preferred as a treatment
for elderly patients due to excellent tolerability (Finnerup
et al 2005; Attal et al 2006; Moulin et al 2007). A recent
review of the literature concludes that the safety, tolerability,
and efﬁcacy of the lidocaine patch 5%, a targeted peripheral
analgesic, has been well established in PHN (Gammaitoni et al
2003). The review reports that potential efﬁcacy in other
neuropathic and non-neuropathic pain conditions has also
been suggested in recent case reports and studies. Several
pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated minimal systemic
absorption with 12-, 18-, and 24-hour/day dosing. Due to the
low mean maximum plasma concentrations there is minimal
risk for systemic toxicity or drug-drug interactions. The most
common adverse events generally involve mild skin reac-
tions and there have been no drug-drug interactions noted
in clinical trials (Gammaitoni et al 2003). All these factors
make this an ideal drug for use in the elderly and it appears
that the risk of adverse events is minimal even in those with
multiple medical problems and concomitant medication use.
However, there is only sufﬁcient evidence in the literature at
the current time for the use of the 5% lidocaine plaster in the
treatment of PHN and it is only licensed in the UK for this
indication. It is currently recommended for use in PHN and
focal neuropathy (Finnerup et al 2005; Attal et al 2006), but
not for all neuropathic pain conditions.
Conclusion
Pharmacotherapy remains the mainstay of management of
neuropathic pain in the elderly. There is a relative paucity
of studies available from which speciﬁc guidelines can be
produced. However, indirect evidence suggests that current
guidelines aimed at the neuropathic pain population in general
can also be adopted for the older person’s treatment, given that
potentialalterationsinpharmacokineticsandpharmacodynam-
ics of various drugs are taken into account and contraindica-
tions and tolerability issues are strictly observed. In general,
drugs should be commenced at a lower dose and be upwardly
titrated more slowly than in middle-aged and young people.
Studies in PHN, which include a majority of patients who are
elderly, show clinically signiﬁcant efﬁcacy from tricyclic anti-
depressants,opioidsandgabapentinoidsandmoderate-to-good
tolerabilityinmostcases.Reportsofserioussideeffectstypical
for the elderly are very few. Tricyclic antidepressants warrant
a word of caution because of their cardiotoxicity and other
problems. In general, studies in the treatment of neuropathic
pain in the elderly, other than PHN, and especially studies in
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1) 119
Pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain in older persons
the oldest-old that evaluate the effectiveness and tolerability
of current and new drugs are desperately needed.
References
Antai-Otong D. 2006. Antidepressants in late-life depression: prescribing
principles. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care, 42:149–53.
Attal N, Cruccu G, Haanpaa M, et al. 2006. EFNS guidelines on pharmaco-
logical treatment of neuropathic pain. European Journal of Neurology,
13:1153–69.
[ANZCA] Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists. 2005.
Acute pain management: scientiﬁc evidence. 2nd ed. Australia: National
Health and Medical Research Council.
Baca E, Roca M, Garcia-Calvo C, et al. 2006. Venlafaxine extended-release
in patients older than 80 years with depressive syndrome. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21:337–43.
Bergey G. 2004. Initial treatment of epilepsy: special issues in treating the
elderly. Neurology, 63:S40–8.
Bernstein J, Korman N, Bickers D, et al. 1989. Topical capsaicin treatment
of chronic postherpetic neuralgia. Journal of American Academy of
Dermatology, 21:265–70.
Brodie M, Overstall P, Giorgi L. 1999. Multicentre, double-blind, ran-
domised comparison between lamotrigine and carbamazepine in elderly
patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy. The UK Lamotrigine Elderly
Study Group. Epilepsy Research, 37:81–7.
British National Formulary. 2007. BNF 53.
Budd K. 1999. The role of tramadol in acute pain management. Acute
Pain, 2:189–96.
Burris J. 2004. Pharmacologic approaches to geriatric pain management.
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 85(Suppl 3):S45–9.
Carey T, Evans A, Hadler N, et al. 1996. Acute severe low back pain.
A population-based study of prevalence and care-seeking. Spine,
21:339–44.
Cusack B. 2004. Pharmacokinetics in Older Persons. The American Journal
of Geriatric Pharmacotherapy, 2:274–302.
Daousi C, MacFarlane IA, Woodward A, et al. 2004. Chronic painful
peripheral neuropathy in an urban community: a controlled comparison
of people with and without diabetes. Diab Med, 21:976–82.
Duck P, Krtaz K, Karnes L, et al. 1993. The prevalence by staged severity
of various types of diabetic neuropathy, retinopathy, and neuropathy in
a population-based cohort: The Rochester Diabetic Neuropathy Study.
Neurology, 43:817–24.
Dworkin R, Backonja M, Rowbotham M. 2003. Advances in neuropathic
pain: diagnosis, mechanisms and treatment recommendations. Archives
of Neurology, 60:1524–34.
Dworkin RH, Corbin AE, Young JP, et al. 2003. Pregabalin for the treat-
ment of postherpetic neuralgia. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurology, 60:1274–83.
Ferrell B. 1995. Pain evaluation and management in the nursing home.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 123:681–7.
Finnerup NB, Otto M, McQuay HJ, et al. 2005. Algorithm for neuropathic
pain treatment: an evidence based approach. Pain, 118:289–305.
Gagliese L, Jackson M, Ritvo P, et al. 2000. Age is not an impediment
to effective use of patient-controlled analgesia by surgical patients.
Anesthesiology, 93:601–10.
Gammaitoni A, Alvarez N, Galer B. 2003. Safety and tolerability of the
lidocaine patch 5%, a targeted peripheral analgesic: a review of the
literature. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 43:111–17.
Gimbel J, Richards P, Portenoy R. 2003. Controlled release oxycodone for
pain in diabetic neuropathy. A randomised controlled trial. Neurology,
60:927–34.
Giron M, Fastbom J, Winblad B. 2005. Clinical trials of potential
antidepressants: to what extent are the elderly represented: a review.
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20:201–17.
Helme R, Gibson S. 1999. Chapter 8: pain in older people. In: Crombie I
ed. Epidemiology of pain. Seattle: IASP Press. p 103–12.
Helme R, Gibson S. 2001. The epidemiology of pain in elderly people.
Clinical Geriatric Medicine, 17:417–31.
International Association for the Study of Pain. 2006. Older people’s pain.
Pain Clinical Updates, 14:1–4.
Johnson S. 2007. Opioid safety in patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Pain treatment topics [online]. Accessed 1 June 2007. URL: http://www.
pain-topics.org.
Leijon G, Boivie J. 1989. Central post-stroke pain – a controlled trial of
amitriptyline and carbamazepine. Pain, 36:27–36.
Leppik I. 2005. Choosing an antiepileptic: selecting drugs for older patients
with epilepsy. Geriatrics, 60(11):42–7.
Leppik I. 2006. Antiepileptic drug trials in the elderly. Epilepsy Research,
68:45–8.
Leppik I, Brodie M, Saetre E. 2006. Outcomes research: clinical trials in
the elderly. Epilepsy Research, 68S:S71–6.
Loney P, Stratford P. 1999. The prevalence of low back pain in adults:
a methodological review of the literature. Physical Therapy,
79:384–96.
Macintyre P, Jarvis D. 1996. Age is the best predictor of postoperative
morphine requirement. Pain, 64:357–64.
Moulin DE, Clark AJ, Gilron I, et al. 2007. Pharmacological management
of chronic neuropathic pain – consensus statement and guidelines from
the Canadian Pain Society. Pain Res Manage, 12:13–21.
Oaklander A, Rissmiller J. 2002. Post-herpetic neuralgia after shingles
is an under-recognised cause of chronic vulvar pain. Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, 99:625.
Parikh C. 2000. Antidepressants in the elderly: challenges for study design
and their interpretation. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
49:539–47.
Partanen J, Niakanen L, Lehiten J, et al. 1995. Natural history of peripheral
neuropathy in patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
New England Journal of Medicine, 333:88–94.
Perucca E, Berlowitz D, Birnbaum A, et al. 2006. Pharmacological and
clinical aspects of antiepileptic drug use in the elderly. Epilepsy
Research, 68S:S49–63.
Raja SN, Haythornethwaite, Pappagallo M, et al. 2002. Opioid versus
antidepressants in postherpetic neuralgia. A randomized controlled
trial. Neurology, 59:1015–21.
Ray W, Meredith S, Thapa P, et al. 2004. Cyclic antidepressants and the
risk of sudden cardiac death. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
75:234–41.
Rice ASC, Maton S. 2001. Postherpetic Neuralgia Study Group. Gabap-
entin in postherpetic neuralgia: a randomised, double blind, placebo
controlled study. Pain, 94:215–24.
Rosenthal N, Silverﬁeld J, Wu S, et al. 2004. Tramadol/acetaminophen
combination tablets for the treatment of pain associated with osteoar-
thritis ﬂare in an elderly patient population. Journal of the American
Geriatric Society, 52:374–80.
Rowan A, Ramsay R, Collins J, et al. 2005. VA Cooperative Study 428
Group. New onset geriatric epilepsy: a randomised study of gabapentin,
lamotrigine, and carbamazepine. Neurology, 64:1868–73.
Rowbotham M, Harden N, Stacey B, et al. 1998. Gabapentin for the treat-
ment of postherpetic neuralgia. JAMA, 280:1837–42.
Sabatowski R, Galvez R, Cherry DA, et al. 2004. Pregabalin reduces pain
and improves sleep and mood disturbances in patients with post-her-
petic neuralgia: results of a randomised, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Pain, 109:26–35.
Schnitzer T. 1999. Managing chronic pain with tramadol in elderly patients.
Clinical Geriatrics, 7(8).
Sindrup S. 2003. Chapter 18: Antidepressants and chronic pain. In:
Jensen T, Wilson P, Rice A eds. Clinical pain management: chronic
pain. London: Arnold.
Taylor R. 2006. Epidemiology of refractory neuropathic pain. Pain Practice,
6:22–6.
Treede R-D, Jensen TS, Campbell JN, et al. In press. Neuropathic pain:
redeﬁnition and a grading system for clinical and research diagnostic
purposes. Neurology.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2008:3(1)120
Haslam and Nurmikko
US Bureau of the Consensus 2002. International Database.
Watson C, Tyler K, Bickers D, et al. 1993. A randomised vehicle-controlled
trial of topical capsaicin in the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia.
Clinical Therapeutics, 15:510–26.
Watson C, Babul N. 1998. Efﬁcacy of oxycodone in neuropathic pain. A
randomized trial in postherpetic neuralgia. Neurology, 50:1837–41.
Watson C, Moulin D, Watt-Watson J, et al. 2003. Controlled-release
oxycodone relieves neuropathic pain: a randomised controlled trial in
painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain, 105:71–8.
Won A, Lapane K, Vallow S, et al. 2006. Long-term effects of analgesics
in a population of elderly nursing home residents with persistent non-
malignant pain. The Journals of Gerontology, 61A:165–9.
Woodhouse A, Mather L. 1997. The inﬂuence of age upon opioid use in
the patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) environment. Anaesthesia,
52:949–55.
