Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 131–142
© 2006 Dove Medical Press Limited. All rights reserved
131
R E V I E W
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease across the
spectrum of severity
Shailaja Shah
William E Reichman
UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, Piscataway, NJ, USA
Correspondence: Shailaja Shah
UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 667 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ
08854, USA
Tel +1 732 235 5840
Fax +1 732 235 5630
Email shahsk@umdnj.edu
Abstract: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia affecting nearly
18 million people around the world and 4.5 million in the US. It is a progressive
neurodegenerative condition that is estimated to dramatically increase in prevalence as the
elderly population continues to grow.As the cognitive and neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms
of AD progresses in severity over time, affected individuals become increasingly dependent
on others for assistance in performing all activities of daily living. The burden of caring for
someone affected by the disorder is great and has substantial impact on a family’s emotional,
social and financial well-being. In the US, the currently approved medications for the treatment
of mild to moderate stages of AD are the cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs). Cholinesterase
inhibitors have shown modest efficacy in terms of symptomatic improvement and stabilization
for periods generally ranging from 6 to 12 months. There are additional data that have emerged,
which suggest longer-term benefits. For the moderate to severe stages of AD, memantine, an
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist is in widespread use and has shown modest
benefit as monotherapy and in combination with ChEIs. The cost effectiveness of the currently
available therapeutic agents for AD has undergone great scrutiny and remains controversial,
especially outside the US. Neuropsychiatric symptoms such as agitation and psychosis are
common in AD. Unfortunately, in the US there are no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
approved agents for the treatment of these symptoms, although atypical antipsychotics have
shown some efficacy and have been widely used. However, the use of these agents has recently
warranted special caution due to reports of associated adverse effects such as weight gain,
hyperlipidemia, glucose intolerance, cerebrovascular events, and an increased risk for death.
Alternative agents used to treat neuropsychiatric symptoms include serotonergic
antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and anticonvulsant medications.
Keywords:cognitive enhancers, cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, atypical antipsychotics
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an acquired neurodegenerative disease that causes
persistent and progressively severe memory loss accompanied by other cognitive
deficits that include aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, dyscalculia, executive function
impairment, and changes in behavior. These clinical features have a major impact on
the affected individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living. As AD
progresses in severity across its different clinical stages, the affected patient becomes
increasingly more dependent on others for care. As the most common cause of
dementia, AD exerts a substantial toll on an aging population worldwide and is of
great public health interest. The neuropathological hallmarks of AD include amyloid
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, inflammation, neuronal loss, and depletion of
neurochemicals such as acetylcholine (Whitehouse et al 1982). Alterations in other
neurotransmitter systems such as the glutamatergic system have also been identified
as contributory to the pathogenesis of the disease.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)132
Shah and Reichman
There is no cure forAD. Current treatment of the disorder
involves the use of medications to obtain symptomatic
cognitive, behavioral, and functional improvement or
stabilization. In addition, individualization of the treatment
plan to address medical co-morbidities, the social and
financial impact of the disease on the family, and caregiver
well-being is vital to achieving successful outcomes
throughout all clinical stages of AD.
Treatment of cognition and
function
Mild cognitive impairment
Alzheimer disease is a gradually progressive neuro-
degenerative disorder whose neuropathological alterations
may precede the onset of clinical symptoms by decades.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is considered by some to
represent the earliest clinical manifestations of impending
dementia. In MCI, the affected individual subjectively
complains of memory problems but has generally normal
cognitive and daily functioning despite a demonstrable
decrease in memory performance on testing (Peterson et al
2001). Mild cognitive impairment has been described as a
transitional state between healthy cognitive aging and overt
dementia caused by AD, vascular dementia, or other causes
of progressive cognitive decline in the elderly.
Approximately 10% to 15% of individuals with MCI
progress to diagnosed AD each year. There is no treatment
approved for MCI. Peterson and colleagues (2005) have
reported on the use of donepezil and vitamin E in patients
with MCI in a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. They found that compared with placebo, at 18 months
donepezil delayed the onset of AD by 6 months, however,
donepezil had no beneficial effects in preventing the onset
of AD by the end of the 36 month trial. Vitamin E was not
shown to be of significant benefit.
Mild to moderate AD
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Available consensus treatment guidelines and practice
parameters, including those of the American Academy of
Neurology (AAN) recommend the use of cholinesterase
inhibitors (ChEIs) as standard therapy for mild to moderate
AD based on evidence accumulated from several 3- to 6-
month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trials (Doody et al 2001). These studies suggest a
modest therapeutic effect of this class of medications on
the symptoms of AD. The primary outcome measures used
across these studies most often include the Alzheimer’s
DiseaseAssessment Scale – cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog)
(Rosen et al 1984) and the clinician’s interview-based
impression of change plus caregiver input (CIBIC-Plus)
(Schneider et al 1997). The ADAS-cog is a highly sensitive
scale that measures multiple cognitive outcomes. Scores
range from 0 to 70 (high to low cognitive functioning).
Untreated patients with mild to moderate AD typically
progress by a 3 to 4 point increase over 6 months. Patients
with moderate to severeAD have an increase of 4 to 6 points
over 6 months if untreated. The CIBIC-Plus is a tool that
assesses patient functioning via a subjective examination of
the patient and an interview with a caregiver (range of scores
1 to 7; score of 1 indicating substantial improvement and 7
indicating marked deterioration). The pivotal 12 to 24 week
duration clinical trials examining the efficacy of ChEIs in
AD have shown improvement in study subjects on the
ADAS-cog of 2.5 to 3.5 points and on the CIBIC-Plus of
0.3 to 0.5 points as compared with deterioration in placebo-
treated subjects (Cummings 2004).
Donepezil
Donepezil is a rapidly reversible inhibitor of acetyl-
cholinesterase. Subjects treated with a daily dose of
donepezil 5–10 mg, in several 12 to 24 week placebo-
controlled trials of patients with mild to moderate probable
AD (n=1759), demonstrated statistically significant
differences on the ADAS-cog and the CIBIC-Plus scales
favoring the active drug (Rogers, Doody, et al 1998; Rogers,
Farlow, et al 1998; Burns et al 1999). During single-blind, 6
week placebo washout periods,ADAS-cog and CIBIC-Plus
scores in the donepezil-treated groups reverted to levels
similar to those in the placebo group (Rogers et al 1998;
Burns et al 1999). This has been interpreted to suggest that
donepezil treatment for 6 months has a symptomatic effect,
but not a “disease modifying” effect.
Two double-blind, 12 month placebo-controlled trials
of donepezil with 10 mg daily have been completed in
patients with mild to moderate AD (Winblad et al 2001;
Mohs et al 2001). Winblad and colleagues reported a
difference in favor of donepezil over placebo using the
Gottfries-Brane-Steen scale (GBS) (Brane et al 2001) as
the primary outcome measure. The GBS scale is a measure
of global functioning. This scale assesses patient function
in four general areas using a semi-structured interview by a
clinician with a patient and caregiver. It measures changes
in the symptoms of dementia over a specified amount of
time. Overall, GBS scale scores for subjects (observed cases)
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 133
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
in the active treatment group showed a decline half as large
as that reported for patients in the placebo group. Mohs and
colleagues reported that the median amount of time to
clinically evident functional decline as determined by several
measures of activities of daily living was delayed by 5
months in the donepezil treated group compared with the
placebo group (Table 1).
In a Cochrane Library review of the efficacy of donepezil
for mild to moderate AD, 4 studies were included covering
treatment of 12 or 24 weeks duration in highly selected
patients. The authors concluded that in selected patients with
mild to moderate AD treated for 12 or 24 weeks, donepezil
produced modest improvements in cognitive function and
no improvements were noted on patient self-assessed quality
of life. In addition, the authors noted significantly higher
number of withdrawals before the end of treatment from
the 10 mg/day donepezil group compared with placebo,
which could have potentially resulted in overestimation of
the beneficial effects at 10mg/day, as last available measures
were used in the analyses. It is not known whether these
gains translate into gains for the caregiver or in substantial
changes in the life of the patient (Birks et al 2000).A recent
study on the long-term use of donepezil has attempted to
address the controversies regarding the practical
effectiveness of the agent from a cost–benefit analysis.
Courtney and co-workers (Courtney et al 2004) studied 565
community residing subjects with mild to moderateAD. The
subjects were referred from memory clinics and clinically
diagnosed withAD with or without cerebrovascular disease.
They were initially randomly assigned to treatment with
donepezil 5 mg/day or placebo during a 12-week run-in
period to assess initial effects. 486 subjects who completed
this phase of the study were then re-randomized to receive
either donepezil or placebo, with double blind treatment
continuing for as long as “judged appropriate”. At the end
of 48 weeks of treatment, a 6 week washout period was
commenced. Patients could then subsequently choose to
continue with the same double-blinded treatment that they
had been on for a further 48 weeks. At the end of every 48
week treatment period a further 4-week washout occurred,
after which patients could again continue on for another 48
weeks. Primary endpoints were entry to institutionalized care
and progression of disability in activities of daily living.
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (Folstein et
al 1975), a widely used screening test for cognitive
impairment in older adults was also used in this study as an
outcome measure. The donepezil-treated group improved
from baseline by 0.9 MMSE points during the first 12 weeks,
however, no change was seen in the placebo group. After
the 12th week, both groups declined at similar rates. Over
the first two years, donepezil-treated subjects showed some
advantage over placebo-treated subjects in MMSE scores
(0.8 points) and functional ability. At three years, no
significant difference was noted between the donepezil-
treated group and the placebo-treated group in rates of
institutionalization or progression of disability. The study
also did not detect any significant difference between
donepezil and placebo on the treatment of behavioral
symptoms. There were no significant differences between
donepezil and placebo in caregiver well-being, time of
caregiving, and costs of care. However, the study confirmed
the same degree of modest efficacy of donepezil in treating
cognition as did the pivotal trials of shorter duration. The
authors concluded that donepezil is not a cost effective
treatment for AD.
Relkin and colleagues (2003) conducted an open-label
trial of donepezil in a large community-based population.
They included 1035 patients with mild to moderate AD, out
of which 894 completed the trial. Nearly all patients had at
least one co-morbid medical condition or were taking a
minimum of one concomitant medication. Efficacy was
measured using the standardized MMSE (sMMSE) (Molloy
Table 1 Summary of major clinical trials of donepezil
Study Sample size, n Study duration Baseline MMSE Cognitive measures Global measures
Rogers, Farlow, et al 1998 473 24 weeks 10–26 ADAS-cog, MMSE CIBIC-Plus; CDR-SB
Rogers, Doody, et al 1998 468 12 weeks 10–26 ADAS-cog, MMSE CIBIC-Plus; CDR-SB
Burns et al 1999 818 24 weeks 10–26 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus, CDR-SB
Mohs et al 2001 431 1 year 12–20 MMSE CDR, CDR-SB
Winblad et al 2001 286 1 year 10–26 GBS, MMSE GDS
Feldman et al 2001 290 24 weeks 5–17 sMMSE CIBIC-Plus
Abbreviations: ADAS-cog,Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale – cognitive subscale; CDR, clinical dementia rating; CDR-SB, clinical dementia rating – sum of the
boxes; GBS, Gottfried-Brane-Steen scale; GDS, global deterioration scale; MMSE, mini-mental state exam; sMMSE, standardized mini-mental state exam; CIBIC-Plus,
clinician interview-based impression of change incorporating caregiver information.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)134
Shah and Reichman
et al 1991). The goal of the sMMSE is to impose clear and
explicit guidelines for administration and scoring to improve
the reliability of the instrument. The sMMSE has
significantly better inter-rater and intra-rater reliability
compared with the MMSE. Over the initial 12 week study
period the sMMSE increased by 1.54 points over baseline.
Donepezil was shown to be well-tolerated with the
occurrence of adverse events significantly lower after a dose
increase at 4 weeks as compared with a dose increase after
1 week as in previous trials. In addition, the investigators
found that concomitant medication use such as aspirin or
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs did not increase the
risk of gastrointestinal side effects with use of donepezil.
Concomitant medications such as digoxin, calcium channel
blockers, or beta blockers did not increase the risk of
bradycardia, a potential side-effect of cholinergic
medications.
Seltzer and colleagues (2004) studied the efficacy of
donepezil in mild AD in subjects with MMSE scores of 21
to 26. In a double blind fashion, subjects were randomized
to receive either donepezil or placebo in a 2:1 ratio for 24
weeks. Donepezil-treated subjects performed better than
placebo-treated subjects on the ADAS-cog and MMSE at
all time points studied.
None of the ChEIs have been approved for treatment of
the severe stages of AD. However, in a 6 month placebo-
controlled trial of donepezil in moderate to severe AD,
donepezil was shown to be of benefit (Feldman et al 2001).
At 6 months, 63% of moderate to severely affected patients
in the donepezil-treated group versus 42% of the placebo-
treated group showed improvement or no change in CIBIC-
Plus scores.
Based on the results from the pivotal double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials in patients
with mild to moderate AD, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has approved use of donepezil at
doses of 5 mg to 10 mg once daily. The starting dose of
donepezil is 5 mg once daily, with an increase to 10 mg
recommended at 4 to 6 weeks.
Rivastigmine
Rivastigmine inhibits acetylcholinesterase and butyryl-
cholinesterase (Ballard 2002). In two 26-week trials
involving patients with mild to moderate AD (n=1424),
patients receiving a daily dose of 6 mg to 12 mg of
rivastigmine demonstrated favorable and significant
differences in ADAS-cog and CIBIC-Plus scores as
compared with the placebo-treated group (Corey-Bloom et
al 1998; Rosler et al 1999) (Table 2).
Sustained benefits of rivastigmine have been reported
for over a 1-year period by Farlow and colleagues (2000).
After receiving double-blind placebo or rivastigmine at daily
doses of 1mg to 4mg or 6mg to 12mg for 26 weeks, patients
were eligible to enter an open label extension phase. The
withdrawal rate for subjects treated with rivastigmine 6 mg
to 12 mg with more rapid dose titration in the initial double-
blind phase of the study was 35% (Corey-Bloom et al 1998).
For the open label extension phase, dose titration was more
flexible and the rate of withdrawal was decreased to 19%
(Farlow et al 2000). At 52 weeks, a large difference (5.7
points) was seen in ADAS-cog scores favoring the
rivastigmine-treated group over the placebo group (Farlow
et al 2000). Although impairment advanced in both groups,
subjects originally receiving placebo for the initial 6 months
of the study did not show the same amount of benefit as
subjects treated with effective doses of rivastigmine for the
entire 52 weeks. This observation suggests the benefit of
starting rivastigmine treatment early in the course of the
illness.
There is some evidence from a retrospective analysis of
rivastigmine therapy that it might have beneficial effects in
moderately severeAD (Burns et al 2004). Data were pooled
Table 2 Summary of major clinical trials of rivastigmine
Study Sample size, n Duration Baseline MMSE Cognitive measures Global measures
Corey-Bloom et al 1998 699 26 weeks 10–6 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus
Rosler et al 1999 725 26 weeks 10–26 ADAS-cog, MMSE CIBIC-Plus
Farlow et al 2000 533 26 week open label 10–26 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus
extension of a 26 week
placebo-controlled study
Burns et al 2004 112 Retrospective analysis 10–12 ADAS-cog, MMSE PDS, BEHAVE-AD
from 3 trials
Abbreviations: ADAS-cog,Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale – cognitive subscale; BEHAVE-AD: behavior pathology in AD rating scale; CIBIC-Plus, clinician
interview-based impression of change incorporating caregiver information; MMSE, mini-mental state exam; PDS: progressive deterioration scale.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 135
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
from three 6-month randomized, placebo-controlled, double-
blind trials. Patients with severe cognitive impairment were
identified if they had MMSE scores of 10 to 12. 112 patients
met the inclusion criteria and had received placebo or daily
rivastigmine, 6 mg to 12 mg. After 6 months, subjects in the
rivastigmine group showed a 0.2 point decrease in mean
ADAS-cog scores (decreased impairment) compared with
baseline, whereas placebo group subjects had an increase
of 6.3 points (increased impairment) (p<0.001). Clinical
improvement was also observed with the MMSE,
Progressive Deterioration Scale (PDS), and the Behavioral
Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease Rating Scale (BEHAVE-
AD).
The FDA has approved rivastigmine (like all other
available ChEIs) for mild to moderate AD. The dose of
rivastigmine increases from 1.5mg twice daily to 3mg twice
daily, then to 4.5 mg twice daily, and to a maximum of 6 mg
twice daily. Dose increments are recommended at 1 to 4
week intervals; fewer side effects emerge when the intervals
are longer.
Galantamine
Galantamine has been proposed to both inhibit
acetylcholinesterase and to act as an allosteric potentiating
ligand on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (Maelicke et al
2001). Several large 5- to 6-month placebo-controlled trials
for patients with mild to moderateAD (n= 2267) have found
beneficial drug effects on the ADAS-cog and CIBIC-Plus
scales for patients treated with galantamine, 16 mg to 24 mg
per day versus placebo (Table 3).
There is some evidence of longer-term benefits of
galantamine in 12-month open label extension studies
(Raskind et al 2000). After 12 months of therapy, patients
who received 24 mg per day of galantamine had ADAS-cog
scores that remained stable relative to baseline measures.
Comparatively, the placebo group had increased impairment
in ADAS-cog scores (increase of 4 to 5 points). The group
that received galantamine throughout the 12-month study
period had better ADAS-cog outcomes at endpoint than did
patients who received placebo during the first 6 months of
the study and were then switched to galantamine. All
findings were observed case (OC) analyses which were
confirmed with intent to treat analyses (ITT) using the last
observation carried forward method (LOCF). Lyketsos and
colleagues (2004) assessed the long-term efficacy as well
as tolerability of galantamine. The authors conducted a 12-
month open-label extension of an earlier 5-month, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial with a 6-week withdrawal
phase. The authors concluded that patients treated with
galantamine continuously throughout the double-blind and
open-label phases (n=288) showed sustained cognitive
benefits at 18.5 months. In addition, the safety and
tolerability of galantamine was comparable with other large
studies of the drug.
Blesa and colleagues (2003) investigated the benefits of
galantamine in patients with more severe disease by
performing a post-hoc analysis using data collected from
two long-term galantamine studies. Patients included in this
study were those with MMSE scores <14, or ADAS-cog
subscale scores of >30. The authors concluded that
galantamine offered both cognitive and functional benefit
in this population. Galantamine is approved by the FDA for
mild to moderate AD. It is initiated at a dose of 4mg twice
daily for 1 month. The dose is increased to 8 mg twice daily
and if desired, up to 12 mg twice daily. Longer intervals
between dosage increases are associated with a lower
incidence of gastrointestinal side effects. Recently,
galantamine was introduced in an extended release form for
Table 3 Summary of major clinical trials of galantamine
Study Sample size, n Duration Baseline MMSE Cognitive measures Global measures
Tariot et al 2000 978 5 months 10–22 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus
Raskind et al 2000 636 6 months 11–24 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus
Wilcock et al 2000 653 6 months 11–24 ADAS-cog CIBIC-Plus
Lyketsos et al 2004 699 18.5 months (12 month 10–22 ADAS-cog ADCS–ADL, NPI
open label extension of
earlier 5 month study)
Blesa et al 2003 72 12 months <14 ADAS-cog ADAS-cog DAD
165 >30
Abbreviations: ADAS-cog,Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale – cognitive subscale; ADCS–ADL, Alzheimer’s disease cooperative study – activities of daily living
scale ; BEHAVE-AD: behavior pathology in AD rating scale; CIBIC-Plus, clinician interview-based impression of change incorporating caregiver information; DAD,
disability assessment for dementia scale (Gelinas et al 1999); MMSE, mini-mental state exam; NPI, neuropsychiatric inventory (Cummings et al 1994).
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)136
Shah and Reichman
once per day dosing. The starting dose is 8 mg per day for
one month followed by titration up to 16 mg or 24 mg per
day.
Despite the postulated differences in mechanisms of
action of the ChEIs, all three drugs (donepezil, rivastigmine,
and galantamine) have similar degrees of efficacy. This was
demonstrated by Ritchie and colleagues (2004) who
conducted a meta-analysis of randomized trials of the
efficacy and safety of these three agents. The authors
conducted regression analyses to compare the effect of dose
on clinical outcomes and completion rates, analyzing ten
donepezil, six galantamine, and five rivastigmine studies.
All three drugs showed beneficial effects on cognitive tests,
as compared with placebo. For donepezil and rivastigmine,
larger doses were associated with larger symptomatic effects
as assessed by theADAS-cog. Clinical global improvement
was shown to be superior for each drug over placebo with
no dose effects noted.
The optimal duration of treatment with ChEIs is
uncertain. The duration of most blinded trials has been 6
months. Trials lasting one year have shown a sustained
difference in efficacy between actively treated groups of
patients and patients receiving placebo (Raskind et al 2000;
Winblad et al 2001). In addition, studies in which the rate
of deterioration in the placebo group was extrapolated and
compared with the level of function of patients continuing
treatment with a ChEI suggest that patients continue to derive
modest benefit from treatment for two to three years (Rogers
et al 2000).
Although the ChEIs as a class are generally well
tolerated, the commonest adverse effects noted in the pivotal
trials include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite,
loss of weight, muscle cramps, and insomnia. The dosing
recommendation provided with these agents is to have them
administered with a meal to lower the risk of side effects.
As a class, ChEIs are contraindicated in the presence of
cardiac conduction abnormalities such as left bundle branch
block and sick sinus syndrome as well as gastric ulcer disease
in which bleeding has occurred. From a comparative
tolerability perspective, data from the pivotal clinical trials
of all three agents suggest that rivastigmine is associated
with the greatest risk of gastrointestinal side-effects (nausea,
emesis, diarrhea) followed by galantamine and then
donepezil.A more gradual dose titration of rivastigmine than
initially recommended with the use of this agent appears to
attenuate the frequency of these symptoms. Donepezil has
been more often associated with muscles cramps and sleep
disturbance than the other two agents in the class.
Moderate to severe AD
Memantine
Memantine was approved by the FDA in October 2003 for
the treatment of moderate to severe AD having been
previously widely available in Germany for several years.
Memantine is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor
noncompetitive antagonist that is proposed to lessen the
neurotoxic effects of excessive excitatory glutamatergic
neurotransmission that occurs in AD. To assess the impact
of treatment, pivotal trials of memantine for moderate to
severe AD have used the Severe Impairment Battery (SIB)
to evaluate abilities to perform basic cognitive tasks (Panisset
et al 1994), the Alzheimer’s disease cooperative study –
Table 4 Summary of major clinical trials of memantine
Study Sample size, Duration Baseline Dose Outcome: last observation carried
n MMSE forward analyses at end point
compared with placebo
Reisberg et al 2003 252 28 week 3–14 20 mg SIB: -4.0 vs 10.1, p<0.001); CIBIC-Plus: 4.5
vs 4.8, p=0.06; ADCS-ADL: -3.1 vs -5.2,
p=0.02
Tariot et al 2004 404 24 weeks 5–14 20 mg memantine/ SIB: 0.9 vs –2.5 p<0.001; CIBIC-Plus: 4.41 vs
(patients already receiving donepezil vs 4.66, p=0.03; ADCS-ADL: -3.4 vs –2.0,
donepezil for at least 6 months) donepezil/placebo p=0.03
Winblad and Poritis 1999 166 12 weeks <10 5 mg/day (first week) CGI-C: (ITT): 73% positive response
and 10 mg/day (next (memantine 10 mg/day) vs 45% (placebo).
11 weeks) vs placebo p<0.001; BGP: (ITT): 3.1 points improvement
with memantine, 1.1 points with placebo.
p=0.016)
Abbreviations: ADCS-ADL,Alzheimer’s disease cooperative study – activities of daily living scale ; CIBIC-Plus, clinician interview-based impression of change
incorporating caregiver information; GCI-C, clinical global impression of change (NIMH 1986); BGP, behavioral rating scale for geriatric patients (van de Kam et al
1971); ITT, intent to treat analyses; SIB, severe impairment battery.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 137
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
activities of daily living scale (ADCS–ADL) (Galasko et al
1997); and the CIBIC-Plus scale (Table 4).
As noted in Table 4, results from the trial by Reisberg
and colleagues indicated benefit of memantine treatment
on cognitive and functional measures. As measured by the
SIB, cognition was stable for the first 12 weeks and the extent
of impairment in the memantine-treated group at end point
was significantly less than that in the placebo treated group
(–4.0 vs –10.1). Memantine treatment also delayed decline
in functional ability versus placebo (ADCS–ADL scores:
–3.1 with memantine vs –5.2 with placebo).
Tariot and colleagues (2004) reports results from a
double-blind combination study in which moderate to
severely impaired AD subjects were randomized to receive
donepezil plus placebo (monotherapy) or donepezil plus
memantine. The investigators reported that combination
therapy with donepezil and memantine had a greater
influence on cognitive improvement, reduced decline in
activities of daily living, and a reduced frequency of new
behavioral symptoms versus the donepezil monotherapy
group.
In another study conducted by Winblad and Poritis
(1999), patients with severe dementia living in a nursing
home setting or a single psychiatric hospital were recruited
to assess the clinical efficacy and safety of memantine during
a 12 week trial. Patients with AD or vascular dementia with
a MMSE score of less than 10 were included. It was a double-
blind, parallel-group comparison study utilizing memantine
5 mg/day during the first week and 10 mg/day during the
next 11 weeks or placebo. Notably, this dosing is in contrast
to 10 mg twice per day utilized in the pivotal trials reported
by Reisberg and colleagues and Tariot and colleagues.
Outcome scales used in this study included the Clinical
Global Impression of change (GCI-C) (NIMH 1986) and
the Behavioral Rating scale for Geriatric Patients (BGP)
subscore ‘care dependence’, (van de Kam et al 1971). The
GCI-C is a 7-point global rating scale related to the CIBIC-
Plus. The BGP is an observer-rated scale for the assessment
of functional and behavioral disturbances in geriatric
patients. The investigators reported that a positive response
was seen in 73% of the memantine-treated subjects versus
45% of the placebo-treated patients on the CGI-C. As
measured by the BGP, memantine treatment improved
functioning and behavioral symptoms to a statistically
significant greater extent than placebo
Adverse effects with memantine are uncommon,
however, they include headache, sedation, fatigue,
constipation, increased confusion, irritability, and agitation.
The recommended starting dose is 5mg once daily, with a
gradual dose titration that increases the daily dose in 5mg
increments each week to reach a maximum dose of 10mg
twice daily. Although memantine is approved for use in
moderate to severe AD, there is preliminary published
evidence to suggest that memantine may be effective for
mild to moderate AD (Peskind et al 2004). Peskind and
colleagues studied memantine in a 24 week placebo-
controlled, randomized trial (n= 403, baseline MMSE score
of 10 to 22) and noted significant improvement in cognition
and observed function. Two additional unpublished studies
of memantine in mild to moderateAD, a monotherapy study
conducted in Europe and a combination study with a ChEI
conducted in the US, failed to show statistically significant
benefits over placebo in the primary outcome measures.
Despite the one positive study cited above, the FDA recently
denied a supplemental new drug application to broaden the
agent’s indication to mild to moderate AD.
The cost-effectiveness of AD treatments has been
questioned. Specifically, the use of ChEIs has been recently
challenged in the UK by the National Institute for Clinical
Excellence (NICE). NICE proposed in their preliminary
guideline to withdraw ChEIs and memantine from the UK
National Health Service (NHS) (Kmietowicz 2005). The
NICE assessment group has indicated that there is
insufficient evidence that acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
have measurable effects on quality of life and time to
admission to nursing home care. This proposal has caused
significant international concern. The NICE guideline does
not adequately take into consideration the effect of treatment
on caregivers who bear a significant care burden. In addition,
the NICE recommendation does not consider the wishes of
the individual patient and caregiver, denying them a chance
to benefit from consistently proven effective therapies.
Treatment of neuropsychiatric
symptoms
Neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with dementia are
common and have been reported in more than 80% of
subjects in most studies (Cummings 2004). These features
of the disorder contribute to poor outcomes for patients and
caregivers. There is some controversy about the frequency
of these symptoms in patients with varying severity of
dementia, although psychotic symptoms seem to be more
common in advanced dementia (Lyketsos et al 2000).
Lyketsos and colleagues (2000) reported findings from a
study of 5092 community residents who represented 90%
of the elderly population of Cache County in Utah, US.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)138
Shah and Reichman
Several disturbances (delusions, anxiety, apathy, irritability,
elation, and disinhibition) were reported with similar severity
at all stages of dementia. In contrast, aggression/agitation
and aberrant motor behavior were more common at later
stages of AD. The study also identified a slightly increased
occurrence of depression and hallucinations in moderately
severe dementia as compared with mild stage dementia. As
behavior disturbances emerge in individuals with dementia,
they should be managed initially by nonpharmacologic
interventions to avoid the potential adverse effects of
psychotropic agents (Cohen-Mansfield 2001). A wide
spectrum of nonpharmacologic interventions have been
studied for the treatment of behavior disturbances in
Alzheimer’s disease (Cohen-Mansfield 2001). These include
music, videotapes of family members, audiotapes of the
voices of caregivers, walking, exercise, and sensory
stimulation.
In behaviorally disturbed demented patients, few studies
of the psychotropic effects of the ChEIs and memantine have
been published. However, in some of the pivotal trials of
the ChEIs and memantine, the data suggest that treatment
with active drug is associated with less behavioral
deterioration over time than placebo treatment. Holmes and
co-workers (2004) conducted a 12 week, randomized
withdrawal study in 134 patients with donepezil. Patients
with mild to moderate stage AD with neuropsychiatric
symptoms as indicated by a baseline Neuropsychiatric
Inventory (NPI) scale of more than 11 points were treated
with donepezil 5 mg daily for 6 weeks, followed by 10 mg
daily for a further 6 weeks. Patients were then randomized
to either placebo or 10mg donepezil daily. The patients were
assessed using the NPI and NPI-caregiver distress (NPI-D)
(Cummings et al 1994) scales at 6 weeks and then again at
12 weeks. The NPI is a caregiver-based interview to assess
10 behavioral disturbances: delusions, hallucinations,
euphoria, anxiety, agitation, disinhibition, irritability, apathy,
and aberrant motor behavior. Frequency is rated from 1
(occasional, less than once per week) to 4 (very frequent,
daily or continuous). Severity is rated from 1 (mild) to 3
(severe). Total score ranges from 1 to 120 points. The NPI-
D scale assesses the caregiver distress caused by the
individual behaviors. Total scores range from 0 to 50 points.
In the randomization phase as well as the open label phase
of the study, there was improvement in the NPI and NPI-D
scores in the donepezil-treated group. For patients who were
on donepezil in the first 6 weeks and later randomized to
placebo, there was a significant worsening of
neuropsychiatric symptoms and caregiver distress at 6 and
12 weeks.
Olin and colleagues (2002) have reported in a Cochrane
review on 2 randomized controlled trials of galantamine for
AD that included the NPI as an outcome measure. In one
trial, there was no benefit of galantamine 24 mg/day or
32mg/day treatment on behavioral symptoms versus placebo
treatment. In the second trial, the 16 mg/day dose was found
to be significantly better than placebo. Two randomized-
controlled trials with memantine for the treatment of
moderate to severe stageAD have included neuropsychiatric
symptom measures as outcomes. Reisberg and colleagues
(2003) reported that the memantine-treated group was not
significantly different than the placebo-treated group in
terms of NPI scores. Tariot and colleagues (2004) reported
a statistically significant difference in favor of the
memantine/donepezil-treated group versus the donepezil/
placebo-treated group in terms of the NPI scores. However,
the magnitude of this difference was small.
Only a few placebo-controlled clinical trials have
addressed the treatment of depression in patients with AD.
The most abundant data exist for sertraline and citalopram
in which the former agent has shown some efficacy for
depressive symptoms and the latter, depression, agitation,
and lability (Table 5).
Risperidone, olanzapine, and quetiapine are frequently
used atypical antipsychotic agents for the treatment of
psychosis and agitation in dementia. There are several open
label trials reporting the efficacy of these agents and a limited
number of placebo-controlled studies (Table 6).
Studies of the efficacy and tolerability of two of the newer
atypical antipsychotics, aripiprazole and ziprazidone in
dementia with behavior disturbance, have not yet appeared
Table 5 Summary of antidepressant trials in elderly dementia patients
Study Sample size, n Study duration Medication Outcome
Pollock et al 2002 52 17 days Citalopram (20 mg/day) Agitation and lability significantly improved
Lyketsos et al 2003 44 12 week Sertraline (mean dose 95 mg) Significant improvement in depression but not in
agitation
Finkel et al 2004 245 12 week Sertraline (mean dose 125 mg) No significant improvement in depression
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 139
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
in the peer-reviewed literature. The available evidence
suggests that overall, atypical antipsychotic agents are better
tolerated than conventional neuroleptics and more
efficacious than placebo in decreasing agitation in patients
with dementia. Importantly, it has been recently reported
that medications in this class may increase the risk of glucose
intolerance and cerebrovascular adverse events. Clozapine
is occasionally recommended for treatment refractory elderly
patients with movement disorders such as Parkinsonism or
tardive dyskinesia and psychosis. One of the major
drawbacks with clozapine use is a significantly increased
risk of agranulocytosis and the need for standardized blood
monitoring (Kasckow et al 2004).
In April 2005, the FDA requested that all manufacturers
of atypical antipsychotic medications add a “black box
warning” to their prescribing information regarding the use
of these medications in elderly patients with dementia-
related psychosis (FDA 2005). According to the FDA,
“analyses of seventeen placebo-controlled trials that enrolled
5106 elderly patients with dementia-related behavior
disturbances revealed a risk of death in the drug-treated
patients of 1.6 to 1.7 times that seen in placebo-treated
patients”. The data reviewed were gathered from dementia
trials of olanzapine, aripiprazole, risperidone, and
quetiapine. Over the course of these trials, averaging about
10 weeks, the rate of death in drug treated patients was about
4.5% compared with a rate of 2.6 % in the placebo group.
The causes of death varied, appearing to be either
cardiovascular or infectious in origin. The black box warning
further goes on to state that the FDA has not approved
aripiprazole, quetiapine, ziprazidone, risperidone, and
olanzapine for the treatment of patients with dementia-
related psychosis. Given the black box warning as well as
increased cardiovascular risks (stroke), metabolic side effects
such as weight gain, hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance, and
diabetes, the clinician should very carefully consider the
choice of pharmacological agent for the treatment of
dementia-related psychosis and other neuropsychiatric
symptoms. Before prescribing an atypical antipsychotic in
dementia care, one should be able to identify target
symptoms of psychosis such as delusional thinking and
hallucinations. Only in the presence of sustained patient
distress, danger to self or others, or impairment of
functioning (resistance to care) is the use of atypical
antipsychotic medications recommended.
In addition to the emergence of atypical antipsychotic
agents as commonly used agents for the treatment of
dementia-associated neuropsychiatric symptoms, the use of
anticonvulsant medications such as carbamazepine and
sodium valproate has commanded significant attention. One
placebo-controlled study using an average dose of 300mg
per day of carbamazepine showed that the drug was well
tolerated by patients and significantly decreased aggression
and agitation (Tariot et al 1998). Potential side effects of
carbamazepine include drowsiness, gastrointestinal distress,
ataxia, rash, elevated hepatic enzymes, and drug interactions
with other agents. This agent has also been associated with
aplastic anemia and agranulocytosis.
Sodium valproate has been reportedly effective in the
treatment of behavioral disturbances in dementia and has
Table 6 Overview of placebo-controlled trials of atypical antipsychotics in dementia
Study Medication Study design Sample size, n Duration Outcome
Katz et al 1999 Risperidone, doses of 0.5 mg, Double-blind 625 12 week Significant (>50%) reductions in
1.0 mg, 2.0 mg some psychotic symptoms and
aggression with Risperidone 1 mg
DeDeyn et al 1999 Risperidone (mean dose Double-blind 344 13 week Risperidone caused >30%
1. 1 mg) or haloperidol (mean reduction in some measures
dose 1.2 mg), versus placebo of aggression
Street et al 2000 Olanzapine (doses of 5 mg, Double-blind 206 6 week 5 mg and 10 mg and not 15 mg
10 mg, 15 mg daily) versus had a significant decrease in
placebo agitation,aggression, hallucinations,
delusions
Tariot et al 2002 Quetiapine (mean dose 120 mg), Randomized placebo 10 week Both treatment groups improved
haloperidol (mean dose 2 mg) controlled in severity of psychosis and
agitation. Quetiapine was better
tolerated than haloperidol
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)140
Shah and Reichman
fewer drug interactions than carbamazepine. Porsteinsson
and colleagues (2001) reported on the use of sodium
valproate in a randomized placebo-controlled six week study
of 56 nursing home patients with dementia and agitation.
The average dose of divalproex sodium used was 840mg
per day. The authors noted that their results suggested
improvement in the agitation subscale of the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS). Potential side effects of
this agent include nausea, vomiting, sedation, diarrhea,
ataxia, and tremor. Hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis have been
noted to be rare complications of the use of sodium valproate.
When this medication is administered, complete blood
counts, hepatic enzymes, and serum drug concentrations
need to be monitored regularly to prevent toxicity.
Gabapentin, lamotrigine, and topiramate are newer
anticonvulsants whose efficacy and tolerability have not been
systematically evaluated for efficacy and tolerability in the
treatment of dementia.
Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam and oxazepam are
often used in the management of agitation, but their efficacy
has not been comprehensively studied. These agents are
generally safe when used in low doses, but with increasing
doses, common side effects include over-sedation, ataxia,
confusion, and paradoxical agitation. In addition, with long-
term use, tolerance and dependence is likely. Zolpidem, a
hypnotic, was shown to reduce nighttime wandering in two
dementia patients (Shelton et al 1997).
The antianxiety agent buspirone has shown efficacy in
case reports in reducing anxiety, aggression, and agitation
in patients with dementia (Sakauye et al 1993). The drug is
generally well-tolerated, however, if used in combination
with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), the
patient is at increased risk for the development of serotonin
syndrome (confusion, tremors, hyperthermia, hypertension,
and seizure).
In a recent review of the pharmacological treatment of
neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia, Sink and
colleagues (2005) conducted a systematic review of English
language articles published from 1996 to 2004. They utilized
Medline, the Cochrane database of systematic reviews and
a manual search of bibliographies for this review. Only
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized control trials
(RCT) or meta-analyses of dementia trials reporting effects
on neuropsychiatric symptoms were included. Twenty-nine
articles met inclusion criteria. Five trials of antidepressants
were included. No efficacy was demonstrated for symptoms
other than depression, except one study of citalopram. For
mood stabilizers, three trials of sodium valproate showed
no efficacy. Two trials of carbamazepine showed mixed
results. Four studies of typical antipsychotics showed small
benefit and no differences were shown among specific
agents. Six trials of atypical antipsychotics were included.
Results indicated modest, statistically significant, efficacy
of olanzapine and risperidone. Two meta-analyses and six
randomized clinical trials of ChEIs showed small,
statistically significant, efficacy. Two randomized clinical
trials of memantine had mixed results for the treatment of
neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Prior to the recent FDA warning regarding the use of
atypical antipsychotic agents in elderly patients with
dementia, expert consensus guidelines were published to
address the treatment of agitation in dementia (Alexopoulos
et al 2005). The guidelines recommend initiating therapy
with risperidone at low doses of 0.25 mg to 0.5 mg per day
with an average maximum dose of 1 mg to 1.5 mg per day if
there is evidence of psychosis. These guidelines also
recommend the use of environmental interventions in
addition to medication treatment. If agitation is due to
depression and/or anxiety, an SSRI trial is the first
recommended option. If insomnia is a contributing factor,
trazodone use is indicated. Other consensus guidelines
(AGS–AAGP 2003) recommend that nonpharmacological
interventions alone are indicated if there is no threat to the
patient or others, medical conditions are being addressed,
and if no psychotic symptoms are evident.
At present, no psychotropic agent presently available
within the US is FDA-approved for use in dementia.Atypical
antipsychotics are the first line agents of choice for severe
behavioral symptoms with psychosis. When medications are
used to manage behavior disturbances, one must document
the specific target symptoms being addressed. Combination
therapy is indicated only after two different trials with two
different classes of agents have proven unsuccessful. Taper
or discontinuation of medications should be attempted and
documented by six months following response and every
six months, thereafter. There is no consensus on the choice
of medication for nonpsychotic behavioral symptoms. There
are no comparison studies between pharmacological and
nonpharmacological interventions, which makes it difficult
to prioritize a specific approach for most nonpsychotic
behavioral symptoms (Table 7).
Conclusions
ChEIs are the mainstay of treatment for mild to moderate
AD and memantine is indicated as therapy for moderate to
severe AD. The degree of efficacy of these agents in
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2) 141
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
improving or stabilizing cognition and function is modest,
but has been consistently demonstrated across numerous
clinical trials. Some controversy exists regarding whether
the putative benefits of these agents outweigh their expense.
As AD advances, neuropsychiatric symptoms contribute
substantially to caregiver distress and are especially difficult
to manage. Preliminary data suggest that memantine and
ChEIs may reduce the severity or delay the emergence of
neuropsychiatric symptoms. Despite their recent association
with an increased risk of death, cerebrovascular adverse
events, and metabolic alterations such as hyperglycemia and
hyperlipidemia, atypical antipsychotics are widely used in
treating psychosis and agitation. Although supporting data
are limited, serotonergic antidepressants and anticonvulsant
agents are frequently used for the treatment of
neuropsychiatric symptoms such as depression, agitation,
and aggression.
References
[AGS–AAGP]American Geriatrics Society andAmerican Association for
Geriatric Psychiatry. 2003. Consensus statement on improving the
quality of mental health care in U.S. nursing homes: Management of
depression and behavioral symptoms associated with dementia. J Am
Geriatr Soc, 51:1287–98.
Alexopoulos G, Jeste D, Carpenter D, et al. 2005. Expert Consensus
Guideline Series: Treatment of dementia and its behavioral
disturbances. Postgraduate Medicine Special Report. McGraw-Hill.
Ballard CG. 2002. Advances in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease:
benefits of dual cholinesterase inhibition (review). Eur Neurol, 47:64–
70.
Birks JS, Melzer D. 2000. Donepezil for mild and moderate Alzheimer’s
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 4:CD001190.
Blesa R, Davidson M, KurzA, et al. 2003. Galantamine provides sustained
benefits in patients with “Advanced moderate” Alzheimer’s disease
for at least 12 months. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord, 15:79–87.
Brane G, Gottfries CG, Winblad B. 2001. The Gottfries-Brane-Steen scale:
validity, reliability, and application in anti-dementia drug trials.
Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord, 12:1–14.
Burns A, Rossor M,Hecker J, et al. 1999. The effects of donepezil in
Alzheimer’s disease- results from a multinational trial. Dement Geriatr
Cogn Disord, 10:237–44.
Table 7 Commonly prescribed drugs, dosage guidelines in the elderly
Drug Starting Maximum recommended
daily dose daily dose
Divalproex 125 mg twice daily 1000 mg
Carbamazepine 50–100 mg 500–800 mg
Risperidone 0.25–0.5 mg 1 mg
Olanzapine 2.5 mg 5–10 mg
Quetiapine 25 mg 200–300 mg
Trazodone 25 mg 100–150 mg
Buspirone 5 mg twice daily 30–45 mg
Lorazepam 0.5 mg 2 mg
Zolpidem 5 mg 10 mg
Burns A, Spiegel R, Quarg P. 2004. Efficacy of rivastigmine in subjects
with moderately severeAlzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry,
19:243–9.
Cohen-Mansfield J. 2001. Nonpharmacologic interventions for
inappropriate behaviors in dementia: a review, summary, and critique.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, 9:361–81.
Corey-Bloom J, Anand R, Veach J. 1998. A randomized trial evaluating
the efficacy and safety of ENA 713 (rivastigmine tartrate), a new
cholinesterase inhibitor, in patients with mild to moderately severe
Alzheimer’s disease. Int Geriatr Psychopharmacol, 2:55–65.
Courtney C, Farrell D, Gray R, et al; AD 2000 Collaborative group. 2004.
Long term donepezil in 565 patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD
2000): randomized double-blind trial. Lancet, 363:2105–15.
Cummings JL, Mega M, Gray K, et al. 1994. The Neuropsychiatric
Inventory: comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in
dementia. Neurology, 44:2308–14.
Cummings JL. 2004. Alzheimer’s disease: drug therapy. N Engl J Med,
351:56–67.
DeDeyn P, Rabheru K, Rasmussen A, et al. 1999. A randomized trial of
risperidone, placebo and haloperidol for behavioral symptoms of
dementia. Neurology, 53:946–55.
Doody RS, Stevens JC, Beck C, et al. 2001. Practice parameter:
management of dementia (an evidence-based review): report of the
Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology. Neurology, 56:1154–66.
Farlow M, Anand R, Messina J Jr, et al. 2000. A 52-week study of the
efficacy of rivastigmine in patients with mild to moderately severe
Alzheimer’s disease. Eur Neurol, 244:236–41.
[FDA] Food and DrugAdministration. 2005. FDA Public HealthAdvisory.
Deaths with antipsychotics in elderly patients with behavioral
disorders [online]. Accessed 1 October 2005. URL: http://
www.fda.gov/cder/drug/advisory/antipsychotics.htm.
Feldman H, Gauthier S, Hecker J, et al; Donepezil MSAD Study
Investigators group. 2001.A 24-week randomized, double-blind study
of donepezil in moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology,
57:613–20. Correction in Neurology, 57:2153.
Finkel SI, Mintzer JE, Dysken M, et al. 2004. A randomized, placebo-
controlled study of the efficacy and safety of sertraline in the treatment
of behavioral manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease in outpatients
treated with donepezil. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry, 19:9–18.
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. 1975. “Mini-mental state”: a
practical method for grading the cognitive state of subjects for the
clinician. J Psychiatr Res, 12:189–98.
Galasko D, Bennett D, Sano M, et al. 1997.An inventory to assess activities
of daily living for clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease. The
Alzheimer’s disease cooperative study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord,
11(Suppl 2):S33–9.
Gelinas I, Gauthier L, McIntyre M, et al. 1999. Development of a functional
measure for persons with Alzheimer’s disease: the disability
assessment for dementia. Am J Occup Ther, 53:471–81.
Holmes C, Wilkinson D, Dean C, et al. 2004. The efficacy of donepezil in
the treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology, 63:214–19.
Kasckow JW, Mulchahey JJ, Mohamed S. 2004. The use of novel
antipsychotics in the older patient with neurodegenerative disorders
in the long-term care setting. J Am Med Dir Assoc, 5:242–8.
Katz IR, Jeste DV, Mintzer JE, et al; Risperidone study group. 1999.
Comparison of risperidone and placebo for psychosis and behavioral
disturbances associated with dementia: a randomized, double-blind
trial. J Clin Psychiatry, 60:107–115.
Kmietowicz Z. 2005. NICE proposes to withdrawAlzheimer’s drugs from
NHS. BMJ, 330:495.
Lyketsos CG, DelCampo L, Steinberg M, et al. 2003. Treating depression
in Alzheimer’s disease: efficacy and safety of sertraline therapy and
the benefits of depression reduction: the DIADS. Arch Gen Psychiatry,
60:737–46.
Clinical Interventions in Aging 2006:1(2)142
Shah and Reichman
Lyketsos CG, Reichman WE, Kershaw P. 2004. Long-term outcomes of
galantamine treatment in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Am J
Geriatr Psychiatry, 12:473–82.
Lyketsos CG, Steinberg M, Tschanz JT, et al. 2000. Mental and behavioral
disturbances in dementia: findings from the Cache County Study on
memory in aging. Am J Psychiatry, 157:708–14.
MaelickeA, Samochocki M, Jostock R, et al. 2001.Allosteric sensitization
of nicotinic receptors by galantamine, a new treatment strategy for
Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Psychiatry, 49:279–88.
Mohs RC, Doody RS, Morris JC, et al. 2001. A 1-year placebo-controlled
preservation of function survival study of donepezil in Alzheimer’s
disease patients. Neurology, 57:481–8. Correction in Neurology,
57:1942.
Molloy DW, Alemayehu E, Roberts R. 1991. Reliability of a standardized
mini-mental state examination compared with the traditional mini-
mental state examination. Am J Psychiatry, 148:102–5.
[NIMH] National Institute of Mental Health. 1986. Clinical global
impressions. In: Guy W (ed). ECDEU assessment manual for
psychopharmacology. Rockville, MA. p 217–22.
Olin J, Schneider L. 2002. Galantamine forAlzheimer’s disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev, 3:CD001747.
Panisset M, Roudier M, Saxton J, et al. 1994. Severe Impairment battery.
A neuropsychological test for severely demented patients. Arch
Neurol, 51:41–5.
Peskind ER, Potkin SG, Pomara N, et al. 2004. Memantine monotherapy
is effective and safe for the treatment of mild to moderateAlzheimer’s
disease: a randomized, controlled trial [abstract]. Eur J Neurol,
11(Suppl 2):186.
Peterson RC, Stevens JC, Ganguli M, et al. 2001. Practice parameter:
early detection of dementia: mild cognitive impairment (an evidence
based review). Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology. Neurology, 56:1133–42.
Petersen RC, Thomas RG, Grundman M, et al. 2005. Vitamin E and
donepezil for the treatment of mild cognitive impairment. N Engl J
Med, 352:2379–88.
Pollock BG, Mulsant BH, Rosen J, et al. 2002. Comparison of citalopram,
perphenazine and placebo for the acute treatment of psychosis and
behavioral disturbances in hospitalized, demented patients. Am J
Psychiatry, 159:460–5.
Porteinsson AP, Tariot P, Erb R. 2001. Placebo-controlled study of
divalproex sodium for agitation in dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry,
9:58–66.
Raskind MA, Peskind ER, Wessel T, et al. 2000. Galantamine in
Alzheimer’s disease. A 6-month randomized placebo-controlled trial
with a 6-month extension. The galantamine USA-1 Study group.
Neurology, 54:2261–76.
Reissberg B, Doody R, Stoffler A, et al. 2003. Memantine in moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med, 348:1333–41.
Relkin NR, Reichman WE, Orazem J, et al. 2003. A large, community-
based, open-label trial of donepezil in the treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord, 16(1):15–24.
Ritchie CW, Ames D, Clayton T. 2004. Metaanalysis of randomized trials
of the efficacy and safety of donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine
for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry,
12:358–69.
Rogers SL, Doody RS, Mohs R, et al. 1998. Donepezil improves cognition
and global function in Alzheimer’s disease: a 15-week, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Donepezil Study group. Arch Intern Med,
158:1021–31.
Rogers SL, Doody RS, Pratt RD, et al. 2000. Long-term efficacy and
safety of donepezil in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: final
analysis of a US multicentre open-label study. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol, 10:195–203.
Rogers SL, Farlow MR, Doody RS, et al. 1998. A 24-week, double-blind
placebo-controlled trial of donepezil in patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. Donepezil Study Group. Neurology, 50:136–45.
Rosen WG, Mohs RC, Davis KL. 1984.A new rating scale forAlzheimer’s
disease. Am J Psychiatry, 141:1356–64.
Rosler M, Anand R, Cicin-Sain A, et al. 1999. Efficacy and safety of
rivastigmine in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: international
randomized controlled trial. BMJ, 318:633–8.
Sakauye KM, Camp CJ, Ford PA. 1993. Effects of buspirone on agitation
associated with dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, 1:82–4.
Schneider LS, Olin JT, Doody RS, et al. 1997. Validity and reliability of
theAlzheimer’s disease cooperative study – clinical global impression
of change. The Alzheimer’s disease Co-operative Study. Alzheimer
Dis Assoc Disord, 11(Suppl2):S22–32.
Seltzer B, Zolnouni P, Nunez M, et al. 2004. Efficacy of donepezil in
early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. A randomized Placebo-controlled
trial. Arch Neurol, 61:1852–6.
Shelton PS, Hocking LB. 1997. Zolpidem for dementia-related insomnia
and nighttime wandering. Ann Pharmacother, 31:319–22.
Sink KM, Holden KF, Yaffe K. 2005. Pharmacological treatment of
neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia, a review of the evidence.
JAMA, 293:596–608.
Street J, Clark S, Gannon K, et al. 2000. Olanzapine treatment of psychotic
and behavioral symptoms in patients with Alzheimer’s disease in
nursing care facilities. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 57:968–76.
Tariot PN, Farlow MR, Grossberg GT, et al; Memantine Study Group.
2004. Memantine treatment in patients with moderate to severe
Alzheimer’s disease already receiving donepezil, a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA, 291:317–24.
Tariot PN, Rosemary RN, Podgorski CA, et al. 1998. Efficacy and
tolerability of carbamazepine for agitation and aggression in dementia.
Am J Psychiatry, 155:54–61.
Tariot PN, Schneider L, Katz I. 2002. Quetiapine in nursing home residents
with Alzheimer’s dementia and psychosis. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry,
10(Suppl 1):93.
Tariot PN, Solomon PR, Morris JC, et al. 2000. A 5-month, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of galantamine in Alzheimer’s disease. The
Galantamine USA-10 Study Group. Neurology, 54:2269-2276
van der Kam P, Mol F, Wimmers MF. 1971. Beoordelingsschaal voor
oudere patienten (BOP). Van Loghum Slaterus, The Netherlands.
Whitehouse PJ, Price DL, Struble RG, et al. 1982. Alzheimer’s disease
and senile dementia: loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. Science,
215:1237–9.
Wilcock GK, Lilienfield S, Gaens E. 2000. Efficacy and safety of
galantamine in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease:
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Galantamine International-
1 Study Group. BMJ, 321:1–7.
Winblad B, Engedal K, Soininen H, et al; Donepezil Nordic Study. 2001.
A 1-year, randomized, placebo-controlled study of donepezil in
patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology,
57:489–95.
Winblad B, Poritis N. 1999. Memantine in severe dementia: results of the
M-BEST study (Benefit and efficacy in severely demented patients during
treatment with memantine). Int J Geriatr Psychiatry, 14:135–46.
