© 2009 Molokhia et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 75–92
Clinical Epidemiology
75
r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Improving reporting of adverse drug reactions:
Systematic review
Mariam Molokhia1
Shivani Tanna2
Derek Bell3
1
Department of Epidemiology
and Population Health, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
London, UK; 2
Department of Primary
Care and Social Medicine, Imperial
College, London, UK; 3
Division
of Medicine, Imperial College London,
Chelsea and Westminster Hospital,
London, UK
Correspondence: Mariam Molokhia
Department of Epidemiology
and Population Health, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
WC1E 7HT, UK
Tel +44 20 7927 2633
Email mariam.molokhia@lshtm.ac.uk
Background: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are a significant cause of morbidity and
mortality, with many being identified post-marketing. Improvement in current ADR reporting,
including utility of underused or innovative methods, is crucial to improve patient safety and
public health.
Objectives: To evaluate methods to improve ADR reporting via a systematic literature
review.
Methods: Data sources were Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library and National Library for
health searches on ADR reporting (January 1997 to August 2007) including cross-referenced
articles. Twenty-four out of 260 eligible studies were identified and critically assessed. Studies
were grouped as follows: i) spontaneous reporting (11); ii) medical chart/note review (2); iii)
patient interviews/questionnaires (3); and iv) combination methods including computer-assisted
methods (8).
Results: Using computerized monitoring systems (CMS) to generate signals associated with
changes in laboratory results with other methods can improve ADR reporting. Educational
interventions combined with reminders and/or prescription card reports can improve hospital-
based ADR reporting, and showed short to medium term improvement.
Conclusions: The use of electronic health data combined with other methods for ADR reporting
can improve efficiency and accuracy for detecting ADRs and can be extended to other health
care settings. Although methods with educational intervention appear to be effective, few studies
have reviewed long-term effects to assess if the improvements can be sustained.
Keywords: adverse drug reaction, reporting, ADR
Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines adverse drug reactions (ADRs) as
“a response to a drug which is noxious and unintended, and which occurs at doses
normally used in man for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease, or for
the modification of physiological function”.1
ADRs lead to considerable morbidity
and mortality worldwide. A study examining hospital-based admissions for ADRs
estimated ADR-related hospital admissions to be as high as 6.5%,2
although certain
patient groups (children and obstetric and gynecology related admissions) were
excluded. ADRs were shown to be directly or indirectly associated with as many as
100,000 deaths per year in the USA.3
In England, hospital episode statistics (HES) data
showed that between 1998 and 2005 there were 447,071 ADRs representing 0.50%
of total hospital episodes; over this period the number of ADRs increased by 45%.4
Hence, ADRs have a major impact on public health, reducing patients’ quality of life
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Epidemiology
27 May 2009
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:176
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
and increasing mortality and morbidity, whilst at the same
time imposing a considerable financial burden on health care
systems. A recent National Confidential Enquiry into Patient
Outcome and Death (NCEPOD) report provided an analysis
of 649 cancer patients who died within 30 days of receiving
chemotherapy in UK hospitals,5
which further highlights the
profile of serious ADR reporting.
Although some ADRs become apparent during clinical
trials, many ADRs are not identified until the post-
marketing stage. The sample sizes in most clinical trials
are often too low for the detection of rare ADRs, and are
unable to detect ADRs with long latency periods. Most
systems utilized for post-marketing drug surveillance rely
primarily on spontaneous reporting. Examples of such
systems include the Yellow Card scheme in the UK, which
is managed by the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA), Medwatch in the US, man-
aged by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the
Uppsala Monitoring Centre in Sweden, which is the base
for the WHO program for International Drug Monitoring.
Typically, signals are identified using disproportionality
measures such as the reporting odds ratio (ROR) which
can be used to estimate relative risk, or the proportional
reporting ratio (PRR): proportion of spontaneous reports
for a selected drug related to a specific adverse outcome,
divided by the corresponding proportion for all or several
other drugs.
There are several limitations with spontaneous reporting
databases. Although spontaneous reporting provides data
on a broad spectrum of patients, the absence of a control
group and lack of denominator data mean rate of ADRs
cannot be accurately calculated.6,7
A significant problem
lies with under-reporting and biases inherent in clinicians’
decisions to report ADRs. Various factors have been found
to contribute to under-reporting, with examples including:
i) lack of awareness on the purpose of ADR monitoring
and how to report ADRs; ii) limited access to yellow cards
(although online reporting is now available); iii) uncertainty
of reactions being caused by drugs; iv) considering ADRs to
be too common or trivial to report; and v) time constraints
on clinicians.8,9
Bias due to media coverage of selected
ADRs, and lack of verification of reported diagnoses further
limits the data.
New opportunities involve computer-based surveillance
methods particularly for hematological, renal, or hepato-
toxic ADRs from either secondary or primary care. The key
advantages are systematic flagging of abnormal results which
warrant further investigation by the responsible physician.
This article discusses relative strengths and weaknesses of
studies using computerized monitoring systems (CMS) in
more detail later.
Methods
We evaluated methods to improve ADR reporting via a
systematic literature review. We searched Medline, the
Cochrane Library, Embase and the National Library of Health
for studies examining methods of improving the reporting
of adverse drug reactions published between January 1997
and August 2007. The search strategy used the key MeSH
terms and keywords: “adverse drug reactions” OR “adverse
drug reaction reporting” OR “adverse drug reaction report-
ing systems”. The search was limited to English language
studies. The types of articles included clinical trials, meta-
analyses, randomized controlled trials, comparative studies
and reviews (Figure 1).
Two reviewers independently selected articles for inclu-
sion from those retrieved by our search. We assessed the
studies that met our eligibility criteria as described below.
Specifically, for trials this included randomization, allocation
concealment, intention to treat analysis and completeness of
follow up. Other than trial data we also included studies that
met the inclusion criteria and examined methods to improve
ADR reports rather than simply reporting prevalence or inci-
dence of ADRs. These papers included data from a number
of sources and study groups. We included papers in which
the interventions used were described in detail with defined
outcome measures.
This search strategy resulted in the identification of 260
studies. Of these 260 studies, 217 were excluded by reviewing
the abstract or the title (the majority of these articles were
descriptive of incidence or prevalence of ADRs), resulting
in 43 potentially eligible studies. Nineteen studies were
eligible for inclusion after reviewing the full articles; five
further studies were identified from the reference sections
of these studies.
Study selection
Inclusion criteria were studies that: i) evaluated or com-
pared methods of ADR reporting; ii) were Europe- or North
America-based. Exclusion criteria were studies that: i) were
based on unverified patient self reports; ii) evaluated medi-
cation errors or prescribing errors specifically; iii) aimed at
calculating incidence of ADRs; iv) aimed at identifying
specific ADRs; v) aimed at ways of reducing the occurrence
of ADRs; vi) described obstacles to ADR reporting; and
vii) were purely theoretical papers.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 77
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Studies were grouped by method of ADR detection.
These were: i) spontaneous reporting and routinely collected
data, with or without intervention; ii) note-based and chart
reviews; iii) interviews, questionnaires, or observers; and iv)
combined methods including computer-assisted methods.
For each study, information was collected on: the country
in which it was carried out, study type, study period, sample
size, the health care professional (HCP) being targeted, the
mechanism which was being tested, the outcome measures,
and the main conclusions with statistical analysis.
Results
Of the 24 articles selected, four articles were related to
trials. For the trials reviewed (including meta-analysis,
a total of eleven trials), outcomes included ADR report-
ing rates, quality measures of reporting,10–12
and relative
Database search
217 excluded by reviewing the titles and/or abstracts
24 studies excluded by reviewing full text articles
5 Articles added from reference lists
260 articles using selected
search strategy
43 articles
19 articles
24 articles
11 articles
Spontaneous reporting
methods with or without interventions
2 articles
Studies using note/
chart review
3 articles
Methods using interviews
Questionnaires
8 articles
Combination methods/
CMS
Figure 1 Article selection process for systematic review on ADR reporting.
Abbreviations:  ADR, adverse drug reactions; CMS, computerized monitoring systems.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:178
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table1OutcomesofstudiesconductedtoevaluateADRreportingusingspontaneousreportingandroutinelycollecteddata,withorwithoutintervention
StudyCountryStudytypeStudyperiodSamplesizeHCPtargetedOutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Disproportionality
methods
Van
Puijenbroek17
Nether-
lands
Comparative
study
Allreports
receivedfrom
1982toJan
2000
26,555reportsAcademic,
Pharmacovigilance
Comparingdifferentmeas-
uresofdisproportionality
usingPPV(positive
predictivevalue)
PPVROR
(1.96
SE1)
PRR
(1.96
SE1)
YulesQ
(1.96
SE1)
χ2
(p0.05)
Poisson
(p0.05)
Differentmeasureswere
broadlycomparableonly
whenfourormorecases
percombinationwereused2reports0.410.440.380.460.34
3reports0.700.730.670.730.61
4reports0.830.850.800.820.75
6reports0.910.900.890.880.84
EducationalInterventions
McGettigan18
IrelandInterven-
tional
9months
(Yearnot
specified)
Doctors118
questionnaires
(65%
response)
PhysiciansQuestionnaireaddressing
reportingofADRsand
interventionbyverbal
andwrittenreminders
todoctorsaboutADR
reportingandyellowcards
placementindrugchart
andimprovingavailabilityin
wards/clinicsetc
Baselinereports:average4–6reportsper3months
1st3months:24reports(withremindersandincreasedavailabilityofyellow
cards)
2nd3months:14reports(aftercessationofreminders)
3rd3months:similarnumberofreportstobaseline(afterremovingyellow
cardsfromdrugcharts)
Only45%doctorshadever
reportedanADR.
Afour-foldincreasein
reportingrateswasdemon-
stratedbutratesreverted
tobaselineoncethe
interventionwasremoved
Clarkson20
UKInterven-
tionalstudy
12months
(1998to1999)
95reports;
171ADRs
PhysiciansComparisonofratesof
reportingbeforeandafter
introductionofapilotPae-
diatricRegionalMonitoring
Centre(PRMC)andafter
monthlyreminderletters/
yellowcardssentout
12monthsbeforeintervention40yellowcardsreceivedfromTrentregion
12monthsafterintervention113yellowcardsreceived(95senttoPRMC
and18sentdirecttoMCA,nowMHRA)fromtheTrentregion
18/95(19%)reportsand26/171(15%)ADRsconsideredmedicallysignifi-
cant
24/95reportscontainedadrugused“off-label”
Demonstratedanincrease
inthenumberofADR
reportsusingmonthly
reportingcards;however
only19%reportsconsid-
ered“medicallysignificant”
suggestingvariablequality
5/18(28%)reportsrefer
toadugspecifically
mentionedintheletter
Castel19
SpainInterven-
tionalstudy
Reportsfrom
Jan1983to
Oct1995
6240reportsPhysiciansComparisonofratesof
reportingbeforeandafter
sendingquarterlyadverse
drugreactionbulletins
toallphysiciansandafter
introducingyellowcardsin
prescriptionpads
Initially,meanmonthlyreportingrate34.4(SD14.1;
n=106months)
Afterbulletinsentout(quarterly),meanreportingrateincreaseto53.9
(SD=14.4;n=48months)
Monthlymeanincreaseinmonthlyreportingratewithyellowcardinpre-
scriptionpads19.8(57.5%increase)
Apparentincreasein
reportingrateshoweverno
controlgroupandsubject
topotentialconfounding;
only22%prescribersused
prescriptionpadyellow
cards
Morrison-
Griffiths13
UKIntervention
comparative
study
21months
(N/A)
177reportsNursesNursesgiveninformation
packsandattendeda
one-hourteachingsession
onADRreporting
Assessmentofqualityof
nursereportscompared
todoctors
Proportionofreportsjudgedasappropriateaccordingtoregulatorycriteria
Nurses137/177(77%);Doctors676/984(69%)
(95%CIforthedifferencebetweenproportions1.4–15.0;p=0.02)
Proportionofreportsclassifiedaseitherprobableorpossible(Naranjo
criteria)
Nurses97%
Doctors98%
Nurseswereableto
reportADRsappro-
priatelybutunclearif
thiswasaresultofthe
educationalintervention
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 79
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Descriptivestudies
Barrow22
UKDescriptive
study
5years(1996
to2000)
NotspecifiedPhysiciansComparisonofHES
datafor“drug-induced”
disorderswithspontane-
ousADRdataforthesame
reactionsduringtheperiod
1996–2000
MostADRsmorelikelyto
berecordedintheHES
database
Year19961997199819992000ADRsingeneralmore
likelytoberecordedin
HESdatabase(apartfrom
ototoxichearinglossand
hemolyticanemia),where
patientepisodereporting
ismandatory;however
informationisusually
completedbyjuniorstaff
members
ADRswith
ratio100%
(morelikely
recorded
intheHES
database)
2325242625
ADRswith
ratio100%
(morelikely
recordedin
yellowcard
database)
22321
Bousquet23
FranceComparative
study
Reportsfrom
Jan2001toJan
2003
42,284reportsPharmacovigilanceComparingsignaldetection
usingtraditionalMed-
DRA(medicaldiction-
aryhierarchywithnew
approacheswhichintegrated
terminologicalreasoningand
Bayesianmeasures
Significantdifferencesinmeannumberofoccurrencesbetweenthe
MedDRA/MedDRART,MedDRART/OntologyRTandOntologyRT/
ontology&AMwitheachsignaldetectiontechnique(p0.001)
HighestmeannumberofoccurrenceswithOntologyRT&AM(3.63)
LowestmeannumberofoccurrenceswithMedDRA(2.66)
Ontologyterminological
reasoningandapproximate
matchinggavehighest
yieldbutmethodswere
unvalidatedfromotherSR
systems
MedDRA–Withouttermino-
logicalreasoningMedDRATR
–Terminologicalreasoning
bysubsumptioninsidethe
MedDRAoriginalhierarchy
OntologyTR–Terminological
reasoningbysubsumption
insidetheontological
structureOntology
TR&AM–Terminological
reasoningbysubsumption
andapproximatematching
insidetheontological
structure
Macedo24
PortugalComparative
study
Jan2001200reports
(131fromGPs
and69from
pharmacists)
PharmacovigilanceComparisonofpublished
algorithmstoevaluate
causalityinreportedADRs
withthecurrentlyused
WHOGI(generalintro-
spection)method
Observedagreements
whenassessingcausality
betweentheGImethods
anddecisionalalgorithms
AverageagreementbetweenGImethodsandotherdecisionalalgorithms
47%(range21%–56%)
Averagekappascore0.26
Highprobabilityofagree-
mentsbeingduetochance
askappascorewasonly
0.26.Confoundingvariables
notconsideredcouldhave
accountedforthelow
concordance
(Continued)
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:180
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table1(Continued)
StudyCountryStudytypeStudyperiodSamplesizeHCPtargetedOutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Banks16
USComparative
study
Datacollected
until2005
14800vaccine-
COSTART
pairs
PharmacovigilanceDisproportionality
Comparingdatamining
methods–proportional
reportingratio(PRR),
screenedPRR(SPRR),
EMPIRICALBayesgeo-
metricmean(EBGM)and
thelowerboundofthe
EBGM’s90%confidence
interval(EBO5)
COSTARTs:CodingSymbolsforaThesaurusofAdverseReactionTerms
describesigns,symptoms,anddiagnoses
Numberofvaccine-
COSTARTpairsthatranked
inthetop100byeachof
themethodshadsubstantial
variation(42to67)and
failedtoconsistently
detectpreviouslyknown
vaccinations
RCTs
Rosebraugh11
USRCTN/A85medical
students
4thyearMedical
students
Interventionwith
15minutelectureonADR
reporting
Comparingintervention
withnon-interventionon
qualityofreports
Overallqualityscoresforinterventiongroupweresignificantlyhigherthan
thenoninterventiongroup
(p0.004)
ImprovementofADR
reportqualitybutnolong
termfollowup
Figueiras10
PortugalClusterRCTIntervention
March2004to
July2004
Followup
13–16months
Intervention
group1388
physicians
Controlgroup
5063physi-
cians
PhysiciansEducationalintervention
withanoutreachvisit
(1or2partpresenta-
tion)andremindercards
Outcomewaschangein
rateofADRreportingand
durationoftheeffectof
intervention
TotalADRreportingatstart(ADRsper1000physician-years)
Interventionbaseline7.6(95%CI4.0–12.6)
Controlbaseline11.3(95%CI8.9–14.1)
P=0.39
TotalADRreportingatendofstudy
Intervention100.2(95%CI85.2–116.4)Controlgp14.5(95%CI12.0–18.0)
p0.001
AdjustedincreaseinrateoftotalADRreportsattributabletointervention
=90.19(95%CI54.51–125.87);RR10.2395%CI3.81–27.51
TotalADRreportinginfirst4monthinterval
Intervention205.2;Control13.1P0.001
TotalADRreportinginfourth4monthinterval
Intervention55.3;Control15.1
P0.07
Interventionsresulted
ina10-foldincreasein
reportingrates;butthis
effectwasattenuatedwith
time.Reportqualitywas
alsoimprovedwithmore
serious,highcausality,
unexpectedandnew-drug
relatedADRs
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 81
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
frequencies and rank order of ADR compared with different
reporting methods.7
Two trials used interventions such as an
educational lecture.10,11
A review of randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) compared spontaneous reporting versus
solicited collection methods for ADR reports.12
A meta-
analysis used six double-blind, placebo-controlled RCTs
to assess frequencies of amiodarone-related ADRs.7
Details
of intention to treat analyses were described,7,10
however,
for the others it was unclear whether an intention to treat
analysis was used.
From the individual trials, one explicitly stated a sample
size calculation to determine numbers of participants to
recruit.10
Exclusion criteria were given in two papers (seven
trials).7,10
Discussion
Spontaneous reporting methods
with or without interventions
Several studies examined interventional or comparative SR
with other data; however there were only two RCTs.10,11
The most commonly used interventions were verbal and
written reminders; supplemented with yellow card placement.
Although most intervention studies demonstrated an
improvement in ADR reporting, in the largest RCT, follow
up was limited to 16 months and so longer term outcomes
could not be assessed. Other trained health professionals
(nurses and medical students) showed competency in ADR
reporting with appropriate interventions,11,13
but in general
were based on small numbers with limited follow up time.
Many studies also lacked control groups. There is potential
to increase the scope of SR with online yellow card reporting
now available both for health care professionals and patients
in the UK and US, although the reports may be of variable
quality, with little formal evaluation.
Measures of disproportionality
Currently, drug regulators use numerator dependent methods
such as ROR, PRR, and Bayesian probability based data min-
ing tools as denominator data is often unavailable.6
Assuming
statistical independence between drug and event, they assess
the deviation of the reporting frequency from the expected.
However recent evaluation of the WHO Bayesian approach
showed good overall sensitivity but rather low specificity,
limited by the small number of occurrences of each drug-
event association in the database,14,15
and may yield false
positives.6,16
van Puijenbroek17
examined concordance of
various measures of disproportionality using SR databases
including a variety of measures compared to the Bayesian
Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN) analysis.
The BCPNN is a probability based approach using linked
and new data fields used by the Uppsala Monitoring Centre
as a reference measure, yielding an “information component
(IC)”. The different measures were all highly sensitive but
had low specificities compared to the BCPNN analysis,
especially with low numbers of reports. Although they were
all broadly comparable when four or more reports per com-
bination were present, this was only applicable in 11.2% of
Dutch SR cases (unvalidated).17
Educational interventions
McGettigan reviewed the effect of increasing availability of
yellow cards on wards in Dublin teaching hospitals, Ireland
by sending them to prescribers (430 participating doctors) and
placing them in drug charts. In addition, verbal and written
reminders to doctors about ADR reporting were employed.
A four-fold increase in reporting rates was demonstrated,
but rates reverted to baseline once the intervention was
removed.18
The increased reporting could be have been
attributed to the questionnaire that was sent out about ADR
reporting as opposed to the reminders and increased avail-
ability of yellow cards. This may have had a confounding
effect, as well as seasonal variation bias.
A similar retrospective time series study with 30,000
participating physicians between 1983 and 1995 by Castel
showed a 58% increase in mean monthly reporting rates by
sending quarterly bulletins about ADR reporting and improv-
ing yellow card availability; which declined to 36% and
18% in the second and third month respectively, but lacked
a control group. The bulletins were initially sent out quarterly
by the end of 1985 however subject to potential confounding,
as mailings later varied to monthly or bimonthly.19
Other
confounding factors which were not assessed included the
number of new drugs marketed, seasonal effects, population
changes, potential reporter training, and variable bulletin
content. The inclusion of yellow cards in prescription pads
may not have been effective as only 22% of prescribers in
the catchment area actually used these pads.
Clarkson compared numbers of yellow cards submitted
before and after monthly reminder letters, in addition to
spare yellow cards being sent to physicians and establishing
a pilot Paediatric Regional Monitoring Centre (PRMC) as an
extension of the UK’s spontaneous ADR reporting scheme.
A 2.8-fold increase in the number of yellow cards received
was shown over a 12 month period.20
It may be easier to
identify ADRs in children, who tend to have fewer medicines
prescribed, however only 19% of the reports had ADRs that
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:182
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table2OutcomesofstudiesconductedtoevaluateADRreportingusingnote/chartreview
StudyCountryStudytypeStudy
period
SamplesizeHCP
targeted
OutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Lata25
USObservational
study
Reports
from
2000to
2001
542ADR
reports
Nurses
Pharmacists
Educational
intervention
comparingincidence
ofadversedrug
reactionreportsfrom
1999usingnursecase
managers(NCM)and
ADRreporters
Comparingnoof
reportsbystaffnurse
andcasemanagement
dept(NCMsand
pharmacist)
NoofADRreports
per100admissions:
 19982.1
 20004.5
 20015.3
%ofallADRs
reported(2000–2001)
Casemanagement
dept63(75%serious
ADRs)Staffnurses
26(9%seriousADRs)
Demonstrated
increaseinnumber
ofADRreportsper
100admissionsand
particularlyserious
ADRsalthoughother
confoundingfactors
werenotconsidered.
TheskillsfortheNCMs
werenotstandardized
Hougland26
USDescriptive
study
Oneyear
(2001)
3103acute
careinpatients;
1961random
inpatients;
1142inpatients
sampledfrom
discharge
records
withflagged
ADEcode
PhysiciansAssessingvalidity
ofICD-9-CMcodes
fordetectingADRs
usingretrospective
chartreviewwitha
structuredtool
OverallPPVfor
aflaggedcode
representingan
ADRwas66%;PPV
forinpatientADRs
was16%
ForinpatientADRs
fromrandom
sample,sensitivity
oftheflaggedcodes
10%(23/224)and
specificity97%
(1689/1737)
ForADRscausing
hospitaladmission
fromrandomsample,
sensitivityofthe
flaggedcodes55%
(32/58)andspecificity
97%(1855/1903)
Withineachgroup
widevariationinPPV
ofvariousADRclasses
Flaggedcodescanaid
detectionofADRs
causinghospital
admission.Sensitivity
andPPVusingflagged
codeswasmuchlower
forinpatientADRsthan
forthoserelatedto
hospitaladmission.
HoweverICD-9CMwas
unabletodifferentiate
eventsthathappened
beforeorduringhospital
admission
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 83
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
were considered to be medically significant, suggesting vari-
able quality of the reports. The existence of a PRMC may
not be generalizable to general practitioners and no control
group was examined.
Morrison-Griffiths evaluated the quality of three dif-
ferent nursing group ADR reports, compared to doctors
in a UK setting. Nurses were given information packs and
attended one-hour teaching sessions on ADR reporting.13
Seventy-seven percent of nurses’ reports were judged as
“appropriate” according to the criteria established by the
regulatory authority compared to 69% of doctors’ reports,
and comparable with doctors for causality 97% and 98%
respectively using Naranjo criteria;21
(there are more recent
recommendations on causality reporting from the WHO).
However it is unclear whether the results are due to effects
of the educational intervention they received, as there was no
control group. Nurses only submitted reports with agreement
of the responsible clinician, although only 3/373 (1%) cards
were blocked in this way.
Barrow carried out a descriptive study to compare HES
data for ADRs leading to admissions with spontaneously
reported ADRs using UK yellow card data between 1996 and
2000. MedDRA codes were identified for the relevant HES
discharge diagnoses coded using ICD-10 codes. In particular,
HES was more likely to identify drug-induced nephropathy,
drug-induced aplastic anemia, dystonia, and Parkinsonism
than yellow card data.22
The study showed that more ADRs
are more likely to be recorded in the HES database compared
to the yellow card database (apart from ototoxic hearing
loss and hemolytic anemia), which may reflect seriousness
of ADR (for example warfarin-related bleeding). This may
be because it is compulsory to report patient episodes in the
HES database; however the information recorded is often
completed by the most junior medical team member or by
administrative staff. Furthermore, ICD-10 codes used for
diagnostic coding in the HES database often lack specificity.
HES data contains details of all admissions to NHS hospitals
in England, but the yellow card database is used throughout
the UK. The matching process for both datasets in terms of
time, place, and codes was also imperfect as terminology
was different. Despite these limitations the HES database
has good potential in being utilized as a mechanism for ADR
reporting and monitoring.
Bousquet compared a new approach of signal detection
which integrated hierarchical groups and Bayesian measures
for signal generation, with the standard method using the
MedDRA terms from over 42,000 reports from the French
SR database. Five measures of automated signal detection
were applied using each method and the mean frequency
of drug-adverse effect associations compared. Using these
enhanced methods for signal detection, the numbers identified
were significantly higher but lacked external validation. The
highest mean number of occurrences was found combining
the ontology terminological reasoning (TR) and approximate
matching (AM) methods (3.63), with significant differences
in the mean number of occurrences between approaches
(p  0.001).23
Bousquet’s study was limited as the signals
generated by each method were unvalidated by other SR
systems. Therefore, although more signals were generated
by applying the new algorithms, there was no distinction
between irrelevant “noise” and relevant signals.
Causality assessment of ADRs
Macedo compared different algorithms by assessing agree-
ment between them, using the WHO “GI” standard method
with decisional algorithms using general practitioners (GPs)
and pharmacists. The kappa index of reliability was used
to quantify the extent to which the observed proportion of
agreements exceeded the proportion of agreements expected
by chance alone. This was 0.26, suggesting a high probability
of agreements being due to chance, particularly where the
number of reports was below four.24
Confounding factors not
considered when evaluating algorithms could have accounted
for the low concordance.
Figueiras conducted a cluster RCT over a 16-month
period in Northern Portugal, covering all National Health
System physicians which showed a significant (10-fold)
increase in reporting rates following education interven-
tion and reminder cards, however the effect only remained
significant for a year. At the end of the study, there was a
significant increase in reports submitted by the intervention
group (p  0.001). After 13 months, this difference became
less significant (p = 0.07) indicating that the duration of the
effect of the intervention is time-dependent. Intervention
also improved report quality by increasing the reporting rate
for serious, high causality, unexpected and new drug-related
ADRs.10
The risk of cross-contamination between groups
was minimized by using a cluster-based distribution, and
by adjusting for unequally distributed variables. However
the study was limited as only 47.2% of physicians assigned
to the intervention group actually attended the lecture, sug-
gesting a potentially greater effect with higher attendance,
and long term benefits were not assessed. Rosebraugh also
noted improvement quality of reports by fourth year medical
students following a 15 minute lecture on ADR reporting,
although there was no long term follow-up.11
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:184
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table3OutcomesofstudiesconductedtoevaluateADRreportingusinginterviews,questionnaires,orobservers
StudyCountryStudytypeStudyperiodSamplesizeHCPtargetedOutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Somers29
BelgiumProspective
comparative
study
9months
(MartoNov1999)
168patients
and56patient
interviews
Physicians
Nurses
Pharmacists
Comparing
spontaneousreport-
ingbyphysiciansand
nurseswithpatient
interviewsbypharma-
cistsasmethodsfor
detectingADRs
SpontaneousADRreports(12):Nurses
4/168patients(2.4%)Physicians
8/168patients(4.8%)Causalityof
ADRs(n=12)
75%probable;25%possible
ProportionofADRsresultingin
intervention92%
Patientinterviews:
32ADRsreportedfrom56patient
interviewsCausalityofADRs
(n = 32)72%probable,28%possible
ProportionofADRsresultingin
intervention59%
Solicitedtechniques
improvedADRreporting.
Theattributedcausality
%wassimilarforboth
groups. Therewerea
higherproportionofADRs
resultinginintervention
identifiedfromspontaneous
reportscomparedtopatient
interviews
Aspinall27
USComparative
study
2months
(JantoFeb2001)
198patientsPhysiciansComparisonof
voluntaryreportingof
ADRswithtelephone
interviewstopatients
andprovidersin
identifyingADRs
Patientandproviderinterviews
identifiedtotal83ADRsin
51patients(13%probable,
86%possible,1%doubtful)
Reportingrate0.5%(1/198)vs
51/198(26%)patientandprovider
interviews
Majority(51%)wererelatedto
cardiovascularmedicationsand
48%resultedinmedicationchange
Telephoneinterviews
identifiedafarhigher
proportionofsuspected
ADRscomparedtothe
passivereportingsystem.
Medicalstaffwereunaware
ofnearlyhalftheADRs
despiteoutpatientreview
withinpreceding72hours
possiblyduetotime
constraints
Greenhill28
USComparative
study
Notstated59Interviews
(95%by
physiciansand
5%bynurse
practitioner
PhysiciansComparingnumber
ofadverseevents
(ADRs)reportedby
differentquestion-
ingmethods:general
inquiry(GI);thedrug-
specificinquiry(DSI);
oracomprehensive
bodysystemreview
(BSR)
Totaladverseevents195
50(26%)ADRsidentifiedatGI(54%
weremoderatetosevere)
16(8%)additionalADRsidentifiedat
DSI(75%weremoderatetosevere)
129(66%)additionalADRs
identifiedatBSR.(37%were
moderatetosevere)
ClinicallyrelevantADRsleadingto
medicalactionGI15(31%);DSI2
(12%)BSR19(15%)
Systematicelicitationof
ADRsorganizedbybody
systems,increasedthe
identificationofclinically
relevantADRsthatmay
notbedetectedbygeneral
enquiry.Howeverthestudy
hadlowpower, ADRs
werenotvalidatedandwas
basedonchildrenusing
psychotropicmedications
onlylimitinggeneralizability
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 85
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Methods using note/chart review
Several studies have used chart review either alone or in
combination with other methods; the main disadvantage is
the intensive time resource required.
Lata25
showed that introducing and educating nursing case
managers (NCMs) using chart review and patient interviews
led to an increase in ADR reporting rates from 1998–2001,
(2.1–5.3 per 100 admissions) although other confounding
factors that may have affected this rise were not considered,
including the number of new medications licensed and other
incentives about ADR reporting. It is impossible to know
the number of ADRs missed by the reporting system and
therefore the sensitivity. The skills for NCMs were not stan-
dardized and might have differed between settings, limiting
generalizability of results. This study resulted in increased
awareness of radio-contrast related ADRs and policy change
regarding warfarin-related ADRs.25
Hougland used retrospective chart review to assess the
validity of ICD-9-CM codes for detecting ADRs, examin-
ing 1142 inpatient charts in a US hospital. The overall
PPV for a flagged code representing an ADR was 66%,
comparing favorably with existing CMS. However, sensi-
tivity of flagged codes for inpatient ADRs was only 10%
(rates were higher at 55% for hospital admission-related
ADRs) indicating that the selected codes only detect a
minority of inpatient ADRs. The specificity was 97% in
both groups. Bias may have resulted by introducing terms
such as “poisoning” for certain medication errors within
the ICD nomenclature. This might have influenced hospital
coders due to liability related to documenting a poisoning
event. Codes could potentially be improved by removing
those with poor PPVs and adding relevant additional codes
determined by reviewers.26
Methods using interviews/questionnaires
Overall detailed questioning may help elicit potential ADRs
but many studies are small, lack validation and may not be
generalizable.27,28
Somers compared patient interviews by pharmacists
with spontaneous reporting by nurses and physicians to
detect ADRs in elderly hospital ward patients in Belgium.
Somers demonstrated that solicited patient interviews
by pharmacists yielded more ADRs 57% (32/56; 98%
classified a probable or possible with 59% of these resulting
in an intervention) than spontaneous reporting by nurses
and physicians 4.8% (8/168), however a higher propor-
tion of ADRs reported spontaneously resulted in medical
intervention (92%). This may indicate that spontaneous
reports yield a greater amount of severe ADRs that need
medical action compared to reports from interviews
classified as severe. This study had some internal validity
as all reports were discussed weekly with the physician to
assess causality, severity, type and level of intervention.
The exclusion of sick and confused patients may have
affected the results as the confusion may have been a result
of an ADR. Combining both methods would probably be
more useful for examining ADR occurrence.29
Aspinall
compared numbers of ADRs by telephone interview on
a randomly selected population sample of 198 patients
and passive spontaneous voluntary reporting in the US.
Although the follow up was only two months; 83 ADR
were identified by telephone interview (99% classified as
probable or possible), compared to just a single spontane-
ous report. Aspinall demonstrated a higher ADR reporting
rate using patient telephone interviews compared to passive
voluntary spontaneous reporting. This study was limited as
it was based at a single academic tertiary care hospital and
only included one reviewer.27
Medical staff were unaware
of nearly half of the ADRs that patients suspected, despite
having reviewed the patient in an outpatient appointment
within the previous 72 hours, suggesting ADRs could be
missed, possibly due to time constraints and inadequate
medication review.
Greenhill compared different questioning methods
by US physicians to identify ADRs in children receiving
psychotropic medications. The general inquiry (GI) was used
initially, sequentially followed by the drug-specific inquiry
(DSI) and the comprehensive body system review (BSR).
195 ADRs were identified during 59 patient interviews and
the study showed systematic elicitation of ADRs, organized
by body systems, increased the identification of clinically
relevant ADRs that may not be detected by general inquiry,
although statistical differences were not assessed. However
the ADRs identified were not validated, and questioning
order effects not considered. The sample size was also small
affecting the study’s power and based on children using
psychotropic medications only, limiting generalizability.28
Combination methods
Computerized monitoring systems
CMS are not currently widely used because of lack of experi-
ence, uncertainty about efficiency, and lack of appropriate
technology. There were eight studies selected which used
combination methods; five of which include the use of CMS.
Although these studies showed a low predictive value for
signals generated by the CMS, with refinement of the signals,
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:186
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table4OutcomesofstudiesconductedtoevaluateADRreportingusingcombinedmethodsofdetectionandcomputerassistedmethods
StudyCountryStudytypeStudy
period
Sample
size
HCP
targeted
OutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Jha30
Prospective
cohortstudy
8months
(Oct1994
toMay1995)
617ADRs;
21,964
patient
days
Physicians,
nursesand
pharmacists
Comparisonofadverse
drugeventsdetectedby
computer-basedmoni-
toringprogram,chart
reviewandstimulated
voluntaryreporting
ADRsidentifiedby:
 Computer-basedmonitor275/617(45%)
Chartreview398/617(65%)
Voluntaryreporting23/617(4%)
SevereADRs281/617
identifiedby:
 Computer-basedmonitor139/281(49%)
Chartreview169/281(60%)
Voluntaryreporting11/281(4%)
Computerbasedmethodsidentifiedfewer
ADRsthanchartreviewbutmorethan
voluntaryreporting.ThePPVofcompu-
tergeneratedalertswas16%duringthe
first8weeksofthestudy,butafterrule
modificationthisroseto23%.Typesof
eventscapturedbycomputermonitoring
(quantitativeresultbased)weresubstan-
tiallydifferenttothosecapturedbychart
review(symptombased)
Dormann31
GermanyProspective
cohortstudy
7months
(JunetoDec
1997)
379
patients;
46ADRs
PhysiciansComparingacomputer-
basedadversedrug
reactionmonitoring
system(CMS)with
stimulatedspontaneous
reporting(SSR)
TotalADRsdetected46(21regardedas
possibleand25asprobable)in45patients
OverallPPVofautomaticallygenerated
laboratorysignals13%
RelativesensitivityofCMSforallADRs74%
RelativespecificityofCMSforallADRS75%
RelativesensitivityofSSRforallADRs37%
RelativespecificityofSSRforallADRs98%
AlthoughthesensitivityofCMSinthis
studywas74%,PPVwaslowat13%. As
therewerenodenominatordataonly
relativesensitivitycouldbedetermined.
ADRsignalsindicatinghematological
ordrugconcentrationpathologyhad
higherPPVsandweremorefrequently
associatedwithanADRthanother
signals
Dormann32
GermanyProspective
pharmacoep-
idemiological
survey
7months
(Sept2000to
March2001)
377
patients;
474admis-
sions
Physicians/
pharmacists
Usingacomputerized
monitoringsystem
(CMS)todetectADRs
bylaboratorysignals
andcomparetopro-
spectivechartreview
NewALSwasthe1st
valueofalabtestout-
sidethenormaldefined
rangeinthestudy
DeltaALSwasanew
valueofalabtestwhich
differedsignificantly
fromthepreviousvalue
PPVofalertscategorizedasnewALS
was25%overallandvariedbetween
13%(allergy)andamaximumof40%
(electrolytes)
PPVofalertscategorizedasdeltaALSswas
32%overall(range18%(alkalinephos-
phatase)and67%(serumelectrolytes).
NewALS:Sensitivity91%Specificity23%
DeltaALS:Sensitivity40%Specificity76%
Introducingsignalsgeneratedbymore
significantdifferencesinlaboratoryvalues
fromthenormalrangeimprovedthe
overallPPVofalerts.Howeverthese
werenotassensitiveasusingalerts
generatedusingthefirstvalueofalabora-
torytestoutsidethenormalrange
However,thespecificityofthenewALS
waslowerthatthedeltaALS. Thevalueof
PPVwashighestfordeltaALSregarding
sodiumandpotassiumlevels(67%)sothis
couldbeausefulmethodofdetecting
ADRinducedelectrolytedisturbances
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 87
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Hope33
USInterven-
tionalstudy
5months
(JantoMay
2001)
Indianapolis
22clinics
(tiered)
Boston
11clinics
(pharma-
cist)
PharmacistsTieredapproachofiden-
tifyingADRscompared
totraditionalpharmacist
basedapproach
Frequencyofadverse
drugeventsandmedica-
tionerrorsandthe
positivepredictivevalue
(PPV)ofasignalfor
ADRs
Boston
Indianapolis
Noof
ADRs
242
535
PPVofa
signalfor
ADRs
10.2%
9.6%
p-value
0.36
TraditionalmethodsofADRdetection
reliantonchartreviewbypharmacists
producedADRsignalswithlowpredic-
tivevalues,andthereislittledifference
betweenatieredvspharmacistapproach.
Therewereanumberofpossible
confoundingfactorsbetweenthesites
whichwerenottakenintoaccount
Haffner34
GermanyProspective
cohortstudy
pediatric
generaland
intensive
careadmis-
sions
5months
(FebtoJune
2001)
52bedsPhysiciansComparisonof
ADRreportingusing
intensifiedsurveillance
(chartreview)and
computer-assisted
screeningofpathological
laboratoryparameters
asasignalforapotential
ADR
Intensifiedsurveillancedetected101ADRs
in11.9%ofpatients
Computer-assistedscreeningdetected
45ADRsin5.7%
ofpatients
Sensitivity:
Intensifiedsurveillance67.2%
Computer-assistedscreening44.8%
Specificity
Intensifiedsurveillancenotspecified
Computer-assistedscreening72.8%
25%ADR-relateddrugswereusedfor
“off-label”indications
PPVofcomputer-assistedscreening
signalswas18.6%
anddetectedADRsassociatedwith
hepaticorhematologicalconsequences
comparedtointensifiedsurveillance
whichidentifiedgastrointestinal,
dermatologicalandneurologicalADRs.
Intensifiedsurveillancedetected
moreandmoresevereADRsthanCMS.
Implementationofadditionalclinical
informationlikeadmissiondiagnosis,
medicationorders,dosevariations,
diagnosticfindingsandclinicalevents
couldhelpimprovecomputerized
detection
Neubert35
GermanyProspective
pharmacoep-
idemiological
survey
6months
(Yearnot
specified)
396
pediatric
isolation
patients
PhysiciansADRswereidentifiedby
intensivechartreview
Evaluatingcomputerized
monitoringsystem
(CMS)basedon
laboratorytestresults
fordetectionofADRsin
additiontospontaneous
reportingbythetreating
physician
73ADRsidentifiedin439admissions
(52/396patients)
ForallADRsignals:
Sensitivity90.3%
Specificity19.6%
Withalertsforrelativelaboratoryresult
changesonly(DELTA);sensitivitydecreased
50%andspecificityincreasedto75.9%
DELTAalertsweresignificantlymore
frequentindicatorsofADRs(29.7%)than
alertsbasedonstaticchanges(12.5%),
p0.05
ImplementingaCMScanbeusedasan
adjunctforADRdetectionbythe
treatingphysician.CMSareselectivefor
certainADRsanddependentonphysician
initiatedrequest
DELTACMSalertsmaybeusefulfor
identifyingtrendsinlaboratoryvalues,
howeverspecificityremainslowsuggest-
ingmanyfalsesignalsmaybegenerated
(Continued)
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:188
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Table4(Continued)
StudyCountryStudytypeStudy
period
Sample
size
HCP
targeted
OutcomeStatisticaltestConclusion
Loke7
UK1)Meta-
analysisof
clinicaltrials
Studies
published
between
1997and
2002
6RCTs
withdata
on4000
patients
AcademicRelativefrequencies
andrankorderofADR
relativefrequencies
comparedusing
threedatasets
Comparisonofrank
orderofADRs
1)HighestrankorderHeart(relative
frequency1.80)
LowestrankorderSkin(relativefrequency
0.35)
Allthreemethodsshowedpoorcon-
cordancewitheachotherpossiblydue
tovariousconstraintsandbiasesofeach
method.IntheRCTsonly2000patients
weretreatedwithamiodaronewhich
wouldreducelikelihoodofdetectingrare
ADRs.Thevalueofcasereportsislimited
duetoestablishedreportingandpublica-
tionbiasbutdetailcouldhelpsupplement
spontaneouscasereportinginhypothesis
generation
2)Case
reports
published
inmedical
journals
Casereports
published
between
1966to2000
357case
reports
2)HighestrankorderRespiratory(relative
frequency1.00)
LowestrankorderGI(relativefrequency
0.02)
3)Spontane-
ousreports
senttothe
WHO
Reportsfrom
1982to2001
640
reports
3)HighestrankorderThyroid(relative
frequency1.70)
LowestrankorderEyes(relativefrequency
0.20)
Wernicke12
US3RCTs
Study
1.children,
Study
2.children
andadoles-
cents,Study
3.adults
Notstated653
patients
PhysiciansUsingsolicited(ques-
tionnaire)andunso-
licited(spontaneous
reporting)methodsto
ascertainADRsreport-
ingrateswithdrugand
placebo
Sp-Soindexcalculated
bydividingthespon-
taneousD/Pratioby
solicitedD/Pratio
D/P=drug/placebo
reportingratiofora
selectedevent
Ofthe29adverseevents,100%hadhigher
ratesofreportingusingsolicitedmethods
Theunsolicitedmethodhadthegreatest
abilitytodistinguishdrugfromplaceboin
22/29(76%)oftheevents,howeverthese
resultswerenotstatisticallysignificantfor
20oftheeventslisted
Althoughsensitivitymightbegreater
usingsolicitedmethods,specificitymay
becompromisedaspatientsmayreport
insignificantsymptoms. TheRCTsall
useddifferentchecklistsandtherewas
lackofstandardizationofsymptoms,
diagnosis,drugdosageandtreatment
duration
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 89
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
this may improve. Chart review, although better at identifying
ADRs, has the disadvantages of being expensive and time-
dependent, with limited scope for intervention. CMS can be
prospective, allowing early detection and intervention in drug
therapy. It involves less staff and has been shown to detect
more ADRs than stimulated spontaneous reporting (SSR).
In general methods to improve ADR reporting have been
most successful when combined with CMS. Additionally,
many software programs exist to implement automated signal
detection in post-marketing databases.6
Jha carried out an eight-month prospective cohort study
in a tertiary care teaching US hospital to compare ADRs
detected by a CMS, chart review and stimulated voluntary
reporting, and found that computer-based methods identified
fewer ADRs (45%) than chart review (65%), but more than
voluntary reporting (4%). The PPV of computer-generated
alerts was 16% initially, but after later changing rules (9/49),
this increased to 23%. This study demonstrated that the types
of events captured by computer monitoring are substantially
different to those captured by chart review. The advantages
of this study are that it was prospective in nature and that
the independent reviewers assessing the likelihood of alerts
being due to ADRs, were blinded to the data generated by
the computer monitor to limit bias.30
Limitations include the
absence of a gold standard for comparison.
Dormann used a prospective cohort study over six months
to compare a CMS for automatically generated laboratory
signals with SSR in a German university hospital. Both
CMS signals and SSRs were validated by the pharmaco-
epidemiological team, using chart review. The PPV of
automatically generated laboratory signals by the CMS was
13%. The sensitivity and specificity of the CMS was 74%
and 75%, respectively. The sensitivity of SSR was 37% but
the specificity was higher at 98%.31
In this study, due to absence of denominator data, only
the relative sensitivity could be determined. Certain ADRs,
for example, signals indicating hematological pathology
or drug concentration, had higher PPVs (17%–25%) and
were more frequently associated with an ADR than other
signals. SSR was most effective in detecting clinical
symptoms such as gastrointestinal side effects, whereas
the CMS more reliably identified ADRs associated with
quantitative changes in laboratory values such as nephro-
toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and hematological changes.31
In a
later study, Dormann compared a CMS with prospective
chart review over six months to detect possible ADRs by
laboratory induced abnormalities. In addition, they com-
pared the PPV of different signals known as “new ALS”
(automatic laboratory signal; the first value of a laboratory
test outside the normal defined range); and “delta ALS”
(a new value of a laboratory test which differed significantly
from the previous value). The PPV of alerts categorized
as “new ALS” varied between 13% for immunoglobulin
E (IgE)-related allergy, and a maximum of 40% for change
in electrolytes (calcium, potassium, sodium). The overall
PPV of alerts categorized as “delta ALS” was higher (18%
to 67%) for abnormalities in liver enzymes (ALP) and
sodium and potassium levels, respectively. However, these
were not as sensitive (40%) as using alerts generated using
the 1st value of a laboratory test outside the normal defined
range (sensitivity 91%). However, the specificity of alerts
generated by the “new ALS” was lower at 23% compared
to 76% with the “delta ALS”.32
Hope compared the use of a tiered approach to a tradi-
tional pharmacist based approach for identifying ADRs with
patients attending ambulatory care clinics in Indianapolis
and Boston. The tiered approach consisted of generating
signals from electronic medical records by computer queries,
followed by exclusion of some signals by nonclinical data
managers who could also add data, subsequently reviewed
by nurses and pharmacists. The alternative approach was
pharmacist based review. Computer searches were used in
both groups for the initial detection. There was no significant
difference in PPVs (p = 0.36) by either approach, 10.2%
(tiered) versus 9.6% (pharmacist), which were both low.33
The tiered approach (although deemed cost-effective) is a
complicated process that may be difficult to enforce and relies
on availability, experience, and judgment of pharmacists.
Confounding factors include that both sites had different
patient populations with unstandardized electronic medical
records, which suggests that lack of differences may not be
attributable to the different approaches alone.
Haffner used a similar approach in a three-month
prospective cohort study in a German teaching hospital
to compare ADR reporting using intensified chart review
and computer-assisted screening of pathological laboratory
parameters. Chart review had a higher sensitivity at 67.2%
when compared to computer-assisted screening (sensitivity
44.8%). The specificity for intensified surveillance was not
calculated but was 72.8% for computer-assisted screening
with a mean PPV of signals of 18.6%. Computer assisted
screening identified ADRs associated with hepatic or hema-
tological consequences, whereas intensified surveillance
(however no details on training were given) identified more
ADRs related to gastrointestinal, dermatological, and neuro-
logical symptoms, which was also confirmed in other studies.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:190
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Sensitivity was unreliable as it was based on the assumption
that all ADRs are picked up by both methods.34
Neubert carried out a prospective pharmacoepidemiologi-
cal pediatric ward-based survey in a University hospital in
Germany to evaluate a CMS which uses automatic laboratory
signals as alerts for identifying ADRs in addition to spontane-
ous reporting by the treating physician. Although the sensi-
tivity of the CMS for ADRs was 90.3%, the specificity was
only 19.6% indicating that although it identifies most ADRs,
it might be generating additional noise. With alerts for relative
laboratory result changes only (DELTA); although specific-
ity increased to 75.9%, sensitivity decreased to 50% which
was similar to Dormann’s findings.32
This study was limited
as laboratory tests were only performed when requested by
the treating physician. Routine observation of ADRs by the
practicing physician only identified 43% of ADRs, which
increased when combining this method with CMS to 74%,
however both methods failed to detect 26% of ADRs.35
These
results suggest that implementing a CMS based on labora-
tory data was ineffective alone and should only be used as an
adjunct to observation by the treating physician. In addition,
certain ADRs only cause clinical symptoms, for example diar-
rhea; and these cannot be detected by the CMS. Conversely,
some ADRs may only be detected by change in laboratory
value, for example drug-induced neutropenia or anemia.
Other combination methods
Loke compared frequencies of ADRs to the antiarrhythmic
drug, amiodarone using three different datasets generated
from: i) a meta-analysis of RCTs; ii) published case reports;
and iii) from spontaneous reports sent to the WHO. The
distributions of ADR rank order and relative frequencies
were dissimilar among the datasets. For example the highest
rank order ADRs were cardiac in the dataset produced by
the meta-analysis in contrast to respiratory and thyroid for
case reports and spontaneous reports respectively. Results
demonstrated poor concordance when comparing amiodarone
ADR relative frequencies using datasets generated by a
meta-analysis of six RCTs, case reports, and spontaneous
reports sent to the WHO.7
Due to the strict selection criteria
applied, only six RCTs were used, which limited the power
of the meta-analysis. The strengths of the meta-analysis were
that selection and detection bias were minimized as the RCTs
were double-blinded and placebo-controlled. However, in the
six RCTs, only 2,000 patients were treated with amiodarone
which would reduce the likelihood of yielding useful informa-
tion on rare ADRs. Variation in the types of ADRs reported
in the different RCTs could have led to some loss of precision
when using a categorized summary of the data. Although
357 case reports fulfilled the inclusion criteria for ADRs to
amiodarone, the value of data produced by such reports is
limited due to established reporting and publication bias.
Wernicke compared spontaneous and solicited ADR
collection methods from three large randomized, double-
blind clinical-controlled trials ADRs in children, adolescents,
and adults given either a drug or placebo. ADRs were either
collected by unsolicited methods (spontaneously) where
open-ended questions were asked, or by solicited methods
where questionnaires consisting of detailed checklists were
administered after spontaneous events were recorded.
Solicited methods yielded higher rates of reporting for all
29 ADRs identified. However, in 76% of ADRs, unsolicited
methods (SR) had a greater ability to distinguish drug from
placebo effects. This suggests that although the sensitivity
might be greater using solicited methods, specificity may be
compromised as prompting patients to report ADRs might
stimulate reporting of insignificant symptoms.12
Lack of
standardization of symptoms, diagnosis, drug, dosage and
treatment duration may have also acted as confounding
factors and may have affected the perception and reporting
of ADRs. In addition, with spontaneous reports, patients
might not report events which are transient or embarrassing
and have resolved before their visit.
Limitations of our review
Although a systematic search of the literature was undertaken
basedonourselectedcriteria,somepublishedandunpublished
studies may have been omitted. Most of the studies had very
short follow up times, and the longest trial included follow
up for 16 months. Therefore we are unable to determine if
improvements in ADR reporting are sustained long term.
We were also limited by the data available from the
papers and the ability to combine studies due to the hetero-
geneous nature in the designs. Many studies did not include
statistical interpretation of their results. We reported limited
meta-analysis for two studies,7,12
but did not attempt a
separate re-analysis. Because of the small number of studies,
we were unable to find evidence for publication bias.
Conclusions
There are several limitations with current methods of ADR
reporting. Most studies that have looked at the effect of
educational intervention to improve spontaneous reporting
have shown considerable improvement in rates, although
this benefit decreases with time. Increasing the availability
of yellow cards on wards as well as encouragement to use
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 91
ADR reportingDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
web-based reporting may also improve reporting rates.
Questionnaires, chart review and patient interviews can be
a valuable source of information on ADRs, but are time
and personnel dependent. Other factors that could influence
reporting of ADRs are the quality of data in spontaneous
reporting databases and the statistical methods employed to
detect signals. Improving coding of terms to describe ADRs,
to make them more specific and homogeneous, may improve
quality of reports. Combining inpatient reviews with hospi-
tal-based CMS may better prospectively identify potential
ADRs. CMS methods appear to have greater sensitivity than
SR (possibly greater for those generated by the first value of
a laboratory test outside the normal range); although in the
studies we reviewed the positive predictive value was low.
The PPV may be better for alerts generated by a laboratory
value which differed significantly from the previous value.
This could be explained by a number of factors and refine-
ment of the CMS approach such as including filters to exclude
nondrug causes may help improve the results.
With health care systems becoming more computerized
in both primary and secondary care, there is great potential
to explore these systems for ADR detection. For example,
the addition of a section for ADRs that occurred during the
patient’s admission in electronic discharge summaries could
improve ADR detection. The computerization of medical
health records with prescription data covering several mil-
lion people can help promote developments of methods for
detecting ADRs in clinical practice in the UK and other
countries. Ongoing initiatives include the EU-ADR project,
a FP7 multinational collaboration for the early detection and
investigation of adverse drugs events,36
using data from a
number of European medical databases.
The population of both developed and developing coun-
tries are gradually aging, with an increasing proportion of the
population comprised of elderly people who are at greatest
risk of suffering from chronic diseases. There is also greater
pressure on clinicians to treat chronic diseases and their risk
factors using evidence-based guidelines. Both these factors
are increasing prescribing rates, promoting polypharmacy,
and leading to an increased risk of drug interactions and
ADRs. Accurate surveillance is an essential first step that
must be undertaken to identify ADRs and implementing
measures to reduce their public health impact.
Acknowledgments
MM is funded by a post-doctoral fellowship from the
National Coordinating Centre for Research Capacity Devel-
opment, and is an investigator for the FP7 EU-ADR project
(http://www.euadr-project.org/). The Department of Primary
Care and Social Medicine at Imperial College and Depart-
ment of Acute Medicine, Division of Medicine is grateful for
support from the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre scheme
and the NIHR Collaboration for Leadership in Applied
Health Research and Care for Northwest London. ST and
MM undertook review design and data collection. All authors
contributed to critical revisions and writing of the manuscript
and approved the final version for publication.
References
	 1.	 World Health Organization. International drug monitoring: The Role of
National Centres. Report No: 498. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization; 1972.
	 2.	 Pirmohamed M, James S, Meakin S, Green C, Scott AK, Walley TJ,
et al. Adverse drug reactions as cause of admission to hospital: prospec-
tive analysis of 18 820 patients. BMJ. 2004;329(7456):15–19.
	 3.	 Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN. Incidence of adverse drug reac-
tions in hospitalized patients: a meta-analysis of prospective studies.
JAMA. 1998;279(15):1200–1205.
	 4.	 Patel H, Bell D, Molokhia M, Srishanmuganathan J, Patel M, Car J, et al.
Trends in hospital admissions for adverse drug reactions in England:
analysis of national hospital episode statistics 1998–2005. BMC Clin
Pharmacol. 2007;7(1):9.
	 5.	 National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death
[NCEPOD]. For better, for worse? A review of the care of patients who
died within 30 days of receiving systemic anti-cancer therapy. 2008.
Cited February 3, 2009. Available from: http://www.ncepod.org.uk/
2008sact.htm.
	 6.	 Hauben M, Zhou X. Quantitative methods in pharmacovigilance: focus
on signal detection. Drug Saf. 2003;26(3):159–186.
	 7.	 Loke YK, Derry S, Aronson JK. A comparison of three different sources
of data in assessing the frequencies of adverse reactions to amiodarone.
Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2004;57(5):616–621.
	 8.	 BMA Science and Education department and the BMA Board of
Science. Reporting Adverse Drug Reactions: A guide for healthcare
professionals. London: British Medical Association; 2006.
	 9.	 Stephens MDB. Introduction. In: Talbot J, Waller P, editors. Stephens’
Detection of New Adverse Drug Reactions. 5th ed. Hoboken, NJ; John
Wiley and Sons Ltd.;2005. p. 10–17.
10.	 Figueiras A, Herdeiro MT, Polonia J, Gestal-Otero JJ. An educa-
tional intervention to improve physician reporting of adverse drug
reactions: a cluster-randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2006;296(9):
1086–1093.
11.	 Rosebraugh CJ, Tsong Y, Zhou F, et al. Improving the quality of adverse
drug reaction reporting by 4th-year medical students. Pharmacoepide-
miol Drug Saf. 2003;12(2):97–101.
12.	 Wernicke JF, Faries D, Milton D, Weyrauch K. Detecting treatment
emergent adverse events in clinical trials: a comparison of spon-
taneously reported and solicited collection methods. Drug Saf.
2005;28(11):1057–1063.
13.	 Morrison-Griffiths S, Walley TJ, Park BK, Breckenridge AM,
Pirmohamed M. Reporting of adverse drug reactions by nurses. Lancet.
2003;361(9366):1347–1348.
14.	 Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RH. A retrospec-
tive evaluation of a data mining approach to aid finding new adverse
drug reaction signals in the WHO international database. Drug Saf.
2000;23(6):533–542.
15.	 Gould AL. Practical pharmacovigilance analysis strategies.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2003;12(7):559–574.
16.	 Banks D, Woo EJ, Burwen DR, Perucci P, Braun MM, Ball R.
Comparing data mining methods on the VAERS database. Pharmaco-
epidemiol Drug Saf. 2005;14(9):601–609.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1
Clinical Epidemiology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-epidemiology-journal
Clinical Epidemiology is an international, peer-reviewed, open access
journal focusing on disease and drug epidemiology, identification of
risk factors and screening procedures to develop optimal preventative
initiatives and programs. Specific topics include: diagnosis, prognosis,
treatment, screening, prevention, risk factor modification, systematic
reviews, risk & safety of medical interventions, epidemiology &
biostatical methods, evaluation of guidelines, translational medicine,
health policies & economic evaluations. The manuscript management
system is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-
review system, which is all easy to use.
92
Molokhia et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
17.	 van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HG, Lindquist M, Orre R,
Egberts AC. A comparison of measures of disproportionality for signal
detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse drug reactions.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2002;11(1):3–10.
18.	 McGettigan P, Golden J, Conroy RM, Arthur N, Feely J. Reporting
of adverse drug reactions by hospital doctors and the response to
intervention. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1997;44(1):98–100.
19.	 Castel JM, Figueras A, Pedros C, Laporte JR, Capella D. Stimulating
adverse drug reaction reporting: effect of a drug safety bulletin
and of including yellow cards in prescription pads. Drug Saf.
2003;26(14):1049–1055.
20.	 Clarkson A, Ingleby E, Choonara I, Bryan P, Arlett P. A novel
scheme for the reporting of adverse drug reactions. Arch Dis Child.
2001;84(4):337–339.
21.	 Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, et al. A method for estimating
the probability of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
1981;30(2):239–245.
22.	 Barrow P, Waller P, Wise L. Comparison of hospital episodes with
‘drug-induced’ disorders and spontaneously reported adverse drug
reactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;61(2):233–237.
23.	 Bousquet C, Henegar C, Louet AL, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC.
Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmaco-
vigilance using a knowledge-based approach. Int J Med Inform.
2005;74(7–8):563–571.
24.	 Macedo AF, Marques FB, Ribeiro CF, Teixeira F. Causality assessment
of adverse drug reactions: comparison of the results obtained from
published decisional algorithms and from the evaluations of an expert
panel. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2005;14(12):885–890.
25.	 Lata PF, Mainhardt M, Johnson CA. Impact of nurse case manager-phar-
macist collaboration on adverse-drug-event reporting. Am J Health Syst
Pharm. 2004;61(5):483–487.
26.	 Hougland P, Xu W, Pickard S, Masheter C, Williams SD. Performance
of International Classification Of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification codes as an adverse drug event surveillance system. Med
Care. 2006;44(7):629–636.
27.	 Aspinall MB, Whittle J, Aspinall SL, Maher RL, Jr, Good CB.
Improving adverse-drug-reaction reporting in ambulatory care
clinics at a Veterans Affairs hospital. Am J Health Syst Pharm.
2002;59(9):841–845.
28.	 Greenhill LL, Vitiello B, Fisher P, et al. Comparison of increasingly
detailed elicitation methods for the assessment of adverse events in
pediatric psychopharmacology. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2004;43(12):1488–1496.
29.	 Somers A, Petrovik M, Robays H, Bogaert M. Reporting adverse drug
reactions on a geriatric ward: a pilot project. Eur J Clin Pharmacol.
2003;58:707–714.
30.	 Jha AK, Kuperman GJ, Teich JM, et al. Identifying adverse drug
events: development of a computer-based monitor and comparison
with chart review and stimulated voluntary report. J Am Med Inform
Assoc. 1998;5(3):305–314.
31.	 Dormann H, Muth-Selbach U, Krebs S, et al. Incidence and costs
of adverse drug reactions during hospitalisation: computerised
monitoring versus stimulated spontaneous reporting. Drug Saf.
2000;22(2):161–168.
32.	 Dormann H, Criegee-Rieck M, Neubert A, et al. Implementation of
a computer-assisted monitoring system for the detection of adverse
drug reactions in gastroenterology. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2004;19(3):303–309.
33.	 Hope C, Overhage JM, Seger A, et al. A tiered approach is more cost
effective than traditional pharmacist-based review for classifying
computer-detected signals as adverse drug events. J Biomed Inform.
2003;36(1–2):92–98.
34.	 Haffner S, von LN, Wirth S, Thurmann PA. Detecting adverse
drug reactions on paediatric wards: intensified surveillance
versus computerised screening of laboratory values. Drug Saf.
2005;28(5):453–464.
35.	 Neubert A, Dormann H, Weiss J, et al. Are computerised monitoring
systems of value to improve pharmacovigilance in paediatric patients?
Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;62(11):959–965.
36.	 EU-ADR: FP7 Multi-national project to integrate electronic health
care records for the early detection and investigation of adverse
drugs events. 2009. Accessed on January 28, 2009. Available from:
http://www.euadr-project.org/.
