Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5 343–348
doi: 10.4137/CMO.S8442
This article is available from http://www.la-press.com.
© the author(s), publisher and licensee Libertas Academica Ltd.
This is an open access article. Unrestricted non-commercial use is permitted provided the original work is properly cited.
Open Access
Full open access to this and
thousands of other papers at
http://www.la-press.com.
Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology
C as e r e p o r t
Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5	 343
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria Presenting with a Left
Intraventricular Thrombus in a Patient with Prior Thymoma
and Aplastic Anemia
Yazan Migdady and Adam J. Olszewski
Division of Hematology and Oncology, Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island, Alpert Medical School of Brown University,
Providence, RI, United States of America. Corresponding author email: adam_olszewski@brown.edu
Abstract: We report the case of a 37-year old man presenting with a left ventricular cardiac thrombus in the setting of subclinical
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinura (PNH) developing two years after immunosuppressive therapy for thymoma-associated aplas-
tic anemia. The literature regarding the interplay between autoimmunity and immunosuppression, aplastic anemia, thymoma and the
­emergence of PNH is reviewed.
Keywords: paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, cardiac thrombosis, thymoma, aplastic anemia
Migdady and Olszewski
344	 Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5
Case Report
A previously healthy, 37-year old man presented
­initially in December 2004 with epistaxis, petechial
rash and severe pancytopenia (absolute neutrophil
count ANC 400/µL, hemoglobin 7.7  g/dL, plate-
lets 3 × 103
/µL). Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated
severely hypocellular marrow with polyclonal lym-
phoid aggregates and normal karyotype, consistent
withsevereaplasticanemia(Fig. 1).Viralserologies,as
well as CD55/59 flow cytometry screening were neg-
ative. A CT scan performed during the initial workup
revealed an 8 cm lobulated anterior mediastinal mass.
The patient underwent a biopsy and subsequent thora-
cotomy, which revealed type B (cortical epithelioid)
thymoma with evidence of the innominate vein inva-
sion, infiltration of mediastinal fat and positive surgi-
cal margin, prompting subsequent adjuvant radiation
to the surgical bed. Despite treatment of thymoma,
there was no observed hematologic improvement in
the aplastic anemia with continued, heavy transfusion
dependence. The patient was evaluated for allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation, but he did not have an
eligible sibling and declined the option of a matched
unrelated donor transplantation. He was treated
with the standard course of antithymocyte globulin
(ATG) and cyclosporine A without any evidence of
­hematologic response during the subsequent 6 months
of support with nearly weekly platelet and/or red cell
transfusions. However, over the course of the ensu-
ing year his transfusion requirements spontaneously
decreased and he ultimately achieved a partial remis-
sion from aplastic anemia. Since December 2006 he
did not require any further transfusions.
In November 2007, a routine surveillance CT scan
of the chest incidentally showed a filling defect within
the apex of the left cardiac ventricle, suspicious for
a malignancy or thrombosis. Further investigation
with a 2D echocardiogram, cardiac catheterization
and MRI (Fig. 2) confirmed a 3.4 cm tethered, mobile
intraventricular mass and no cardiac function abnor-
mality. The patient was anticoagulated with warfarin,
however after 2 months there was no resolution of the
lesion and excision was recommended.
Consideringpriormediansternotomy,themasswas
removed by minimally invasive thoracotomy under
cardiopulmonary bypass. Pericardium was accessed
through a small right lateral thoracotomy in the third
intercostal space, with exposure of the interatrial
septum above the pulmonary veins and dissection
of paraaortic adhesions. Antegrade cardioplegia was
delivered after heparinization. The mass was accessed
via left atrium with retraction of the anterior leaflet of
the mitral valve. It appeared as a ­yellowish fibrous
structure attached to the trabeculations in the apex.
The lesion was pathologically identified as organizing
thrombus with peripheral fibroblast ­proliferation and
fibrin inflammatory debris. There was no evidence of
antiphospholipid antibodies, other thrombophilias,
abnormal cardiac function or coronary vessel pathol-
ogy. However, a repeat CD55/59 flow cytometry
confirmed a new diagnosis of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria (PNH), with over 80% CD55/59-de-
ficient red cells and granulocytes (Fig. 3). Continued
anticoagulation was prescribed.
At that point there was only mild chronic hemo-
lysis (hemoglobin 11 g/dL, LDH 380 IU/L) and the
patient did not require any intervention except for
continued anticoagulation and monitoring. However,
in June 2011 he sustained an episode of severe hemo-
lysis (with a hemoglobin drop from 13.2 to 6.3 g/dL)
following an upper respiratory tract infection, com-
plicated by acute renal failure. Upon recovery, he
was reevaluated for potential allogeneic bone mar-
row transplantation and eculizumab therapy. Figure 4
tracks the history of the patient’s cytopenias on the
background of clinical events.
×10 ×40
CD3 CD20
Figure 1. Microscopic images of the bone marrow biopsy. (A) low-power
magnification of May-Grunwald/Giemsa stain showing hypocellular
­marrow with a lymphoid germinal center. (B) high-power view demon-
strating decreased hematopoiesis with interspersed lymphocytes. CD3,
CD20: immunohistochemical stains highlighting mixed, polyclonal nature
of T and B-lymphocytes in the tissue.
Intraventricular thrombus in PNH
Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5	 345
A B
C D E
Figure 2. Images of the cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 2D echocardiogram sequence visualizing the intraventricular thrombus. (A) MRI,
coronal projection, inversion-recovery fast low-angle shot sequence (FLASH). (B) MRI, four-chamber axial image from the steady-state free-precession
sequence. (C) Echo, two-chamber apical window showing a homogenous echodensity in the apex. (D) four-chamber apical window. (E) short axis
­parasternal view.
CD59 deficient
2004 2008
CD59 deficient
Linear region Linear region
Count
CD59-FITC
Figure 3. CD59 red cell flow cytometry histogram at the initial presentation and at the time of thrombus diagnosis, when a bimodal distribution with a
dominant PNH clone became manifest.
Migdady and Olszewski
346	 Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5
Discussion
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is a rare
clonal stem cell disorder, characterized by chronic
­intravascular hemolysis, highly thrombophilic state
and progression to bone marrow failure, commonly
after a period of sustained hematopoiesis.1
The patho-
genesis of this disorder involves a somatic mutation
in the PIG-A gene with consequent deficiency in
glycosylphosphatidylinositol(GPI)-anchored mem-
brane proteins, such as surface complement deacti-
vators CD55 (decay-accelerating factor) and CD59
(protectin).Thisdeficitleadstocomplement-mediated
red cells lysis, increased platelet reactivity, abnormal
fibrinolysis and a number of other pathophysiologic
phenomena producing a hypercoagulable state.2
Intravascular hemolysis with release of free plasma
hemoglobin contributes to nitric oxide deficiency and
endothelial dysfunction in a mechanism that links
thrombotic risk in PNH and other hemolytic disorders
such as sickle cell disease.3
Thrombosis, the major source of morbidity and
mortality in PNH, typically occurs within the venous
circulation, frequently in unusual sites, such as
hepatic or splanchnic veins, cavernous sinus etc. The
10 year cumulative incidence of venous thrombo-
sis among all affected patients is 23% and depends
on the size of the abnormal clone. Intraventricular
cardiac thrombi have not been previously reported in
association with this disease. Thrombosis within the
left ventricle occurs almost exclusively in the setting
of pre-­existing heart failure. In a recent review only
seven prior cases of left ventricular thrombus with
preserved cardiac function were reported, mostly
with a history of prothrombotic medical conditions.4
Arterial thrombosis occasionally does occur in
PNH.AmongninepatientswithacutestrokeandPNH,
in five cases the thrombosis was one of the first mani-
festations of the hematologic disorder.5
In the largest
descriptive series, cases of arterial thrombosis in the
central nervous system, coronary circulation, hepatic,
mesenteric arteries and aorta were ­summarized.6
The
arterial events were classified as high-risk despite
their relatively low incidence. They occurred mostly
in young patients without underlying atherosclerosis.
However, the relative risk of coronary event was over
20 and cardiac thrombosis was associated with the
highest mortality score.
The disturbed coagulation system in low-shear,
slow-flow venous circulation is believed to play
the dominant role in the pathogenesis of venous
­thromboembolism, while platelet pathology is typically
implicated in ­arterial thrombosis. Interestingly, platelet
activation was reported in PNH and antiplatelet therapy
was suggested as possible therapeutic intervention.7
Platelets just as other blood cells originate from the
pathologic clone and are prone to complement-medi-
ated injury and activation. Circulating platelet-derived
procoagulant microparticles rich in phospholipids were
detected in PNH and may contribute to the thrombotic
risk.8
In case of either venous or arterial thrombo-
sis, anticoagulation remains the mainstay of therapy.
Recent reports highlight decrease in thrombotic risk
0
1000
70
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
8
9
10
11
12
13
3000
5000
7000
Resection
of thymoma
ATG/CsA
treatment
Diagnosis of
PNH
12/2004 06/2005 12/2005 06/2006 06/2007 08/200812/2006 12/2007 12/2008
Platelets(103
/µL)
ANC(/µL)
Hemoglobin(g/dL)
Figure 4. Tracing of the patient’s cytopenias (platelets—green, haemoglobin—red, neutrophil count—blue) on the backdrop of the clinical events.
Intraventricular thrombus in PNH
Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5	 347
after treatment with eculizumab (monoclonal antibody
against the complement protein 5).9
The occurrence of contemporaneous malignant
thymoma and severe aplastic anemia with subsequent
PNH in our case sheds additional light on the com-
plex interaction between thymoma-derived autoim-
munity, T-cell directed immunosuppression and the
dynamics of PNH clone emergence and survival.
Sensitive assays detect cells with PNH phenotype
in over 50% of patients with acquired AA, and the
emergence of a PNH clone inAAhad been previously
reported in 10%–25% of cases after immunosuppres-
sive ­therapy.10
In the era of sensitive flow cytometry
screening, although there is a large proportion of
PNH-positive patients at the onset of AA, the occur-
rence of a new clone years later is not common.11
In the majority of patients with a detectable mutant
population, the proportion of PNH cells ultimately
decreased after immunosuppressive therapy.12
Thymoma often produces paraneoplastic autoim-
munedisorders,suchasmyastheniagravis,pureredcell
aplasia and AA. In the single previously reported case
of PNH occurring after resection of thymoma, circu-
lating myelotoxic CD8+ lymphocytes were detected.13
It is hypothesized that while PIG-A mutations occur
sporadically in healthy population, impaired immune
surveillance or autoattack against normal progenitors
is critical for expansion and hematopoietic dominance
of the PNH clone. The mutant population has the abil-
ity to restore hematopoiesis—in our patient ironically
leading to remission from severe aplastic anemia unre-
sponsive to standard treatment. Such a paradoxical
mechanism had been conjectured in the past.14
Yearly screening for PNH in AA patients after
therapy has been recommended by the Interna-
tional PNH Interest Group, although the benefits and
­duration of such screening remain uncertain.15
While
prospective series do not uphold earlier postulations
that overt PNH should frequently develop in patients
with AA harboring a small CD55/59 deficient popu-
lation, our case underscores the importance of longi-
tudinal follow up and screening.16
The appearance of
a new large PNH clone, while uncommon, warrants
prophylactic anticoagulation, since the risk of throm-
bosis approaches 50% over 10 years.17
Cardiac sur-
gery in the setting of PNH may be complicated with
increased risk of hemolysis, renal failure and throm-
bosis, so additional perioperative interventions have
been recommended.18
In case of clinically overt PNH,
treatment with eculizumab is effective in decreas-
ing hemolysis, transfusion dependence and the risk
of thrombosis.19
It also favorably affects survival in
patients with PNH.20
As our case illustrates, a seem-
ingly spontaneous, delayed remission from AA may
occur thanks to the emergence of hematologically
effective PNH, which nevertheless can manifest its
own thrombotic and hemolytic consequences.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Michael Atalay, Dr. Stanley Schwartz
and Dr. Joe Yammine for help with obtaining and
editing photographs.
Disclosures
Author(s) have provided signed confirmations to the
publisher of their compliance with all applicable legal
and ethical obligations in respect to declaration of
conflicts of interest, funding, authorship and contrib-
utorship, and compliance with ethical requirements
in respect to treatment of human and animal test
subjects. If this article contains identifiable human
subject(s) author(s) were required to supply signed
patient consent prior to publication. Author(s) have
confirmed that the published article is unique and not
under consideration nor published by any other pub-
lication and that they have consent to reproduce any
copyrighted material. The peer reviewers declared no
conflicts of interest.
References
1.	 Rosse WF, Nishimura J. Clinical manifestations of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria: present state and future problems. International Journal of
Hematology. 2003;77(2):113–20.
2.	 Weitz IC. Thrombosis in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal ­hemoglobinuria.
Seminars in Thrombosis and Hemostasis. 2011;37(3):315–21.
3.	 Rother RP, Bell L, Hillmen P, Gladwin MT. The clinical sequelae of intravas-
cular hemolysis and extracellular plasma hemoglobin: a novel mechanism of
human disease. JAMA. 2005;293(13):1653–62.
4.	 Jeganathan R, Ralph-Edwards A. Left apical pedunculated thrombus with
normal ventricular function mimicking an intracardiac tumor. Journal of
Cardiac Surgery. 2011:5–7. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21951172.
5.	 Audebert HJ, Planck J, Eisenburg M, Schrezenmeier H, Haberl RL. ­Cerebral
ischemic infarction in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria report of 2 cases
and updated review of 7 previously published patients. Journal of Neurology.
2005;252(11):1379–86.
6.	 Ziakas PD, Poulou LS, Rokas GI, Bartzoudis D, Voulgarelis M. Thrombosis
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: sites, risks, outcome. An overview.
Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. 2007;5(3):642–5.
7.	 Gralnick HR, Vail M, McKeown LP, et al. Activated platelets in paroxysmal
nocturnal haemoglobinuria. British Journal of Haematology. 1995;91(3):
697–702.
Publish with Libertas Academica and
every scientist working in your field can
read your article
“I would like to say that this is the most author-friendly
editing process I have experienced in over 150
publications. Thank you most sincerely.”
“The communication between your staff and me has
been terrific. Whenever progress is made with the
manuscript, I receive notice. Quite honestly, I’ve
never had such complete communication with a
journal.”
“LA is different, and hopefully represents a kind of
scientific publication machinery that removes the
hurdles from free flow of scientific thought.”
Your paper will be:
•	 Available to your entire community
free of charge
•	 Fairly and quickly peer reviewed
•	 Yours! You retain copyright
http://www.la-press.com
Migdady and Olszewski
348	 Clinical Medicine Insights: Oncology 2011:5
	 8.	 Hugel B, Socié G, Vu T, et al. Elevated levels of circulating procoagulant
microparticles in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and
aplastic anemia. Blood. 1999;93(10):3451–6.
	 9.	 Hillmen P, Muus P, Dührsen U, et al. Effect of the complement inhibitor
eculizumab on thromboembolism in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2007;110(12):4123–8.
	10.	 Tichelli A, Gratwohl A, Nissen C, Speck B. Late clonal complica-
tions in severe aplastic anemia. Leukemia and lymphoma. 1994;12(3–4):
167–75.
	11.	 Schrezenmeier H, Hildebrand A, Rojewski M, et  al. Paroxysmal noc-
turnal haemoglobinuria: a replacement of haematopoietic tissue? Acta
­Haematologica. 2000;103(1):41–8.
	12.	 Scheinberg P, Marte M, Nunez O, Young NS. Paroxysmal ­nocturnal
hemoglobinuria clones in severe aplastic anemia patients treated with
horse anti-­thymocyte globulin plus cyclosporine. Haematologica. 2010;
95(7):1075–80.
	13.	 Palmieri G, Selleri C, Montella L, et al. Thymoma followed by paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria: A unique clinical association in the context of
multiorgan autoimmunity with a potential role for CD8+ T lymphocytes.
American Journal of Hematology. 2006;81(10):774–8.
	14.	 Luzzatto L, Gianfaldoni G, Notaro R. Management of paroxysmal nocturnal
haemoglobinuria: a personal view. British Journal of Haematology. 2011;
153(6):709–20.
	15.	 Parker C, Omine M, Richards S, et al. Diagnosis and management of parox-
ysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2005;106(12):3699–709.
	16.	 Pu JJ, Mukhina G, Wang H, Savage WJ, Brodsky RA. Natural history of
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria clones in patients presenting as
aplastic anemia. European Journal of Haematology. 2011;87(1):37–45.
	17.	 Hall C, Richards S, Hillmen P. Primary prophylaxis with warfarin pre-
vents thrombosis in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). Blood.
2003;102(10):3587–91.
	18.	 Dinesh D, Baker B, Carter JM. Cardiopulmonary bypass surgery in a patient
with paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Transfusion Medicine (Oxford,
England). 2006;16(3):206–8.
	19.	 Hillmen P, Hall C, Marsh JCW, et al. Effect of eculizumab on hemolysis and
transfusion requirements in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobi-
nuria. The New England Journal of Medicine. 2004;350(6):552–9.
	20.	 Kelly RJ, Hill A, Arnold LM, et al. Long-term treatment with eculizumab
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: sustained efficacy and improved
survival. Blood. 2011;117(25):6786–92.
