Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, 7, 83-95 83
1570-159X/09 $55.00+.00 ©2009 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.
Transitional Polytherapy: Tricks of the Trade for Monotherapy to
Monotherapy AED Conversions
William R. Garnett1
, Erik K. St. Louis2,*
, Thomas R. Henry3
and Thomas Bramley4
1
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA; 2
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA; 3
University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA; 4
Xcenda, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
Abstract: The goal of epilepsy therapy is to help patients achieve seizure freedom without adverse effects. While mono-
therapy is preferable in epilepsy treatment, many patients fail a first drug due to lack of efficacy or failure to tolerate an
initial medication, necessitating an alteration in therapy. Sudden changes between monotherapies are rarely feasible and
sometimes deleterious given potential hazards of acute seizure exacerbation or intolerable adverse effects. The preferred
method for converting between monotherapies is transitional polytherapy, a process involving initiation of a new antiepi-
leptic drug (AED) and adjusting it toward a target dose while maintaining or reducing the dose of the baseline medication.
A fixed-dose titration strategy of maintaining the baseline drug dose while titrating the new medication is preferable when
breakthrough seizures are occurring and no adverse effects are present. However, a flexible titration strategy involving re-
duction of the baseline drug dose to ensure adequate tolerability of the new adjunctive medication is preferred when pa-
tients are already experiencing adverse effects. This article reviews pharmacokinetic considerations pertinent for ensuring
successful transitional polytherapy with the standard and newer antiepileptic drugs. Practical consensus recommendations
“from an expect panel (SPECTRA, Study by a Panel of Experts Considerations for Therapy Replacement and Antiepilep-
tics) for a successful monotherapy” AED conversions are then summarized. Transitional polytherapy is most successful
when clinicians appropriately manage the titration strategy and consider pharmacokinetic factors germane to the baseline
and new adjunctive medication.
Key Words: Epilepsy, antiepileptic drugs, titration, conversion, monotherapy, polytherapy, pharmacokinetics.
INTRODUCTION
Epilepsy is characterized by two or more unprovoked
seizures that may be either partial (focal or localized) or gen-
eralized. A single seizure does not define epilepsy because
the probability of having a second seizure ranges between
20% and 70%. Therefore, depending on the underlying risk
factors, therapy with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) is usually
not initiated until a patient has a second seizure. However,
when it is established that a patient has epilepsy (i.e., two or
more unprovoked seizures), rapid initiation of therapy to
control seizures is appropriate.
The goal of seizure therapy is producing seizure freedom
without adverse effects of treatment. The choice of the initial
AED involves selecting a drug that is appropriate for the
patient’s seizure type, the safety profile for that individual
and the patient’s ability to tolerate the drug, the potential for
interactions with other drugs, the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics that determine the dosing schedule, a
formulation that the patient can ingest, and the expense.
While monotherapy is preferable in epilepsy treatment,
many patients fail a first drug due to lack of efficacy or fail-
ure to tolerate an initial medication, necessitating an altera-
tion in therapy. Sudden changes between monotherapies are
rarely feasible and sometimes deleterious since they expose
the patient to potential hazards of acute seizure exacerbation
or intolerable adverse effects. The preferred method for con-
*Address correspondence to this author at Department of Neurology, Mayo
Clinic, 200 First Street Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Tel: (507)
538-1038; Fax: (507) 284-4074; E-mail: StLouis.Erik@mayo.edu
verting between monotherapies is transitional polytherapy, a
process involving initiation of a new antiepileptic drug
(AED) and adjusting it toward a target dose while maintain-
ing the baseline medication. A flexible titration strategy in-
volving reduction of a baseline drug dose to ensure adequate
tolerability of the new adjunctive medication is preferred.
This article reviews pharmacokinetic considerations perti-
nent for ensuring successful transitional polytherapy with the
standard and newer antiepileptic drugs. Practical consensus
recommendations from an expert panel for successful mono-
therapy to monotherapy AED conversions are then summa-
rized. Transitional polytherapy is most successful when cli-
nicians appropriately manage the titration strategy and con-
sider pharmacokinetic factors germane to the baseline and
new adjunctive medication.
MONOTHERAPY
A guiding principal of AED therapy is the initiation of
therapy with a single AED (ie, monotherapy). While AED
therapy formerly was often initiated with combination ther-
apy (eg, phenytoin and phenobarbital), the principle of
monotherapy was established in the 1980s, based on studies
that demonstrated comparable efficacy and superior toler-
ability of monotherapy compared to polytherapy. Initial ther-
apy of newly diagnosed epilepsy with combination AEDs is
inappropriate because most patients respond to a single AED
[27,28]. The use of a second AED increases a patient’s drug
load, adding to the number and severity of side effects. A
second drug also increases the potential for drug-drug inter-
actions and makes drug regimens more complex. More com-
plex drug regimens result in a lower rate of compliance (ad-
herence) [9]. Other potential limitations of initial AED poly-
84 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
therapy are that if two AEDs are used initially, it is difficult
to titrate each drug individually, and the use of combination
therapy is more expensive. Therefore, while combination
therapy may be appropriate in many refractory patients in
chronic epilepsy treatment, it is not appropriate as initial
therapy. Many clinicians feel that polytherapy is not appro-
priate until a patient has failed two or three trials of mono-
therapy with appropriately selected AEDs for that patient’s
epilepsy syndrome.
A factor that limits the use of monotherapy with some
newer AEDs is the stringent FDA approval process for
monotherapy treatment in epilepsy, which requires demon-
stration of superiority to another treatment, usually arising
from a large randomized controlled trial utilizing an active
control design. AEDs may be approved for use in some
countries following equivalency trials. In these trials, the
new AED will be compared to an established AED such as
carbamazepine. If a new drug is found to be at least as effec-
tive as the standard, the drug is approved following proof of
equivalency or non-inferiority. The FDA viewpoint is that
while drugs may be equivalent, they may be equally ineffec-
tive. In some studies, a low and presumably ineffective dose
of a standard AED, such as valproic acid, was used in place
of the placebo. While a placebo-controlled study is consid-
ered the “gold standard” for proof of principle for efficacy in
clinical trials, most experts would consider treatment of
newly diagnosed epilepsy with a placebo to be unethical.
Therefore, all of the newer or “second-generation” AEDs
beginning with the approval of felbamate in 1993 have been
initially studied as add-on therapy for patients with uncon-
trolled partial seizures with or without secondary generaliza-
tion. Entry criteria for such studies typically require continu-
ing seizures despite therapy with one to three AEDs in ade-
quate doses. Therefore, initial efficacy is determined as
combination therapy.
Drugs that are efficacious as combination therapy may
not be efficacious as monotherapy. A drug which is proven
to be efficacious for seizure reduction when given as adjun-
ctive therapy may only be effective due to a pharmacody-
namic combined effect with the original baseline drug; that
is, the second AED may require the additional seizure sup-
pressive activity of the first drug to be effective. There are
several potential clinical trial designs for evaluating the effi-
cacy of an AED for use as monotherapy depending on its
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. One of the most
frequently used designs is a so-called conversion to mono-
therapy design, in which the patient is initially treated with
combination therapy, and then the initial AED is discontin-
ued to assess the efficacy of the new drug alone. A few of
the second-generation AEDs have conducted trials to dem-
onstrate efficacy as monotherapy. For example, lamotrigine,
topiramate, oxcarbazepine, and felbamate have been demon-
strated to be effective as monotherapy and have received
FDA approval for use as monotherapy, while gabapentin also
has evidence for monotherapy use [18]. A recent study has
also documented the efficacy of levetiracetam monotherapy
efficacy in large comparator trial designs [7].
The initial choice of an AED has little effect on the re-
sponse rate as long as the AED is appropriate for the seizure
type [28]. In an assessment of a large number of drug naïve
patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy, almost 50% of pa-
tients will respond to an AED regardless of which drug is
utilized [28]. Thus, factors such as tolerability, safety, dosing
regimen, and expense are more important in selecting an
AED. However, if 50% of patients respond to initial therapy,
this implies that another 50% do not respond to an initial
AED. Many clinicians feel that patients should fail two or
three trials of monotherapy before chronic polytherapy is
entertained.
A sudden overnight switch from one AED to another is
ill advised, given the efficacy of the newly planned AED has
not yet been established, placing the patient at risk for cata-
strophic seizure worsening, raising the risk for acute repeti-
tive seizures or even status epilepticus. Conversely, patients
may not tolerate a rapid titration to target dose of the newly
planned AED even if it is effective from its inception. Most
clinicians agree that a gradual conversion process to a new
planned AED monotherapy is the safest and most tolerable
approach, a process that may be called transitional polyther-
apy. Transitional polytherapy involves a gradual titration of
the newly planned AED toward a target dose, and, after this
is achieved, a gradual withdrawal of the baseline drug. Dur-
ing this process, if intolerable adverse effects emerge, accel-
erating the withdrawal of the baseline initial drug may be
considered.
Patients who fail to respond to their initial AED will need
transitional polytherapy during conversion to a new mono-
therapy with another AED. Another reason requiring transi-
tion to a new medication is that a patient may be unable to
tolerate their initial medication, irrespective of clinical effec-
tiveness of that therapy. Such patients also need transitional
polytherapy during a switch to another new AED monother-
apy. Therefore, patients who fail to achieve seizure control,
and/or are unable tolerate an initial AED, have need for tran-
sitional polytherapy.
TRANSITIONAL POLYTHERAPY DURING CONVER-
SION FROM MONOTHERAPY TO MONOTHERAPY
There are many reasons why a given patient may not
tolerate a specific AED. Some patients have idiosyncratic
reactions necessitating removal of a drug. For example,
phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine are associated
with allergic rash. In some cases, this rash may progress to a
life-threatening condition such as the Stevens-Johnson syn-
drome or toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). More com-
monly, adverse effects may not be acute or life threatening
but are troublesome to the patient. For example, some pa-
tients note diplopia, blurred vision, drowsiness, and lethargy
with carbamazepine. While these CNS adverse effects may
be reduced with a controlled release formulation of carba-
mazepine or a lower dose, the effects may still limit a pa-
tient’s quality of life (QoL). There is a negative linear rela-
tionship between adverse effects and patient QoL: as adverse
events increase, patient QoL decreases [20]. In women of
childbearing potential, teratogenic effects of specific AEDs
are of concern. Several pregnancy registries have raised con-
cerns regarding the use of valproic acid in women of child
bearing potential [4,48,50]. Other patients have difficulty
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 85
adhering to a specific drug regimen, especially regimens
involving multiple daily doses; if the AED has to be given
three or four times per day, adherence greatly diminishes [9].
Also, some patients, especially children and the elderly, may
find that they cannot ingest certain AED formulations. These
patients may need to be switched to a drug that is available
as a sprinkle, liquid, or smaller pill size. Finally, changes in
financial status or insurance coverage may make acquisition
of several AEDs difficult.
The conversion of a patient on monotherapy with an ini-
tial baseline AED to a new planned AED may be rapid or
slow. A rapid conversion would involve abruptly stopping
the initial baseline drug and starting the newly planned drug.
This is usually only done in a situation where the person has
experienced a life-threatening reaction to an AED. The sud-
den withdrawal of an AED may precipitate a withdrawal
seizure. Generally, a patient will be more slowly converted
from an initial baseline AED to a new planned AED so that
there is a transitional period of polytherapy. One method for
a slow conversion is to begin to slowly reduce the dose of an
initial baseline AED and to initiate a titration process with a
new planned AED. Another method, generally preferred
especially in patients who are tolerating an initial baseline
drug but who have not achieved seizure control, maintains
the dose of the baseline drug while the dose of the planned
drug is titrated to the desired amount. Then the baseline drug
is tapered off.
The relative merits of further titration of the current drug
toward the goal of high dose monotherapy, or alternatively
initiating transitional polytherapy, is a central aspect of epi-
lepsy care. Unfortunately, there is no evidence to guide this
decision point, making the process more art than science
(please see suggested algorithmic approach toward pursuit of
high dose monotherapy vs. initiation of polytherapy shown
in (Fig. 1)). In newly diagnosed epilepsy, approximately
50% of patients respond to the first AED utilized, and the
majority of patients respond to moderate target doses [26,27].
Exceptional patients clearly benefit from further vigorous
titration of initial AED monotherapy. For patients that dem-
onstrate incremental improvements in seizure frequency as
AED dosing is increased without reaching a plateau in thera-
peutic effect, additional titration of high dose AED mono-
therapy is entirely reasonable and preferable as the logical
goal of epilepsy care is to produce seizure freedom. Occa-
Fig. (1). Suggested Algorithmic Approach for Initiating and Carrying Out Transitional Polytherapy. There are two potential pathways
for using the algorithm which consider the alternative common clinical scenarios of either breakthrough seizures (beginning in upper left
corner) or adverse effects (lower right corner) during initial monotherapy. If a patient experiences breakthrough seizures without adverse
effects on monotherapy, the algorithm suggests further titration of high dose monotherapy until a “therapeutic plateau” (i.e., a maximal level
of seizure reduction response) is reached, then progressing to a “Fixed-dose” transitional polytherapy strategy. Alternatively, if the patient
experiences adverse effects, a “Flex-dose” strategy is most appropriate, which involves simultaneous reduction and tapering of the primary
baseline antiepileptic drug (AED) while titrating the new adjunctive AED. The anticipated successful outcomes of these strategies would be
seizure freedom on high dose monotherapy, seizure freedom following conversion to a new monotherapy, or a trial of chronic maintenance
polytherapy with both the baseline and adjunctive AED.
86 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
sional patients continue to show improvement, and rarely
become seizure free, when their AED therapy is dosed well
beyond the average effective dose for that drug. The only
limitation in such scenarios is avoiding intolerable dose-
related AED adverse effects such as sedation, cognitive
slowing, and ataxia.
However, for the majority of patients, further aggressive
titration beyond an average effective AED dose is a largely
futile enterprise yielding only additional adverse effects and
little improvement in seizure burden. As such, it is reason-
able to define treatment failure and the practical endpoint of
initial monotherapy as continued breakthrough seizures oc-
curring despite employing an average effective daily AED
dosage. Such a patient is evolving toward refractory epilepsy
even at this point. It is then reasonable and appropriate to
begin a new adjunctive AED with the plan of converting to a
second monotherapy, necessitating at least a brief period of
transitional polytherapy.
There are then several possible outcomes and logical
courses of further treatment (Fig. 1): (1) the patient becomes
seizure free when the new AED is added and remains seizure
free with ensuing taper of the primary baseline AED; this
patient is a successful monotherapy conversion and is treated
with the newly added drug in monotherapy; (2) the patient
becomes seizure free on the combination of AEDs during
transitional polytherapy, has further disabling seizures during
attempted taper of the initial baseline AED, and becomes
seizure free again when the baseline primary drug is in-
creased in dose or again reinstituted; this patient is thus best
treated with a combination of both drugs in chronic mainte-
nance polytherapy; 3) the patient continues having seizures
despite the combination therapy, and seizure frequency actu-
ally worsens and/or intolerable adverse effects develop dur-
ing titration of the new adjunctive AED; in this instance,
resumption of the initial AED and another attempted adjunc-
tive AED titration can be offered.
Alternatively, the main problem with intitial monother-
apy may be adverse effects. Typical dose-related adverse
effects include sedation, ataxia, and cognitive slowing. In
this situation, options include dose reduction of the antiepi-
leptic drug provided the patient remains seizure free, or em-
ploying a new adjunctive AED in transitional polytherapy
with the goal of converting the patient over to that drug as a
new second monotherapy. In this situation, adopting a “Flex-
dose” strategy of drug titration (i.e., titrating the new adjunc-
tive AED while tapering the primary baseline AED) is usu-
ally more successful in a patient who is already experiencing
unpleasant dose-related adverse effects, which are likely to
become exacerbated further by treatment with two drugs; for
this reason, it is most reasonable to being a taper of the pri-
mary AED during the period of drug overlap. Potential out-
comes include successful conversion to a new monotherapy
with the new drug, or chronic maintenance polytherapy
should the patient continue to have breakthrough seizures
with attempted withdrawal of the primary baseline AED. The
reader is again referred to (Fig. 1) for a summary of this ap-
proach, and for further detailed discussion of polytherapy to
the next article in this series entitled “Truly “Rational” Poly-
therapy: Maximizing Efficacy and Minimizing Drug Interac-
tions, Drug Load, and Adverse Effects.”
Drug interactions present a special challenge to transi-
tional polytherapy in the conversion of monotherapy to
monotherapy. The AEDs are classified as CYP enzyme in-
ducers, enzyme inhibitors, or enzyme neutral drugs. Most
clinically relevant CYP interactions occur with isozyme sub-
type 3A4, although important inhibitory interactions also
commonly occur at isozymes 2C9 and 2C19. Similar mecha-
nisms of interaction can occur with induction or inhibition of
other hepatic metabolic pathways, especially glucuronic acid
conjugation. The following discussion pertains most to CYP
level interactions but is also generally relevant to other en-
zymatic systems.
AEDs that are themselves inducers or inhibitors have an
effect on other drugs; specifically, AED inducers or inhibi-
tors may increase or decrease another drug’s metabolism,
while enzyme neutral AEDs have no effect on the metabo-
lism of other drugs. AEDs that have enzyme induction and
inhibition properties have such effects on other AEDs as well
as non-AED drugs used for treatment of other concurrent
diseases, such as anticoagulants, antihypertensives, choles-
terol-lowering drugs, and oral contraceptives. Also, the me-
tabolism of some AEDs, even those that are themselves en-
zyme-neutral, may be impacted by other drugs that are in-
ducers or inhibiters. Drug interactions may also occur when
adding a new drug or when discontinuing a drug that the
patient has been on for an extended period. For example,
phenytoin is an enzyme inducer that increases the metabo-
lism of many other drugs. During transitional polytherapy
with phenytoin and another inducible drug, when phenytoin
is added, the metabolism of the other inducible drug is in-
creased, as is its serum clearance, so the serum concentration
of the inducible drug decreases. However, if phenytoin and
another inducible drug is being used in combination and
phenytoin is removed, the elimination of the other inducible
drug will be reduced, and it will instead accumulate and the
serum concentration of the inducible drug will increase. This
could lead to dangerous complications such as bleeding
when the inducible co-medication involved is an anticoagu-
lant such as warfarin. The opposite is true for an AED that is
an enzyme inhibitor, such as valproic acid, topiramate, or
oxcarbazepine. These enzyme inhibiting AEDs may result in
reduced clearance and subsequent accumulation, leading to
increased serum concentrations of a co-medication. While
most of the focus of drug-drug interactions is on pharma-
cokinetic interactions of enzyme induction or inhibition,
there are some other drugs that have pharmacodynamic in-
teractions. A pharmacodynamic interaction probably occurs
at the receptor site. For example, the addition of lamotrigine
to the drug regimen of a patient taking carbamazepine may
result in a higher incidence of CNS side effects. However,
lamotrigine does not interfere with the metabolism of either
carbamazepine or its active 10-11 diepoxide metabolite.
AEDs have very different clinical pharmacology and
clinical pharmacokinetic profiles. It is important to review
these profiles in evaluating rates and methods of transitional
polytherapy from monotherapy to monotherapy.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF AEDS
A complete review of clinical pharmacology of the AEDs
is beyond the scope of this paper. However, factors such as
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 87
the route of elimination, half-life, and potential for drug in-
teractions are important factors to consider in transitional
polytherapy. These factors will influence the rate of dosage
titration and withdrawal.
Carbamazepine (Tegretol, Tegretol-XR, Carbatrol,
Others)
The principle mechanism of action of carbamazepine is
thought to relate to blockade of voltage-dependent sodium
channels. Carbamazepine is eliminated by hepatic metabo-
lism and is metabolized to an active metabolite, 10-11 car-
bamazepine epoxide [2]. The concentration of the parent
drug and the metabolite may vary independently. Carba-
mazepine is unique in that it induces its own metabolism and
the half-life of carbamazepine becomes shorter with contin-
ued dosing. The metabolism of carbamazepine may be in-
duced or inhibited, principally by CYP 3A4, and carba-
mazepine will induce the metabolism of other AEDs and
non-AED drugs. A limitation of carbamazepine is its asso-
ciation with rare but severe idiosyncratic adverse effects
such as fatal hepatic injury or Stevens Johnson Syndrome
(SJS) [11,17]. Patients of Asian ancestry may be particularly
vulnerable to evolution of SJS, and it is recommended by
FDA in the United States that patients of Han Chinese ances-
try in particular, and others of Asian ancestry who com-
monly express this genotype, receive preliminary testing for
the HLA-B*1502 susceptibility allele for SJS prior to initiat-
ing carbamazepine therapy [15].
Felbamate (Felbatol)
Felbamate is also presumed to have a major mechanism
of action of voltage-dependent sodium channel blockade, but
it also blocks glutamatergic NMDA receptors [33]. The as-
sociation of aplastic anemia and hepatotoxicity with felba-
mate have restricted the use of this AED to those with brittle,
refractory epilepsy [34]. Felbamate is eliminated renally and
hepatically. The metabolism may be inhibited and induced.
Felbamate will inhibit the metabolism of some drugs (eg,
phenytoin, valproic acid, carbamazepine epoxide) and induce
others (eg, carbamazepine).
Gabapentin (Neurontin, Others)
Gabapentin binds to the alpha2—delta1 subunit of the
presynaptic calcium channel, modulating neurotransmitter
release [45]. Gabapentin is actively absorbed. It binds to an
L-amino protein carrier system in the gut and this system
may become saturated. Therefore, the bioavailability of
gabapentin decreases as the dose increases sometimes neces-
sitating more frequent dosing. Gabapentin is eliminated
renally, and the clearance of gabapentin correlates with the
creatinine clearance [38].
Lacosamide (Vimpat)
Lacosamide is a novel AED with a presumed mechanism
of action related to slow sodium channel inactivation, possi-
bly to modulation of collapsin response mediator protein-2
(CRMP-2) binding that modulates neutrophic factors [10].
This AED is rapidly and completely absorbed, reaches a
peak concentration in one hour with a 13-hour elimination
half-life, and has a linear concentration curve up to dosing of
800 mg/day [10]. Lacosamide has minor metabolism to an
inactive O-desmethyl metabolite and is cleared renally. No
significant CYP induction/inhibition, nor any drug interac-
tion with other AEDs or common prescription drugs have
been reported.
Lamotrigine (Lamictal)
The principle mechanism of action for lamotrigine is
blockage of voltage gated sodium channels [16]. Lamo-
trigine is eliminated almost completely by Phase II hepatic
metabolism. While the half-life of lamotrigine is around 22
hours in drug naïve patients, indicating that once-a-day dos-
ing would be feasible, the metabolism may be induced or
inhibited [16]. The half-life of lamotrigine in patients taking
enzyme inducers is around 12 hours [21]. The clearance of
lamotrigine is significantly reduced in patients taking val-
proic acid, due to inhibition of lamotrigine’s glucuronidation
by valproate [51]. Unless the dose of lamotrigine is very
slowly increased, the use of valproic acid and lamotrigine
together is associated with an increase in the incidence of
skin rash. While the metabolism of lamotrigine may be in-
duced or inhibited, it does not alter the metabolism of other
drugs. Oral contraceptives have been reported to decrease the
serum concentration of lamotrigine, potentially rendering it
less effective and requiring dose supplementation [39]. A
similar phenomena of female hormones lowering lamo-
trigine’s concentration is also seen during pregnancy, as the
serum concentration of lamotrigine may decrease as preg-
nancy progresses toward full term, then rises again in the
postpartum state [47]. The dose of lamotrigine must be in-
creased slowly because of the increased incidence of skin
rash with a rapid dosage titration.
Levetiracetam (Keppra)
Levetiracetam binds the presynaptic SV2A synaptic vesi-
cle protein, which appears to be its principle mechanism of
action [31,46]. Most of levetiracetam is eliminated renally
with minor elimination via hydrolysis that does not involve
liver enzymes [1]. The metabolism of levetiracetam is not
induced or inhibited, and levetiracetam does not interact with
other drugs. The dose of levetiracetam may need to be re-
duced in patients with renal impairment. Due to its generally
excellent tolerability, levetiracetam dosage can generally be
increased rapidly.
Oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)
Oxcarbazepine is a prodrug and is rapidly converted to a
monohydroxylated derivative (MHD) which is active [42].
MHD is eliminated by glucuronide conjugation or hydroxy-
lation as well as renally. Patients with renal dysfunction have
a decreased clearance of MHD. Although this drug is struc-
turally and mechanistically related to carbamazepine, there is
no auto induction [40]. While the metabolism of oxcar-
bazepine to MHD is not induced or inhibited, the further
metabolism of MHD may be altered by other drugs; in par-
ticular, the metabolism of MHD is inducible at CYP 3A4
[42]. Also, oxcarbazepine or MHD may interact with other
drugs; an important interaction is the possibility of reduced
hormonal contraceptives concentrations in women of child
bearing potential receiving oxcarbazepine [14]. Oxcar-
bazepine may have favorable impact upon mood in patients
with epilepsy [32].
88 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
Phenobarbital (Luminal)
Phenobarbital is the oldest AED still in active use and
remains the most commonly used AED worldwide, particu-
larly in the treatment of neonatal seizures where it remains a
drug of choice given extensive experience with its use in this
patient population [6,28]. However, the use of Phenobarbital
has waned substantially in the United States and Europe
given its inferior tolerability to other older drugs and the
newer AEDs [28]. The main mechanism of action of pheno-
barbital is related to increased duration of opening of the
chloride ionophore by binding the alpha subunit of the
GABA-A receptor complex [28]. Phenobarbital has both
hepatic and renal elimination. The half-life of phenobarbital
ranges from 72 to 125 hours, necessitating very slow dosage
adjustment. The metabolism of phenobarbital may be inhib-
ited or induced. Phenobarbital is a potent CYP enzyme in-
ducer.
Phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek, Others)
The main mechanism of action for phenytoin is blockade
of voltage gated sodium channels. Phenytoin has very com-
plex pharmacokinetics displaying saturable absorption, satu-
rable metabolism (Michaelis-Menton kinetics), and high
protein binding [23]. This drug is eliminated primarily by
hepatic metabolism. However, the half-life is concentration
dependant due to saturable metabolism. Saturable metabo-
lism means that small changes in dose may result in signifi-
cantly larger increases in serum concentration. The metabo-
lism of phenytoin may be inhibited or induced, and pheny-
toin induces the metabolism of other drugs.
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
Like its structural analog gabapentin, the main mecha-
nism of pregabalin appears to be related to binding at the
alpha2—delta1 subunit of the presynaptic calcium channel,
modulating neurotransmitter release [44].
Although this drug is structurally related to gabapentin,
the pharmacokinetics of pregabalin are linear because pre-
gabalin does not display the saturable absorption shown by
gabapentin [12]. Pregabalin is completely eliminated renally
and is not protein bound. Patients with renal impairment will
have a decreased pregabalin clearance. There are no drug
interactions reported with pregabalin. The dose of pregabalin
may be rapidly increased as tolerated, although many pa-
tients require slower titration due to CNS adverse effects.
Rufinamide (Banzel)
This triazole derivative is structurally unrelated to cur-
rently marketed AEDs, and its major mechanism of action
appears to be related to prolonged inactivation of sodium
channels [3]. The extent of rufinamide absorption decreases
with higher dosing. The drug is extensively metabolized by
carboxylase enzymatic degradation to an inactive carboxylic
acid, and renally cleared. Rufinamide is a weak CYP3A4
inducer, so it may impact metabolism of other AEDs and
medications cleared through CYP3A4 including hormonal
contraceptives. Plasma half-life is 6-10 hours. Rufinamide
may increase phenytoin concentrations to some degree, but
has no significant effects on other AEDs. Valproate de-
creases rufinamide clearance in children by up to 70%, so
titration of either drug should be adjusted accordingly when
rufinamide and valproate are co-administered.
Tiagabine (Gabatril)
The presumed mechanism of action is related to its activ-
ity as a potent and selective blocker of the GAT-1 GABA
transporter, thereby inhibiting reuptake of GABA into pre-
synaptic neurons and prolonging its availability synaptically
[22,49].Tiagabine is eliminated by hepatic metabolism, which
can be induced or inhibited. However, this drug is not re-
ported to affect the metabolism of other drugs. Tiagabine is
highly protein bound. The dose of tiagabine must be slowly
increased because of increased side effects with rapid dosage
titration.
Topiramate (Topamax)
The main mechanism of action of topiramate is thought
to be related to voltage gated sodium ion channel blockade,
but it also has a variety of other synaptic and non-synaptic
effects, including blockade of glutamatergic non-NMDA
kainate/AMPA receptors, facilitation of GABAergic neuro-
transmission, and mild inhibition of carbonic anhydrase [41].
Topiramate has both renal and liver elimination. However,
the renal elimination predominates. In patients with hepatic
dysfunction, renal elimination may increase [19]. Patients
with decreased renal function will have a decreased clear-
ance of topiramate. Enzyme inducers increase clearance of
topiramate. Topiramate inhibits the metabolism of some pa-
tients taking phenytoin but not all. The interaction appears to
occur in those patients who are at the point of saturating their
phenytoin metabolism [23]. The dose of topiramate must be
slowly increased because the incidence of side effects may
increase with a rapid dosage titration, especially when topi-
ramate is used in adjunctive therapy with other AEDs. The
propensity for topiramate adverse effects with monotherapy
use appears to be substantially lower than when topiramate is
used in adjunctive therapy settings [36].
Valproic acid (Sodium Divalproex) (Depakene, Depakote,
Depakote-ER)
Valproate also has a predominant mechanism of action
related to blockade of voltage gated sodium channels, but
there is also evidence for additional mechanisms including
facilitation of GABAergic neurotransmission and inhibition
of glutamatergic neurotransmission via NMDA receptor in-
hibition [30]. The rate of absorption of valproic acid depends
on the formulation; the sodium salt with enteric coating (De-
pakote) is well absorbed, while the generic valproic acid
formulation (Depakene) is poorly absorbed and often causes
nausea, especially during initial titration. Valproic acid is
metabolized by the liver by Phase II metabolism to multiple
metabolites, one of which may be liver toxic [37]. Valproic
acid is highly protein bound. However, the binding saturates
at concentrations around 90 mcg/mL. This increases the free
fraction, which increases the clearance. Thus, the percent
increase in total concentration will be less than the percent
increase in dose.
Zonisamide (Zonegran)
The principle mechanism for zonisamide again appears to
be related to blockade of voltage-dependent sodium chan-
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 89
nels, limiting sustained neuronal burst firing, but it also has
several additional mechanisms, including inhibition of low-
threshold T-type calcium channels and weak inhibition of
carbonic anhydrase [5]. About 70% of zonisamide is metabo-
lized in the liver and about 30% is eliminated renally [24].
While the metabolism of zonisamide may be induced or in-
hibited, zonisamide does not alter the clearance of other
drugs. The dose of zonisamide should be slowly increased to
reduce the incidence of side effects, especially CNS side
effects.
While the need for transitional polytherapy in the conver-
sion of monotherapy to monotherapy has been established
clinically, there are few published papers on how this should
be done. While some have considered this to be more art
than science, a recent panel of experts was convened to es-
tablish standard recommendations to guide all clinicians in
transitional polytherapy.
SPECTRA CONSENSUS PANEL RECOMMENDA-
TIONS
There is very little published data to assist the clinician in
determining the rate of upward titration and downward taper
of AEDs during the process of transitional polytherapy from
monotherapy to monotherapy. A panel of neurologists and
clinical pharmacists who specialize in the care of patients
with epilepsy was assembled to participate in a therapy con-
version Delphi study called SPECTRA (Study by a Panel of
Experts: Considerations for Therapy Replacement in Antie-
pileptics). The goal of SPECTA was to develop a practical
guide on AED monotherapy conversion, and the consensus
recommendations were recently published [45].
The process involved two web-based surveys and one
live consensus panel. In the first web-based survey, panel
members were asked questions about therapy conversion in
adults. The second web-based survey responded to the an-
swers from the first survey. The questionnaires used the Del-
phi technique to elicit individual responses and facilitate the
experts in refining their views as the group proceeded to
agreement. Delphi is a group facilitation technique that seeks
to obtain consensus on the opinions of experts through a se-
ries of structured questionnaires commonly referred to as
rounds. This technique maintains anonymity, controls feed-
back, and provides statistically based responses. After the
second web-based survey, the group was convened to reach
consensus on the rate of tapering of the old AED, the rate of
titration of the new AED, and the usefulness of drug level
monitoring. During the third round, panel members reviewed
each statement and voted anonymously using an automated
response system (ARS). The response options ranged from 1
to 5, where 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4
= agree, and 5 = strongly agree. Generally, a mean score of
4.0 (agree) was required to indicate that consensus had been
reached. The panel did not feel that sufficient experience or
literature existed to provide recommendations regarding the
approved AED pregabalin (Lyrica), nor did they consider
lacosamide (Vimpat) or rufinamide (Banzel) since these
drugs were investigational at the time the panel was con-
vened.
The panel reached a consensus for the following recom-
mendations for a general taper and titration.
Starting a Taper
The panel recommended that the old baseline AED be
tapered after a presumably efficacious dose was reached with
the new planned AED. However, if a patient experienced
significant adverse effects during the conversion, the taper of
the old baseline AED may be started sooner.
Tapering
The panel recommended slower tapering and smaller
reductions for persons who are seizure free and licensed to
drive for all agents. However, in 10 out of 12 drugs re-
viewed, a faster taper was recommended if a patient experi-
enced significant adverse events. The exceptions were car-
bamazepine and valproic acid. The panel only recommended
a slower taper if patients experienced inadequate seizure
control when receiving tiagabine and topiramate. General
drug specific tapering strategies are depicted in (Fig. 2), and
drug specific alterations to the general tapering strategy are
summarized in Table 1.
Titration
Fig. (2). General Tapering Method. Note that phenobarbital, with
a 10-25% reduction of original dose every month, is not illustrated.
CBZ, carbamazepine; FBM, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; LEV,
levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; OXC, oxcarbazepine; PB, pheno-
barbital; PHT, phenytoin; TGB, tiagabine; TPM, topiramate; VPA,
valproate; ZNS, zonisamide. (reproduced with kind permission
from Elsevier, Inc. St. Louis et al; Conversions between mono-
therapies in epilepsy: expert consensus. Epilepsy and Behavior
2007; 11: 224).
90 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
After reviewing the package inserts titration schedules,
the panel agreed with this method for lamotrigine, tiagabine,
and zonisamide. For the nine other AEDs, they recom-
mended additional methods to assist with titration and taper-
ing processes. Factors such as enzyme inducers and ad-
vanced age modified titration schemes.
The panel reached a consensus on the taper and titration
of individual AEDs. Drug specific general titration strategies
are summarized in Table 2, and alterations to the general
titration strategies are shown in Table 3.
Carbamazepine
The general taper is 20% of the original dose every week.
A faster taper was recommended for patients with reduced
liver function and patients being converted to oxcarbazepine.
A larger reduction in dose was recommended for patients
with significant adverse effects. A smaller reduction in dose
was recommended for patients with inadequate seizure con-
trol.
The initial dose recommended for carbamazepine was
200 mg/day with a dosage increase of 200 mg every 7 days.
After a total daily dose of 400 to 800 mg/day was achieved,
the panel would use drug levels to determine the next course
of action. A faster titration was recommended in patients
with inadequate seizure control or for patients who were
converting from oxcarbazepine. A slower titration was rec-
ommended for elderly patients, patients with reduced liver
function, patients with mild adverse effects, or patients con-
verting from felbamate. A larger increase in dose was rec-
ommended for inadequate seizure control, and a smaller in-
crease in dose was recommended for elderly patients.
Felbamate
The panel recommended that the general taper for felba-
mate be 25% of the original dose every week. The taper
Table 1. Summary of Drug Specific Alterations to General Tapering Methods. Antiepileptic Drugs (AEDs) are listed alphabetically.
The SPECTRA Panel reached consensus for modification of the usual general tapering method for each drug in certain situations,
and recommended faster or slower tapering, by larger or smaller dose decrements, in the situations listed in each column for each
individual AED. CBZ, carbamazepine; FBM, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; LEV, levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; OXC, oxcar-
bazepine; PB, phenobarbital; PHT, phenytoin; TGB, tiagabine; TPM, topiramate; VPA, valproate; ZNS, zonisamide. (modified
and reproduced with kind permission from Elsevier, Inc. St. Louis et al; Conversions between monotherapies in epilepsy: expert
consensus. Epilepsy and Behavior 2007; 11: 226).
AED Faster Taper Slower Taper Larger Dose Decrements Smaller Dose Decrements
1. CBZ Impaired liver function
Conversion to OXC
Significant adverse effects Inadequate seizure control
2. FBM Impaired liver function
Significant adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control Impaired liver function
3. GBP Renal insufficiency
Significant adverse effects
Significant adverse effects Inadequate seizure control
4. LTG Impaired liver function
Converting to VPA
Significant adverse effects
Impaired liver function
Converting to VPA
Inadequate seizure control
5. LEV Renal insufficiency
Significant adverse effects
Significant adverse effects Renal
insufficiency
Inadequate seizure control
6. OXC Converting to CBZ
Significant adverse events
Significant adverse effects
Converting to CBZ
Inadequate seizure control
7. PB On PB <1 month
Significant adverse effects
Significant adverse effects Inadequate seizure control
8. PHT Impaired liver function
Significant adverse effects
Impaired liver function
9. TGB Impaired liver function
Significant adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control Impaired liver function
10. TPM Renal insufficiency
Significant adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control Renal insufficiency Inadequate seizure control
11.VPA Impaired liver function Impaired liver function
12. ZNS Significant adverse effects Inadequate seizure control
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 91
Table 2. Summary of Drug Specific General Titration Methods. The SPECTRA panel provided consensus recommendations for gen-
eral strategies of titrating each of the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) shown below. Recommended starting doses, titration schemes,
and target doses were agreed upon for each AED. The final column indicates whether or not the panel reached consensus regard-
ing a recommendation for blood level monitoring during titration. CBZ, carbamazepine; FBM, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; LEV,
levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; OXC, oxcarbazepine; PB, phenobarbital; PHT, phenytoin; TGB, tiagabine; TPM, topiramate;
VPA, valproate; ZNS, zonisamide. (reproduced and modified with kind permission from Elsevier, Inc. St. Louis et al; Conver-
sions between monotherapies in epilepsy: expert consensus. Epilepsy and Behavior 2007; 11: 225).
AED Starting Dose Interval (Increase) Target Daily Dose Monitor Blood Level
During Titration
1. CBZ 200 mg/day 200 mg every 7 days 400-800 mg/daya
Yes
2. PBM 600 mg/day 300 mg every 7 days 1200-1800 mg/day No consensus
3. GBP 600-900 mg/day 600-900 mg every 7 days 1800-2700 mg/day No consensus
4. LTGb
Package insert
Existing AED is CBZ, PHT, PB
or primidone
Existing AED is VPA
Existing AED is not CBZ, PHT,
PB VPA or primidone
50 mg/day
25 mg every other
day
25 mg every day
50 mg every day for 2 weeks. 100 mg
every day for weeks 3 and 4; then 100 mg
every week
25 mg every other day for 2 weeks. 25 mg
every day for weeks 3 and 4. 50 mg every
day for week 5.
25-50 mg every 1-2 weeks. 50 mg every
day for weeks 3 and 4. 100 mg every day
every 7 days
200-500 mg/day
100-200 mg/day
300-500 mg/day
No consensus
No consensus
No consensus
5. LEV 500-1000 mg/day 500-1000 mg every 7 days 1000-2000 mg/day No consensus
6. OXC 300-600 mg/day 300 mg every 7 days 900-1500 mg/day No consensus
7. PBc
8. PHT 3-5 mg/kg/day 30 mg/day if steady state
Level >12 g/mL:
50 mg /day if steady state
Level 7-12 g/mL
100 mg/day if steady state
Level <7 g/mL
Therapeutic blood
level
Yes
9. TGB
Package insert
Existing drug is enzyme-inducer
Existing drug not an enzyme-
inducerd
4 mg/day 4 mg every 7 days for 4 weeks. 4-8 mg
every 7 days in weeks 5 and 6.
32-56 mg/day in 2-4
divided doses
No consensus
10. TPM 25-50 mg/day 25-50 mg every 7 days 100-200 mg/day No consensus
11. VPA 500-1000 mg/day 250-750 mg every 7 days 1000-2000 mg/daye
Yes
12. ZNS
Package insert
100 mg/day 100 mg every 2 weeks 300-400 mg/day No consensus
a
For CBZ, use higher end of target daily dose if converting from an enzyme inducer.
b
For LTG, titration schemes outlined are taken from US packaging insert guidelines: international clinicians are advised to consult package insert recommendations and approvals in
countries, which may differ from US standards.
c
Titration with PB is not encouraged (the SPECTRA panel decided not to provide specific recommendations regarding phenobarbital, reflecting a general discouragement for use of
phenobarbital in modern epilepsy treatment).
d
Following a given dose of TGB, the estimated plasma concentration in non-induced patients is more than twice that in patients receiving enzyme-inducing agents. Use in non-
induced patients requires lower doses of TGB. These patients may also require a lower titration of TGB. These patients may also require a slower titration of TGB compared with
induced patients.
e
For VPA, use lower end of range for generalized seizures.
92 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
Table 3. Summary of Drug Specific Alterations to General Titration Methods. Antiepileptic Drugs (AEDs) are listed alphabetically.
The SPECTRA Panel reached consensus for modification of the usual general titration schemes for each drug in certain situations,
and recommended faster or slower tapering, by larger or smaller dose decrements, in the situations listed in each column for each
individual AED. CBZ, carbamazepine; FBM, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; LEV, levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; OXC, oxcar-
bazepine; PB, phenobarbital; PHT, phenytoin; TGB, tiagabine; TPM, topiramate; VPA, valproate; ZNS, zonisamide. (reproduced
and modified with kind permission from Elsevier, Inc. St. Louis et al; Conversions between monotherapies in epilepsy: expert
consensus. Epilepsy and Behavior 2007; 11: 226).
AED Faster Titration Slower Titration Larger Dose Increments Smaller Dose Increments
1. CBZ Inadequate seizure control
Conversion from OXC
Elderly patient
Impaired liver function
Mild adverse effects
Converting from FBM
Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
2. FBMa
Mild adverse effects Inadequate seizure control Impaired liver function
3. GBP Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
Renal insufficiency
Mild adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control
4. LTGb
Mild adverse effects
Converting to VPAc
Inadequate seizure control Impaired liver function
5. LEV Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
Renal insufficiency
Mild adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
6. OXC Converting from CBZ
Inadequate seizure control
Impaired liver function Inadequate seizure control
Converting from CBZ
Impaired liver function
7. PBd
8. PHTe
9. TGB Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
Impaired liver function
Mild adverse effects
Inadequate seizure control Impaired liver function
Elderly patient
10. TPM Inadequate seizure control Renal insufficiency Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
Renal insufficiency
11. VPA Elderly patient
Mild adverse effectsf
Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
12. ZNS Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient Inadequate seizure control Elderly patient
Note: All references to package insert refer to US packaging: international clinicians are encouraged to consult packaging information and recommended prescribing practices in their
own countries, which may vary substantially from US standards.
a
FBM should not be used by a nonepileptologist: should not be used in elderly patients: and should not be used in patients with impaired liver function.
b
Should refer to package insert when converting from PHT.
c
Should refer to package insert when converting from VPA.
d
Titration with PB is not encouraged (the SPECTRA panel decided not to provide specific recommendations regarding phenobarbital, reflecting a general discouragement for use of
phenobarbital in modern epilepsy treatment).
e
No alterations to the general titration method are recommended.
f
Adverse events are final dose related, not titration related.
could be faster in patients with reduced liver function and in
patients with significant adverse effects. The percent dose
reduction could be larger in patients with reduced liver func-
tion and smaller in patients with inadequate seizure control.
The recommended starting dose was 600 mg/day. The
dose could be increased by 300 mg every 7 days to a target
dose of 1200 to 1800 mg/day. A slower titration was recom-
mended for patients with mild side effects. The panel felt
that this AED should only be used by epileptologists. They
did not want to encourage the use of felbamate in the elderly
or in patients with reduced liver function and, therefore, did
not offer any suggestions for these groups.
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 93
Gabapentin
The general taper recommended for gabapentin was 25%
of the original dose every week. A faster taper would be ac-
ceptable for patients with renal insufficiency or patients with
significant adverse effects. A larger dose reduction would be
acceptable for patients with significant adverse effects, and a
smaller reduction would be acceptable for patients with in-
adequate seizure control.
As the initial dose of gabapentin, 600 to 900 mg/day was
recommended, with an increase of 600 to 900 mg every 7
days to a total dose of 1800 to 2700 mg. A faster titration
was recommended for inadequate seizure control. A slower
titration was recommended for elderly patients, patients with
renal insufficiency, and patients with mild adverse effects. A
larger dose increase was recommended for patients with in-
adequate seizure control.
Lamotrigine
A reduction of 20% to 25% of the original dose was rec-
ommended as the general taper of lamotrigine. A faster taper
was recommended for patients with reduced liver function,
patients taking valproic acid, and patients with significant
adverse effects. A larger dosage reduction was endorsed for
patients with reduced liver function and for patients convert-
ing to valproic acid monotherapy, while a smaller reduction
in dose was endorsed for patients with inadequate seizure
control.
The panel accepted the package insert recommendations
for the starting dose and for the dosing interval. After a dose
of 200 to 500 mg/day was reached, the panel recommended
that levels be used to determine the next course of action.
The panel did not recommend any faster rate of titration but
did recommend a slower rate of titration for patients with
mild adverse effects and for patients who were converting
from valproic acid. A larger dosage increase was recom-
mended for patients with inadequate seizure control, and a
smaller dosage increase was recommended for patients with
reduced liver function. The panel referred clinicians to the
package insert for dosage adjustments for patients converting
from valproic acid or enzyme-inducing AEDs.
Levetiracetam
The panel recommended that a general taper of leveti-
racetam begin with a 20% to 25% reduction in the original
dose every week. The taper may be faster in patients with
renal insufficiency or significant adverse effects. The percent
reduction may be larger in patients with significant adverse
effects or renal insufficiency and smaller in patients with
inadequate seizure control.
A starting dose of 500 to 1000 m/day of levetiracetam
was recommended. The recommended dosing interval was
500 to 1000 mg every 7 days to a target dose of 1000 to 2000
mg/day. A faster titration was endorsed for patients with
inadequate seizure control. A slower titration was recom-
mended for elderly patients, patients with renal insufficiency,
and patients with mild adverse effects. A larger dose increase
was recommended for patients with inadequate seizure con-
trol, and a smaller increase was recommended for elderly
patients.
Oxcarbazepine
The general taper recommended for oxcarbazepine was
20% to 25% of the original dose every week. A faster taper
was approved for patients converting from carbamazepine
and for patients with significant adverse effects. No recom-
mendations were made for a slower taper. A larger dose re-
duction was deemed appropriate for patients with significant
adverse side effects and for patients converting from carba-
mazepine monotherapy. A smaller reduction was acceptable
for patients with inadequate seizure control.
The recommended starting dose of oxcarbazepine was
300 to 600 mg/day. A 300 mg increase in dose every 7 days
was recommended up to a target dose of 900 to 1500 mg/
day. A faster rate of titration was acceptable for patients with
inadequate seizure control and for patients converting from
carbamazepine, while a slower titration was acceptable for
patients with reduced liver function. A larger dosage increase
was agreed upon for patients with inadequate seizure control
and for those patients who are converting from carba-
mazepine, while a smaller increase was recommended for
patients with reduced liver function.
Phenobarbital
The general taper that was recommended for phenobarbi-
tal was 10% to 25% of the original dose every month. A
faster taper was recommended for patients on phenobarbital
less than 1 month and for those with significant adverse ef-
fects. No recommendations were made for a slower taper. A
larger reduction in dose was recommended for patients with
significant adverse effects, while a smaller reduction was
recommended for patients with inadequate seizure control.
The panel did not make any recommendations for pheno-
barbital titration, as switching a patient to Phenobarbital was
not encouraged.
Phenytoin
A 20% to 25% reduction of the original dose every
month was recommended as a general taper for phenytoin. A
faster taper was recommended for patients with reduced liver
function or significant adverse effects. A larger reduction in
dose was recommended for patients with reduced liver func-
tion. No recommendations were made for a slower taper or
for a smaller reduction in dose.
The recommended starting dose of phenytoin was 3 to 5
mg/kg/day. The recommended dosage adjustments were 30
mg/day for steady state levels >12 mcg/mL, 50 mg/day for
steady state levels between 7 and 12 mcg/mL, and 100
mg/day for steady state levels <7 mcg/mL [35]. The target
dose was dependant on the drug level.
Tiagabine
The general taper recommended for tiagabine was 20% to
25% of the original dose every week. A faster taper may be
appropriate for patients with reduced liver function or pa-
tients with significant adverse effects, and a slower taper
may be appropriate for patients with inadequate seizure con-
trol. The panel recommended a larger reduction in dose for
patients with reduced liver function but did not make any
recommendations for smaller reductions in dose.
94 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Garnett et al.
The panel accepted the package insert suggestions for
dosage titration. A faster titration was recommended for pa-
tients with inadequate seizure control, and a slower titration
was recommended for elderly patients, patients with reduced
liver function, and patients with mild adverse effects. The
panel recommended a larger dose increase in patients with
inadequate seizure control, and a smaller dosage increase in
elderly patients and patients with reduced liver function.
Topiramate
A 20% to 25% reduction of the original dose every week
was recommended as the general taper for topiramate. A
faster taper was recommended for patients with renal insuffi-
ciency or significant adverse effects. A slower taper was
recommended for patients with inadequate seizure control. A
larger reduction in dose was recommended for patients with
renal insufficiency, and a smaller reduction in dose was rec-
ommended for patients with inadequate seizure control.
The initial dose that was recommended was 25 to 50
mg/day with dosage increases of 25 to 50 mg every 7 days
up to 100 to 200 mg/day. Faster titration was recommended
for patients with inadequate seizure control, and a slower
titration was recommended for patients with renal insuffi-
ciency. A larger increase in dose was recommended for pa-
tients with inadequate seizure control, and a smaller increase
in dose was recommended for elderly patients and patients
with renal insufficiency.
Valproate (Valproic Acid, Sodium Divalproex)
The general taper that was recommended for valproate
was 20% to 25 % of the original dose every week. A faster
taper and a larger dosage reduction were recommended for
patients with reduced liver function. No recommendations
were made for slower tapers or smaller dosage reduction.
For the starting dose of valproate, 500 to 1000 mg/day
was recommended. Dosage increases of 250 to 750 mg every
7 days were recommended up to a dose of 1000 to 2000
mg/day. Blood levels would then determine the next course
of action. The panel made no recommendation for faster
dosage titration but recommended a slower titration in eld-
erly patients and patients with mild adverse effects. The
panel recommended a larger increase in dose for patients
with inadequate seizure control and a smaller increase in
dose for elderly patients.
The panel also agreed that the adverse effects of val-
proate are final-dose related and are not usually titration re-
lated. The panel concluded that the target concentration of
valproate for general seizures is on the lower end of the tar-
get concentrations.
Zonisamide
A 20% to 25% reduction of the original dose every week
was recommended as the general taper for zonisamide. A
faster titration and larger increase and dosage for patients
with inadequate seizure control. No recommendations were
made for a slower taper or for a smaller dosage reduction.
The panel accepted the package insert method for initiat-
ing and titrating zonisamide. The panel recommended a
faster titration and larger increase in dosage reduction for
patients with inadequate seizure control and a slower titra-
tion and a smaller dosage increase for elderly patients.
Blood Level Monitoring
The panel also discussed drug level monitoring during
transitional polytherapy from monotherapy to monotherapy,
recommending drawing a drug level for the new AED before
withdrawing the old AED. The panel also recommended
obtaining a level of the new AED once the patient is on
monotherapy to be used as a baseline or benchmark level to
which future comparisons could be made when necessary.
Examples of scenarios in which a previously efficacious,
steady-state AED dosing and concentration could be threat-
ened include problems with patient adherence, new drug-
drug interactions, new medical illness, or pregnancy.
CONCLUSION
The concept of monotherapy for the treatment of epilepsy
is well established. However, at least 50% of patients fail
therapy with the first AED. Conversion from one AED to
another is complex. Generally, sudden withdrawal of initial
AED therapy is discouraged unless a patient has experienced
serious adverse effects. In most instances when patients are
changing from one AED to another, there will be a period of
transitional polytherapy during the conversion from mono-
therapy to monotherapy. This process is complicated by drug
interactions and complex AED pharmacokinetics.
Until now, physicians have had to rely on their own
clinical experience to determine the rate of AED tapering
and titration. The SPECTRA report utilized the well-
validated Delphi technique to achieve consensus from prac-
ticing epileptologists and clinical pharmacists on tapering
and titrating AEDs. Now there is a set of guidelines that cli-
nicians can use to compare their clinical experiences and aid
them in the period of transitional polytherapy with antiepi-
leptic drugs from monotherapy to monotherapy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful for secretarial assistance with
manuscript formatting and copyright permissions by Ms.
Laura Disbrow, Mayo Clinic Department of Neurology, and
for artistic preparation of the Figure graphic from the Mayo
Clinic Media Support Section. Mayo Clinic Support Section
for the Figure 1 graphic (as Fig. 2 is instead from a previous
article).
REFERENCES
[1] Abou-Khalil, B. (2008) Levetiracetam in the treatment of epilepsy.
Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat., 4(3), 507-523.
[2] Albani, F., Riva, R., Baruzzi, A. (1995) Carbamazepine clinical
pharmacology: a review. Pharmacopsychiatry, 28(6), 235-244.
[3] Arroyo, S. (2007) Rufinamide. Neurotherapeutics, 4(1), 155-162.
[4] Artama, M., Auvinen, A., Raudaskoski, T., Isojarvi, I, Isojarvi, J.
(2005) Antiepileptic drug use of women with epilepsy and congeni-
tal malformations in offspring. Neurology, 64(11), 1874-1878.
[5] Biton, V. (2007) Clinical pharmacology and mechanism of action
of zonisamide. Clin, Neuropharmacol., 30(4), 230-40.
[6] Booth, D., Evans, D.J. (2004) Anticonvulsants for neonates with
seizures. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., (3), doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD004218.pub2.
[7] Brodie, M.J., Perucca, E., Ryvlin, P., Ben-Menachem, E.,
Meencke, H.J. (2007) Levetiracetam Monotherapy Study Group.
Transitional Polytherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 95
Comparison of levetiracetam and controlled-release carbamazepine
in newly diagnosed epilepsy. Neurology, 68(6), 402-408.
[8] Christensen, J., Petrenaite, V., Atterman, J., Sidenius, P., Ohman,
I., Tomson, T., Sabers, A. (2007) Oral contraceptives induce lamo-
trigine metabolism: evidence from a double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Epilepsia, 28(3), 484-489.
[9] Cramer, J.A., Russel,l M.L. (1988) Compliance in epilepsy: strate-
gies to enhance adherence to a medical regimen. Epilepsy Res.
Suppl., 1,163-175.
[10] Doty, P., Rudd, G.D., Stoehr, T., (2007) Thoma. Lacoasmide. Neu-
rotherapeutics, 4(1), 145-148.
[11] Dreifuss, F.E., Langer, D.H. (2007) Hepatic considerations in the
use of antiepileptic drugs. Epilepsia, 28(Suppl 2), S23-29.
[12] Dworkin, R.H., Kirkpatrick, P. (2005) Pregabalin. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov., 4, 455-456.
[13] Farooq, M.U., Bhatt, A., Majid, A., Gupta, R., Khasnis, A., Kassab,
M.Y. (2009) Levetiracetam for managing neurologic and psychiat-
ric disorders. Am. J. Health Syst. Pharm., 66(6), 541-561.
[14] Fattore, C., Cipolla, G., Gatti, .GL., Limido, G.L., Sturn, Y.,
Bernasconi, C., Perucca, E. (1999) Induction of ethinylestradiol
and levorgestrel metabolism by oxcarbazepine in healthy women.
Epilepsia, 40, 783-787.
[15] Ferrell, P.B. Jr., McLeod, H.L. (2008) Carbamazepine, HLA-B*
1502 and risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis: US FDA recommendations. Pharmacogenomics 9(10),
1543-1546.
[16] Fitton, A., Goa, K.L. (1995) Lamotrigine: an update of its pharma-
cology and therapeutic use in epilepsy. Drugs, 50(4), 691-713.
[17] Franciotta, D., Kwan, P., Perucca, E. (2009) Genetic basis for idio-
syncratic reactions to antiepileptic drugs. Curr. Opin. Neurol.,
22(2), 144-149.
[18] French, J.A., Kanner, A.M., Bautista J, Abou-Khalil, B., Browne,
T., Harden, C.L., Theodore, W.H., Bazil, C., Stern, J., Schachter,
S.C., Bergen, D., Hirtz, D., Montouris, G.D., Nespeca, M., Gidal,
B., Marks, W.J. Jr., Turk, W.R., Fischer, J.H., Bourgeois, B.,
Wilner, A., Faught, R.E., Sachdeo, R.C, Beydoun, A., Glauser,
T.A. (2004) Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic drugs
II: treatment of refractory epilepsy. Report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee and Quality Standards Sub-
committee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Ameri-
can Epilepsy Society. Neurology, 62, 1261-1273.
[19] Garnett, W.R. (2000) Clinical pharmacology of topiramate: a re-
view. Epilepsia, 41(Suppl 1), S61-5.
[20] Gilliam, F.G., Fessler, A.J., Baker, G., Vahle, V., Carter, J.,
Attarian, H. (2004) Systematic screening allows reduction of ad-
verse antiepileptic drug effects: a randomized trial. Neurology,
62(1), 23-27.
[21] Goldsmith, D.R., Wagstaff, A.J., Ibbotson, T., Perry, C.M. (2003)
Lamotrigine: a review of its use in bipolar disorder. Drugs, 63(19),
2029-2050.
[22] Gram, L. (2007) Tiagabine: A novel drug with a GABAergic
mechanism of action. Epilepsia, 35(Supp 5), S85-87.
[23] Jones, G.L., Wimbish, G.H., McIntosh, W.E. (2006) Phenytoin:
basic and clinical pharmacology. Med. Res. Rev., 3(4), 383-434.
[24] Kothare, S.V., Kaleyias, J. (2008) Zonisamide: review of pharma-
cology, clinical efficacy, tolerability, and safety. Expert Opin. Drug
Metab. Toxicol., 4(4), 493-506.
[25] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. Early identification of refractory epilepsy.
(2000) N. Engl. J. Med., 342, 314-319.
[26] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. (2000) Epilepsy after the first drug fails:
substitution or add-on? Seizure 9, 464-468.
[27] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. (2001) Effectiveness of first antiepileptic
drug. Epilepsia, 42,1255-1260.
[28] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. (2004) Phenobarbital for the treatment of
epilepsy in the 21st century: a critical review. Epilepsia, 45(9),
1141-1149.
[29] Levy, R.H., Wurden, C.J. (1995) Carbamazepine: interactions with
other drugs. In: Levy, R.H., Mattson, R.H., Meldrum, B.S., Eds.
Antiepileptic drugs. 4th ed. Raven Press: New York, pp. 543-554.
[30] Löscher, W. (2002) Basic pharmacology of valproate: a review
after 35 years of clinical use for the treatment of epilepsy. CNS
Drugs, 16(10), 669-94.
[31] Lynch, B.A., Lambeng, N., Nocka, K., Kensel-Hammes, P.,
Bajjalieh, S.M., Matagne, A., Fuks, B. (2004) "The synaptic vesicle
protein SV2A is the binding site for the antiepileptic drug
levetiracetam". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101(26), 9861-9866.
[32] Mazza, M., Della Marca, G., Di Nicola, M.,Martinotti, G., Gino, P.,
Janiri, L., Bria, P., Mazza, S. (2007) Oxcarbazepine improves
mood in Patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav., 10(3), 397-401.
[33] Palmer, K.J., McTavish, D. (1993) Felbamate: a review of its
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and therapeutic
efficacy in epilepsy. Drugs, 45(6), 1041-1065.
[34] Pellock,J.,Faught,E., Leppik, I., Shinnar, S., Zuppanc, M.L. (2006)
Felbamate: consensus of current clinical experience. Epilepsy Res.,
71(2), 89-101.
[35] Privatera, M.D. (1997) Clinical rules for phenytoin dosing. Ann.
Pharmacother., 27(10), 1164-1173.
[36] Privatera, M.D., Brodie, M.J., Mattson, R.H., Chadwick, D.W.,
Neto, W., Wang, S., EPMN 105 Study Group (2003) Topiramate,
carbamazepine, and valproate monotherapy: double-blind compari-
son in newly diagnosed epilepsy. Acta Neurol. Scand., 107(3), 165-
175.
[37] Rettie, A.E., Rettenmeier, A.W., Howald, W.N., Baillie, T.A.
(1987) Cytochrome P-450—catalyzed formation of delta 4-VPA, a
toxic metabolite of valproic acid. Science, 235(4791), 890-893.
[38] Rose, M.A., Kam, P.C. (2002) Gabapentin: pharmacology and its
use in pain management. Anaesthesia, 57(5), 451-462.
[39] Sabers, A., Öhman, I., Christensen, J., Tomson, T. (2003) Oral
contraceptives reduce lamotrigine plasma levels. Neurology, 61(4),
570-571.
[40] Schachter, S.C. (1999) Oxcarbazepine: current status and clinical
applications. Exp. Opin. Investig. Drugs, 8, 1-10.
[41] Shank, R.P., Gardock,i J.F., Streeter, A.J, Maryanoff, B.E. (2000)
An overview of the preclinical aspects of topiramate: pharmacol-
ogy, pharmacokinetics, and mechanism of action. Epilepsia,
41(Suppl 1), S3-9.
[42] Shorvon, S. (2000) Oxcarbazepine: a review. Seizure, 9(2), 75-79.
[43] Sidhu, J., Job, S., Singh, S., Philipson, R. (2006) The pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic consequences of the co-administration
of lamotrigine and a combined oral contraceptive in healthy female
subjects. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol., 61(2), 191-199.
[44] Sills, G.J. (2006) The mechanisms of action of gabapentin and
pregabalin. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., 6(1), 108-113.
[45] StLouis, E.K., Gidal, B.E., Henry, T.R., Kaydanova, Y., Krumholz,
A., McCabe, P.H., Montouris, G.D., Rosenfeld, W.E., Smith, B.J.,
Stern,J.M.,Waterhouse,E.J.,Schulz,R.M., Garnett, W.R., Bramley,
T. (2007) Conversions between monotherapies in epilepsy: expert
consensus. Epilepsy Behav., 11, 222-234.
[46] Surges, R. (2008) Review: is levetiracetam different from other
antiepileptic drugs? Levetiracetam and its cellular mechanism of
action in epilepsy revisited. Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord., 1(1), 13-
24.
[47] Tran, T.A., Leppik, I.E., Blesi. K., Sathanandan, S.T., Remmel, R.
(2002) Lamotrigine clearance during pregnancy. Neurology, 59,
251-255.
[48] Vajda, F.J., Eadie, M.J. ( 2005) Maternal valproate dosage and
foetal malformations. Acta Neurol. Scand .,112(3), 137-143.
[49] Walker, M.C. (2002) The mechanism of action of Tiagabine. Rev.
Contemporary Pharmacother.,12(5), 213-223.
[50] Wyszynski, D.F., Nambisan, M., Surve ,T., Alsdorf, R.M., Smith,
C.R., Holmes, L.B. (2005) Antiepileptic drug pregnancy registry:
increased rate of major malformations in offspring exposed to val-
proate during pregnancy. Neurology, 64(6), 961-965.
[51] Yuen, A.W., Land, G., Weatherly, B.C., Peck, A.W. (1992) So-
dium valproate acutely inhibits lamotrigine metabolism. Br. J. Clin.
Pharmacol., 33(5), 511-513.
Received: December 30, 2008 Revised: April 23, 2009 Accepted: May 19, 2009
