106 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, 7, 106-114
1570-159X/09 $55.00+.00 ©2009 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.
Minimizing AED Adverse Effects: Improving Quality of Life in the
Interictal State in Epilepsy Care
St. Louis EK
*
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Abstract: The goals of epilepsy therapy are to achieve seizure freedom while minimizing adverse effects of treatment.
However, producing seizure-freedom is often overemphasized, at the expense of inducing adverse effects of treatment. All
antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have the potential to cause dose-related, “neurotoxic” adverse effects (i.e., drowsiness, fatigue,
dizziness, blurry vision, and incoordination). Such adverse effects are common, especially when initiating AED therapy
and with polytherapy. Dose-related adverse effects may be obviated in most patients by dose reduction of monotherapy,
reduction or elimination of polytherapy, or substituting for a better tolerated AED. Additionally, all older and several
newer AEDs have idiosyncratic adverse effects which usually require withdrawal in an affected patient, including serious
rash (i.e., Stevens-Johnson Syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis), hematologic dyscrasias, hepatotoxicity, teratogenesis
in women of child bearing potential, bone density loss, neuropathy, and severe gingival hyperplasia. Unfortunately, occur-
rence of idiosyncratic AED adverse effects cannot be predicted or, in most cases, prevented in susceptible patients. This
article reviews a practical approach for the definition and identification of adverse effects of epilepsy therapies, and re-
views the literature demonstrating that adverse effects result in detrimental quality of life in epilepsy patients. Strategies
for minimizing AED adverse effects by reduction or elimination of AED polytherapy, appropriately employing drug-
sparing therapies, and optimally administering AEDs are outlined, including tenets of AED selection, titration, therapeutic
AED laboratory monitoring, and avoidance of chronic idiosyncratic adverse effects.
Key Words: Epilepsy, antiepileptic drugs, adverse effects, quality of life, interictal state.
QOL: A NEW TREATMENT PARADIGM IN EPILEP-
SY
Although analysis of quality of life (QOL) in epilepsy
began later than many other medical fields, an ever growing
body of epilepsy QOL research has accumulated over the last
decade. A review of all the validated instruments for re-
search and clinical use in epilepsy is beyond the scope of this
article; two excellent recent reviews addressing the range of
available tools and their relative advantages and potential
uses are available for the interested reader [16,28]. In gener-
al, QOL research emphasizes measures of a patient’s general
wellness in a particular disease state, incorporating a multi-
dimensional health assessment of physical, psychological,
and social domains affected by the illness and its treatment;
these domains comprise most commonly utilized instruments
in epilepsy research and practice, the QOLIE-89, QOLIE-31,
and QOLIE-10 [28].
Epilepsy QOL research has re-emphasized the impor-
tance of producing seizure-freedom as a principle goal for all
patients, but has also revealed that the interictal state is a
principle determinant of a patient’s own perceived quality of
life; in addition to seizures themselves, a patient’s daily
functioning, cognitive status, mood states, social functioning,
and the closely related factor of perceived adverse treatment
effects determine how a patient feels about their overall
QOL. QOL research in epilepsy has reshaped priorities in
epilepsy care, calling for clinicians to maintain vigilance
*Address correspondence to this author at Department of Neurology, Mayo
Clinic, 200 First Street Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Tel: (507)
538-1038; Fax: (507) 284-4074; E-mail: StLouis.Erik@mayo.edu
over the patient’s interictal status in the monitoring of mood,
cognition, social functioning, and adverse effects in addition
to seizure burden.
DEFINING AND IDENTIFYING ADVERSE EFFECTS
OF EPILEPSY THERAPIES
An adverse effect of therapy may be defined as any clini-
cal symptom, sign, or laboratory dyscrasia which is deemed
undesirable to the patient, the physician, or both. Adverse
effects, while always unintended, are not entirely unexpected
in epilepsy care; adverse effects are unfortunately common,
reported in 40-50% of epilepsy patients receiving monothe-
rapy AED treatment [2,21]. Most common are dose-related
adverse effects, sometimes termed “neurotoxic” adverse ef-
fects, which may include (but are certainly not limited to)
drowsiness, dizziness, fatigue, headache, blurry or double
vision, impaired concentration or memory, or incoordination.
Some AEDs are apt to produce certain characteristic adverse
effects. A list of AEDs and common adverse effects (which
is by no means exhaustive or comprehensive) is given in
Table 1.
Identifying AED toxicity in affected patients is proble-
matic for several reasons. Some patients may have grown
used to feeling ill while receiving AED therapy and compla-
cently accept adverse effects as a natural consequence of
their treatment. Additionally, patients are often understanda-
bly reluctant to “make waves” during clinic visits. Patients’
fears of ongoing seizures tend to overshadow complaints
about medication toxicity, and conversely, seizure-free pa-
tients are often too comfortable with and grateful for their
outcomes to broach the risk of lowering or withdrawing
AEDs producing adverse effects, despite limitations in QOL.
Minimizing AED Adverse Effects Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 107
Furthermore, patient reticence to raise concerns over tox-
icity is compounded by physicians’ preoccupation with as-
sessment of seizure events (perhaps driven in part by overly
busy clinics which discourage thorough communication),
leading physicians to focus only on seizure histories while
neglecting to inquire about AED toxicity and other important
related interictal factors. Physicians also typically place
greater concern about serious idiosyncratic adverse effects
despite their infrequency due to fear of litigation; instead of
being vigilant to bedside measures of common adverse ef-
fects, physicians may instead too often focus on clinical la-
boratory values such as AED blood levels, chemistries, liver
function testing, and complete blood counts. However, while
a valuable adjunct to guide clinical decision-making, AED
blood levels are neither a fail-safe for detecting clinical tox-
icity or ensuring therapeutic seizure-freedom, and uncertain-
ty exists as to the interpretation and clinical value of blood
levels for many of the newer AEDs.
The availability of a rapid, efficient, and accurate tool for
identifying common, dose-related, potentially remediable
adverse effects in the office setting would greatly assist cli-
Table 1. Properties of the AEDs
Older AEDs Spectrum of
Effect
Daily Adult Do-
sage/Interval
Levels (uG/mL) Usual Adverse
Effects
Severe
Idiosyncratic
Toxicities
Interactions
Carbamazepine Partial 400-1600+ mg (BID-
QID)
4-12+ Diplopia, dizziness,
ataxia, hyponatre-
mia
Yes Bidirectional;
(AEDs, OC, AC,
many)
Ethosuximide Absence 500-1500+ mg (BID) 40-100+ Nausea. sedation Yes Unidirectional
Phenobarbital Partial 90-180+ mg (qD) 15-40 Sedation, Psycho-
motor slowing
Yes Bidirectional (AEDs,
OC, AC, many)
Phenytoin Partial 200-400+ mg (qD-BID) 8-20+ Sedation, dizziness,
ataxia, gingival
hyperplasia
Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs, OC, AC,
many)
Primidone Partial 500-1500+ mg (BID-
TID)
5-12 (measure
phenobarbital)
Sedation, psycho-
motor slowing
Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs, OC, AC,
many)
Valproate Broad 750-2500+ mg (qD-TID) 50-100+ Nausea, tremor, hair
loss, weight gain
Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs)
Newer AEDs
Felbamate Broad 1800-4800+ mg (BID-
TID)
30-100+ Irritability, insom-
nia, weight loss
Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs, OC, AC)
Gabapentin Partial 900-3600+ mg (TID-
QID)
4-20++ Sedation, dizziness,
weight gain
No None
Lacosamide Partial, potentially
broad
200-600+ mg ? Sedation, fatigue ? None known
Lamotrigine Broad 300-600+ mg (qD-BID) 4-20+ Dizziness, rash Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs, OC)
Levetiracetam Broad 1000-3000++ mg (BID) 5-40++ Sedation, dizziness No None
Oxcarbazepine Partial 600-3600+ mg (BID) 10-40+ (MHD) Sedation, dizziness
hyponatremia
Yes Bidirectional
(AEDs, OC)
Rufinamide Broad 400-3200+ mg daily ? Sedation, diarrhea ? Bidirectional
Tiagabine Partial 16-64 mg (BID-TID) 100-300 ng/mL Sedation, dizziness No Unidirectional
Topiramate Broad 100-600+ mg (qD-BID) 10-20+ Sedation, cognitive
complaints, pares-
thesias, weight loss,
rare nephrolithiasis
No Bidirectional(AEDs,
OC at high doses)
Zonisamide Broad 100-600+ mg (qD-BID) 10-40+ Sedation, paresthe-
sias, weight loss,
rare nephrolithiasis
Yes Unidirectional
AED = antiepileptic drug; uG/mL= micrograms/milliliter; + = higher doses/levels often additionally effective, as tolerated; ++ = considerably higher doses/levels sometimes addi-
tionally effective in intractable patients, as tolerated; MHD = 10, 11; Monohydroxyderivative active metabolite of oxcarbazepine; nG/mL = nanograms/milliliter. Interactions: Unidi-
rectional indicates that other AEDs or drugs may affect this AED; Bidirectional indicates that other drugs may affect this AED, and this AED affects other drugs; OC=oral contracep-
tives, AC=anticoagulants; many=many other non-AEDs.
108 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
nicians and patients alike. Fortunately, such a tool exists: the
Adverse Event Profile (Table 2) [2,3].
AED ADVERSE EFFECTS ARE A PRINCIPLE DE-
TERMINANT OF QOLIE
Antiepileptic drug adverse effects are a principle deter-
minant of QOL in epilepsy patients. Proactive, quantitative
assessment of adverse effects enables their identification and
appropriate alteration of AEDs to reduce adverse effects. A
recent randomized controlled trial of a rapid diagnostic tool
for identification and quantification of AED adverse effects
in a clinical office setting has been conducted, which eva-
luated the self-completed Adverse Event Profile (AEP, Table
2) questionnaire [11]. This study convincingly demonstrated
that clinicians who had access to information from the AEP
more frequently adjusted their patients’ AEDs, resulting in
improved patient quality of life, without sacrificing seizure
control. The authors concluded that routine use of the AEP in
epilepsy clinics may aid clinicians in identifying adverse
effects of AED therapy, and consequently guide them in ad-
justing the AED regimen appropriately to obviate adverse
effects. This research suggests that the clinicians’ well inten-
tioned quest to produce seizure-freedom often leads to over-
treatment with AEDs; pushing AED doses ever upward, and
adding AED upon AED in a spiraling fashion may have clear
negative consequences for quality of life.
MINIMIZING AED ADVERSE EFFECTS
AEDs should be adjusted to achieve the clinical goals of
seizure-freedom without adverse effects. This may be a deli-
cate balancing act for some patients, since all AEDs have the
potential to cause dose-related, “neurotoxic” adverse effects.
Fortunately, adverse effects may be obviated in most patients
by dose reduction, reducing or eliminating AED polytherapy,
or substituting for a better tolerated AED.
One relatively simple solution to avoiding or minimizing
AED adverse effects is a class switch from an older to a
newer AED in patients who are experiencing toxicity on
their current therapy, and selecting newer AEDs for new
onset epilepsy patients who may be vulnerable to the devel-
Table 2. Adverse Events Profile.
The instructions to patient for the Adverse Events Profile are as follows: During the past four weeks, have you had any of the problems or
adverse effects listed below? For each item, if it always or often has been a problem, circle 4; if it sometimes has been a problem, circle 3;
and so on. Please answer ever item.
Always/Often Sometimes Rarely Never
Unsteadiness 4 3 2 1
Tiredness 4 3 2 1
Restlessness 4 3 2 1
Feelings of aggression 4 3 2 1
Nervousness and/or ag-
gression
4 3 2 1
Headache 4 3 2 1
Hair loss 4 3 2 1
Problems with skin (eg
acne, rash)
4 3 2 1
Double or blurred vision 4 3 2 1
Upset stomach 4 3 2 1
Difficulty in concentration 4 3 2 1
Trouble with mouth or
gums
4 3 2 1
Shaky hands 4 3 2 1
Weight gain 4 3 2 1
Dizziness 4 3 2 1
Sleepiness 4 3 2 1
Depression 4 3 2 1
Memory problems 4 3 2 1
Disturbed sleep 4 3 2 1
Minimizing AED Adverse Effects Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 109
opment of AED toxicity. Older AEDs result in adverse ef-
fects of treatment in nearly half of patients [16,28]. Fortu-
nately, the availability of several newer AEDs offers im-
proved tolerability and safety profiles, helpful qualities that
the clinician may employ to minimize adverse effects in epi-
lepsy care. Since 1990, eleven new antiepileptic drugs rather
than nine (AEDs; felbamate, gabapentin, lacosamide, lamo-
trigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, pregabalin, rufina-
mide, tiagabine, topiramate, and zonisamide) have been ap-
proved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) based
initially on adjunctive therapy pivotal trial designs.
Several controlled trials have suggested that newer AEDs
possess superior tolerability to older AEDs, especially in
patient populations with specific vulnerability to AED toxici-
ty such as the elderly [5,32]. Unfortunately, higher cost con-
tinues to limit access of newer AEDs for many patients, but
availability of reliable generic formulations of many newer
AEDs has increased recently, which could largely obviate
this barrier.
Another principle for avoiding and minimizing adverse
effects is to employ monotherapy at the lowest effective dose
whenever possible, and reserve AED polytherapy at an ac-
ceptable total drug load for refractory epilepsy. While all
older AEDs were “grandfathered” in their indication for mo-
notherapy treatment of epilepsy by FDA on the basis of
comparator trial data and longstanding clinical experience,
monotherapy approval and data supporting use for most
newer AEDs is more limited. Gabapentin, oxcarbazepine,
and lamotrigine possess randomized controlled trial evidence
for monotherapy treatment of partial-onset seizures and topi-
ramate has evidence for monotherapy use in new onset epi-
lepsy [9]. Although felbamate possess monotherapy efficacy
data, its sole use currently is in brittlely refractory epilepsy,
given its risk of idiosyncratic toxicities.
REDUCING POLYTHERAPY REDUCES ADVERSE
EFFECTS
AED polytherapy should be reserved for use in refractory
epilepsy. When polytherapy is necessary to achieve seizure
control, utilizing the lowest possible drug load (the lowest
numbers and doses of AEDs) is desirable. Many medically
refractory epilepsy patients require chronic polytherapy, and
the recent AAN/AES Practice Guidelines for the treatment of
refractory epilepsy stated that all newer FDA-approved
AEDs have Class 1 evidence for adjunctive treatment of re-
fractory partial-onset seizures in adults, and there is ample
evidence to conclude that lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, and
topiramate are effective for the treatment of refractory partial
seizures in children [10]. While no good evidence for specif-
ic AED polytherapy combinations exists, augmenting mono-
therapy with an AED offering a different or complementary
mechanism of action may be considered.
Eleven new antiepileptic drugs rather than nine. When
polytherapy is prescribed, great care must be taken to avoid
excessive drug dosing and drug-drug interactions that may
increase clinical toxicity through pharmacokinetic factors.
Considerable research has demonstrated that the most delete-
rious result of polytherapy is an increased risk for develop-
ment of adverse effects, including pharmacodynamic dose-
related neurotoxic effects, severe life threatening rash with
combined lamotrigine and valproate, and teratogenic effects
in children born to pregnant women receiving AED polythe-
rapy. A recent survey of patients with epilepsy demonstrated
that central nervous system-related adverse effects, especial-
ly memory complaints and fatigue, appear to be most fre-
quent overall, and that polytherapy was more frequently as-
sociated with these adverse effects than monotherapy [6].
Unfortunately, only a small number of refractory patients
can be rendered seizure-free with AED polytherapy, al-
though some patients benefit substantially by reduction of
seizure burden. A recent pivotal prospective observational
study demonstrated that only 3% of patients who fail two
sequential initial monotherapies are subsequently rendered
seizure-free by polytherapy [13]. Since AED polytherapy
only rarely results in seizure freedom, the overall philosophy
of AED therapy for refractory epilepsy necessarily shifts
from effecting seizure-freedom to the more modest goal of
seizure palliation. While no epilepsy care should be rendered
with a defeatist attitude, a practical realization that the re-
fractory patient is highly unlikely to benefit from overly ag-
gressive AED dosing may prevent overtreatment of the pa-
tient with ever escalating doses and numbers of AEDs in a
polytherapy regimen. Instead, establishing that a patient has
refractory epilepsy suggests the need for proactive explora-
tion of non-pharmacologic treatment alternatives to AED
therapy that offer the potential benefits of reducing AED
drug load and minimizing adverse effects.
DRUG SPARING THERAPIES MAY ENABLE AED
REDUCTION
Failure to produce seizure control after even one well-
tolerated, optimally administered monotherapy AED is an
ominous prognostic feature that may portend medical intrac-
tability in many patients [14]. After failure of one or two
AED monotherapies, patients with epilepsy should receive
strong consideration of additional diagnostic evaluation for
non-pharmacological therapies, including state-of-the art
neuroimaging to detect lesional epileptogenic pathology that
is potentially amenable to surgical resection, and ictal video-
electroencephalography (vEEG) for definitive epilepsy syn-
drome classification and possible localization. Potentially
“drug sparing” non-pharmacologic therapies may afford op-
portunities to reduce AED adverse effects by minimizing
AED drug numbers and dosages, thereby improving QOL.
Currently available “drug-sparing” therapies include epilepsy
surgery, the vagus nerve stimulator, dietary therapies, and
exploration of co-morbid primary sleep disorders that may
aggravate epilepsy. However, each of these therapies have
their own unique set of potential adverse effects that are
quite different from those of the AEDs to consider.
The superiority of epilepsy surgery over medical therapy
for well-localized mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, the most
common refractory partial epilepsy syndrome, has been well
established in a randomized controlled trial [38]. Patients
with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy were randomized to ante-
rior temporal lobectomy surgery or best medical therapy. At
one-year, an intention to treat analysis demonstrated supe-
riority of surgery; 58% of patients randomized to surgical
therapy were rendered seizure-free (which rose to 64% of
110 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
those who received surgery), whereas only 8% of patients
became seizure-free on medical management. Patent QOL
was also improved significantly in the surgical group com-
pared with the medical group, although the persistence of
this difference weaned by the completion of the trial. A re-
cent metaanalysis yielded similar data on seizure-control for
temporal lobe resections, but suggested less robust outcomes
varying between 27-46% patients rendered seizure-free fol-
lowing extratemporal resections [8,37]. Importantly, numer-
ous studies have shown decreases in patient drug load when
comparing pre-operative to post-operative dosages and num-
bers of AEDs. Adverse effects of epilepsy surgery include a
minor risk (between 1-5% in major series) of major acute
surgical complications such as hemorrhage, infarction, or
infection, or of memory, language, visual, motor, or somato-
sensory functional loss depending upon the locali-zation of
the surgical epileptic focus. Some patients with refractory
partial epilepsy are not suitable epilepsy surgical candidates
due to diffuse or unlocalizable epileptic foci, while others
may have epileptic foci overlapping critical cerebral func-
tional cortex. Still others may choose not to undergo brain
surgery despite suitable candidacy. In these cases, other op-
tions may still exist.
The vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) is a FDA approved
device as an adjunctive treatment for refractory partial-onset
onset seizures. Long-Term follow-up outcome data suggests
that over 40% of patients experience a 50% or greater reduc-
tion in their seizures [24]. More recent evidence suggests
that up to 15% of patients may become seizure-free when the
device is implanted in patients with milder refractory epilep-
sy (epilepsy duration less than 5 years, having failed 4 or
fewer previous AED trials) [31]. There is no current evi-
dence based guideline for the best timing of VNS placement,
but most epileptologists reserve VNS for patients who are
not resective surgery candidates or who refuse surgery, and
for patients who have filled several older and new AEDs,
given that seizure free efficacy is less with VNS than with
resection surgery for carefully selected well-localized pa-
tients, and generally efficacy of VNS to that seen with
AEDs. However, VNS offers additional benefits to seizure
burden reduction alone in many patients; VNS therapy has
been noted to improve patient QOL, possibly by improving
important determinants of QOL in epilepsy such as alertness,
mood and memory which may be due in part to successful
reduction of AED loads [7,15]. A distinguishing advantage
of VNS therapy is its lack of sedating or neurotoxic adverse
effects; instead, VNS adverse effects such as throat discom-
fort or vocal hoarseness are usually mild, temporary, and
related only to the stimulation-on duty cycle, and VNS ad-
verse effects are usually easily mitigated by alterations in
stimulation parameter settings. Predictors of which precise
epilepsy localizations and etiologies are most likely to bene-
fit from VNS, and the optimal dosing of the device once it
has been implanted, are yet to be defined in prospective clin-
ical trials.
Specialized diets may be a useful adjunctive treatment for
epilepsy. The best studied of these is the ketogenic diet. The
ketogenic diet is a high fat, low protein, low carbohydrate
diet that induces systemic ketosis, which has an antiepilepto-
genic effect on the brain. The ketogenic diet is most often
successfully employed in children, but may also be tried in
adolescents and adults. Unfortunately, unless rigid com-
pliance is assured, the ketogenic diet produces little benefit
and, in general, most adolescents and adults have limited
tolerance of the diet. However, highly motivated and despe-
rately refractory epilepsy patients may benefit from the keto-
genic diet. An alternative that is often more tolerable, but not
yet robustly studied, is the modified Atkins diet, a high fat,
moderate protein, low carbohydrate diet that induces mild
ketosis. The risk of inducing undesirable lipid abnormalities,
metabolic states, and other long-term health effects of these
dietary therapies also remain unclear.
Identifying and treating seizure aggravators is also an
important consideration. Recent studies have suggested that
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a frequent co-morbidity in
refractory epilepsy, and a pilot treatment trial of nasal conti-
nuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) in patients with
refractory epilepsy and co-morbid OSA showed substantial
seizure reduction without alteration of AED therapy [17-19].
Primary sleep disorders such as OSA, restless legs syn-
drome, and periodic limb movements of sleep may fragment
sleep and worsen seizure burden in patients with refractory
epilepsy. If a primary sleep disorder is suspected, a diagnos-
tic polysomnogram should be ordered, and aggressive treat-
ment for any primary sleep disorder discovered should be
initiated. One limitation of therapy for OSA is that adverse
effects and poor tolerability of nCPAP therapy are common;
tolerability and potential risks of nCPAP therapy in those
with co-morbid epilepsy have not been reported and merit
prospective investigation.
PRACTICAL STRATEGIES FOR OPTIMAL AED
ADMINISTRATION TO MINIMIZE ADVERSE EF-
FECTS
Guidelines for choosing and optimally administering
epilepsy therapies are currently lacking. Until evidence-
based guidelines are developed, optimal selection and ad-
ministration of epilepsy therapies must be highly individua-
lized by synthesizing available data and patient qualities and
preferences. AED selection, titration, target dosage, basic
pharmacokinetic properties, potential AED and non-AED
drug interactions, therapeutic AED laboratory monitoring,
and avoidance of chronic idiosyncratic adverse effects are all
considerations when attempting to minimize adverse effects
of AED administration. There are currently no clear evidence
based algorithms to guide these important factors in AED
treatment. Nonetheless, common treatment principles under-
lie the choosing, dosing, sequencing, and monitoring of AED
therapy in epilepsy care. While a comprehensive guide to
employing AED therapy is beyond the scope of this article,
several basic principles for optimal AED administration in-
clude:
- Choose AED therapy appropriate for the epilepsy syn-
drome;
- Consider patient characteristics and co-morbidities when
choosing AEDs;
- Employ AED monotherapy at the lowest effective dosage
to achieve seizure freedom;
Minimizing AED Adverse Effects Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 111
- Reserve AED polytherapy (combining two or more
AEDs) for refractory patients and minimize total drug
load to limit adverse effects;
- Treat according to the patient’s clinical response, not the
AED level;
- Monitor for long-term complications of older AED ther-
apy and consider withdrawal of therapy when appropri-
ate; and
- Choose affordable AED therapy.
A few of these points which are particularly important for
avoiding and minimizing adverse effects are next considered.
AED SELECTION
A first general principle in AED choice and usage is to
employ AED monotherapy whenever possible, since mono-
therapy is just as effective, or more effective, than polythera-
py. Monotherapy limits the potential for adverse effects and
drug interactions. Specific AEDs are itemized with accom-
panying information on clinical spectrum of uses, pharmaco-
kinetics, typical dosing and blood levels, and cardinal ad-
verse effects in Table 1. When choosing and utilizing AEDs,
a considerable amount of pharmacological knowledge and
clinical wisdom is necessary for successful patient outcomes.
Patient’s characteristics such as age, sex, co-morbidities, and
co-existing medications are important determinants of proper
drug selection and use. These factors most frequently guide
which AED may have the most desirable pharmacokinetic
and phamacodynamic properties to avoid the development of
undesirable adverse effects, and examples of patient charac-
teristics that impact on AED selection are now discussed.
Older patient age is a factor suggesting a heightened vul-
nerability to the development of dose-related neurotoxic ad-
verse effects. Several recent studies have shown that newer
AEDs are better tolerated in the elderly [5, 32]. Female sex is
an important determinant of AED selection; women usually
have lower bone density and may therefore be most vulnera-
ble to development of osteopenia, and growing evidence now
suggests that several older AEDs may accelerate bone loss.
In women of childbearing potential, AEDs that are asso-
ciated with teratogenicity and which may interact with hor-
monal contraceptives also merit cautious use, and may be
best avoided. Patient co-morbidities may affect the choice of
an AED. For example, weight is an important consideration.
Valproate, pregabalin, and carbamazepine may contribute to
weight gain, while topiramate and zonisamide may include
weight loss among their “adverse effect” profile. The patient
with both epilepsy and migraine might favor topiramate or
valproate, drugs which are efficacious for both conditions.
Patients receiving other AEDs or non-AED co-medications
interacting with AEDs are at particular risk for adverse ef-
fects of treatment and adverse consequences. Hormonal con-
traceptive and anticoagulants are perhaps the best known
non-AED medications resulting in hazardous interactions
with enzyme-inducing AEDs (EIAEDs), but other inducible
medications such as lipid-lowering drugs and anti-hyper-
tensives may result in catastrophic cardiovascular and cere-
brovascular consequences if rendered less effective by
EIAEDs.
AED TITRATION AND TARGET DOSE
AED dosing must be individualized to achieve optimal
results. The usual strategy is to titrate the AED toward a tar-
get dose that has proven effective for most individuals in
pivotal clinical studies and in subsequent clinical experience.
Dose adjustment can then be made in the event of adverse
drug reactions or recurrent seizures. If the endpoint of sei-
zure freedom is preserved, maintaining a lower but clinically
therapeutic AED dosage and level (if obtained) is entirely
acceptable. If a patient continues to experience breakthrough
seizures, raising the AED dose to the maximal dose tolerated
is sometimes necessary, although recent evidence demon-
strates that only a minority of patients become seizure-free
when dosed above the usual population range, so a practical
viewpoint of treatment futility should be realized when pa-
tients experience frequent breakthrough seizures despite
adequate AED dosages [14]. Therapeutic change should be
strongly considered when seizure-freedom is not maintained
at AED doses which are effective for most patients.
AED SEQUENCING AND POLYTHERAPY CONSID-
ERATIONS
Overlapping AEDs in transitional polytherapy (where the
baseline AED is maintained at the current dose to limit
breakthrough seizures, the newly added AED is titrated to a
protective dose, then the original drug is tapered and discon-
tinued) is the preferred method when introducing a new AED
monotherapy. Abruptly stopping the existing AED increases
the risk of seizures while introducing the new adjunctive
AED too rapidly may induce adverse effects that taint the
patient’s perception of what could otherwise be an effective
therapy. Recently, an expert consensus panel was convened
to address the issue of how best to convert between AED
monotherapies when initial monotherapy fails due to lack of
efficacy or tolerability, utilizing the Delphi model of deter-
mining consensus on strategies for best practice [33]. The
experts agreed on a basic principle to taper an existing base-
line AED only after a presumably efficacious dose of the
newly planned adjunctive AED is reached. It was felt that
application of this principle should be modified by occur-
rence of adverse effects possibly attributable to the existing
drug, in which case earlier or more rapid tapering of the ex-
isting drug should be considered. The experts agreed that
seizure-free patients benefit from slower tapering in smaller
decrements than would be typical for patients with seizures
not controlled by the existing AED.
Most patients should receive two sequential AED mono-
therapies with differing mechanisms of action prior to at-
tempting chronic polytherapy. In general, a similar strategy
to that agreed upon by the expert panel for monotherapy
conversions should also be used when initiating addition of a
second (or third) adjunctive AED for use as chronic polythe-
rapy. A recent trial well illustrated the potential for increased
toxicity with adjunctive AED therapy [25]. This randomized,
perspective, adjunctive topiramate study design directly ad-
dressed which strategy for addressing adverse effects emerg-
ing during adjunctive AED titration was most efficacious
and tolerable, by randomizing subjects to two treatment
arms; (1) a “Flex Dose” titration group, in which investiga-
112 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
tors were permitted to reduce the baseline AED as needed to
permit titration of adjunctive topiramate; and (2) a “Fixed
Dose” titration group, where investigators were not permit-
ted to adjust the baseline AED for titration-emergent adverse
effects (similar to the restrictions required in most pivotal
labeling studies for the newer AEDs as adjunctive therapy);
if investigators needed to adjust the baseline co-therapy, the
patient was exited from randomized treatment. The percen-
tage of patients exiting randomized treatment due to adverse
effects was the primary study endpoint. The “Flex Dose”
group achieved higher target doses of adjunctive topiramate,
while the “Fixed Dose” group had nearly twice as many sub-
jects drop-out for intolerable adverse effects [25]. This data
suggests that it may be best to reduce the baseline AED to
minimize adverse effects emerging during the titration of a
new adjunctive therapy, to enable an adequate therapeutic
trial of the new adjunctive AED therapy. The adjunctive
AED can be further increased as needed to achieve optimal
therapeutic doses in transition toward a new monotherapy
when the new adjunctive AED demonstrates a meaningful
therapeutic effect [4].
When utilizing polytherapy, the clinician must be know-
ledgeable about the potential for pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic AED interactions, which influence the risk of
developing adverse effects. While an exhaustive review of
drug interactions is beyond the scope of this article, a few
illustrative scenarioswillsuffice to make this important point.
In general, the main pharmacokinetic interactions to consider
in AED polytherapy are potential Cytochrome P450 meta-
bolism competition, and protein binding and displacement.
Co-administration of the enzyme-inducing AEDs (i.e., phe-
nobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine) with inducible AEDs
(such as lamotrigine, topiramate, or tiagabine) increases and
hastens the metabolism of the inducible AED. In complex
polytherapy regimens, reducing the dose of enzyme-indu-
cing AEDs (such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, or the barbi-
turates) will “de-induce” the regimen, thereby increasing the
serum concentrations of highly inducible AEDs (such as
lamotrigine and topiramate), leading to optimized pharmaco-
kinetics of the inducible AED and improved seizure control
in some instances [1]. Conversely, when an inhibitor such as
valproate is given with lamotrigine, there is a greater chance
of serious rash than when lamotrigine is given with enzyme-
inducing AEDs [23]. Two recent studies of vulnerable insti-
tutionalized patients well illustrate the complex pharmacoki-
netic issues that can arise in polytherapy. In these studies of
elderly nursing home and multiply handicapped patients,
common use of undesirable pharmacokinetic AED combina-
tions was found, especially phenytoin/phenobarbital and
phenytoin/valproate polytherapy, [12,20]. The interactions
between these AEDs are bidirectional, complex, and varia-
ble, leading to unpredictable increases or decreases in drug
concentrations, and in an institutionalized patient population
with common co-morbid hypoalbuminemia, free phenytoin
levels should be monitored to enable appropriate co-therapy
adjustments to avoid toxicity. Switching to a regimen with
less likelihood of complex interactions should be strongly
considered in such instances. An extensive, superb review of
AED drug interactions is found in the recent work by Patsa-
los and colleagues [26].
Pharmacodynamic adverse effects are especially difficult
to avoid when using polytherapy, as dose-related neurotoxic
and cognitive adverse effects are more prevalent in polythe-
rapy. Cognitive impairments commonly accompany polythe-
rapy and are often subtle and difficult to identify without
specifically questioning the patient. While standard office
assessment of cognition often shows minimal impact, de-
tailed neuropsychological and electrophysiological measures
often show impairments in attention, concentration, execu-
tive function, and memory in patients receiving AED therapy
[22,29,34,35]. Some adverse effects such as sedation, cogni-
tive impairments, gait disturbance, and hair changes are con-
sistently underreported unless patients are specifically ques-
tioned about the presence or absence of these symptoms.
Clinicians should consider routinely using adverse events
screening instruments such as the AEP to identify AED ad-
verse effects during office visits, especially for patients re-
ceiving polytherapy. Some AEDs have a greater tendency to
cause pharmacodynamic adverse effects when co-adminis-
tered with other AEDs; for example, there is a greater chance
for adverse effects when utilizing topiramate as adjunctive
therapy than when it is administered as monotherapy [27,30].
AED THERAPEUTIC MONITORING: TREAT THE
PATIENT, NOT THE LEVEL
An intimately related issue to clinical toxicity meriting
discussion is “laboratory” toxicity, that is, when AED blood
levels fall above established “normal” therapeutic ranges.
Philosophies on the use of AED blood level monitoring dif-
fer, but most agree that blood levels should be considered
only a guideline to treatment in most cases. AED levels
should not be perceived as an absolute indication for altering
AED dosing, divorced from clinical judgment of the pa-
tient’s seizure control or adverse effects. Blood level moni-
toring can help guide therapy, but so-called “therapeutic”
levels are derived from treatment of populations. An individ-
ual patient may require a lower or higher intensity of AED
therapy to achieve optimal results. In general, AED levels
are most useful when testing a clinical hypothesis. “Routine”
or scheduled levels should be generally discouraged, an ex-
ception being chronic phenytoin therapy in institutionalized
patients (where “zero-order” kinetics from non-linear hepatic
metabolism may lead to drug accumulation and toxicity).
AED blood level monitoring is further reviewed in the next
article in this series.
PREVENTION OF IDIOSYNCRATIC ADVERSE EF-
FECTS OF AEDS
Unfortunately, accurate prediction of the development of
idiosyncratic toxicities of AEDs is not currently possible.
The highest risk of idiosyncratic reactions associated with
most older AEDs such as serious rash, hepatotoxicity and
hematologic dyscrasias is during the first 6-12 months of
therapy, and extremely rare thereafter, so that routine moni-
toring for these problems is rarely necessary in otherwise
healthy patients. Intermittent blood testing for monitoring of
liver function tests and hematologic functions is reasonable,
although not of proven value; consider obtaining baseline
AST/SGOT and complete blood count (CBC) with repeated
measures at 1, 3, and 6 months following initiation of thera-
py with older AEDs, and measure baseline serum sodium
Minimizing AED Adverse Effects Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 113
before initiation of carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine (which
may result in hyponatremia) with repeat testing after two
months, perhaps with earlier or more frequent testing in el-
derly patients or those receiving sodium-wasting diurectics.
If felbamate is used, baseline and weekly liver function and
CBC testing is indicated per package insert labeling. Most
experts continue such extensive monitoring until at least sev-
eral months of clinical and laboratory stability have been
reached, given the potential for fatal aplastic anemia and
hepatotoxicity, and then continue periodic monitoring the-
reafter.
There is mounting concern that patients on chronic thera-
py with older AEDs are at risk for bone density loss and
fractures. Enzyme-inducing AEDs (EIAEDS: i.e., carbamaze-
pine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, oxcarbazepine,
and possibly high dose topiramate) have the potential to de-
crease bone density through secondary hypoparathyroidism
and decreased Vitamin D levels, and some evidence suggests
that non-inducers such as valproate also lead to decreased
bone density [36]. Many epileptologists are now proactively
counseling patients who have received therapy with older
AEDs for several years about the emerging risk of reduced
bone density, suggesting measuring bone mineral densitome-
try, and placing patients on supplemental calcium. Offering
patients the opportunity to attempt withdrawal from older
AEDs if they have been seizure free for several years (and if
they are at low risk of seizure recurrence), or transitioning
them to a newer AED lacking enzyme-inducing pro-perties
(although there is little evidence of long-term safety for bone
health with newer AEDs) may also be considered.
Women of child bearing potential (WCBP) are at risk for
two worrisome AED-related adverse effects: pregnancy due
to oral contraceptive failure, and AED-induced fetal terato-
genesis. Avoiding EIAEDs in WCBP whenever possible is
prudent to avoid hormonal contraceptive failure, and coun-
seling WCBP about the hazard of contraceptive failure with
EIAEDs is important. WCBP should be instructed to utilize
double-barrier contraception in addition to their hormonal
methods when receiving EIAEDs. Prior to a planned preg-
nancy, weaning the WCBP from AEDs when she is seizure-
free and at low risk of seizure recurrence, or utilizing mono-
therapy when AED therapy is necessary whenever feasible,
is especially important in WCBP since polytherapy use has
been linked to teratogenesis. While there is not yet unequi-
vocal evidence regarding AED safety or hazards during first
trimester exposure in pregnancy, available evidence suggests
that phenobarbital and valproate should be avoided when
possible (unless these agents have resulted in complete sei-
zure-freedom, in which case many experts still agree that the
most desirable AED to maintain during pregnancy is the
AED which has resulted in seizure control). Although no
certain evidence basis exists. most agree that WCBP taking
AEDs should receive folic acid 1 milligram daily (or a pre-
natal multivitamin), especially those on EIAEDs. Some ex-
perts recommend high dose folic acid for women receiving
valproate, up to 4 milligrams daily.
Chronic phenytoin exposure is of particular concern, giv-
en its relatively common association with cosmetic adverse
effects including gingival hyperplasia (which may be severe
enough to warrant repeated gingivectomies), and the rare but
real potential of axonal peripheral neuropathy and irreversi-
ble cerebellar ataxia. Many experts now feel that because of
these risks, phenytoin use should be for a relatively short
term (i.e., no longer than a few years), after which time the
patient can be offered the opportunity to transition to another
AED if continued therapy is necessary.
One additional idiosyncratic toxicity meriting mention
here is risk of serious rash with lamotrigine, which appears
to be related to several factors, at least one of which is mod-
ifiable: pediatric age, concurrent valproic acid therapy, and
overly rapid initial titration of lamotrigine. When initiating
lamotrigine, paying strict attention to AED co-medications
and adhering strictly to the recommended package insert
titration instructions is required.
CONCLUSIONS
Epilepsy QOL research suggests that too little clinician
attention has been focused upon the interictal state. One crit-
ical determinant of QOL in epilepsy patients is whether they
suffer from adverse effects of AED therapy. Research has
shown that identification of AED adverse effects is aided by
using the Adverse Events Profile (AEP), a validated clinical
tool easily completed by patients in the office setting within
a few minutes, and that considering this information leads to
appropriate alterations in AED therapy that may improve
patient QOL. Strategies for reducing common dose-related
“neurotoxic” adverse effects include optimal AED selection,
titration, co-therapy reduction, utilizing monotherapy, and
elimination of polytherapy when feasible. In refractory epi-
lepsy, utilizing drug-sparing therapies such as epilepsy sur-
gery, VNS or dietary therapies, or diagnosis and treatment of
co-morbid primary sleep disorders may minimize AED doses
and drug load, thereby minimizing adverse effects. Idiosyn-
cratic adverse effects cannot be reliably predicted with cur-
rent clinical tools and strategies for prevention of specific
idiosyncratic adverse effects such as teratogenicity and bone
loss are unfortunately lacking, but treating women of child
bearing potential receiving AED therapy with folic acid and
daily supplemental calcium is reasonable (the latter should
also be considered even for men receiving chronic AEDs
with risk factors for osteoporosis). Vigilance toward the cur-
rent presence and future possible evolution of adverse effects
of epilepsy therapy should be considered a chief responsibili-
ty of epilepsy clinicians, since proactive AED alteration may
effect improvements in patient QOL.
REFERENCES
[1] Anderson, G.D., Gidal, B.E., Messenheimer, J.A., Gilliam, F.G.
(2002) Time course of lamotrigine de-induction: impact of step-
wise withdrawal of carbamazepine or phenytoin. Epilepsy Res., 49,
211-217.
[2] Baker, G.A., Jacoby, A., Buck, D.,Stalgis, C., Monnett, D. (1997)
Quality of life of people with epilepsy: a European study. Epilep-
sia, 38(3), 353-362.
[3] Baker, G.A., Camfield, C., Camfield, P., Crammer, J.A., Elger,
C.E., Johnson, A.L., Martins da Silva, A., Mindardi, H., Munari,
C., Perucca, E., Thorbecke, R. (1998) Commission on Outcome
Measurement in Epilepsy, 1994-1997: Final report. Epilepsia,
39(2), 213-231.
[4] Baulac, M. (2003) Rational conversion from antiepileptic polythe-
rapy to monotherapy. Epileptic Disord.,5(3), 125-132.
114 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
[5] Brodie, M.J., Richens, A., Yuen, A.W. (1995) Double-blind com-
parison of lamotrigine and carbamazepine in newly diagnosed epi-
lepsy. UK Lamotrigine-Carbamazepine Monotherapy trial Group.
Lancet, 345(8949), 476-479.
[6] Carpay, J.A., Aldenkamp, A.P., van Donselaar, C.A. (2005) Com-
plaints associated with the use of antiepileptic drugs: results from a
community-based study. Seizure, 14(3), 198-206.
[7] Cramer, J. (2001) Exploration of changes in health-related quality
of life after 3 months of vagus nerve stimulation. Epilepsy Behav.,
2(5), 460-465.
[8] Engel, Jr., J., Weibe, S., French, J., Sperling, M., Williamson, P.,
Spencer, D., Gumnit, R., Zahn, C., Westbrook, E., Enos, B. (2003)
Practice parameter: temporal lobe and localized neocortical resec-
tions for epilepsy: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology, in association with the
American Epilepsy Society and the American Association of Neu-
rological Surgeons. Neurology, 60(4), 538-547.
[9] French, J.A., Kanner, A.M., Bautista, J., Abou-Khalel, B., Browne,
T., Harden, C.L., Theodore, W.H., Bazil, C., Stern, J., Schachter,
S.C., Bergen, D., Hirtz, D., Montouris, G.D., Nespecia, M., Gidal,
B., Marks, Jr., W.J., Turk, W.R., Fischer, J.H., Bourgeois, B.,
Wilner, A., Faught, Jr., R.E., Sachdeo, R.C., Beydoun, A., Glauser,
T.A. (2004) Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic drugs,
I: treatment of new-onset epilepsy: report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee and Quality Standards Sub-
committee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Ameri-
can Epilepsy Society. Neurology, 62(8),1252-1260.
[10] French, J.A., Kanner, A.M., Bautista, J., Abou-Khalel, B., Browne,
T., Harden, C.L., Theodore, W.H., Bazil, C., Stern, J., Schachter,
S.C., Bergen, D., Hirtz, D., Montouris, G.D., Nespecia, M., Gidal,
B., Marks, Jr., W.J., Turk, W.R., Fischer, J.H., Bourgeois, B.,
Wilner, A., Faught, Jr., R.E., Sachdeo, R.C., Beydoun, A., Glauser,
T.A. (2004) Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommit-
tee of the American Academy of Neurology; Quality Standards
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology; American
Epilepsy Society. Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic
drugs II: treatment of refractory epilepsy: report of the Therapeu-
tics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee and Quality Stan-
dards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and
the American Epilepsy Society. Neurology, 62(8), 1261-1273.
[11] Gilliam, F.G., Fessler, A.J., Baker, G.,Vahle, V., Carter, J.,
Ararian, H. (2004) Systematic screening allows reduction of ad-
verse antiepileptic drug effects: a randomized trial. Neurology, 62,
23-27.
[12] Harms, S.L, Eberly, L.E., Garrard, J.M., Hardie, N.A., Bland, P.C.,
Leppik, I.E. (2005) Prevalence of appropriate and problematic anti-
epileptic combination therapy in older people in the nursing home.
J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., 53, 1023-1028.
[13] an, P., Brodie, M.J. (2000) Early identification of refractory epilep-
sy. N. Engl. J. Med, 342(5), 314-319.
[14] an, P., Brodie, M.J. (2001) Effectiveness of the first antiepileptic
drug. Epilepsia, 4, 1255-1260.
[15] Labar, D.R. (2002) Antiepileptic drug use during the first 12
months of vagus nerve stimulation therapy: a registry study. Neu-
rology, 59(6 Suppl 4), S38-S43.
[16] Leone, M.A., Beghi, E., Righini, C.,Apolone, G., Mosconi, P.
(2005) Epilepsy and quality of life in adults: a review of instru-
ments. Epilepsy Res., 66, 23-44.
[17] Malow, B.A., Bowes, R.J., Lin, X. (1997) Predictors of sleepiness
in epilepsy patients. Sleep, 20(12), 1105-1110.
[18] Malow, B.A., Levy, K., Maturen, K., Bowes, R. (2000) Obstructive
sleep apnea is common in medically refractory epilepsy patients.
Neurology, 55(7), 1002-1007.
[19] Malow, B.A., Foldvary-Schaefer, N., Vaughn, B.V., Selwa, L.M.,
Chervin, R.D., Weatherwax, K.J., Wang, L, Song, Y. (2008) Treat-
ing obstructive sleep apnea in adults with epilepsy: a randomized
pilot trial. Neurology, 71(8), 572-577.
[20] Mamiya, K., Yukawa, E., Matsumoto, T., Aita, C., Goto, S. (2002)
Synergistic effect of valproate coadministration and hypoalbumi-
nemia on the serum-free phenytoin concentration in patients with
severe motor and intellectual disabilities. Clin. Neuropharmacol.,
25(4), 230-233.
[21] Mattson, R.M., Crame,r J.A., Collins, J.F. Smith, D.B., Delgado-
Esceuta, A.V., Browne, T.R., Williamson, P.D., Trelman, D.M.,
McNamara, J.O., McCutchen, C.D. (1985) Comparison of pheno-
barbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and primidone in partial and
secondary generalized tonic-clonic seizures. N. Engl. J. Med., 313,
145-151.
[22] Meador, K.J. (2002) Cognitive outcomes and predictive factors in
epilepsy. Neurology, 58, S21-S26.
[23] Messenheimer, J., Mullens, E., Giorgi, L., Young, F. (1998) Safety
review of adult clinical trial experience with lamotrigine. Drug
Safety, 18, 281-296.
[24] Morris, G.L. 3rd
, Mueller, W.M. (1999) Long-term treatment with
vagus nerve stimulation in patients with refractory epilepsy. The
Vagus Nerve Stimulation Study Group E01-E05. Neurology, 53(8),
1731-1735.
[25] Naritoku, D.K., Hulihan, J.F., Schwarzman, L.K., Kamin, M., Ol-
son, W.H. (2005) Effect of cotherapy reduction on tolerability of
epilepsy add-on therapy: a randomized controlled trial. Ann. Phar-
macother., 39(3), 418-423.
[26] Patsalos, P.N., Froscher, W., Pisani, .F, van Rijn, C.M. (2002) The
importance of drug interactions in epilepsy therapy. Epilepsia
43(4), 365-385.
[27] Privitera, M.D., Brodie, M.J., Mattson, R.H.,Chadwick, D.W.,
Neto, W., Wang, S., EPMN 105 Study Group. (2003) Topiramate,
carbamazepine, and valproate monotherapy: double-blind compari-
son in newly diagnosed epilepsy. Acta Neurol. Scand., 107, 165-
175.
[28] Privitera, M., Ficker, D. (2004) Assessments of adverse events and
quality of life in epilepsy: design of a new community trial. Epilep-
sy. Behav., 5, 841-846.
[29] Rahmann, A., Stodieck, S., Husstedt, I.W., Evers, S. (2002) Pre-
attentive cognitive processing in epilepsy: a pilot study on the im-
pact of epilepsy type and anti-epileptic treatment. Eur. Neurol., 48,
146-152.
[30] Reife, R., Pledger, G., Wu, S.C. (2000) Topiramate as add-on ther-
apy: pooled analysis of randomized controlled trials in adults. Epi-
lepsia, 41(Suppl. 1), S66-71.
[31] Renfroe, J.B., Wheless, J.W. (2002) Earlier use of adjunctive vagus
nerve stimulation therapy for refractory epilepsy. Neurology, 59(6
Suppl 4), S26-S30.
[32] Rowan, A.J., Ramsay, R.E., Collins, J.F.,Pryor, F., Boardman,
K.D., Uthman, B.M., Spitz, M., Frederick, T., Towne, A., Carter,
G.S., Marks, W., Felicetter, J., Tomyanvich, M.L., VA Cooperative
Study 428 Group. (2005) New onset geriatric epilepsy: a rando-
mized study of gabapentin, lamotrigine, and carbamazepine. Neu-
rology, 64(11),1868-1873.
[33] St Louis, E.K., Gidal, B.E., Henry, T.R., Kaydanova, Y., Krumholz,
A., McCabe, P.H., Montouris, G.D., Rosenfeld, W.E., Smith, B.J.,
Stern, J.M., Waterhouse, E.J., Schulz, R.M, Garnett, W.R., Bramley,
T. (2007) Conversions between monotherapies in epilepsy: expert
consensus. Epilepsy Bhav., 11(2), 222-234.
[34] St. Louis, E.K., McEvoy, S., Shi, Q.C., Rizzo, M. (2005) Useful
Field of View Impairment in Partial Epilepsy. In: Proceedings of
the 3rd
International Driving Symposium on Human Factors in
Driver Assessment, Training, and Vehicle Design. Iowa City, Iowa:
University of Iowa Press.
[35] St. Louis, E.K., Dennhardt, J., Luck, S.J. (2006) Visual attention is
impaired in epilepsy. Epilepsia, 47(S4), 104.
[36] Souverein, P.C., Webb, D.J., Weil, J.G., Weil, J.G., Van Staa, T.P.,
Egberts, A.C.G. (2006) Use of antiepileptic drugs and risk of frac-
tures: case-control study among patients with epilepsy. Neurology,
66(9), 1318-1324.
[37] Tellez-Zenteno, J.F., Dhar, R., Wiebe, S. (2005) Long-term seizure
outcomes following epilepsy surgery: a systematic review and me-
ta-analysis. Brain, 128(Pt.5), 1188-1198.
[38] Wiebe, S., Blume, W.T., Girvin, J.P., Eliasziw, M. (2001) A ran-
domized, controlled trial of surgery for temporal-lobe epilepsy. N.
Engl. J. Med., 345, 311-318.
Received: December 30, 2008 Revised: April 23, 2009 Accepted: May 19, 2009
