Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, 7, 77-82 77
1570-159X/09 $55.00+.00 ©2009 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.
Antiepileptic Drug Monotherapy: The Initial Approach in Epilepsy
Management
Erik K. St. Louis1,*
, William E. Rosenfeld2
and Thomas Bramley3
1
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA; 2
St. Luke’s Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri, USA; 3
Xcenda, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA
Abstract: Antiepileptic drug (AED) monotherapy is the preferred initial management approach in epilepsy care, since
most patients may be successfully managed with the first or second monotherapy utilized. This article reviews the ration-
ale and evidence supporting preferential use of monotherapy when possible and guidelines for initiating and successfully
employing AED monotherapy. Suggested approaches to consider when patients fail monotherapy include substituting a
new AED monotherapy, initiating chronic maintenance AED polytherapy, or pursuit of non-pharmacologic treatments
such as epilepsy surgery or vagus nerve stimulation. Reducing AED polytherapy to monotherapy frequently reduces the
burden of adverse effects and may also improve seizure control. AED monotherapy remains the optimal approach for
managing most patients with epilepsy.
Key Words: New onset epilepsy, antiepileptic drugs, monotherapy, titration.
INTRODUCTION
Epileptic seizures have been observed since antiquity
[57]. Treatment preferences generally favored polytherapy
prior to the evolution of modern antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).
In the early 1900s, phenobarbital and the ketogenic diet were
used to manage epilepsy. Throughout the earlier 20th
century,
the standard AEDs (phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone,
valproic acid, carbamazepine, and ethosuximide) were often
combined in polytherapy use, due to the pervasive belief that
polytherapy was more efficacious than monotherapy. How-
ever, during the 1970s, several studies suggested that mono-
therapy was equally efficacious, less toxic, and more toler-
able than polytherapy [51,52]. Since then, most epilepsy
experts have advocated monotherapy as the preferred ap-
proach in epilepsy, although polytherapy is sometimes still
necessary. This review examines the evidence favoring ini-
tial monotherapy and suggests methods to maintain mono-
therapy or reduce polytherapy to monotherapy when possi-
ble.
THE RATIONALE FAVORING MONOTHERAPY
Since the early 1990s, the second-generation AEDs, fel-
bamate, gabapentin, lamotrigine, topiramate, tiagabine, ox-
carbazepine, levetiracetam, zonisamide, and pregabalin, have
become available. Recently, the seemingly ever increasing
armamentarium of AEDs has seen two additional newer
(“third-generation”) AEDs released, lacosamide and rufina-
mide. Advantages of most newer AEDs include a more de-
sirable safety profile and fewer adverse effects and drug in-
teractions than their predecessors. Recent pivotal clinical
trials have provided evidence to support monotherapy use of
second-generation AEDs [42]. Current treatment guidelines
recommend monotherapy in most cases because data indicate
*Address correspondence to this author at Department of Neurology, Mayo
Clinic, 200 First Street Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Tel: (507)
538-1038; Fax: (507) 284-4074; E-mail: StLouis.Erik@mayo.edu
similar efficacy and better patient tolerability compared to
polytherapy [43-45,48,49,51,52]. Polytherapy may only
minimally increase seizure control and can substantially in-
crease AED toxicity, [9,20,43-45,48,49,51,52] drug interac-
tions, [2,21,30,34,38,39,40,41] seizure aggravation [43,44],
comorbid depression,[39] risk of sudden unexplained death
in epilepsy patients (SUDEP), [28,36,37] noncompliance, [8]
and cost [4]. Polytherapy and seizure burden were the two
main causes of quality of life impairment in one recent sur-
vey of epilepsy patients [58].
WHO BENEFITS MOST FROM MONOTHERAPY?
While monotherapy is preferable for most patients with
epilepsy, monotherapy is particularly desirable for certain
special patient populations, including women, elderly, and
patients with co-morbid conditions (who are at increased risk
for AED toxicity and drug interactions) [11,21,38]. Com-
pared to polytherapy, monotherapy reduces the potential for
adverse drug interactions. Hepatic and renal dysfunction
significantly impacts the metabolism and elimination of
many AEDs, which may reduce tolerability and safety of
continued use. Pregnant women taking two or more AEDs
are at substantially increased risk of fetal malformations (3%
versus 15%) than mothers receiving monotherapy [11]. See
Table 1 for a list of monotherapy recommendations.
EVIDENCE SUPPORTING PREFERENTIAL MONO-
THERAPY IN EPILEPSY
The majority of patients with epilepsy respond to treat-
ment with monotherapy; 47% of patients become seizure-
free with the first AED tried, and another 13% achieve free-
dom from seizures with the second monotherapy trial [24].
While available evidence is central in determining
whether an AED is effective for monotherapy usage, FDA
approval and indication generally guide how an AED will be
prescribed. First-generation AEDs were “grandfathered” by
the FDA, receiving approval for monotherapy for a particular
78 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
seizure type without requirement to satisfy current rigorous
approval requirements [42]. The majority of second-gene-
ration AEDs are approved only as adjunctive therapies. Cur-
rent FDA standards require superiority trial designs since
placebo-controlled studies are considered unethical in epi-
lepsy, and few such studies have been conducted given the
practical difficulties and expense involved in such trials [42].
United States practitioners are thus at the mercy of superior-
ity trial design data produced by trials that are conducted for
the purpose of gaining FDA approval, a somewhat artificial
circumstance leaving practitioners in doubt as to how to util-
ize the AED for monotherapy in clinical practice, unlike in
Europe where approval standards permit the more practical
standard of equivalence trial designs. As a result, many U.S.
clinicians often continue to prescribe first-generation AEDs
for new onset epilepsy because of experience and familiarity,
limited comparative efficacy data with newer AEDs, and
concern over the higher cost of newer drugs. To determine
the best AED choices for monotherapy, further randomized,
double-blind, long-term, comparative clinical trials with the
newer AEDs are needed. Since few comparator studies are
funded by industry, government agencies should become
involved in conducting additional comparative clinical trial
studies, and independent groups (ie, International League
Against Epilepsy) should be persuaded to collect data from
historically treated and control patients.
Currently, four second-generation AEDs are FDA ap-
proved for use as monotherapy, with some limitations; these
are oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, topiramate, and felbamate
[17]. In four randomized, controlled, blinded trials, oxcar-
bazepine demonstrated efficacy as monotherapy in patients
with partial seizures [36,60]. Lamotrigine is currently ap-
proved as monotherapy when converting from an enzyme-
inducing AED or valproate but not for de novo or initial
monotherapy [17]. However, lamotrigine should be used
with caution in persons under the age of 16 due to a higher
incidence of a potentially life-threatening rash in pediatric
patients, [27] and patients receiving concurrent valproic acid
or who receive inappropriately fast initial titration of lamo-
trigine are also at heightened risk of serious rash [34]. Topi-
ramate is indicated as initial monotherapy in adults and chil-
dren aged 10 years and older with partial onset or primary
generalized seizures; efficacy was established in both a large,
double-blind, dose-controlled study and a second large trial
comparing two doses of topiramate with standard compara-
tors carbamazepine and valproate [3,17,59]. Felbamate also
has evidence for monotherapy use in partial-onset seizures;
however, severe idiosyncratic toxicities limit its use [15,16].
Additionally, gabapentin possesses adequate evidence for
confident use as monotherapy in treatment of partial-onset
seizures, although it lacks formal FDA approval for this in-
dication [10,17].
Among the second-generation AEDs approved for mono-
therapy use, few comparator trials have been conducted.
Gabapentin and lamotrigine have been shown to be compa-
rably effective and tolerable in two large prospective trials,
and were more tolerable than carbamazepine in elderly with
newly diagnosed epilepsy [6]. A large, naturalistic, un-
blinded controlled trial recently demonstrated superior effi-
cacy (for time to treatment failure) of lamotrigine as com-
pared to carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and topiramate [31].
The other second-generation and third-generation AEDs
have not been FDA approved for monotherapy use since
most lack an adequate level of evidence for this indication.
However, the efficacy and tolerability of levetiracetam
monotherapy for treatment of partial-onset seizures has been
confirmed in a recent large, prospective, comparator trial
against carbamazepine [7]. Small controlled clinical trials are
also available to support tiagabine monotherapy use [47].
GUIDELINES FOR AED MONOTHERAPY
Given the complexity and expansive body of evidence
concerning AED therapy in the medical literature and limita-
tions in practical application of this literature to actual pa-
tients, practice guidelines and expert surveys are valuable
tools to assist clinicians in applying evidence based practice
for patients with epilepsy. Practice guidelines are available to
Table 1. Monotherapy AED Options for Different Patient Populations: A Compilation of Practice Guidelines and Clinician
Recommendations for the Treatment of Generalized Tonic-Clonic, Absence, Partial, and Myoclonic Seizures*‡†
Patient Characteristic First Line Supporting Reference
Elderly Lamotrigine or Levetiracetam [26, 27]
Female of reproductive age Lamotrigine [25-27]
Pregnant Lamotrigine [26, 27]
Liver failure Levetiracetam or Lamotrigine or Gabapentina
[26, 27]
Renal failure Lamotrigine or Valproic acidb
[26, 27]
Depression Lamotrigine or Valproic acidb
or Oxcarbazepinec
[26, 27]
a
Absence seizures only.
b
Generalized tonic-clonic seizures only.
c
Simple partial and secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures only.
*Pregabalin not available at time of these studies.
‡
Topiramate not recommended in any of these patient groups by Karceski and colleagues [23]; however, French et al. [17] recommends topiramate as monotherapy.
†
French et al. [17]evaluated second-generation AEDs only.
Antiepileptic Drug Monotherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 79
assist practitioners in the management of new-onset and re-
fractory epilepsy and epilepsy in women. The American
Academy of Neurology/American Epilepsy Society (AAN/
AES) Practice Guidelines for the treatment of new-onset
epilepsy identified gabapentin, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine,
and topiramate as possessing Class I evidence (prospective
study, blinding, statistical population-based sample, and pa-
tients studied concurrently and early in the course of therapy)
for use as monotherapy in the treatment of new-onset partial
or mixed seizures [18]. The recently updated guidelines for
the treatment of epilepsy in women state that in women with
epilepsy (WWE), monotherapy is recommended during the
reproductive years to reduce the risk of teratogenicity seen
with polytherapy [1].
A recent survey of epilepsy experts found that lamo-
trigine, levetiracetam, and valproic acid are preferred AED
choices for monotherapy in the treatment of generalized
tonic-clonic, absence, and myoclonic seizures [23]. Previous
survey results were compared to the current survey, and,
overall, valproic acid is still the drug of choice for each of
these seizure types, except for absence seizures, where etho-
suximide remains the preferred AED. Many practitioners
chose lamotrigine and topiramate as first-line treatment for
generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
HOW TO INITIATE MONOTHERAPY
Practical tenets for achieving successful monotherapy in
new-onset epilepsy management include the following: 1)
select an efficacious AED for the specific seizure type; 2)
choose an AED with a tolerable adverse effect and toxicity
profile; and 3) titrate the AED slowly to the desired dose,
taking into account the patient’s response to treatment. If the
first AED monotherapy is ineffective, adding a second AED,
then tapering and discontinuing the ineffective AED, is the
preferred approach [56]. When switching AEDs, selecting an
agent with a different MOA may increase the likelihood of a
successful treatment response. If the second sequential AED
monotherapy is ineffective, an adjunctive AED with a differ-
ent and potentially complementary MOA should be consid-
ered for use in adjunctive polytherapy. Since approximately
35% of patients with epilepsy will not respond to monother-
apy, most refractory patients become candidates for poly-
therapy [24,26]. Polytherapy with lower or moderate dosages
of two AEDs may also sometimes be preferred for manage-
ment of refractory patients who have dose-limiting neuro-
toxic adverse effects with high-dose monotherapy [24].
Before initiating treatment, patients with epilepsy should
undergo a thorough medical evaluation to determine seizure
type and consider baseline patient characteristics that may
influence the decision of whether treatment is necessary and,
if so, which AED may be the most logical choice. Evaluation
to determine the patient’s epilepsy syndrome begins with a
thorough clinical history, including a detailed description of
the seizure semiology, an awake and asleep electroencepha-
logram (EEG), and a brain magnetic resonance image (MRI).
A standard brain MRI is adequate in newly diagnosed epi-
lepsy where the priority is to exclude underlying serious
symptomatic pathologies, such as arteriovenous malforma-
tions or neoplasms. However, when feasible, available, and
of reasonable cost, it is advantageous to consider obtaining
brain MRI with a volumetric seizure-protocol study in pa-
tients with suspected partial-onset seizures, given better
identification of subtle mesial temporal lobe pathologies
such as hippocampal sclerosis or malformations of cortical
development that may impact on prognosis for drug respon-
siveness, as well as future decisions regarding surgical triage
if the patient becomes refractory to AEDs.
Educating the patient about epilepsy, AED compliance,
and seizure first-aid is important for ensuring successful
therapy. AED selection is determined by seizure type, patient
medical history, and concurrent medications. For partial epi-
lepsy, any approved AED could be considered for use (ex-
cept ethosuximide, which is ineffective for partial-onset sei-
zure treatment). In idiopathic or symptomatic generalized
epilepsies, as well as for ambiguous or unknown epilepsy
syndromes, a broad-spectrum AED should be preferentially
utilized given the potential to treat (or avoid aggravation of)
other potentially associated generalized seizure-types in gen-
eralized epilepsies (i.e., absence and myoclonic seizures in
idiopathic generalized epilepsies, or tonic seizures in symp-
tomatic generalized epilepsy).
Once an AED has been selected, starting with a low dose
and gradually titrating to a moderate and presumably effec-
tive dose is a reasonable strategy, since titration to doses
higher than a mean effective dosage are often poorly toler-
ated and only provide additional efficacy in perhaps 10% to
15% of patients [24]. A more rapid titration may be neces-
sary in selected patients who have had multiple recent sei-
zures. Maximizing the dose is only recommended in patients
who do not respond to moderate doses. At each patient visit,
it is necessary to conduct a detailed assessment of AED ther-
apy, including adverse effects and compliance. Utilizing a
quantitative survey of patient’s perceived adverse effects
such as the adverse events profile (AEP) has been shown to
improve physicians’ ability to detect adverse effects of
treatment and appropriately alter antiepileptic drug therapies
to improve quality of life [19]. The impact of adverse effects
on daily living should be discussed, and any barriers to com-
pliance should be addressed.
WHY ARE SOME PATIENTS REFRACTORY TO
MONOTHERAPY?
The efficacy of currently available AEDs is limited to
reduction of seizure frequency, and no AED has yet been
proven to impact the pathophysiology of epilepsy itself [55].
Currently, there is no convincing evidence that any of the
available AEDs are anti-epileptogenic, nor has any AED
been shown to favorably impact the long-term outcome of
epilepsy [24]. Yet, prescribing an AED after a second or
third seizure event is the accepted practice standard, based
on logic derived in part from epidemiologic studies of the
natural history of new onset unprovoked seizures that con-
firm a greatly increased risk for further seizure recurrence
following the occurrence of a second unprovoked seizure
[22]. The desired short-term outcomes of epilepsy manage-
ment are seizure freedom, seizure control when complete
seizure freedom is not possible, and maximizing patient
quality of life, given that the complications of untreated sei-
zure activity are increased risk of injury and mortality, cog-
nitive and behavioral abnormalities, and social disadvantage.
80 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
Currently, there is no AED for the treatment of epilepsy that
is completely effective, without adverse effects, and effica-
cious for all patients. Of the older AEDs, carbamazepine was
shown to be the most effective and tolerable AED in two
pivotal clinical trials; thus, it became the standard to which
developing AEDs have been compared, [7,31-33] although
carbamazepine itself has never been compared to placebo or
demonstrated efficacy in an active control-designed study.
Most studies have shown that newer AEDs have equivalent
efficacy to that of carbamazepine, but several newer AEDs
have superior tolerability including lamotrigine and gabapen-
tin [6,46]. However, recently published comparator trials of
newer AEDs against a sustained release form of carba-
mazepine have shown relatively equivalent tolerability, sug-
gesting that immediate release forms of carbamazepine may
be less tolerable and sustained release forms of carba-
mazepine are equally tolerable to newer AEDs [7,31].
WHY DOES MONOTHERAPY FAIL?
AED monotherapy may fail for a variety of reasons, in-
cluding errant diagnosis (eg, mistaking syncopal spells as
seizures), inaccurate diagnosis of seizure type leading to
ineffective AED choice (eg, mistaking partial complex sei-
zures for absence with prescription of carbamazepine rather
than ethosuximide or valproate), intolerable adverse effects
(eg, depression, sedation, cognition problems), idiosyncratic
reactions (eg, rash, aplastic anemia, hepatoxicity), noncom-
pliance, over treatment, [50] and pharmacogenetic factors
[53]. Monotherapy is most likely to be effective if the clini-
cian develops a personalized treatment plan that is appropri-
ately customized for the individual patient, provides the pa-
tient with suitable education concerning the drug chosen, and
offers the opportunity for close telephone follow-up and sur-
veillance with evolution of any adverse effects to enable
prompt feedback and modification of the titration scheme or
target dose.
Monotherapy may be ineffective when the AED choice is
suboptimal for a particular patient type. Certain AEDs are
arguably best avoided in certain patient types, such as pheny-
toin or carbamazepine in the elderly [21,29] (given their vul-
nerability for adverse effects, osteoporosis, and drug interac-
tions) or valproate in women of child-bearing potential
(given its heightened teratogenic risk) [11]. AEDs that re-
quire substantial hepatic metabolism are best avoided in pa-
tients with liver disease. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, pheno-
barbital, primidone, oxcarbazepine, and high-dose topiramate
are enzyme inducers; these agents increase the hepatic me-
tabolism of concurrently administered drugs, endogenous
and exogenous sex hormones, and vitamin D. Enzyme-
inducing AEDs can lead to: therapeutic failure of other in-
ducible AEDs and other drugs such as anticoagulants, hor-
monal contraceptives, lipid-lowering agents, and antihyper-
tensives; reproductive dysfunction; and osteopenia or frank
osteoporosis [21,40,41]. Primidone and phenobarbital are not
commonly recommended as first-line therapies due to poor
tolerability and efficacy as well as abuse potential. Felba-
mate is associated with rare but potentially fatal idiosyncratic
hematologic and hepatic toxicities, limiting its use solely to
brittlely refractory patients [16].
Overtreatment may be another cause of failure [14]. Ap-
proximately 50% of patients with new onset epilepsy achieve
remission with moderate doses of the first AED prescribed
[26]. When a moderate dose fails, maximizing the dose re-
sults in up to 10-25% of patients obtaining seizure control,
[25] but at the risk of adverse events. Rarely, some epilepsy
patients may experience a paradoxical increase in seizure
frequency or severity at higher AED doses [54]. If no im-
provement or a worsening in seizure activity is seen, the
AED dose should be reduced or the drug discontinued.
WHAT TO DO WHEN MONOTHERAPY FAILS
Patients who do not achieve seizure freedom on an ap-
propriately selected and optimally administered initial AED
monotherapy are unlikely to become seizure free on future
AED trials [25]. If the patient is experiencing breakthrough
seizures while receiving moderate doses of an AED, increas-
ing the dosage of that AED until the patient has either be-
come clinically toxic or has shown a clear plateau in re-
sponse to the medication is reasonable. If the patient has
continued breakthrough seizures at this point, transition to a
second monotherapy is indicated. Approximately two-thirds
of epilepsy patients will have adequate seizure control with
either the first or second trial of AED monotherapy [25]. The
remaining third are considered to have refractory epilepsy. If
a second monotherapy also fails, consideration of initiating
AED polytherapy by adding a drug with a different and
complementary principle mechanism of action should be
considered. While monotherapy is preferable to polytherapy,
some patients will require more than one AED to attain suc-
cessful seizure control [12,13]. In refractory patients receiv-
ing polytherapy, the treatment goal necessarily shifts some-
what from the goal of producing seizure freedom, which is
increasingly improbable, to effecting palliation and control
of seizures while minimizing adverse effects. Since refrac-
tory patients rarely attain seizure-freedom with polytherapy,
many require evaluation for alternative non-pharmacologic
treatments such as resection surgery or vagus nerve stimula-
tion (VNS).
Patients who subsequently become refractory to the first
or second empiric AED monotherapy should be strongly
considered for ictal seizure recording with video-EEG moni-
toring to ensure that the epilepsy diagnosis is accurate, and if
so, to establish the correct epilepsy syndrome diagnosis.
Video-EEG monitoring allows an accurate diagnosis of the
seizure-type, which may enable the clinician to appropriately
tailor AED therapy and explore the patient’s potential candi-
dacy for resection surgery or VNS therapy. Video-EEG
monitoring also ensures exclusion of diagnoses that mimic
epilepsy, such as psychogenic non-epileptic spells (ie, pseu-
doseizures), a particularly common finding representing be-
tween 30-50% of admissions to most epilepsy monitoring
units. In such cases, AEDs may in most cases be tapered and
discontinued, with referral to appropriate psychological
counseling resources, and when necessary, psychiatric care.
More rarely, physiologic non-epileptic spells such as syn-
cope or sleep disorders are instead identified in some patients
with suspected epilepsy, and appropriate referral to other
specialists can be offered.
Antiepileptic Drug Monotherapy Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 81
CONVERTING FROM POLYTHERAPY TO MONO-
THERAPY
Patients may begin receiving polytherapy while transi-
tioning from one trial of monotherapy to another (transitional
monotherapy), or because of two failed attempts with mono-
therapy (chronic polytherapy). In the first situation, eventual
monotherapy is likely to result once the original AED is ta-
pered off. However, in the latter case, patients may continue
on multiple AEDs indefinitely. While receiving multiple
AEDs, some patients may go into seizure remission, while
other patients will continue to require sequential trials of
additional AEDs (AED sequencing). Patients who are appro-
priate candidates for tapering one or more AEDs are those
who have been seizure free for 2 years or longer. For these
patients, a slow taper is recommended, with dose reductions
occurring weekly or every other week. Additionally, patients
receiving unsuccessful polytherapy (ie, polytherapy that has
failed to produce seizure freedom or that is resulting in intol-
erable adverse effects) should be considered for a further
trial of monotherapy or additional AED sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS
Epilepsy treatment often requires lifelong medication
management. Monotherapy is preferred when managing pa-
tients with epilepsy, given similar efficacy and superior tol-
erability compared to polytherapy for most patients, espe-
cially those with newly diagnosed epilepsy who are not re-
fractory to other treatments. While preferred for initial use in
epilepsy treatment, monotherapy may also fail for a variety
of reasons. Monotherapy may fail in patients who do not
receive thorough evaluation and counseling by their physi-
cian. Patients need to have a clear understanding of treatment
expectations candidates for tapering of one or more AEDs.
Adverse effects, noncompliance, and evolving refractory
epilepsy are the principle reasons for treatment failure. To
increase the likelihood of successful monotherapy, clinicians
should consider individual patient characteristics, including
seizure type, potential drug interactions, likelihood of com-
pliance, and cost, while realizing that therapy may require
modification. Vigilance for need of further medication titra-
tion or tapering, the patient’s current seizure frequency and
severity, and occurrence of adverse effects is necessary for
successful monotherapy in epilepsy care.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors are grateful for secretarial assistance with
manuscript formatting by Ms. Laura Disbrow, Mayo Clinic
Department of Neurology.
REFERENCES
[1] American Academy of Neurology Guideline Summary for Clini-
cians. Management Issues for Women with Epilepsy. Available at:
www.aan.com. [Accessed March 5, 2006].
[2] Anderson, G.D., Gidal, B.E., Messenheimer, J.A., Gilliam, F.G.
(2002) Time course of lamotrigine de-induction: impact of step-
wise withdrawal of carbamazepine or phenytoin. Epilepsy Res., 49,
211-217.
[3] Arroyo, S., Dodson, W.E., Privitera, M.D., Glauser, T.A., Naritoku,
D.K., Dlugos, D.J., Wang, S., Schwabe, S.K., Twyman, R.E.;
EPMN-106/INT-28 Investigators. (2005) Randomized dose-
controlled study of topiramate as first-line therapy in epilepsy. Acta
Neurol. Scand., 112(4), 214-222.
[4] Boon, P., D'Havé, M., Van Walleghem, P., Michielsen, G., Vonck,
K., Caemaert, J., De Reuck, J. (2002) Direct medical costs of re-
fractory epilepsy incurred by three different treatment modalities: a
prospective assessment. Epilepsia, 43, 96-102.
[5] Brodie, M.J., Overstall, P.W., Giorgi, L. (1999) Multicentre, dou-
ble-blind, randomised comparison between lamotrigine and carba-
mazepine in elderly patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy. The
UK Lamotrigine Elderly Study Group. Epilepsy Res., 37(1), 81-87.
[6] Brodie, M.J., Chadwick, D.W., Anhut, H., Otte, A., Messmer, S.L.,
Maton, S., Sauermann, W., Murray, G., Garofalo, E.A.; Gabapentin
Study Group 945-212. (2002) Gabapentin versus lamotrigine
monotherapy: a double-blind comparison in newly diagnosed epi-
lepsy. Epilepsia, 43, 993-1000.
[7] Brodie, M.J., Perucca, E., Ryvlin, P., Ben-Menachem, E.,
Meencke, H.J.; Levetiracetam Monotherapy Study Group. (2007)
Comparison of levetiracetam and controlled-release carbamazepine
in newly diagnosed epilepsy. Neurology, 68(6), 402-408.
[8] Buck, D., Jacoby, A., Baker, G.A., Chadwick, D.W. (1997) Factors
influencing compliance with antiepileptic drug regimes. Seizure,
6(2), 87-93.
[9] Carpay, J.A., Aldenkamp, A.P., van Donselaar, C.A. (2005) Com-
plaints associated with the use of antiepileptic drugs: results from a
community-based study. Seizure, 14(3), 198-206.
[10] Chadwick, D.W., Anhut, H., Greiner, M.J., Alexander, J., Murray,
G.H., Garofalo, E.A., Pierce, M.W. (1998) A double-blind trial of
gabapentin monotherapy for newly diagnosed partial seizures.
International Gabapentin Monotherapy Study Group 945-77.
Neurology, 51, 1281-1288.
[11] Crawford, P. (2005) Best practice guidelines for the management
of women with epilepsy. Epilepsia, 46(Suppl 9), 117-124.
[12] Deckers, C.L., Hekster, Y.A., Keyser, A., Meinardi, H., Renier,
W.O. (1997) Reappraisal of polytherapy in epilepsy: a critical re-
view of drug load and adverse effects. Epilepsia, 38, 570-575.
[13] Deckers, C.L., Hekster, Y.A., Keyser, A., van Lier, H.J., Meinardi,
H., Renier, W.O. (2001) Monotherapy versus polytherapy for epi-
lepsy: a multicenter double-blind randomized study. Epilepsia, 42,
1387-1394.
[14] Deckers C.L. (2002) Overtreatment in adults with epilepsy.
Epilepsy Res., 52, 43-52.
[15] Faught, E., Sachdeo, R.C., Remler, M.P., Chayasirisobhon, S.,
Iragui-Madoz, V.J., Ramsay, R.E., Sutula, T.P., Kanner, A.,
Harner, R.N., Kuzniecky, R., Kramer, L. D., Kamin, M., Rosen-
berg, A. (1993) Felbamate monotherapy for partial-onset seizures:
an active-control trial. Neurology, 43, 688-692.
[16] Felbatol®
(felbamate) package insert. Novartis Pharmaceutical
Corporation: Cranbury, NJ; February 1999.
[17] French, J.A., Kanner, A.M., Bautista, J., Abou-Khalil, B., Browne,
T., Harden, C.L., Theodore, W.H., Bazil, C., Stern, J., Schachter,
S.C., Bergen, D., Hirtz, D., Montouris, G.D., Nespeca, M., Gidal,
B., Marks, W.J., Jr, Turk, W.R., Fischer, J.H., Bourgeois, B.,
Wilner, A., Faught, R.E., Jr, Sachdeo, R.C., Beydoun, A., Glauser,
T.A.; Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology; Quality Standards Subcom-
mittee of the American Academy of Neurology; American Epilepsy
Society. (2004) Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic
drugs I: treatment of new onset epilepsy. Report of the Therapeu-
tics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee and Quality Stan-
dards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and
the American Epilepsy Society. Neurology, 62, 1252-1260.
[18] French, J.A., Kanner, A.M., Bautista, J., Abou-Khalil, B., Browne,
T., Harden, C.L., Theodore, W.H., Bazil, C., Stern, J., Schachter,
S.C., Bergen, D., Hirtz, D., Montouris, G.D., Nespeca, M., Gidal,
B., Marks, W.J. Jr, Turk, W.R., Fischer, J.H., Bourgeois, B.,
Wilner, A., Faught, R.E. Jr, Sachdeo, R.C., Beydoun, A, Glauser,
T.A.; Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology; Quality Standards Subcom-
mittee of the American Academy of Neurology; American Epilepsy
Society. (2004) Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic
drugs II: treatment of refractory epilepsy. Report of the Therapeu-
tics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee and Quality Stan-
dards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and
the American Epilepsy Society. Neurology, 62, 1261-1273.
[19] Gilliam, F.G., Fessler, A.J., Baker, G., Vahle, V., Carter, J.,
Attarian, H. (2004) Systematic screening allows reduction of ad-
82 Current Neuropharmacology, 2009, Vol. 7, No. 2 Erik K. St. Louis
verse antiepileptic drug effects: a randomized trial. Neurology,
62(1), 23-27.
[20] Guberman, A. (1998) Monotherapy or polytherapy for epilepsy?
Can. J. Neurol. Sci., 25(4), S3-S8.
[21] Harms, S.L., Eberly, L.E., Garrard, J.M., Hardie, N.A., Bland, P.C.,
Leppik, I.E. (2005) Prevalence of appropriate and problematic
antiepileptic combination therapy in older people in the nursing
home. J Am. Geriatr. Soc., 53, 1023-1028.
[22] Hauser, W.A., Rich, S.S., Lee, J.R., Annegers, J.F., Anderson, V.E.
(1998) Risk of recurrent seizures after two unprovoked seizures. N.
Engl. J. Med., 338(7), 429-434.
[23] Karceski, S., Morrell, M.J., Carpenter, D. (2005) Treatment of
epilepsy in adults: expert opinion, Epilepsy Behav., 7, S1-S64.
[24] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. (2000) Epilepsy after the first drug fails:
substitution or add-on? Seizure, 9, 464-468.
[25] Kwan, P., Brodie, M. (2000) Early identification of refractory epi-
lepsy. N. Eng. J. Med., 342(5), 314-319.
[26] Kwan, P., Brodie, M.J. (2001) Effectiveness of first antiepileptic
drug. Epilepsia, 42, 1255-1260.
[27] Lamictal®
(lamotrigine) package insert. Glaxo Wellcome, Inc.:
Research Triangle Park NC; November 1998.
[28] Langan, Y. (2000) Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP):
risk factors and case control studies. Seizure, 9(3), 179-183.
[29] Leppik, I.E., Bergey, G.K., Ramsay, R.E., Rowan, A.J., Gidal,
B.E., Birnbaum, A.K., Elliott, M.B. (2004) Advances in antiepilep-
tic drug treatments: a rational basis for selecting drugs for older pa-
tients with epilepsy. Geriatrics, 59(12), 14-24.
[30] Mamiya, K., Yukawa, E., Matsumoto, T., Aita, C., Goto, S. (2002)
Synergistic effect of valproate coadministration and hypoalbu-
minemia on the serum-free phenytoin concentration in patients with
severe motor and intellectual disabilities. Clin. Neuropharmacol.,
25(4), 230-233.
[31] Marson, A.G., Al-Kharusi, A.M., Alwaidh, M., Appleton, R., Baker,
G.A., Chadwick, D.W., Cramp, C., Cockerell, O.C., Cooper, P.N.,
Doughty, J., Eaton, B., Gamble, C., Goulding, P.J., Howell, S.J.,
Hughes, A., Jackson, M., Jacoby, A., Kellett, M., Lawson, G.R.,
Leach, J.P., Nicolaides, P., Roberts, R., Shackley, P., Shen, J., Smith,
D.F., Smith, P.E., Smith, C.T., Vanoli, A., Williamson, P.R.; SANAD
Study group. (2007) The SANAD study of effectiveness of carba-
mazepine, gabapentin, oxcarbazepine, or topiramate for treatment of
partial epilepsy: an unblinded randomized controlled trial. Lancet,
369(9566), 1000-1015.
[32] Mattson, R.H., Cramer, J.A., Collins, J.F., Smith, D.B., Delgado-
Escueta, A.V., Browne, T.R., Williamson, P.D., Treiman, D.M.,
McNamara, J.O., McCutchen, C.B. (1985) Comparison of carba-
mazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and primidone in partial and sec-
ondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures. N. Eng. J. Med. 313,145-
151.
[33] Mattson, R.H., Cramer, J.A., Collins, J.F. (1992) A comparison of
valproate with carbamazepine for the treatment of complex partial
seizures and secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures. N. Engl.
J. Med., 327, 765-771.
[34] Messenheimer, J., Mullens, E., Giorgi, L., Young, F. (1998) Safety
review of adult clinical trial experience with lamotrigine. Drug
Saf., 18, 281-296.
[35] Muller, M., Marson, A.G., Williamson, P.R. (2006) Oxcarbazepine
verus phenytoin for epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., 2,
CD0036.
[36] Nilsson, L., Farahmand, B.Y., Persson, P.G., Thiblin, I., Tomson,
T. (1999) Risk factors for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a
case-control study. Lancet, 353, 888-893.
[37] Nilsson, L., Bergman, U., Diwan, V., Farahmand, B.Y., Persson,
P.G., Tomson, T. (2001) Antiepileptic drug therapy and its man-
agement in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a case-controlled
study. Epilepsia, 42(5), 667-673.
[38] Novak, P.H., Ekins-Daukes, S., Simpson, C.R., Milne, R.M.,
Helms, P., McLay, J.S. (2005) Acute drug prescribing to children
on chronic antiepilepsy therapy and the potential for adverse drug in-
teractions in primary care. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol., 59(6), 712-717.
[39] Paciello, N., Mazza, M., Mazza, S. (2002) Depression in epilepsy:
symptoms or syndrome? Clin. Ter., 153, 397-402.
[40] Patsalos, P.N., Fröscher, W., Pisani, F., van Rijn, C.M. (2002) The
importance of drug interactions in epilepsy therapy. Epilepsia,
43(4), 365-385.
[41] Perucca, E. (1995) Pharmacological principles as a basis for poly-
therapy. Acta Neurol. Scand. Suppl., 162, 31-34.
[42] Privitera, M. (2006) Large clinical trials in epilepsy: funding by the
NIH versus pharmaceutical industry. Epilepsy Res., 52-56.
[43] Reynolds, E.H., Shorvon, S.D. (1981) Single drug or combination
therapy for epilepsy? Drugs, 21, 374-382.
[44] Reynolds, E.H., Shorvon, S.D. (1981) Monotherapy or polytherapy
for epilepsy? Epilepsia, 22, 1-10.
[45] Reynolds, EH. (1987) Polytherapy, monotherapy, and carba-
mazepine. Epilepsia, 28(Suppl 3), S77-S80.
[46] Rowan, A.J., Ramsay, R.E., Collins, J.F., Pryor, F., Boardman,
K.D., Uthman, B.M., Spitz, M., Frederick, T., Towne, A., Carter,
G.S., Marks, W., Felicetta, J., Tomyanovich, M.L.; VA Coopera-
tive Study 428 Group. (2005) New onset geriatric epilepsy: a ran-
domized study of gabapentin, lamotrigine, and carbamazepine.
Neurology, 64(11), 1868-1873.
[47] Schachter, S.C. (1995) Tiagabine monotherapy in the treatment of
partial epilepsy. Epilepsia, 36(Suppl 6), S2-S6.
[48] Schmidt, D. (1983) Single drug therapy for intractable epilepsy. J.
Neurol., 229(4), 221-226.
[49] Schmidt, D. (1983) Reduction of two drug therapies in intractable
epilepsy. Epilepsia, 24, 368-376.
[50] Schmidt, D., Elger, C., Holmes, G.L. (2002) Pharmacological over-
treatment in epilepsy mechanisms and management. Epilepsy Res.,
52, 3-14.
[51] Shorvon, S.D., Reynolds, E.H. (1977) Unnecessary polypharmacy
for epilepsy. BMJ, 1, 1635-1637.
[52] Shorvon, S.D., Reynolds, E.H. (1979) Reduction of polypharmacy
for epilepsy. BMJ, 2, 1023-1025.
[53] Sisodiya, S.M. (2005) Genetics of drug resistance. Epilepsia,
46(Suppl 10), 33-38.
[54] Somerville, E.R. (2006) Seizure aggravation by antiepileptic drugs.
Curr. Treat. Options Neurol., 8(4), 289-296.
[55] Stefan, H., Lopes da Silva, F.H., Löscher, W., Schmidt, D.,
Perucca, E., Brodie, M.J., Boon, P.A., Theodore, W.H., Moshé,
S.L. (2006) Epileptogenesis and rational therapeutic strategies.
Acta Neurol. Scand., 113, 139-155.
[56] St Louis, E.K., Gidal, B.E., Henry, T.R., Kaydanova, Y.,
Krumholz, A., McCabe, P.H., Montouris, G.D., Rosenfeld, W.E.,
Smith, B.J., Stern, J.M., Waterhouse, E.J., Schulz, R.M., Garnett,
W.R., Bramley, T. (2007) Conversions between monotherapies in
epilepsy: expert consensus. Epilepsy Behav., 11, 222-234.
[57] Temkin, O. (1994) The Falling Sickness: A History of Epilepsy
from the Greeks to the Beginnings of Modern Neurology, 2nd
ed.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
[58] Thomas, S.V., Koshy, S., Nair, C.R., Sarma, S.P. (2005) Frequent
seizures and polytherapy can impair quality of life in persons with
epilepsy. Neurol. India, 53, 46-50.
[59] Topamax®
(topiramate) package insert. Ortho McNeil Pharmaceu-
tical, Inc.: Raritan,NJ; June 2003.
[60] Trileptal®
(oxcarbazepine) package insert. Novartis Pharmaceutical
Corporation: East Hanover, NJ; January 2006.
Received: December 25, 2008 Revised: April 23, 2009 Accepted: May 19, 2009
