Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology
Abstract
Asthmatic diseases have been reported since the ancient world. Hay
fever for instance, was described for the first time in the late 18th
cen-
Ludger Klimek1
Philip Schendzielorz1
tury, and the term “allergy” was introduced about 100 years ago. Today
the incidence of allergies is rising; almost one third of the Western
population suffers from its side effects. Allergies are some of the most 1 Zentrum für Rhinologie und
Allergologie, Wiesbaden,
Germany
chronic medical complaints, which results in high health expenditures.
Therefore, they have a large health and political relevance.
Caused by genetic and environmental factors, the group of IgE mediated
allergies is large. It consists of e.g. atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma
or allergic rhinitis. This paper aims to emphasize the ways of early
diagnosis of allergic rhinitis (AR) as AR represents the most important
representative of allergic diseases in ENT.
Keywords: allergic rhinitis, atopic/allergic diseases, in vitro-diagnosis,
specific immunotherapy
1 Introduction
Bronchial asthma has been reported since the ancient
world, in contrary to hay fever that, was described for the
first time in the late 18th
century.
Interestingly, mainly aristocrats/wealthy people were
those affected in former times.
Today, allergies are widespread; almost one third of the
Western population suffers from its clinical implications.
Allergies belong to the most frequent chronic ailment that
causes high health expenditures due to high therapy costs
and inability to work or go to school. In this way they have
a large health and political relevance.
The word “Allergy” originates from the Greek word “allos”
(“change of the original status”).
The definition is based on the concept that the exposition
to an extraneous material would induce a change of re-
activity in persons towards their ambience. Subsequent
contacts with the substance would either increase reactiv-
ity (hypersensitivity) or decrease reactivity (hyposensitiv-
ity/immunologic tolerance). Gell and Coombs suggested
classifying allergic reactions in four different immunologic
mediated categories (Table 1). Type I was defined as the
IgE mediated reaction that appeared immediately.
The term atopic disease is commonly used for illnesses
that are accompanied by the detection of allergen specific
IgE-antibodies such as atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis
or bronchial asthma. In spite of this common property,
those afore-mentioned atopic diseases show display
genetic and environmental determinants and risk factors.
This review paper is meant to emphasize that the early
diagnosis of allergic rhinitis (AR) is the most important
factor in avoiding the development of other allergic dis-
eases namely of bronchial asthma and to achieve suc-
cessful treatment.
Early diagnosis of allergic diseases is even more import-
ant considering the fact that early treatment of allergic
sensitization can prevent clinical manifestation, exacer-
bation or expansion of allergic diseases to other organ
systems (secondary prevention).
Primary prevention on the one hand means eliminating
or at least diminishing factors causing the onset of a
disease. This includes alterations of causal or predispos-
ing environmental or workplace factors. On the other
hand, it means increasing the individual tolerance.
Primary prevention is particularly probable for at-risk
groups (genetic prestressed persons). In a certain way
this might apply to the total population as well as includ-
ing allergy specific health promotion.
Targets of secondary prevention are individuals that show
early symptoms (e.g. bronchial or nasal hyper responsive-
ness or detected sensitization) and sensitized asymptom-
atic persons. Secondary prevention should obviate
manifestation or symptom alteration.
This can be achieved by avoiding clinically relevant aller-
gens and toxic irritant substances, consultative activities,
prophylactic activities or allergenspecific immunotherapy
(hyposensitization).
Avoiding new onsets of other atopic or allergic diseases
can be added to secondary prevention as well.
2 Allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis (AR) manifests itself in 20% of a person's
lifetime, and therefore is one of the most frequent allergic
diseases (Review in [1]). Its clinical manifestation often
begins in early childhood, and leads to annoying symp-
toms that can last one's whole life. It can influence the
social life, academic capacity and labor productivity of
the affected patients. Typically, there is a high comorbidity
described such as conjunctivitis, asthma, food allergy,
atopic dermatitis, sinusitis among others. Patients suf-
fering from allergic rhinitis seem to develop bronchial
1/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Review ArticleOPEN ACCESS
Table 1: Classification of types of allergic reaction according to Coombs and Gell [140]
Table 2: Classification of allergic rhinitis (according to [1])
asthma 3.2 times more often than healthy human beings
[2]. This is expressed in the initiative "Allergic Rhinitis and
its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)" among others that was de-
veloped and published in collaboration with the World
health organization (WHO) [1]. The comorbidities listed
above motivate to diagnose and treat allergic rhinitis as
early as possible (secondary prevention). It was proven
that early diagnosis of allergic diseases can improve effi-
ciency of specific immunotherapy, avoid comorbidities
(e.g. bronchial asthma with patients suffering from allergic
rhinitis) and can decrease the enlargement of the sensi-
tization-spectrum [1], [3]. This considerably affects the
health expenditures evoked by this disease pattern.
The social-economic consequences caused by allergic
rhinitis and its comorbidities are tremendous. They arise
from direct, indirect and intangible costs of the health
system and the overall economy [3]. In 2000, the ex-
penses of AR amounted to about 240 million Euros, and
the expenses of the total allergic respiratory disorders
(consequently including all comorbidities of AR) were es-
timated to be 5.1 billion Euros [4].
Therefore it must to be noted that according to the white
paper “Allergy in Germany”, only 10% of the patients with
AR are treated according to the actual guidelines, and
only one third of the patients are treated at all [3].
Allergic rhinitis is clinically defined as a symptomatic
disease of the nose induced by IgE mediated inflamma-
tion of the nasal mucosa after exposure to allergens.
Clinically, AR can be subdivided in seasonal, perennial
or work-related types, but this classification can not be
used consistently. Seasonal allergens are present almost
all year. Perennial allergens show seasonal upswings and
downturns in their level of exposure throughout the year.
Nevertheless, allergen-exposure and symptoms do not
correlate definitely, and therefore therapeutic con-
sequences cannot be drawn directly.
A work group of the WHO suggested a new classification
emphasizing the duration of symptoms (Table 2, [1]). The
severity of symptoms should be defined by means of its
effects on the quality of life of the patients.
2.1 Basic pathophysiological principles
of allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis is characterized by cellular inflammatory
reactions that can be divided experimentally and partly
clinically in an early phase reaction and a late phase re-
action. The following processes are included in this inflam-
matory reaction [1]:
• Release of mediators such as histamines (essential
marker of the early phase reaction), arachidonic acid
meta-bolites (cyteinyl leukotrienes), and kinines
• Release of pro-inflammatory and TH2- associated
cytokines and chemokines
• Expression of adhesion molecules, selective cell recruit-
ing and transendothelial migration of cells
• Activation and differentiation of eosinophiles, T-
lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes, mast cells, basophiles,
endothelial- and epithelial cells, fibroblasts
• Lifetime extension of inflammatory cells
• Regulation of local and systemic IgE-response, in-
creased expression of IgE-receptors
2/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
• Interaction with the immunosystem and the bone
marrow
To some extent, the release of mediators of AR, as well
as symptoms of AR can be imitated by provocation with
e.g. pollen allergens. This test differs noticeably from the
natural allergen exposure. An early phase reaction can
be reproduced in allergic patients when exposed to low
doses of allergens. Late phase reactions require higher
(often not physiological) amounts of allergens. The inten-
sity of the reaction of the nasal mucosa to an allergen-
exposure depends on the degree of mucosal inflamma-
tion; the intensity of the reaction varies throughout the
year [5]. “Priming” describes an increased reaction
caused by repeated exposure [6].
“Minimal persistent inflammation” is a new and important
concept: after an allergen-exposure or after a low expos-
ure, inflammatory parameters keep their high level even
though the patients are not suffering from any symptoms
[7]. The persistent allergic rhinitis is characterized by
interacting allergic triggers with this sustained inflammat-
ory reaction. The pathology is then based on a complex
interaction.
An important attribute of allergic rhinitis is nasal hyperre-
activity. Hyperreactivity is an intensified response to un-
specific stimuli (smoke, dust, odorous substances, alter-
ations in temperature and efforts), and leads to sneezing,
nasal obstruction or nasal secretion.
Comorbidities of allergies and their early diagnosis are
considerably influenced by the immunological mechan-
isms of the pathophysiological processes; which will be
explained in detail in the following segment.
Antigen presenting cells (APC) and induction of specific
sensitization
Allergens first penetrate the epithelial barrier of respira-
tory tract, gastrointestinal tract or dermis of the body.
There, specialized and highly capable antigen presenting
cells (dendrite cells, Langerhans cells) absorb allergens
as total proteins and process them.
In this way, the allergen decomposes into peptides and
is bound to MHC-complexes. Thus it is presented to T-
cells in this kind of linkage (primarily located in the locally
drained lymph nodes, where APC migrate to) [8].
Subsequently, specific native T-cells with suitable recep-
tors are activated, they proliferate and return consistently
as “Memory-T-cells” to the accordant tissue (Homing) [9].
There they can react again after allergen exposure. Be-
sides the described specific interaction of APC and T-cells,
costimulating signals are necessary to completely activate
T-cells. They consist of interactions with membrane-bound
molecules such as B7-group on APC or CD 28 on T-cells
and interactions with soluble mediators such as interleu-
kin 1. Lack of these signals does not lead to sensitiza-
tions, rather, it leads to anergy of T-cells (status of no
excitability). This is then followed by the death of the T-
cells and immunological tolerance [10]. The deactivation
of immune responses matters a great deal for the regula-
tion of the immune system, especially to avoid misguided,
overshooting or never-ending reactions.
2.2 TH1/TH2-Dichotomy
Besides the old classification of T-cells in CD4+
, T-helper
cells and CD8+
cytotoxic-suppressor cells, a new classifi-
cation of T-helper cells has been established according
to their cytokine production pattern. Native (not deter-
mined) CD4+
T-cells are called TH0-cells. They can differ-
entiate to TH1-cells which produce interferon (IFN)-
gamma, tumour necrosis factor (TNF) -alpha or interleukin
(IL)-2 among others or to TH2-cells which IL-4, 5, 6 and
13 [11]. Both cell types produce their own growth factors
(IL-2 and accordingly IL-4), and they inhibit the respective
processing of other TH-type (IFN-gamma of TH1 inhibits
TH2; IL-10 of TH2 inhibits TH1). Costimulating signals
(maybe some different types of APC as well), but primarily
certain cytokines can favour one course of either TH-type.
So IL-4 supports the TH2-development and IL-12 favours
the TH1-development [12], [13]. In turn the cytokine-
ambience of mucous membranes and skin is formed
primarily by the cells of epithelial cell organisations.
2.2.1 B-cells and IgE-production
High IgE-level characterize atopic diseases [14]. Mainly
IL-4 (and IL-13) activates the class switch of immuno-
globulins of B-cells according to specific gene products
which code for various IgE- types. Furthermore, IL-4 sup-
ports the production of IgE by plasma cells [12]. The in-
duction of class switch of immunoglobulins is also influ-
enced by the interaction of the membrane-bound mol-
ecules CD40L of activated T-cells and CD40 of B-cells
[15]. Furthermore, IL-6 can activate the immunoglobulin
production generally. Moreover, several other signals
exist that can manipulate IgE production. One such rep-
resentative is IFN-gamma, the most important inhibitor
of IgE production [16]. IFN-gamma is synthesized by TH1-
cells and CD8+
T-cells, and therefore the cells tend to in-
hibit IgE production (in contrast, there are CD8+
T-cells
that produce TH2-type cytokines too). Thus TH2-cells can
initialize positive signals for IgE production (CD40L and
IL-4), which can indeed can be found with atopic patients
[17], [18]. The total process described above is called
Allergen Specific Induction of TH2-cells, which helps B-
cells produce allergen specific IgE, thus completing the
induction of a type-1-sensitization.
Allergens triggering IgE mediated type-1-allergies are
usually complex molecules (proteins or glycoprotein’s)
composed of a high number of amino acids in a defined
sequence (primary structure) which is arranged in a spe-
cific way (secondary structure). In turn, bigger subunits
of such a molecule fold themselves characteristically
(tertiary structure). The parts of allergens recognized
specifically by T-cells (variable region of the T-cell-recep-
tor) are denominated T-cell epitopes (Figure 1); normally
they are peptides (primary structure). Parts of allergens
that are identified by B-cells (variable regions of the im-
3/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Figure 1: Interaction of allergens with mast cell-linked IgE-molecules provoke degranulation of mast cells and release of mast
cell-mediators.
munoglobulins) are called B-cell epitopes (mainly depend-
ent on conformation, tertiary structure).
2.2.2 Mast cells and “immediate phase
reaction”
After occurred sensitization with allergen specific IgE-
production, new allergen contact induces de-granulation
of mast cells or basophiles if multiple FcepsilonRI-bound
IgE-molecules are cross-linked. Anti-IgE- or Anti-Fcepsi-
lonRI-antibodies and non-specific factors like complement
factors (C3a, C5a), thrombin as well as insect venoms,
Ca-ionophore, pharmaceuticals and toxines can evoke
mast cell- or basophile-degranulation, too [19]. Further-
more, “releasability” of mastcells and basophiles is
modulated by cytokines such as IL-3 and neuro-transmit-
ters like substance P (SP), vasoactive intestinal poly-
peptide (VIP) and somatostatine [20].
Degranulation of mast cells or basophils leads to release
of several preformed mediators or newly synthesized
mediators such as histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrines,
kinins, plattlet- activating factor (PAF), cytokines (IL-3, 4
and 5), proteases (tryptase, chymase, carboxypeptidase)
and proteoglycanes [19]. Firstly, this causes the “imme-
diate reaction” with oedema (wheal) and erythema at the
location of allergen exposure or can trigger a systemic
anaphylactic reaction within a few minutes. Secondly,
mast cell mediators or mediators of other cells can pro-
voke a “late phase reaction”.
2.2.3 Eosinophiles, “late phase reaction” and
chronic allergic inflammation
Usually, a “late phase reaction” (differentiate from the
type of allergy that appears delayed) occurs a few hours
after allergen exposure. Typically, basophiles and eosino-
philes are migrating into the tissue attracted by chemo-
tactic factors like PAF, C5a, prostaglandins and leuko-
trienes and cytokines [21], [22]. Those cells produce pro-
inflammatory mediators and enzymes which can damage
tissue like major basic protein (MBP), eosinophile-peroxi-
dase (EPO), collagenase, phosphatase, arylsulfatase,
eosinophile cationic Protein (ECP), eosinophile protein X
(EPX), eosinophilie-neurotoxin (EDN), leukotrienes,
prostaglandins, PAF and oxygen radicals (Figure 2) [19].
The determination of the ECP-level is a good activity-
marker of atopic diseases.
At the moment, it is mainly not solved which factors could
help to switch those inflammatory processes off. T-cells
seem to be important in regulation of the allergic inflam-
mation. T-cells as well as other cells like mast cells show
the ability to produce important regulative mediators like
IL-4. IL-4 induces e.g. adhesion molecules like VCAM-1
(vascular cellular adhesion molecule) at vessels of the
affected tissue. In this way it stimulates directly migration
of basophiles and eosinophiles having suitable receptors
to VCAM-1, VLA-4 (very late antigen) [9]. Mediators like
TNF-alpha, IL-1 and IFN-gamma play decisive roles in
regulating other adhesion molecules like several selectins
or integrins [23].
4/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Figure 2: IgE-mediated release of inflammatory mediators
2.3 Clinical symptoms of allergic rhinitis
(AR), comorbidities
The clinical symptoms of allergic rhinitis are the cardinal
symptoms: sneezing, nose itching, clear nasal secretion
and nasal obstruction. The rhinitis caused by pollen is
characterized by sneezing, nasal secretion and concomi-
tant conjunctivitis. In contrast, rhinitis caused by mite al-
lergens especially generates nasal obstruction. According
to the new definition, all symptoms are represented
equivalently in case of the persistent rhinitis.
It was estimated [24] that about 20% of nasal allergies
are caused by seasonal, 40% by perennial allergens and
40% are mixed manifestation types. First epidemiological
researches according to the new definition show that
about one third of all AR patients suffer from persistent
AR and two thirds suffers from intermittent AR.
Comorbidities of allergic rhinitis are various and relevant.
Disturbances of life quality and productivity induced by
AR vary from sleep disorders to daytime fatigue [25], on
to the reduction of learning aptitude of children [26]. Ac-
cording to a trial that included 69 children with seasonal
allergic rhinitis [27], 80% suffered from pharyngitis, 70%
from conjunctivitis, 40% from asthma and 37% from
atopic eczema. In several trials especially asthma was
discovered to be an important comorbidity of AR: children
with a frequency of 32% [28] and adults with a frequency
of 16% [29]. The opposite way around over 80% of asth-
matic patients suffer from AR too. Sinusitis exhibits a
coincidence of 25% [30]. The latter represents another
important disease contributing to the patients’ morbidity
and should be considered differential diagnosis. This
does not fit for nasal polyps that are not associated with
allergic rhinitis [31], [32]. Serous otitis media seems to
be disproportionately associated with an allergy [33]. In
the case of children, habitual snoring and obstructive
sleep apnoea are related to allergies [34].
2.4 Increasing prevalence of allergies
Clinical trials that evaluate the prevalence of allergic
diseases demonstrated decisive differences between
Eastern and Western Europe. Thereby, a unique situation
existed in Germany. Almost as in a natural experiment,
population groups having similar genetic dispositions had
been exposed to very different environmental influences
in the Eastern versus in the Western part of the country
over several decades. Those general living conditions
have led to obvious differences in manifestation of atopic
diseases in children as well as in adults. In Munich for
instance, the prevalence of hay fever (8.6% versus 2.7%,
p<0.0001), bronchial asthma (9.3% versus 7.2%, p<0.05)
and bronchial hyper-reactivity (8.3% versus 5.5%,
p<0.001) has been reported to be significantly higher
than in Leipzig and Halle in school children of the ages
9–11 years [35].
The frequency of atopic sensitizations measured by skin-
prick-test showed less positive results in children from
Eastern Germany than in children from Western Germany
too (18.2% versus 36.7%, p<0.001) [35]. In a similar
comparative trial analysing children of the ages 10–12
years, it was noticed that the prevalence of atopic sensi-
tizations in Estonia and Poland was less than in Sweden
(13.6% versus 19.9% versus 30.3%, p<0.001).
5/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
2.5 Natural course of atopic diseases in
childhood
With increasing age the spectrum of atopic sensitizations
changes in children. Primarily, during infancy IgE-anti-
bodies are produced against food allergens especially
bovine milk and egg white of chicken which can lead to
different clinical symptom patterns.
They can cause dermatological syndromes (atopic
dermatitis, urticaria), gastro-intestinal discomforts and
rarely respiratory troubles. Sensitizations to mite, cat
epithelia or other indoor allergens develop later on during
toddlerhood and school age. The peak of pollen sensitiza-
tion as well as the incidence of hay fever shows up around
adolescence.
2.6 Risk factor for the development of
allergies
In order to apply early diagnosis of allergic diseases well-
directed, possible risk populations have to be defined
that account for higher risks to develop allergies. In the
following part risk factors for development of allergies
are listed according to the actual existing data.
2.6.1 Intrinsic factors
Familiar disposition
It is well documented that a positive family history of
atopic diseases represents a risk factor for developing
bronchial asthma, hay fever and atopic dermatitis. The
more family members are affected the higher the risk
that the child will develop atopic diseases [36].
Also twin trials showed that the concordance of atopic
diseases is higher with monozygotic twins than with
dizygotic twins [36]. Therefore, few doubts exist that eti-
ology of atopic diseases is mainly comprised of hereditary
components. Nevertheless allergic diseases display
complex syndromes with various manifestations de-
veloping from infancy to pre-school age, school age up
to adulthood. It is not surprising that the heredity trans-
mission pattern of atopic diseases does not go along with
Mendel’s genetics. Rather, it has to be assumed that
some genes make individuals susceptible to developing
asthma or other atopic diseases (polygene hereditary)
and/or that different combinations of gene mutations are
present in patients with atopic diseases [37].
2.6.2 Environmental factors
2.6.2.1 Type and dimension of allergen exposure
It is well proven that the development of respective
sensitizations will augment with increasing concentrations
of indoor allergens in childhood especially in case of
genetically disposed individuals. This was illustrated
convincingly in several trials for sensitizations to mite and
cat epithelia. Allergen concentration of 2 µg/g dust of Der
p 1, major allergen of house-dust mite, and respectively
8 µg/g dust of Fel d 1, major allergen of cat epithelia,
have been suggested as minimal doses to increase the
risk of sensitization. In case of bronchial asthma signifi-
cant elevated risks for developing asthma symptoms are
supposed to exist when a proband is exposed to more
than 10 µg/g dust of Der p 1 during infancy [37].
2.6.2.2 Nutrition
Prospective trials showed that hypoallergenic baby milk
can cause a temporary protective effect on the incidence
of atopic dermatitis, food allergy and infant obstructive
bronchitis.
Children with genetic disposition (at least one parent
suffering from allergy) developed atopic discomforts more
rarely during the first one to two years of their life if they
were breast feed or were fed hypoallergenic food (hydro-
sylates).
Other diet factors can be important in developing atopic
diseases as well. A lately published Australian trial
demonstrated that children with high consumption of
fresh oily fish had decreased prevalences of asthma and
bronchial hyper reactivity [37].
2.6.2.3 Social factors and infant infections
It has been known for a long time that allergies represent
a disease of wealthy people. At present, high social status
influences the development of atopic diseases such as
allergic rhinitis. Furthermore, several trials displayed a
highly inverse correlation between the number of brothers
and sisters of a subject and the prevalence of hay fever
and atopic sensitization. In various trials this coherence
was documented consistently for children, adolescents
and adults in many countries. Thus bronchial asthma is
not associated in the same manner as hay fever and
atopy [37].
This means that single children have a significantly
higher risk to develop allergic sensitizations or hay fever
than individuals from families with many children. In trials
with a big number of cases, it has been demonstrated
that older brothers and sisters have a higher protective
effect than younger brothers and sisters. It was supposed
that increased infantile exposure to viral and bacterial
infections of the upper respiratory tract could prevent
manifestation of atopic diseases [38].
This assumption is interesting regarding the different
prevalence of atopic diseases in Eastern and Western
European countries because the majority of children in
the former DDR (low sensitization rate) went to nursery
school after their first birthday. It was recently reported
that very early access to nursery school before consider-
ably reduces the risk of allergic sensitization. Furthermore,
a noticeable inverse coherence was demonstrated in
Lithuania and Estonia between the number of persons
living in one household and atopic sensitizations: the
more individuals living in the same space, the fewer
people got allergies [39].
6/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Similar coherences have been reported from other
countries. Recently, an US-american research team
showed that infantile non-obstructive infections of the
lower respiratory tract (especially pneumonia and tracheo-
bronchitis) are associated with a significant decrease of
IgE-level in serum and positive skin-prick-test rate later
in life of those children. Furthermore, it was demonstrated
by an Italian research group that the detection of serum-
antibodies against hepatitis A was associated inversely
with the manifestation of asthma and atopy in early
adulthood [37].
Immunological trials dealing with the IgE-regulation ex-
plain the biological plausibility of the hypothesis that in-
fantile infections may prevent the development of atopic
sensitizations and manifestations of allergic diseases.
Simplified it can be assumed that two T-helper-cell-popu-
lations exist that are needed to activate anti-body produ-
cing B-cells. TH2-cells enhance IgE-production by in-
creased release of certain cytokines like interleukin 4.
By contrast TH1-cells and their cytokines (especially inter-
feron-y) inhibit the function of TH2-cells. The cytokine
interferon-y is also produced during the course of viral
infections. It has also been demonstrated that interferon-
y is a strong inhibitor of many TH2-cell-functions and
consequently inhibits the IgE-synthesis
2.6.2.4 Environmental pollution
Exposure to passive smoking
Passively inhaled smoke of tobacco contains various
gases and particles with over 4,000 different chemical
bonds. Tar particles, carbon monoxide, nitrogen and
volatile hydrocarbon represent the most important com-
ponents. Passive smoking is the main source of indoor
pollution. The concentration of pollutants depends on the
number of smokers, the intensity of their smoking habits,
the size of the apartment and the ventilation system [40].
The pollution burden can reach immense dimensions by
passive smoking since children in westernized countries
stay most of the daytime indoor. Most information about
the dimension and sources of passive smoking is derived
from questionnaires. Some trials have measured cotinine,
a degradation product of nicotine, in urine, saliva or blood
as an objective parameter of pollution with tobacco
smoke. But many trials showed that questionnaires coin-
cide well with the objective measurements. Therefore it
can be assumed that parents correctly report the actual
consumption of cigarettes in anonymous scientific surveys
[40].
Individual and socioeconomic factors are important
drivers which determine the individual sensitivity to
passive smoking. It can be assumed that adults reacting
sensitively to the negative effects of tobacco smoke would
smoke less, or would stop smoking completely. In contrast
children can not choose and can not influence their par-
ents smoking behaviour. Therefore it must be supposed
that a considerable portion of very sensitive children are
exposed to various pollutants of smoke.
The consequences of active- and passive-smoking-expos-
ure have been explored in several trials. For infancy it
was demonstrated convincingly that passive smoking will
significantly raise the risks for developing infections of
the lower respiratory tract like bronchitis and pneumonia
(especially for babies and infants). Usually, the effects
are higher if the mother smokes in comparison to the
father. This is due to the fact that the child may be ex-
posed more frequently through close contact to the
mother or because pollutants affect a fetus.
The implications of maternal smoking during pregnancy
have been investigated in 80 babies shortly after child-
birth (on average 4.2 weeks later). Lung function tests
were used among others. The mothers smoking habits
have been documented via questionnaires and via object-
ive parameters (continine-concentration in urine). Children
of smoking mothers displayed significantly lower forced
expiratory flows compared to healthy children.
The lung function measurements were performed shortly
after childbirth and were adjusted according to multi-
variant statistical models for short-time passive smoke
exposure of children. So, it can be assumed that the loss
of lung function test represents the implication of smoke
exposure in uterus. Those damaging effects are proven
until the age of 18 months. However, many factors point
out that the damaging effects will last longer.
2.6.2.5 Air pollutants
Sulphur dioxide and airborne particles
It does not seem to be reasonable that high concentra-
tions of SO2 and airborne particles can cause the devel-
opment of allergic diseases. The prevalence of asthma,
bronchial hyperreactivity, allergic rhinitis and atopic
sensitization has been significantly lower in regions with
high concentrations of SO2 and airborne particles like
Eastern Germany and Poland than in less polluted regions
in Western Germany or Sweden [40], [41].
Traffic exposure
Until now, insufficient knowlegde is available about the
noxious effects of exposure to traffic. It was noticed that
the prevalence of non-specific respiratory symptoms and
a reduction of lung function can occur in children and
adults living in regions with high traffic volume [41].
In a Dutch trial, trucks caused higher effects than cars.
However, at the moment, it is unknown to what extent
this effect is attributed to soot or diesel exposure or to
increased airborne particle exposure. So far it could not
be confirmed that there are explicit effects on the preva-
lence of allergic rhinitis or atopic sensitization [42].
Ozone
Healthy and asthmatic subjects have been investigated
regarding effects of ozone on lung function or respiratory
discomfort mainly in climate trials. The extension of spir-
ometric alterations and of symptoms like coughing,
shortness of breath or inspiration-associated pain varied
a lot between probands concerning a certain degree of
7/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
exposure. However those results have been reproduced
in some individuals’ reflecting possibly the reactivity to
ozone of a particular proband [42]. It was shown by many
investigators that probands adapt rapidly to a continuous
exposure. Increase of bronchial reactivity to histamine
and methacholine was observed in many healthy subjects
after having been exposed to ozone. Therefore few indi-
cations point out that ozone might be a causal factor in
the development of allergic diseases [42].
3 Diagnostic methods for early
diagnosis of allergies
Diagnosis of allergic diseases is based on the typical
medical history with allergic symptoms and on the results
of diagnostic tests that target cell-bound IgE’s in in-vivo-
and in-vitro tests. These diagnostic tests consist of skin
tests, nasal-, conjunctival- and bronchial-provocation tests
and the detection of IgE in serum. Furthermore, early
diagnosis is focused normally on diagnosis in children,
for which reason specific aspects of clinical investigation
will be presented for patients in childhood in the following
part.
3.1 Allergy diagnostics in childhood
Often first indicators for allergies can be found by ques-
tioning parents about eczema, chronic occurring gastro-
intestinal discomfort and frequent bronchial disorders in
the first month of life. At the age of about five years, ac-
complishing allergy tests and their clinical benefit become
as important as in adult allergic patients. The proceeding
is vaguer in younger children: overall, younger children
are tested more rarely by reason of faulty interpretation.
Allergy testing as early diagnosis becomes more important
in this period of life due to the described conclusions of
immunological processes of sensitization especially in
the first month and early years of life. The relevance of
allergy tests is clarified in a prospective trial with children
up to 2 years of age by Delacourt et al. [43]. This research
group demonstrated that those children, who developed
infantile bronchial asthma in all cases 18 months later,
suffered from an obstructive disease and had a positive
result in a prick-test against the house-dust mite D. pter-
onyssinus or to cat epithelia. The goal of optimal individ-
ual allergy diagnostics in childhood should be that chil-
dren with increased risk factors for developing allergic
diseases later on are identified as early as possible.
Identified candidates should receive a suitable therapy
with allergen avoidance, pharmacotherapy and causative
allergen-specific immunotherapy.
3.2 Skin testing
3.2.1 Anatomy and physiology/immunology of
skin (dermis)
The epidermis is not vascularised, and therefore the
corium contains a superficial vascular plexus extending
into the papillae between the two skin layers and a deep
vascular plexus from where plasma and inflammatory
cells can invade the skin. In addition, the corium holds
nerve fibres reaching up to the epithelial layer that can
contact mast cells and Langerhans-cells [44], [45].
Langerhans-cells belong to the dendrite cells and repre-
sent high potent APC [46], [47]. They are usually located
in the epidermis, and migrate
to local lymph nodes (SALT = Skin-associated lymphoid
tissue) after having been exposed to allergens [8]. In the
lymph-nodes they activate T-cells, which are normally
represented in a low number in the skin. Mast cells are
found in the corium and can release several different
mediators. Histamine is the most important mediator in
case of skin tests for type-1-allergies [48], [49]. It pro-
vokes vasodilatation (erythema) and plasma extravasa-
tions (oedema/wheel) within a few minutes.
3.2.2 Types of skin tests
Corresponding to the different allergy types, different skin
tests are applied. Skin tests fit particularly well for diag-
nosis of type-I- and type-IV-allergies. Furthermore they
are well standardized. Type-IV-allergies and contact aller-
gies are tested by the epicutaneous test (Patch-test) [50].
In this test, allergens (mainly small haptens penetrating
the epithelial barrier) wrapped in suitable vehicles are
applied to the top of the unmodified skin (mostly of the
back) Because the reaction is delayed, the skin is evalu-
ated after 48 hours and 72 hours, accompanied by a
generation of eczema. Skin tests for type-I-allergies are
the Prick-, Scratch-, and intracutaneous test (as described
below):
3.2.2.1 Skin tests for Type-I-Allergies
Pre-conditions and prearrangements
Prior to skin testing, the skin must react normally as a
pre-condition. Medications and other influences should
not increase or decrease skin reactivity. Allergy medica-
tion should generally be stopped (Table 3). Overshooting
reactions as seen with urticaria (factitia) can be excluded
e.g. by testing dermographism. Furthermore, the tested
area should not include alterations like eczema, and the
skin must be cleaned in order to prevent infections. The
use of non-specific therapeutic agents like ointments or
creams is prohibited in the testing area at the day of
testing. During the period before testing, other kinds of
skin irritations (physico-chemical influences) should be
avoided.
8/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Table 3: Recommended waiting period for pharmaceutical products before skin and nasal provocation testing
9/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
(Continued)
Table 3: Recommended waiting period for pharmaceutical products before skin and nasal provocation testing
Adequate treatment must be provided especially to chil-
dren because patients can suffer from unexpected allergic
and other reactions (presence of a physician, first aid kit
and medication) [51]. Usually, children can be tested at
the age of 5–6 years (for compliance reason). In this case
the physician should know how to treat emergencies and
should be equipped with adequate emergency materials.
After testing, the person should be observed at least 30
minutes [52].
The selection of test allergens is adjusted to the individ-
ual’s specific set of allergy problems. It should include
the particular most frequent trigger allergens detected
in taking history.
Practical aspects of skin testing
Usually, testing of type-I-allergies is carried out at the
volar part of the forearms (given accessibility, reproduci-
bility, comparability). The distance between the testing
spots of two allergens must be far apart so that even two
10/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
huge reactions would not overlap one another (Prick-test:
at least 2 cm; intracutaneous test: at least 5 cm). A
standardized order of test allergens should be determined
(test protocol as below) and reference numbers of the
particular allergens should be written on the skin before
testing.
The (modified) Prick-Test [53] is completed by applying
a bead of allergen solution on top of the skin and pricking
into the skin with a needle (or lancet) in the area of the
bead [54], [55]. In this way parts of the allergen solution
are inserted through the epidermal barrier into the corium
by the lancet. Here the reactive mast cells are located.
When using Prick-(by-) Prick-tests [56] the lancet is
pricked into the allergen source (e.g. food) first, followed
by a direct skin puncture. Non-specific toxic or infectious
allergen sources should be avoided for the latter principle.
A negative control (solution substance) and a positive
control (diluted histamine) should always be part of Prick
testing in order to see alterations from normal skin reactiv-
ity. Between the “pricking” of the various test solutions,
the pricking-lancet must be cleaned thoroughly (e.g. by
wiping it with a sterile swab). The Prick-test is the recom-
mended method for skin testing [57], especially if suffi-
ciently standardised allergen extracts are available.
With the Scratch-test [57], the tested area of skin must
first be degreased and superficial horny lamellas must
be removed by “tape-stripping”. “Tape-stripping” involves
placing adhesive strips on the skin and then removing
them. In order to increase sensitivity scratch lines can be
created by “Prick-lancets” in the testing area additionally.
This decreases the specificity of the test enormously.
Afterwards the allergenic substance is wiped over the
prepared area and can remain on the skin. In this case,
non-specific toxic or infectious allergen sources should
be avoided as allergen sources as well. As a basic prin-
ciple, Prick-tests should be performed with standardized
allergen extracts whereas Scratch-tests should be used
only if required extracts are not available or their quality
is insufficient. Therefore, the Prick-(by-) Prick-test often
represents the better choice.
The most sensitive type of skin testing is the intracu-
taneous test (ICT) (1,000 times more sensitive than Prick-
tests) [58], [59]. Thus they should not be performed un-
less Prick-testing is negative. Dangers to patients should
be avoided by all means. If less potent allergen prepar-
ations are used, ICTs often represent the best choice of
diagnosis. The applied testing solutions are diluted 100
times as high as those used in Prick-tests and have to be
diluted further if possible. Using a tuberculinum syringe
with a needle size of 26 G or 27 G 30–50 µl, the diluted
testing solution is injected strictly intracutaneously (in
order to avoid injections into the dermal vascular plexus).
Injections of air interfere with adequate metering. A
negative control and a positive control should also be
carried along with this test. A new syringe and cannula
must be used for every injection.
Metering of skin tests
The meter-reading of reactions from skin tests takes place
after 15–20 minutes [60]. In this interval, allergic type-I-
reactions occur normally. It is recommended to observe
the test reactions intermittently during this time period
too. Late recations can develop hours or days later, or
reactions can persist (late phase reactions among others).
These reactions can be allergologically relevant but nor-
mally they rarely appear at testing spots where an imme-
diate reaction was not noticed in type-I reactions. For the
metering [57], [61] the size of histamine reaction can be
used in relative grades 0-III or it can be measured using
absolute criteria (Table 4). Testing results should be
documented in written form or in preprinted test proto-
cols.
Table 4: Graduation of Prick-testing (intracutaneous testing)
3.2.3 Evaluation of testing results
Young children, old patients or certain medical conditions
(e.g. poly-neuropathies, cancer-or dialysis- patients) gen-
erally have reduced skin reactivity [62]. Usually, specificity
of Prick-tests is up-rated in comparison to intracutaneous
tests which are more sensitive [59], [63]. Normally,
positive skin tests correlate well with positive in-vitro-tests
of determination of allergen specific IgE-level if the quality
of allergens is good and tests are performed correctly
[64].
In case of negative skin tests to a certain allergen a type-
I-allergy cannot be excluded definitely if the skin reactivity
is decreased (often low or no histamine related reaction)
or the quality of the allergen extract is insufficient. (It
might be that all relevant single allergens are not included
11/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
in the extract or that they are inactivated/degraded, ex-
pired, etc.) The evidence of non-standardized tests (e.g.
Scratch-tests) has to be limited even further. Furthermore
it is problematic that the skin is tested representatively
for the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract in allergies
of the upper air passages. When performing skin tests,
only the existence of systemic sensitization can be evalu-
ated but the clinical relevance (actuality) cannot. The
medical history or further tests, especially nasal provoca-
tion tests can help. Discrepancies between skin tests and
medical history should be revaluated by taking a second
medical history.
Certainly, a positive skin test does not prove that a clinic-
ally relevant sensitization exists [65], [66]. If non-specific
reactions are excluded – what might be difficult in non-
standardised tests (like Scratch-tests) – positive results
only prove that allergen specific IgE is present on dermal
mast cells, which is functionally active and could lead to
mast cell de-granulation. This displays an important dif-
ference to the method of detection of allergen specific
IgE-level in serum proving the explicit presence of distinct
immunoglobulin classes but neglecting the functionality
of IgE-molecules. In addition, allergen specific IgE persists
on mast cells longer than in serum where IgEs show a
half-life of a few days. Therefore IgE can only be detected
in serum if it is produced during this certain period [67].
These considerations and maybe the different amount
of single allergens of allergen extracts for skin tests re-
spectively for in-vitro-testing can cause alterations
between both kind of tests even though the test perform-
ance is correct.
In two constellations medical history and skin testing can
predicate confidently the diagnosis of type-I-allergies: as
in the case of seasonal allergens (pollen), symptoms
correlate with pollen flying times; in the case of good ac-
cordance of symptoms and allergen exposure like animal
contact allergies (appearance of symptoms after contact
to the animal). Even though before starting therapeutic
steps (e.g. initializing of allergen specific immunotherapy,
extensive mite decontamination etc.) the relevance of
allergens should be supported by additional provocation
tests. Beside that the significance of other causes of the
respective symptoms should be excluded by other med-
ical investigations. This applies especially to perennial
allergens or allergens whose exposure happens in a hid-
den way (e.g. mites, mould funguses). The assessment
of possible type-I-allergies gets specifically difficult in the
case of medical drugs (metabolites, total antigen produc-
tion, few commercially available standardised test solu-
tions), food allergies (industrial processing, digestion,
arguable quality and stability of allergen extracts) and
mould funguses (incomplete knowledge about its aller-
gens, arguable quality of allergen extracts). In those
events, skin test results must be interpreted carefully
[68], [69].
3.3 In-vitro-methods for early diagnosis
of allergies
3.3.1 Measurement of total IgE
Serum contains a considerably low concentration of anti-
bodies belonging to immunoglobulin class E (IgE) com-
pared to other classes of immunoglobulins. IgEs are able
to provoke a specific reaction of the immune system by
linking to selective, high- or low-affinitive cellular receptors
[70] (Figure 3). They are structurally distinguished from
IgG-antibodies by additional CH-regions at the constant
region of the heavy chain. IgE-antibodies are particularly
important for type-I-allergies and therefore can be used
for early diagnosis of allergies.
Reference values of total-IgE for infancy have been
defined in the context of multi-centre trial [71] (Table 5).
Table 5: Reference values for total-IgE
According to the applied method and epidemiological
data basis normal values turned out to be a little higher
or lower [72]. The maximal diffusion of the normal values
was measured in the age of 6 years to 14 years [73].
3.3.1.1 Evaluation
Elevated total-IgE in the context of allergy diagnosis: The
highest IgE-level could be detected in case of atopic
dermatitis. Concentrations of more than 10,000 U/ml
could be reached. In case of extremely high level of total-
IgE (>20,000 U/ml) the differential diagnosis of cellular
immune deficiency has to be excluded [74]. High total
IgE combined with elevated count of eosinophiles should
hint to a parasitic disease [75]. Additionally, the elevated
total IgE-level can be found during the period of allergen
exposure. Generally, detection of total IgE in order to
screen for atopic diseases is less applicable than detec-
tion of specific IgE against common environmental aller-
gens. An elevated total IgE-level does not prove the
manifestation of atopic diseases; on the contrary, a nor-
mal total IgE-level does not exclude atopic diseases [76].
Atopic diagnosis in umbilical cord blood: Measurement
of total IgE in umbilical cord blood was suggested in order
to diagnose early risks for newborn. Such a value can be
evaluated only if contamination of the cord blood by ma-
ternal blood was ruled out. Elevation of cord blood IgE
>0.9 U/ml is considered as a predictive parameter for
12/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Figure 3: Model of IgE-mediated sensitization pattern and effector’s phase. The arrows (right half of the picture) mark points
of the IgE-reaction with different diagnostic principles and allergologic tests
the risk of atopy [77]. However values <0.9 U/ml can not
exclude developing of atopic diseases. Therefore umbilical
cord blood IgE-screening can not be recommended. This
method should be subjected to population with risk
factors like positive family history of atopy.
Immunodeficiency: A huge number of congenital immune
defects, especially of the cellular system can be accom-
panied by elevation of total IgE [78]. In the context of
immunodeficiency diagnostics measuring of total IgE-level
belong to the screening procedures of the humoral im-
mune system together with all remaining immunoglobulin
groups and subgroups.
3.3.2 Measurement of specific IgE (sIgE)
sIgE represents the fraction of total IgE-antibodies in
serum whose specificity to certain allergens can be de-
termined by in-vitro-tests. Detection of certain sIgEs
demonstrates a specific sensitization against corres-
ponding allergens (Figure 3). Afterwards it has to be
controlled whether the sensitization is clinically relevant.
Therefore sIgE represents only one parameter in the
classical allerogological diagnostic-concept which is also
applicable for early diagnosis of allergies: medical history
– skin testing – laboratory tests – provocation tests. In
case of the measurement of sIgEs the quality (pattern of
epitope, degree of purity) of the used allergens is import-
ant.
3.3.2.1 Indications of sIgE-measurement
Detection of sIgE in serum and skin testing are considered
to be equivalent in allergy-diagnostics. In case of sIgE-
13/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
measurement in early diagnosis of allergies it can be
distinguished between primary and secondary indications.
Primary indications for sIgE-analysis (before other diag-
nostic methods like skin tests):
• conditions, in which skin-tests are difficult to perform:
babies or infants•
skin alterations of the testing area•
Urticaria factitia•
Other contra-indications to skin-tests or other diag-
nostic methods (intake of antihistamines etc.),
•
Testing of allergens that are not available for skin
testing
•
• Danger for patients:
Anaphylactic shock or anaphylactic reaction in the
past
•
Suspected high grade sensitization (insect venom
allergy, medical drug allergy, especially beta-lactam-
antibiotics)
•
intake of interfering medication like beta-blocker or
ACE-inhibitor
•
Secondary indications for sIgE-analysis (after other diag-
nostic methods):
in case of discrepancy between the results of skin
test an medical history
•
special selected clinical situations where additional
estimation of the grade of sensitization is needed
•
– also, as additional preparation for provocation or
specific immunotherapy
3.3.3 Methods of determination of sIgE
3.3.3.1 Routine methods of determination
There exist several methods to determine sIgE being
based on similar principles: specific allergen extracts and
partly available recombinant allergens are connected to
a solid phase or they are applied as fluid allergens to
which specific immunoglobulins will link after incubation
[79]. If solid phases are used, their surfaces as well as a
sufficient amount and quality of allergens should assure
that ideally all sIgEs can be bound. After removing un-
linked immunoglobulins, radioactive Anti-IgE-antibodies
marked with fluorescence or enzyme-linked Anti-IgE-anti-
bodies are added. The linked Anti-IgE-antibodies are de-
termined either by direct determination of radioactivity
and fluorescence intensity or after adding a substance
by measuring the enzymatic induced color reaction. In
using a calibration curve related to know sIgE-amounts
the process can be quantified. Therefore, artificially
defined units or the calibration curve of total-IgE-values
defined by the WHO (heterologous interpolation) are used.
Hence, a real quantification of sIgEs is not possible so
far. Apart from the used allergens, the testing systems
differ from each other in regard to the solid phase for
linking allergen and the necessary reagents as well as
the following detection system (Table 6).
3.3.4 Interpretation of specific IgE-values
Screening-Tests for sIgE-antibodies: A bunch of screening
tests for determination of sIgE against mixtures of food
and inhalation allergens are available. They are offered
especially for early diagnosis.
One difficulty of screening tests is insufficient evaluation.
A positive screening test only shows that a sensitization
exists against one or multiple allergens. In using semi-
quantitative tests it can be assumed that negative results
cannot exclude sensitizations. Generally, screening is a
reasonable method if rationalization of the diagnostic
method is reached. Nevertheless, the screening character
of those methods should be obvious.
Table 7: Testing method for detection of allergen- and
antigen-specific IgG
3.3.5 Allergenspecific IgG/IgG4
On the contrary to allergen specific IgE the serum-concen-
tration of allergen specific IgG-antibodies is 100- to 1,000
times higher. Thus, less sensitive methods of detection
can be used. There are several methods to determine
immunoglobulins qualitatively and quantitatively (Table
7). Some companies recommend determination of IgG
as a diagnostic method (especially of food allergens) on
and off. Though allergen specific antibodies of isotype M,
G, A can be found in sera of healthy persons as frequent
as in sera of atopic individuals [80]. Production of allergen
specific antibodies of this type of immunoglobulin belongs
to the normal immune response to impurity exposure.
Here, clinical symptoms do not correlate with the allergic
type-I-reaction. Their function in the pathogenesis of
bronchial asthma respectively allergy are unidentified.
14/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Table 6: Testing methods in order to determine allergen specific IgE-antibodies (according to [141])
15/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
(Continued)
Table 6: Testing methods in order to determine allergen specific IgE-antibodies (according to [141])
Concerning their clinical relevance the importance of
those antibodies is totally insecure [81]. Therefore, detec-
tion of allergen specific IgG- and IgG4- antibodies as a
method of early diagnosis of allergic type-I-diseases has
to be lowered.
3.4 Test systems with mast cells,
basophile and eosinophile granulocytes,
T-lymphocytes and their products
3.4.1 Mediators of basophile granulocytes and
mast cells
Mast cells and basophile granulocytes are equipped with
high-affine IgE-receptors and have the ability to release
rapid inflammatory mediators and immune-regulatory
cytokines [82]. They play a decisive role in the allergic
type-I-reaction. Assays determining cell-specific mediators
of body fluids (e.g. mast cell- tryptase, histamine) can in-
dicate acute or currently occurred activations of those
inflammatory cells (e.g. after anaphylactic reactions).
They can help to detect allergic diseases early, especially
if general reactions have occurred that cannot definitely
be allocated to allergic genesis.
Histamines and their metabolites can be determined in
body fluids by various sensitive and specific methods;
mainly using the immunoassay technique [83]. Detection
in plasma or urine is not important for diagnosis of allergic
diseases because of the rapid metabolism in organisms
and influence of several variables. In contrast to hista-
mine, the tryptase is degraded more slowly (serum-half-
life: 2 hours), and tryptase can help to detect events of
mast cell involvement retrospectively [84]. This is import-
ant in the context of early diagnosis of allergic diseases
because those markers can predict severe courses of
allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
Indications for tryptase measurement:
• Questionable reactions with mast cell involvement
within the last 24 hours, e.g. IgE mediated reactions
by immediate type-I-allergens (insect venom, food al-
lergy among others), anaphylactic reactions (pharma-
16/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
ceuticals, substances for invasive diagnostics among
others),
• To find the cause/activator of a shock reactions
(<24 h)
• Questionable mastocytosis (e.g. elevated basal tryp-
tase-level as a hint to mastocytosis [85])
• Different variables influence the result and complicate
interpretation:
Degree of severity of reaction•
Time course of events and moment of blood with-
drawal [86],
•
Individual aberration of mast cell activation and
tryptase-level
•
No availability of common valid standard values•
While high tryptase-level (>12.5 µg/l) along with low
basal level can argue for involvement of mast cells, values
in normal range do not mean a lot (possibly false nega-
tive). Tryptase-level measurement does not show advan-
tages over clinical evaluation for monitoring of moderate
allergic events (e.g. beginning IgE-mediated food allergy
reaction after oral provocation) by reason of insufficient
sensitivity [87].
3.4.2 Mediators from eosinophile granulocytes
Esosinophile granulocytes participate in the patho-genesis
of allergic diseases decisively. Augmented numbers of
eosinophiles can be detected in the mucous membranes
of the upper and lower respiratory tract of allergic pa-
tients, as well as in the skin of patients with atopic
dermatitis. The measurable mediators in serum reflect
the number of eosinophiles and the degree of activation.
Therefore, they demonstrate the degree and actual status
of inflammatory reaction.
Several investigations are based on the detection of
“Eosinophil Cationic Protein” (ECP) [88] depending on
pre-analytics in a high degree: the release of ECP from
eosinophile granulocytes is induced depending on the
degree of activation during clotting of the whole blood
(pre-analytical preparation: 1 h at room temperature,
meaning 18–22°C). ECP can be measured in other bio-
logical fluids (e.g. serum, “lavage”-fluid) by means of im-
munoassays (serum reference range for adults: <15 µg/l).
ECP- measurement is not suited for individual prediction
because of its tremendous inter-individual dispersion.
Considering this fact, elevated ECP-level cannot help in
diagnostics nor in an explicit allocation to a specific illness
[89]. In selected cases, ECP-measurement can be used
for follow-up of severe atopic diseases [90] provided that
other follow-up parameters are not available.
3.4.3 Cellular allergen stimulation tests
Cellular in-vitro-tests for specific allergy diagnostics serve
mainly as indirect detection methods of sensitization of
basophile granulocytes (by reason of easy availability
compared to mast cells). Some cellular in-vitro-test sys-
tems for type-I-allergy diagnostics use the principle of
detecting mediators or cellular antigens appearing on the
surface of cells after successful activation. For this im-
munologic reaction blood leucocytes are concentrated
by dextran-sedimentation and are incubated with aller-
gens or other trigger factors. Surface marker (CD63) ex-
pressed after allergen stimulation or released mediators
of basophile granulocytes (e.g. histamine, sulfido-leuko-
trienes) serve as indirect parameter for cellular bound
sIgE (Figure 3). The cellular IgE-independent reactivity
preparedness of involved leucocytes is reflected by other
activators (bacterial peptide fMLP, complement compon-
ent C5a) that cause a successful activation and mediator
release.
In imitating major parts of the immunologic reaction chain
of allergic reactions in in-vitro-/ex-vivo-experiments, it
was expected for a long time that hereby allergic reactions
could be diagnosed at an early stage. In this way, those
testing methods could especially have been applied for
early diagnosis. Bell-shaped dose-response-curves (Figure
4) result in using test systems with rising allergen concen-
trations. The slope of the curve correlates with the cellular
sensitization, but does not have any relationship with the
maximum of those curves. (Cellular reactivity represents
a diagnostically irrelevant factor for signal transmission
normally [91].) Allergen specific mediator-dose-response
curves are extremely variable intra and inter-individually.
Therefore a release-test is insufficient to detect sensitiza-
tion if only one allergen concentration is tested. It must
be added that basophiles of about 5–15% cell donors do
not have the ability to release mediators after IgE-medi-
ated stimulation even though cellular IgEs are present
(non-responder). So, significance of cellular tests is less
significant than direct IgE-measurement. They are meth-
odically laborious; they do not apply for transports of
probes; they are expensive and hard to conduct and in-
terpret. Therefore they are not as relevant for allergologic-
al routine diagnostics and especially not for early diagno-
sis of allergic diseases. Adequate indications might be
samples with low total-IgE and ineffective detection of
sIgE even though a sensitization was suspected or in case
of rare allergens. Due to the technical requirements and
the complex interpretation they should be performed only
by physicians that do have extensive experience with
specialized cellular allergy tests.
3.4.4 Activation and histamine-release of
basophile granulocytes
In basophile-de-granulation-tests cells are stained and
counted before and after stimulation with allergens. At
the moment, this method is not important by reason of
an unacceptable dispersion. The histamine-release-test
with allergens measures the released histamine of
basophiles fluorimetrically or by means of immunoassays.
As a positive control, cells are incubated with anti-IgE-
antibodies [92]. The released histamine is alluded to in
percentages to the total histamine of cells determined
by lyses in a parallel preparation (Figure 4). This test is
performed only by a few centres and is preserved mainly
for special diagnostic or scientific questions because no
17/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Figure 4: Histamine-dose-efficacy-curve after allergen-stimulation of human basophile granulocytes in vitro. The maximum of
histamine release (displayed in percentage of total histamine-content (100%)) behaves independently of the cell sensitivity
(indicated as allergen-concentration e.g. for 30% histamine- release (Ag30)). The analysis is aggravated by the individual
variability (differences of multiple decimal power).
advantages exist for this test in routine diagnostics of
IgE-mediated allergies compared to the method of direct
IgE-measurement. Flow cytometry represents another
method to investigate basophile-activation. Those
methods use the new expression of CD63 at the surface
of basophile granulocytes after successful stimulation
via allergens. This kind of testing can be an alternative
to the in-vitro-histamine-release-test in case of existent
technical equipment and sufficient experience.
3.4.5 Measurement of other effectors-cell-
mediators (Leucotrien-release-test)
Though other preformed or new synthesised mediators
of effector-cells can be measured too especially sulfido-
leukotrienes (SLT) have been used beside histamine for
allergy diagnostic so far. In using type-I-allergens the
leukotriene-release-test (e.g. Cellular Antigen Stimulation
Test, CAST [93]) permits an indirect detection of cell-
bound IgE as well (Figure 3). After mixed leucocytes have
been pre-activated with interleukin-3 and have been
stimulated new-synthesised SLT can be measured
quantitatively in immunoassays on ELISA-basis. Basically,
the same conditions count as for the histamine-release-
test [94]. However the concentration of mediators will be
higher due to the pre-treatment with interleukin-3 espe-
cially in donors with fewer release [95]. As a positive
control for allergen induced release serves a monoclonal
anti-Fc-IgE-receptor-antibody. The SLT-release is increased
in adding further stimuli like C5a, fMLP or PAF. Whether
the test can deliver diagnostic information in case of in-
tolerance-reactions by this modification [96] Whether the
test can possibly deliver diagnostic information in case
of intolerance reactions (e.g. acetylsalicylate acid as
model for a non-IgE-mediated intolerance) by this modi-
fication [96] has to be investigated in further controlled
trials.
Selected allergological diagnostic problems can indicate
the use of leukotriene-release-test in particular cases
[97], [98], as long as other methods (skin test, sIgE-
measurement) have already been performed (Table 8).
The leukotriene-release-test cannot be recommended at
the moment in order to identify pseudo-allergens.
In order to evaluate the test results negative controls
(stimulation with puffer and interleukin-3) and positive
controls (stimulation with anti-Fcε-RI, calcium-ionophor)
are supplied for IgE-mediated release of the mediator.
Beside that other controls (C5a, fMLP, PAF) are attached
in order to investigate other stimulation mechanisms. A
positive reaction to an allergen (meaning the indirect
proof of sensitization) is only indicative for a clinically
relevant allergy in combination with a corresponding
medical history.
The leukotriene-release-test represents a complex cellular
test-system which is especially important in continuative
in-vitro diagnostic and not in the routine allergy diagnostic.
18/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Table 8: Indications for the use of leucotrien-release-tests (after skin-tests and sIgE-determination)
How far the test can be applied in pseudo-allergic reac-
tions or for therapy-monitoring has to be tested in add-
itional controlled trials. In case of explicit indications,
controlled accomplishment and critical interpretation the
leukotriene-release-test might be part of a specialized in-
vitro allergy diagnostic potentially.
3.4.6 Determination of basophile-activation by
means of flow cytometry
The activation of basophile granulocytes can be also be
quantified by cytrometry detection of the surface marker
CD63 [99] after allergen stimulation. Single investigations
with pollen- [100], insect venom- [101] and food allergens
[102] proved efficiency of CD63-detection for diagnostic
questions in small patient collectives. How far basophile-
activation-tests by means of flow cytometry represent a
potential method for early diagnosis of allergies has to
be approved by further controlled trials.
3.4.7 Lymphocyte-stimulation-tests (LST)
The application of in-vitro-tests is limited in diagnostics
of cellular mediated allergic reactions so far. At the mo-
ment, the lymphocyte-transformation-test is the most
common test. In the LST, lymphocyte-cultures are exposed
to the suspected allergen in attendance of antigen-
presenting cells. The insertion of tritium-marked thymidin
(3H-thymidin) is mainly used to estimate the lymphocyte-
transformation. The LST proves a specific T-cell-response
of mononuclear cells isolated from blood against the
antigen/allergen. One problem with the LST is that it
cannot be distinguished between a physiological response
to the antigen and an allergic T-cell-response.
Skin tests and in-vitro-tests do not show useful results
for skin lesions like exanthema after intake of medication.
Therefore, drug related exanthema display the most fre-
quent indications for LST in order to close the “diagnostic
gap”. Additionally, other reactions are linked to medical
drugs like allergic vasculitis, aplastic anemia or hepatitis
in which LST was used a diagnostic tool [103], [104].
Extremely good results are achieved by the use of LST in
penicillin allergies. This led to further investigations of
mechanisms of cellular immune reactions against peni-
cillin [105], [106], [107]. Also in the case of carbamazepin
and phenytoin, it was published that LST-results are
meaningful when considering an immunologic setting
[108]. There are some notifications of a small number of
cases about positive LST in further pharmceuticals like
nitrofurantoin, chinidin, nystatin, captopril, ibuprofen,
aminophenazon oder propyphenazon [109]. Nyfelder and
Pichler declared a diagnostic sensitivity of 74–78% and
a specificity of 85% in one of their publications indicating
that this test is not worse than other allergological testing
procedures [110]. There are also reports that positive
LST of blood lymphocytes in protein induced allergies like
food allergies [111], [112], [113] or aggravations of
atopic dermatitis are caused by inhalation allergens [114].
In order to clarify type-I-reactions and allergic contact
dermatitis, more sensitive testing procedures (skin tests,
specific IgE) are usually available. How easily LST can be
interfered by certain substances can be demonstrated
using the example of endotoxins. They can be found fre-
quently in protein fractions and can cause false positive
results of milk-protein-measurements in control individ-
uals [112], [113]. Due to those findings, a detoxification
of commercial protein fractions or allergen extracts [115]
must be used before its use in LST.
Another group of allergens are classical contact allergens
like nickel sulphate, chromate sals or isothiazoline [116],
[117], [118]. Furthermore, LST is a suitable test to prove
sensitizations against beryllium. Diagnosis of berylliosis
represents the best established indication for LST [119].
In higher concentrations, some contact allergens can act
as mitogenes (obligate stimuli) postulating an individual
balanced titration. Whether the partly bad specificity of
LST can originate from non-optimal conditions in analysis
of metal combound [120] cannot be said at the moment.
Good correlations can be achieved between LST and
epicutaneous testing for nickel sulphate [117], [118].
Consistently, false negative reactions of LST have been
observed which limit the application and acceptance of
this test in routine diagnosis [106], [121], [122]. There
are various reasons for negative results:
The observed reaction in patients is not caused by
immunological mechanisms.
•
It was mistimed, e.g. too early after treatment with
steroids, or the period has been to long between
allergen contact and taking the blood sample
•
A metabolite instead of the medication that was not
tested in-vitro causes the allergic reaction [104],
[123].
•
The medical drug inhibits the insertion of thymidin
by its own pharmacological effect [121].
•
By adding enzymes to the test, sera 3H-thymidin is
degraded encymatically in a more extensive way
than in controls [124].
•
19/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
The test is not sensitive enough by reason of too
low numbers of sensitized memory-cells in blood
that probably react in LST.
•
3.4.8 Variations and possibilities to develop
cellular in-vitro-test-systems
The explanatory power of LST has been improved in pre-
incubating antigens with liver microsomes containing
cytochrome-P450 especially in case of sensitizations
against pyrazolones and anticonvulsives because metab-
olites can be detected as well [104], [121], [123]. New
read-out-systems provide interesting perspectives for
advancement of cellular in-vitro-diagnostics of allergic
reactions like the measurement of cytokines (MTT-assay)
or the flow cytometry display of dividing cells after adding
a stimulus [125]. Flow cytometry analysis of LST with
activation markers (meaning membrane molecules that
can be detected more or less after antigen-triggering)
seem to be less sensitive than the determination of
thymidin-insertion [126], [127]. Even though flow cyto-
metry promises to reach a higher specificity of LST in
separating lymphocyte-subpopulations by functional as-
sociated marker (e.g. measurement of allergen-triggered
CLA+-blood-lymphocytes in cutaneous inflammations
[128], [129] or of alpha4beta7+-lymphocytes in food al-
lergies [130]).
3.5 Therapeutic consequences from
early diagnosis of allergies
The early diagnosis of allergic diseases allows a specific
intervention while considering the following therapeutic
aspects:
Abatement/Removal of the patients symptoms•
Prevention of secondary damages/ development of
persistent inflammatory processes in mucous
membranes of the respiratory tract
•
Reduction of the risk to develop a bronchial asthma
and further allergy-associated diseases
•
Reduction of the risk to develop further sensitiza-
tions
•
The therapeutic efficiency of allergen specific immuno-
therapy with subcutaneous injections (SCIT) with allergens
and respectively chemically modified allergen extracts
(Allergoids) could be demonstrated in several trials (re-
views in [131], [132], [133]).
SCIT is also a cost-effective treatment in consideration
of economic factors like the reduction of the medication
usage, increase of productivity and respectively decrease
of absences of work and diminished prevalence of new
sensitizations and allergic asthma [134], [135].
3.6 Preventive effects of SIT with regard
to the development of allergic bronchial
asthma
The data of the PAT-trial is important in order to evaluate
the early treatment by SIT. This European multi-centre
trial showed a significant decrease of the development
of a manifest bronchial asthma (Figure 5) [136].
They have treated 144 children with allergic rhinitis (AR)
either with SCIT or medicinally for a period of three years.
Interestingly, it was observed that children showed a
significantly decreased prevalence of asthma having been
assigned to the SIT treated group after three years of
therapy. Furthermore, a preventative long-term effect
could be proven regarding the prevention of asthma. Even
seven years after finishing SCIT, children developed sig-
nificantly fewer allergic asthma than the control group
[137]. Considering these results, the immunotherapy is
the only known therapy that reduces the development of
bronchial asthma in patients with allergic rhinitis.
3.7 Prevention of additional allergic
sensitizations
Explicit evidence exists that the prevalence of new allergic
sensitizations can be decreased by SCIT. A prospective
trial was published with 44 children suffering from house
dust mite allergy. They showed that the rate of new
sensitizations can be reduced significantly by a 3-year
SCIT [138]. They also discovered similar preventive effects
in a retrospective open-label-trial with 8,396 patients for
a observation period of seven years [139].
4 Summary and future prospects
Allergic diseases belong to the most frequent diseases
of humanity. Their prevalence is growing dramatically in
all industrialised countries.
Allergies often cause atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis or
bronchial asthma in early childhood. Besides considerably
restricting symptoms, allergies affect the life quality of
patients, their social life, and school and work productiv-
ity.
Allergic diseases are characterized by various comorbid-
ities which arise depending on the duration of illness.
Additionally, the affected tissue can be damaged. Further-
more, a chronic persistent inflammatory alteration of tis-
sue can occur which may be irreversible. During the
course of the disease, the number of allergens to which
the individual patient reacts can also increase. All these
issues combined can have tremendous consequences
on the direct, indirect and intangible costs of a health
system and overall economy. Diagnosis and treatment
of allergic diseases as early as possible can prevent some
of the outcomes (secondary prevention).
20/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
Figure 5: Allergen specific immunotherapy can avoid the development of allergic bronchial asthma in patients with allergic
rhinitis (according to [136])
It was demonstrated that early diagnosis of allergic dis-
eases makes specific immunotherapy more efficient. In
this way comorbidities can be avoided (e.g. bronchial
asthma in patients with allergic rhinitis) and the expansion
of sensitization can be limited.
In the future, improved diagnostic methods can further
enhance accurate detection.
References
1. Bousquet J, Van CP, Khaltaev N. Allergic rhinitis and its impact
on asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;108:S147-334. DOI:
10.1067/mai.2001.118891
2. Pariente PD, LePen C, Los F, Bousquet J. Quality-of-life outcomes
and the use of antihistamines in a French national population-
based sample of patients with perennial rhinitis.
Pharmacoeconomics. 1997;12:585-95. DOI:
10.2165/00019053-199712050-00009
3. Ring J, Wenning J; Deutsche Gesellschaft für Allergie und
klinische Immunologie. Weißbuch: Allergie in Deutschland 2000.
München: Urban und Vogel; 2000.
4. Statistisches Bundesamt. Gesundheitsbericht für Deutschland:
Spezialbericht Allergien. Stuttgart: Metzler-Poeschel; 2000.
5. Klimek L, Reichenbach M, Mewes T, Mann W. Untersuchungen
zur Reproduzierbarkeit und jahreszeitlichen Abhängigkeit von
spezifischen intranasalen Provokationstests bei
Birkenpollenallergikern. Laryngorhinootologie. 1997;76:475-9.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-997463
6. Connell JT. Quantitative intranasal pollen challenges: 3. The
priming effect in allergic rhinitis. J Allergy. 1969;43:33-44. DOI:
10.1016/0021-8707(69)90018-5
7. Ciprandi G, Buscaglia S, Pesce G, Pronzato C, Ricca V, Parmiani
S, Bagnasco M, Canonica GW. Minimal persistent inflammation
is present at mucosal level in patients with asymptomatic rhinitis
and mite allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1995;96:971-9. DOI:
10.1016/S0091-6749(95)70235-0
8. Kripke ML, Munn CG, Jeevan A, Tang JM, Bucana C. Evidence
that cutaneous antigen-presenting cells migrate to regional lymph
nodes during contact sensitization. J Immunol. 1990;145:2833-
8.
9. Picker LJ. Control of lymphocyte homing. Curr Opin Immunol.
1994;6:394-406. DOI: 10.1016/0952-7915(94)90118-X
10. Johnson JG, Jenkins MK. Co-stimulatory functions of antigen-
presenting cells. J Invest Dermatol. 1992;99:62S-5. DOI:
10.1111/1523-1747.ep12669010
11. Mosmann TR, Cherwinski H, Bond MW, Giedlin MA, Coffman RL.
Two types of murine helper T cell clone: I. Definition according
to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins; 1986.
J Immunol. 2005;175:5-14.
12. Maggi E, Parronchi P, Manetti R, Simonelli C, Piccinni MP, Rugiu
FS, De CM, Ricci M, Romagnani S. Reciprocal regulatory effects
of IFN-gamma and IL-4 on the in vitro development of human
Th1 and Th2 clones. J Immunol. 1992;148:2142-7.
13. Modlin RL. Th1-Th2 paradigm: insights from leprosy. J Invest
Dermatol. 1994;102:828-32.
14. Jones HE, Inouye JC, McGerity JL, Lewis CW. Atopic disease and
serum immunoglobulin-E. Br J Dermatol. 1975;92:17-25. DOI:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.1975.tb03028.x
15. Enk AH, Katz SI. Identification and induction of keratinocyte-
derived IL-10. J Immunol. 1992;149:92-5.
16. Vercelli D. Regulation of IgE synthesis. Allergy Proc. 1993;14:413-
6. DOI: 10.2500/108854193778792795
21/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
17. van Reijsen FC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA, Kalthoff FS, Maggi E,
Romagnani S, Westland JK, Mudde GC. Skin-derived aeroallergen-
specific T-cell clones of Th2 phenotype in patients with atopic
dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1992;90:184-93. DOI:
10.1016/0091-6749(92)90070-I
18. Kay AB, Ying S, Varney V, Gaga M, Durham SR, Moqbel R,
Wardlaw AJ, Hamid Q. Messenger RNA expression of the cytokine
gene cluster, interleukin 3 (IL-3), IL-4, IL-5, and
granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, in allergen-
induced late-phase cutaneous reactions in atopic subjects. J Exp
Med. 1991;173:775-8. DOI: 10.1084/jem.173.3.775
19. Schartz L, Huff T. Biology of mast cells and Basophils. In:
Middleton EJ, Reed CE, Ellis EF, editors. Allergy, Principles and
Practice. St. Louis: Mosby-Year-Book; 1993.
20. Church MK, el-Lati S, Caulfield JP. Neuropeptide-induced
secretion from human skin mast cells. Int Arch Allergy Appl
Immunol. 1991;94:310-8. DOI: 10.1159/000235393
21. Wardlaw AJ, Moqbel R, Cromwell O, Kay AB. Platelet-activating
factor. A potent chemotactic and chemokinetic factor for human
eosinophils. J Clin Invest. 1986;78:1701-6. DOI:
10.1172/JCI112765
22. Wang JM, Rambaldi A, Biondi A, Chen ZG, Sanderson CJ,
Mantovani A. Recombinant human interleukin 5 is a selective
eosinophil chemoattractant. Eur J Immunol. 1989;19:701-5.
DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830190420
23. Schleimer RP, Sterbinsky SA, Kaiser J, Bickel CA, Klunk DA,
Tomioka K, Newman W, Luscinskas FW, Gimbrone MA Jr,
McIntyre BW. IL-4 induces adherence of human eosinophils and
basophils but not neutrophils to endothelium. Association with
expression of VCAM-1. J Immunol. 1992;148:1086-92.
24. Skoner DP. Allergic rhinitis: definition, epidemiology,
pathophysiology, detection, and diagnosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2001;108:S2-8. DOI: 10.1067/mai.2001.115569
25. Craig TJ, Teets S, Lehman EB, Chinchilli VM, Zwillich C. Nasal
congestion secondary to allergic rhinitis as a cause of sleep
disturbance and daytime fatigue and the response to topical
nasal corticosteroids. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998;101:633-7.
DOI: 10.1016/S0091-6749(98)70171-X
26. Vuurman EF, van Veggel LM, Uiterwijk MM, Leutner D, O'Hanlon
JF. Seasonal allergic rhinitis and antihistamine effects on
children's learning. Ann Allergy. 1993;71:121-6.
27. Lack G. Pediatric allergic rhinitis and comorbid disorders. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2001;108:S9-15. DOI:
10.1067/mai.2001.115562
28. Wright AL, Holberg CJ, Martinez FD, Halonen M, Morgan W,
Taussig LM. Epidemiology of physician-diagnosed allergic rhinitis
in childhood. Pediatrics. 1994;94:895-901.
29. Leynaert B, Bousquet J, Neukirch C, Liard R, Neukirch F. Perennial
rhinitis: An independent risk factor for asthma in nonatopic
subjects: results from the European Community Respiratory
Health Survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104:301-4. DOI:
10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70370-2
30. Ruoppi P, Seppa J, Nuutinen J. Acute frontal sinusitis: etiological
factors and treatment outcome. Acta Otolaryngol. 1993;113:201-
5. DOI: 10.3109/00016489309135793
31. Keith PK, Conway M, Evans S, Wong DA, Jordana G, Pengelly D,
Dolovich J. Nasal polyps: effects of seasonal allergen exposure.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1994;93:567-74. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-
6749(94)70068-0
32. Bachert C, Hormann K, Mosges R, Rasp G, Riechelmann H, Muller
R, Luckhaupt H, Stuck BA, Rudack C. An update on the diagnosis
and treatment of sinusitis and nasal polyposis. Allergy.
2003;58:176-91. DOI: 10.1034/j.1398-9995.2003.02172.x
33. Corey JP, Adham RE, Abbass AH, Seligman I. The role of IgE-
mediated hypersensitivity in otitis media with effusion. Am J
Otolaryngol. 1994;15:138-44. DOI: 10.1016/0196-
0709(94)90063-9
34. McColley SA, Carroll JL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM, Sampson HA. High
prevalence of allergic sensitization in children with habitual
snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. Chest. 1997;111:170-3.
DOI: 10.1378/chest.111.1.170
35. von Mutius E, Martinez FD, Fritzsch C, Nicolai T, Roell G,
Thiemann HH. Prevalence of asthma and atopy in two areas of
West and East Germany. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
1994;149:358-64.
36. von Mutius E. Epidemiologie des Asthma bronchiale im
Kindesalter. Pneumologie. 1997;51:949-61.
37. Martinez FD, Wright AL, Taussig LM, Holberg CJ, Halonen M,
Morgan WJ; The Group Health Medical Associates. Asthma and
wheezing in the first six years of life. N Engl J Med.
1995;332:133-8. DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199501193320301
38. Martinez FD. Role of viral infections in the inception of asthma
and allergies during childhood: could they be protective? Thorax.
1994;49:1189-91. DOI: 10.1136/thx.49.12.1189
39. Silverman M, editor. Childhood asthma and other wheezing
disorders. London: Chapman & Hall Medical; 1995.
40. von Mutius E. Air pollution and asthma. In: Bousquet J, Yssel H,
editors. Immunotherapy in Asthma. New York: Dekker; 1999.
41. ATS workshop on the Health Effects of Atmospheric Acids and
their Precursors. Health effects of atmospheric acids and their
precursors. Report of the ATS workshop on the Health Effects of
Atmospheric Acids and their Precursors. Am Rev Respir Dis.
1991;144:464-7.
42. Committee Of The Environmental And Occupational Health
Assembly Of The American Thoracic Society (ATS). Health effects
of outdoor air pollution, Part 1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
1996;153:3-50.
43. Delacourt C, Labbe D, Vassault A, Brunet-Langot D, de Blic J,
Scheinmann P. Sensitization to inhalant allergens in wheezing
infants is predictive of the development of infantile asthma.
Allergy. 1994;49:843-7. DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-
9995.1994.tb00785.x
44. Hosoi J, Murphy GF, Egan CL, Lerner EA, Grabbe S, Asahina A,
Granstein RD. Regulation of Langerhans cell function by nerves
containing calcitonin gene-related peptide. Nature.
1993;363:159-63. DOI: 10.1038/363159a0
45. Wiesner-Menzel L, Schulz B, Vakilzadeh F, Czarnetzki BM.
Electron microscopical evidence for a direct contact between
nerve fibres and mast cells. Acta Derm Venereol. 1981;61:465-
9.
46. Stingl G, Katz SI, Clement L, Green I, Shevach EM. Immunologic
functions of Ia-bearing epidermal Langerhans cells. J Immunol.
1978;121:2005-13.
47. Inaba K, Schuler G, Witmer MD, Valinksy J, Atassi B, Steinman
RM. Immunologic properties of purified epidermal Langerhans
cells. Distinct requirements for stimulation of unprimed and
sensitized T lymphocytes. J Exp Med. 1986;164:605-13. DOI:
10.1084/jem.164.2.605
48. Robertson I, Greaves MW. Responses of human skin blood
vessels to synthetic histamine analogues. Br J Clin Pharmacol.
1978;5:319-22.
49. Smith JS, Mansfield LE, de Shazo R, Nelson HS. An evaluation
of the pharmacologic inhibition of the immediate and late
cutaneous effect to allergen. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
1980;65:188. DOI: 10.1016/0091-6749(80)90195-5
50. Rietschel RL, Fowler JF Jr. Fisher's Contact Dermatitis. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkin; 1995.
22/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
51. Lockey RF, Benedict LM, Turkeltaub PC, Bukantz SC. Fatalities
from immunotherapy (IT) and skin testing (ST). J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1987;79:660-77. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-
6749(87)80164-1
52. American Academy of Allergy and Immunology. The waiting period
after allergen skin testing and immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1990;85:526-7. DOI: 10.1016/0091-6749(90)90166-
2
53. Pepys J. Skin testing. Br J Hosp Med. 1975;14:412.
54. Brown HM, Su S, Thantrey N. Prick testing for allergens
standardized by using a precision needle. Clin Allergy.
1981;11:95-8. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1981.tb01571.x
55. Osterballe O, Weeke B. A new lancet for skin prick testing. Allergy.
1979;34:209-12. DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.1979.tb01700.x
56. Dreborg S. Food allergy in pollen-sensitive patients. Ann Allergy.
1988;61:41-6.
57. Dreborg S, Backman A, Basomba A. Skin tests used in type I
allergy testing. Position paper of the European Academy of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology. Allergy. 1989;44:1.
58. Mantoux C. Intradermoréaction de la tuberculose. Cr Acad Sci.
1908;147:355.
59. Chipps BE, Talamo RC, Mellits ED, Valentine MD. Immediate (IgE-
mediated) skin testing in the diagnosis of allergic disease. Ann
Allergy. 1978;41:211-5.
60. Voorhorst R. Perfection of skin testing technique. A review.
Allergy. 1980;35:247-50. DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-
9995.1980.tb01762.x
61. Aas K, Belin L. Suggestions for biologic qualitative testing and
standardization of allergen extracts.Acta Allergol. 1974;29:238-
40.
62. Skassa-Brociek W, Manderscheid JC, Michel FB, Bousquet J.
Skin test reactivity to histamine from infancy to old age. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 1987;80:711-6. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(87)90292-2
63. Bernstein IL. Proceeding of the task force of guidelines for
standardizing old and new technologies used for the diagnosis
and treatment of allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
1988;82:487. DOI: 10.1016/0091-6749(88)90958-X
64. Bousquet J. In vivo methods for study of allergy: skin tests. In:
Middleton EJ, Reed CE, Ellis EF, editors. Allergy, Principles and
Practice. St. Louis: Mosby-Year-Book; 1988.
65. Lindblad JH, Farr RS. The incidence of positive intradermal
reactions and the demonstration of skin sensitizing antibody to
extracts of ragweed and dust in humans without history of rhinitis
or asthma. J Allergy. 1961;32:392-401. DOI: 10.1016/0021-
8707(61)90016-8
66. Hagy GW, Settipane GA. Risk factors for developing asthma and
allergic rhinitis. A 7-year follow-up study of college students. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 1976;58:330-6. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(76)90139-1
67. Holgate AT, Church MK. Allergy. London: Gower Medical
Publishing; 1993.
68. Leynadier F, Sansarricq M, Didier JM, Dry J. Prick tests in the
diagnosis of anaphylaxis to general anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth.
1987;59:683-89. DOI: 10.1093/bja/59.6.683
69. Workshop on experimental methodology for clinical studies of
adverse reactions to foods and food additives. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1990;86:421-42.
70. Sutton BJ, Gould HJ. The human IgE network. Nature.
1993;366:421-8. DOI: 10.1038/366421a0
71. Kulig M, Tacke U, Forster J, Edenharter G, Bergmann R, Lau S,
Wahn V, Zepp F, Wahn U. Serum IgE levels during the first 6 years
of life. J Pediatr. 1999;134:453-8. DOI: 10.1016/S0022-
3476(99)70203-9
72. Holford-Strevens V, Warren P, Wong C, Manfreda J. Serum total
immunoglobulin E levels in Canadian adults. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1984;73:516-22. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(84)90363-4
73. Sitzmann F. Normalwerte. München: Hans Marseille Verlag;
1986.
74. Mensing H. Zur Differentialdiagnose der Dermatitis atopica.
Allergologie. 1994;17:477-80.
75. Rothenberg ME. Eosinophilia. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1592-
600. DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199805283382206
76. Burney P, Malmberg E, Chinn S, Jarvis D, Luczynska C, Lai E. The
distribution of total and specific serum IgE in the European
Community Respiratory Health Survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
1997;99:314-22. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-6749(97)70048-4
77. Bergmann RL, Edenharter G, Bergmann KE, Guggenmoos-
Holzmann I, Forster J, Bauer CP, Wahn V, Zepp F, Wahn U.
Predictability of early atopy by cord blood-IgE and parental history.
Clin Exp Allergy. 1997;27:752-60. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-
2222.1997.310899.x
78. Wahn V. Differentialdiagnose kindlicher Immundefekte. Prädiat
Prax. 1998;55:79-100.
79. Boccagni P, Favari F, Zanoni G, Pezzini A, Tridente G. Comparison
of four in vitro assays for specific IgE detection. Int J Clin Lab
Res. 1994;24:102-5. DOI: 10.1007/BF02593909
80. Bjorksten B. Immunological outcome measures. Eur Respir J
Suppl. 1996;21:22s-7s.
81. Boluda L, Fernandez-Caldas E, Berrens L. The role of IgG in type-
I allergy: an unsolved problem. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol.
1997;7:205-10.
82. Galli SJ. Mast cells and basophils. Curr Opin Hematol. 2000;7:32-
9. DOI: 10.1097/00062752-200001000-00007
83. Hammar E, Berglund A, Hedin A, Norrman A, Rustas K, Ytterstrom
U, Akerblom E. An immunoassay for histamine based on
monoclonal antibodies. J Immunol Methods. 1990;128:51-8.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-1759(90)90462-5
84. Brockow K, Vieluf D, Puschel K, Grosch J, Ring J. Increased
postmortem serum mast cell tryptase in a fatal anaphylactoid
reaction to nonionic radiocontrast medium. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1999;104:237-8. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-
6749(99)70141-7
85. Biedermann T, Rueff F, Sander CA, Przybilla B. Mastocytosis
associated with severe wasp sting anaphylaxis detected by
elevated serum mast cell tryptase levels. Br J Dermatol.
1999;141:1110-2. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.1999.03214.x
86. Schwartz LB, Yunginger JW, Miller J, Bokhari R, Dull D. Time
course of appearance and disappearance of human mast cell
tryptase in the circulation after anaphylaxis. J Clin Invest.
1989;83:1551-5. DOI: 10.1172/JCI114051
87. Beyer K, Niggemann B, Schulze S, Wahn U. Serum tryptase and
urinary 1-methylhistamine as parameters for monitoring oral
food challenges in children. Int Arch Allergy Immunol.
1994;104:348-51.
88. Venge P, Bystrom J, Carlson M, Hakansson L, Karawacjzyk M,
Peterson C, Seveus L, Trulson A. Eosinophil cationic protein (ECP):
molecular and biological properties and the use of ECP as a
marker of eosinophil activation in disease. Clin Exp Allergy.
1999;29:1172-86. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.1999.00542.x
23/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
89. Winther L, Moseholm L, Reimert CM, Stahl SP, Kaergaard PL.
Basophil histamine release, IgE, eosinophil counts, ECP, and
EPX are related to the severity of symptoms in seasonal allergic
rhinitis. Allergy. 1999;54:436-45. DOI: 10.1034/j.1398-
9995.1999.00910.x
90. Czech W, Krutmann J, Schopf E, Kapp A. Serum eosinophil
cationic protein (ECP) is a sensitive measure for disease activity
in atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol. 1992;126:351-5. DOI:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00677.x
91. MacGlashan DW Jr. Releasability of human basophils: cellular
sensitivity and maximal histamine release are independent
variables. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1993;91:605-15. DOI:
10.1016/0091-6749(93)90266-I
92. Kleine-Tebbe J. Basophil histamine release by freshly prepared
food extracts. Allergy Proc. 1993;14:255-8. DOI:
10.2500/108854193778811982
93. de Weck AL. Zellulärer Allergen-Stimulierungs-Test (CAST).
Allergologie. 1997;20:487-502.
94. MacGlashan DW Jr, Peters SP, Warner J, Lichtenstein LM.
Characteristics of human basophil sulfidopeptide leukotriene
release: releasability defined as the ability of the basophil to
respond to dimeric cross-links. J Immunol. 1986;136:2231-9.
95. Kepley CL, Youssef L, Andrews RP, Wilson BS, Oliver JM. Multiple
defects in Fc epsilon RI signaling in Syk-deficient nonreleaser
basophils and IL-3-induced recovery of Syk expression and
secretion. J Immunol. 2000;165:5913-20.
96. Wedi B. In vitro diagnostic of pseudoallergic reactions - new
aspects. ACI Int. 1996;8:113-5.
97. Cahen YD, Maly FE, Wuthrich B. [Cellular antigen stimulation test
(CAST) – applicability in the diagnosis of insect toxin allergies].
Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1997;127:5-11.
98. Lebel B, Messaad D, Kvedariene V, Rongier M, Bousquet J,
Demoly P. Cysteinyl-leukotriene release test (CAST) in the
diagnosis of immediate drug reactions. Allergy. 2001;56:688-
92. DOI: 10.1034/j.1398-9995.2001.00103.x
99. Knol EF, Mul FP, Jansen H, Calafat J, Roos D. Monitoring human
basophil activation via CD63 monoclonal antibody 435. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 1991;88:328-38. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(91)90094-5
100. Saporta M, Kamei S, Persi L, Bousquet J, Arnoux B. Basophil
activation during pollen season in patients monosensitized to
grass pollens. Allergy. 2001;56:442-5. DOI: 10.1034/j.1398-
9995.2001.056005442.x
101. Sainte-Laudy J, Sabbah A, Drouet M, Lauret MG, Loiry M.
Diagnosis of venom allergy by flow cytometry. Correlation with
clinical history, skin tests, specific IgE, histamine and leukotriene
C4 release. Clin Exp Allergy. 2000;30:1166-71. DOI:
10.1046/j.1365-2222.2000.00863.x
102. Moneret-Vautrin DA, Sainte-Laudy J, Kanny G, Fremont S. Human
basophil activation measured by CD63 expression and LTC4
release in IgE-mediated food allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
1999;82:33-40. DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)62657-9
103. Berg PA, Daniel PT, Brattig N. Immunologie und Nachweis
medikamentöser Allergien. In: Fuchs E, Schulz KH, editors.
Manuale Allergologicum IV. Deisenhofen: Dustri Verlag; 1996.
pp. 1-13.
104. Hertl M, Merk HF. Lymphocyte activation in cutaneous drug
reactions. J Invest Dermatol. 1995;105:95S-8S.
105. Koponen M, Pichler WJ, de Weck AL. T cell reactivity to penicillin:
phenotypic analysis of in vitro activated cell subsets. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 1986;78:645-52. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(86)90083-7
106. Pichler WJ. Der Lymphozytentransformationstest in der Diagnostik
von unerwünschten Arzneimittelreaktionen. In: Merk HF, editor.
Allergische und pseudoallergische Arzneimittelreaktionen. Berlin:
Blackwell; 1993. pp. 119-30.
107. Stejskal VD, Olin RG, Forsbeck M. The lymphocyte transformation
test for diagnosis of drug-induced occupational allergy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 1986;77:411-26. DOI: 10.1016/0091-
6749(86)90175-2
108. Mauri-Hellweg D, Bettens F, Mauri D, Brander C, Hunziker T,
Pichler WJ. Activation of drug-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in
individuals allergic to sulfonamides, phenytoin, and
carbamazepine. J Immunol. 1995;155:462-72.
109. May A, Weber A, Gall H, Kaufmann R, Zollner TM. Means of
increasing sensitivity of an in vitro diagnostic test for aspirin
intolerance. Clin Exp Allergy. 1999;29:1402-11. DOI:
10.1046/j.1365-2222.1999.00655.x
110. Nyfeler B, Pichler WJ. The lymphocyte transformation test for the
diagnosis of drug allergy: sensitivity and specificity. Clin Exp
Allergy. 1997;27:175-81. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-
2222.1997.tb00690.x
111. Kondo N, Agata H, Fukutomi O, Motoyoshi F, Orii T. Lymphocyte
responses to food antigens in patients with atopic dermatitis
who are sensitive to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1990;86:253-
60. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-6749(05)80073-9
112. Werfel T, Ahlers G, Schmidt P, Boeker M, Kapp A. Detection of a
kappa-casein-specific lymphocyte response in milk-responsive
atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy. 1996;26:1380-6. DOI:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.1996.tb00539.x
113. Werfel T, Ahlers G, Schmidt P, Boeker M, Kapp A, Neumann C.
Milk-responsive atopic dermatitis is associated with a casein-
specific lymphocyte response in adolescent and adult patients.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1997;99:124-33.
114. Wistokat-Wulfing A, Schmidt P, Darsow U, Ring J, Kapp A, Werfel
T. Atopy patch test reactions are associated with T lymphocyte-
mediated allergen-specific immune responses in atopic
dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy. 1999;29:513-21. DOI:
10.1046/j.1365-2222.1999.00510.x
115. Karplus TE, Ulevitch RJ, Wilson CB. A new method for reduction
of endotoxin contamination from protein solutions. J Immunol
Methods. 1987;105:211-20. DOI: 10.1016/0022-
1759(87)90268-7
116. Rasanen L, Sainio H, Lehto M, Reunala T. Lymphocyte
proliferation test as a diagnostic aid in chromium contact
sensitivity. Contact Dermatitis. 1991;25:25-9. DOI:
10.1111/j.1600-0536.1991.tb01768.x
117. Rasanen L, Tuomi ML. Diagnostic value of the lymphocyte
proliferation test in nickel contact allergy and provocation in
occupational coin dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis. 1992;27:250-
4. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0536.1992.tb03255.x
118. Werfel T, Hentschel M, Kapp A, Renz H. Dichotomy of blood- and
skin-derived IL-4-producing allergen-specific T cells and restricted
V beta repertoire in nickel-mediated contact dermatitis. J
Immunol. 1997;158:2500-05.
119. Schreiber J, Zissel G, Greinert U, Galle J, Schulz KH, Schlaak M,
Muller-Quernheim J. [Diagnosis of chronic berylliosis].
Pneumologie. 1999;53:193-8.
120. Cederbrant K, Hultman P, Marcusson JA, Tibbling L. In vitro
lymphocyte proliferation as compared to patch test using gold,
palladium and nickel. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1997;112:212-
7. DOI: 10.1159/000237456
121. Merk HF. In-vitro-Diagnostik bei Arzneimittel-Allergien.
Allergologie. 1988;11:57-9.
24/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
122. Roujeau JC, Albengres E, Moritz S, Piacentino A, Cuny M, Revuz
J, Touraine R. Lymphocyte transformation test in drug-induced
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol.
1985;78:22-4. DOI: 10.1159/000233856
123. Merk HF. Arzneimittelallergie: Einfluss des Fremdstoff-
Metabolismus. Allergologie. 1989;12:171-3.
124. Bodycote J, Wolff S. Metabolic breakdown of [3H]thymidine and
the inability to measure human lymphocyte proliferation by
incorporation of radioactivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1986;83:4749-53. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.83.13.4749
125. Wells AD, Gudmundsdottir H, Turka LA. Following the fate of
individual T cells throughout activation and clonal expansion.
Signals from T cell receptor and CD28 differentially regulate the
induction and duration of a proliferative response. J Clin Invest.
1997;100:3173-83. DOI: 10.1172/JCI119873
126. Boeker M, Werfel T. In vitro Untersuchungen von Antigen- und
Allergen-spezifisch aktivierten mononukleären Zellen.
Allergologie. 1994;17:374-9.
127. Werfel T, Boeker M, Kapp A. Rapid expression of the CD69
antigen on T cells and natural killer cells upon antigenic
stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cell suspensions.
Allergy. 1997;52:465-9. DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-
9995.1997.tb01031.x
128. Abernathy-Carver KJ, Sampson HA, Picker LJ, Leung DY. Milk-
induced eczema is associated with the expansion of T cells
expressing cutaneous lymphocyte antigen. J Clin Invest.
1995;95:913-8. DOI: 10.1172/JCI117743
129. Reekers R, Busche M, Wittmann M, Kapp A, Werfel T. Birch
pollen-related foods trigger atopic dermatitis in patients with
specific cutaneous T-cell responses to birch pollen antigens. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104:466-72. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-
6749(99)70395-7
130. Eigenmann PA, Tropia L, Hauser C. The mucosal adhesion
receptor alpha4beta7 integrin is selectively increased in
lymphocytes stimulated with beta-lactoglobulin in children allergic
to cow's milk. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;103:931-6. DOI:
10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70441-0
131. Klimek L, Malling HJ. Die spezifische Immuntherapie
(Hyposensibilisierung) bei allergischer Rhinokonjunktivitis.
Metaanalyse zu Wirksamkeit und Nebenwirkungen. HNO.
1999;47:602-10.
132. Klimek L. Die allergenspezifische Immuntherapie
(Hyposensibilisierung) Teil 1: Grundlagen und subkutane
Applikation. HNO. 2000;48:116-22.
133. Fuchs T, Klimek L. Die allergenspezifische Immuntherapie
(Hyposensibilisierung) Teil 2. HNO. 2000;48:158-64.
134. Greiner W, Graf von der Schulenberg JM, Gillissen A. Kosten und
Nutzen der Hyposensibilisierung bei allergischem Asthma und
Rhinitis. Gesundh ökon Qual manag. 2002;7:179-86.
135. Schadlich PK, Brecht JG. Economic evaluation of specific
immunotherapy versus symptomatic treatment of allergic rhinitis
in Germany. Pharmacoeconomics. 2000;17:37-52. DOI:
10.2165/00019053-200017010-00003
136. Moller C, Dreborg S, Ferdousi HA, Halken S, Host A, Jacobsen L,
Koivikko A, Koller DY, Niggemann B, Norberg LA, Urbanek R,
Valovirta E, Wahn U. Pollen immunotherapy reduces the
development of asthma in children with seasonal
rhinoconjunctivitis (the PAT-study). J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2002;109:251-6. DOI: 10.1067/mai.2002.121317
137. Jacobsen L, Niggemann B, Dreborg S, Ferdousi HA, Halken S,
Host A, Koivikko A, Norberg LA, Valovirta E, Wahn U, Moller C.
Specific immunotherapy has long-term preventive effect of
seasonal and perennial asthma: 10-year follow-up on the PAT
study. Allergy. 2007;62:943-8. DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-
9995.2007.01451.x
138. Des RA, Paradis L, Menardo JL, Bouges S, Daures JP, Bousquet
J. Immunotherapy with a standardized Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus extract. VI. Specific immunotherapy prevents the
onset of new sensitizations in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
1997;99:450-3. DOI: 10.1016/S0091-6749(97)70069-1
139. Purello-D'Ambrosio F, Gangemi S, Merendino RA, Isola S,
Puccinelli P, Parmiani S, Ricciardi L. Prevention of new
sensitizations in monosensitized subjects submitted to specific
immunotherapy or not. A retrospective study. Clin Exp Allergy.
2001;31:1295-302. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2001.01027.x
140. Coombs RR, Gell PG. The classification of allergic reactions
underlying disease. In: Coombs RR, Gells PG, editors. Clinical
Aspects of Immunology. Oxford: Blackwell; 1963. p. 317.
141. Klimek L. Labordiagnostik allergischer Erkrankungen. CME
Praktische Fortbildung Hals-Nasen-Ohrenheilkunde 1. 2007.
Corresponding author:
Prof. Dr. med. Ludger Klimek
Zentrum für Rhinologie und Allergologie, An den Quellen
10, 65183 Wiesbaden, Germany, Tel.: +49
611-8904381, Fax: +49 611-8904382
Ludger.Klimek@HNO-Wiesbaden.de
Please cite as
Klimek L, Schendzielorz P. Early detection of allergic diseases in
otorhinolaryngology. GMS Curr Top Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2008;7:Doc04.
DOI: 10.3205/cto000049, URN: urn:nbn:de:0183-cto0000492
This article is freely available from
http://www.egms.de/en/journals/cto/2010-7/cto000049.shtml
Published: 2010-10-07
Copyright
©2010 Klimek et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/deed.en). You
are free: to Share — to copy, distribute and transmit the work, provided
the original author and source are credited.
25/25GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 2008, Vol. 7, ISSN 1865-1011
Klimek et al.: Early detection of allergic diseases in otorhinolaryngology...
