© 2010 Pham et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 203–220
Drug Design, Development and Therapy Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
203
R e v i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S12056
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention for acute
coronary syndrome
Son V Pham1
Phuong-Chi T Pham2
Phuong-Mai T Pham3
Jeffrey M Miller4
Phuong-Thu T Pham5
Phuong-Anh T Pham6
1
Bay Pines VA Medical Center,
Department of Cardiology, Bay Pines,
FL, USA; 2
Department of Medicine,
Nephrology Division, UCLA-Olive
View Medical Center, 3
Department
of Medicine, Greater Los Angeles
VA Medical Center, 4
Department
of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology
Division, UCLA-Olive View Medical
Center, 5
Department of Medicine,
Nephrology Division, Kidney and
Pancreas Transplant Program, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
Los Angeles, CA, USA; 6
Mercy
General Hospital, Heart and Vascular
Institute, Department of Cardiology,
Sacramento, CA, USA
Correspondence: Phuong-Thu T Pham
Department of Medicine, Nephrology
Division, Kidney and Pancreas
Transplant Program, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Email ppham@mednet.ucla.edu
Abstract: In patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for acute coronary
syndrome (ACS), both periprocedural acute myocardial infarction and bleeding complications
have been shown to be associated with early and late mortality. Current standard antithrom-
botic therapy after coronary stent implantation consists of lifelong aspirin and clopidogrel
for a variable period depending in part on the stent type. Despite its well-established efficacy
in reducing cardiac-related death, myocardial infarction, and stroke, dual antiplatelet therapy
with aspirin and clopidogrel is not without shortcomings. While clopidogrel may be of little
beneficial effect if administered immediately prior to PCI and may even increase major
bleeding risk if coronary artery bypass grafting is anticipated, early discontinuation of the
drug may result in insufficient antiplatelet coverage with thrombotic complications. Optimal
and rapid inhibition of platelet activity to suppress ischemic and thrombotic events while
minimizing bleeding complications is an important therapeutic goal in the management of
patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. In this article we present an overview
of the literature on clinical trials evaluating the different aspects of antithrombotic therapy in
patients undergoing PCI and discuss the emerging role of these agents in the contemporary
era of early invasive coronary intervention. Clinical trial acronyms and their full names are
provided in Table 1.
Keywords: acute coronary syndrome, percutaneous coronary intervention, aspirin, clopidogrel,
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, bivalirudin
Antiplatelet agents
Aspirin
Aspirin irreversibly acetylates cyclooxygenase subtype 1 found in platelets and effec-
tively blocks the production of the potent aggregatory agent thromboxaneA2.Aspirin
is an essential drug in every PCI setting.
In an observational analysis of the PCI-CURE study consisting of 2,658 patients
with ACS undergoing PCI stratified into three aspirin dose groups . 200 mg (high,
n = 1,064), 101–199 mg (moderate, n = 538), and ,100 mg (low, n = 1,056), Jolly et al1
demonstrated similar rates of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction (MI), or stroke
among the three aspirin groups, whereas the rate of major bleeding was increased in those
receiving high dose aspirin (Hazard ratio of high- vs low-dose 2.05, P = 0.009). Notably,
however, the risk of major bleeding was increased in high- compared to ­moderate- and
low-dose groups [HR: high- vs low-dose 2.05 (1.20–3.50), and ­moderate- vs low-dose
0.78 (0.34–1.77)]. Similarly, the net adverse clinical events (death, MI, stroke, major
bleeding) favored low- over high-dose aspirin (8.4% vs 11.0%, HR 1.31, P = 0.056).
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Drug Design, Development and Therapy
3 September 2010
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
204
Pham et al
Nonetheless, it should be noted that several limitations
­intrinsic to any observational study exist.
The CURRENT-OASIS-7 was the first large scale, mul-
ticenter, multinational, randomized factorial trial designed to
simultaneously evaluate the efficacy and safety of a higher
loading and maintenance dose of clopidogrel compared with
the standard-dose regimen and high-dose ASA compared
with low-doseASA in patients withACS, UA/NSTEMI, and
STEMI, undergoing angiography with intended PCI.2
More than 25,000 patients were randomized in a 2 × 2
factorial design to receive high-dose or standard-dose clopi-
dogrel (600 mg clopidogrel loading dose followed by 150 mg
daily for 7 days, then 75 mg daily for high-dose regimen
(n = 12,508); 300 mg clopidogrel loading dose followed
by 75 mg daily for standard-dose regimen (n = 12,579),
respectively). Within each group (ie, high- versus low-dose
clopidogrel), patients were further randomized to receive
high-dose or low-dose ASA (300–325 mg for high-dose;
75–100 mg for low-dose). The primary outcome was first
occurrence of any component of cardiovascular death, MI, or
stroke through 30 days. The safety outcome was the specific
CURRENT definition of major bleeding through 30 days.
The aspirin analysis showed no difference in the primary
outcome between the low- and high-dose aspirin groups
Table 1 Study acronyms and their respective clinical trial full names (in alphabetical order)
Acronyms Clinical trial full names
ACE Abciximab and Carbostent Evaluation
ACUITY Acute Catheterization and Urgent Intervention Triage Strategy
ADMIRAL Abciximab Before Direct angioplasty and stenting in Myocardial Infarction Regarding Acute and Long-term Follow-up
ARMYDA-2 The Antiplatelet Therapy for Reduction of Myocardial Damage during Angioplasty – 2nd edition
ASPIRE Arixtra Study in Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
ATOLL Acute STEMI Treated With Primary Angioplasty and Intravenous Lovenox or Unfractionated Heparin
BRIDGE Maintenance of Platelet inhibition with cangreLor after discontinuation of Thienopyridines in Patients Undergoing surgery
CHAMPION-PCI Cangrelor versus Standard Therapy to Achieve Optimal Management of Platelet Inhibition-percutaneous Coronary
Intervention
CHAMPION- Cangrelor versus Standard Therapy to Achieve Optimal Management of Platelet Inhibition (Platform)
PLATFORM
CREDO Reduction of Events during Observation
CURRENT/OASIS-7 Clopidogrel Optimal Loading Dose Usage to Reduce Recurrent EveNTs/Optimal Antiplatelet Strategy for Interventions
DISPERSE Dose Confirmation Study Assessing Anti-platelet Effects
EPIC Evaluation of 7E3 for the Prevention of Ischemic Complications
ESPRIT Enhanced Suppression of the Platelet IIb/IIIa Receptor with Integrilin Therapy
HORIZONS-AMI Harmonizing Outcomes with Revascularization and Stents in Acute Myocardial Infarction
IMPACT-II Integrilin to Minimize Platelet Aggregation and Coronary Thrombosis
ISAR Intracoronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen
ISAR-CHOICE Intracoronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen: Choose Between 3 High Oral Doses for Immediate Clopidogrel Effect
ISAR-REACT Intracoronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen-Rapid Early Action for Coronary Treatment
MATE A prospective randomized trial of triage angiography in acute coronary syndromes ineligible for thrombolytic therapy
MULTISTRATEGY MULTIcenter Evaluation of Single High-dose Bolus Tirofiban versus Abciximab with Sirolimus Eluting STEnt or Bare Metal
Stent in Acute Myocardial Infacrtion
OASIS-5 The Fifth Organization to Assess Strategies in Acute Ischemic Syndromes
OASIS-6 The Sixth Organization to Assess Strategies in Acute Ischemic Syndromes
ON-TIME-2 Ongoing Tirofiban in Myocardial Infaction Evaluation 2
PCI-CURE Percutaneous coronary intervention-Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent Events
PLATO A Study of Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes
REPLACE-2 Randomized Evaluation in Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Linking Angiomax to Reduced Clinical Events-2
SYNERGY Safety and efficacy of enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparin in patients with non-ST segment elevation acute coronary
syndromes who receive tirofiban and aspirin
TACTICS-TIMI 18 Treat Angina with Aggrastat and Determine Cost of Therapy with an Invasive or Conservative Strategy-Thrombolysis in
Myocardial Infarction 18
TIMI IIIB Thrombolysis in Myocardial Ischemia
TRILOGY A Comparison of Prasugrel and Clopidogrel in Acute Coronary Syndrome Subjects With Unstable Angina/
Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction Who Are Medically Managed
TRITON-TIMI 38 Trial to Assess Improvement in Therapeutic Outcomes by Optimizing Platelet Inhibition with Prasugrel-Thrombolysis in
Myocardial Infarction
VANQWISH Veterans Affairs Non-Q-Wave Infarction Strategies In-Hospital
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
205
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
among the overall patient cohort, the PCI subgroup, and
the no PCI subgroup. There was also no difference in stent
thrombosis or increase in bleeding using the CURRENT
major or severe bleeding and TIMI major bleeding criteria.
In the clopidogrel analysis, there was no significant difference
in the primary composite outcome for the overall population
between the high- and standard-dose clopidogrel (4.2% vs
4.4% respectively; hazard ratio [HR] 0.95; P = 0.37), and no
statistically significant benefit in each individual component
of the primary outcome. Conversely, the PCI subgroup had
a significant reduction in the primary composite outcome
in the high- vs standard-dose clopidogrel (4.5% vs 3.9%;
HR 0.85; P = 0.036) and reduction in definite stent thrombo-
sis in those who received a stent (0.7% vs 1.2%; P = 0.001).
Both the overall population and PCI subgroup with high-dose
clopidogrel had statistically significant increased CURRENT
major and severe bleeding but notTIMI major bleeding, fatal
bleeding, intracranial bleeding, or CABG-related bleeding.
Within the high aspirin cohort, the primary efficacy event
rate was lower with the high-dose clopidogrel vs standard-
dose clopidogrel group (4.6% vs 3.8%, HR 0.83, P = 0.036).
There was no difference seen between the high- vs ­standard-
dose clopidogrel group within the low aspirin cohort (4.2% vs
4.5%, HR 1.07; P = 0.42). With respect to major bleeding,
the interaction between aspirin and clopidogrel did not reach
statistical significance (P = 0.099).
The trial showed no clinical benefit of high-dose aspirin
or clopidogrel for the entire study group with the exception
of the high-dose clopidogrel PCI subgroup who had signifi-
cantly reduced ischemic events and stent thrombosis at the
cost of increased bleeding.
Aspirin current status
The American College of Cardiology and American Heart
Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines advocate chewing aspirin
(162–325 mg) by patients who have not taken aspirin before
presenting with an ST elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI). Post-PCI STEMI patients should continue aspirin
162–325 mg daily for at least 1 month after bare metal stent
(BMS) implantation, 3 months after sirolimus-eluting stent
(SES) implantation, and 6 months after paclitaxel-eluting
stent (PES) implantation. Thereafter, aspirin is continued
indefinitely at a dose of 75 mg to 162 mg daily (Class I).
Patients with unstable angina (UA) or non-ST elevation
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) should receive aspirin as
soon as possible after hospital presentation and be maintained
on aspirin indefinitely (Class I).3
Thienopyridines
The thienopyridines are platelet P2Y12
receptor antagonists
that irreversibly inhibit adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-
induced platelet aggregation. Aspirin and thienopyridine
combination therapy has been shown to have synergistic
antiplatelet effect and has become standard treatment for
the prevention of ischemic events in patients with ACS and
in those undergoing PCI.
Ticlopidine
Ticlopidine is a first generation thienopyridine that has
largely been replaced by clopidogrel. Studies suggest that
clopidogrel has a more favorable side effect profile and
is a safe and effective alternative to ticlopidine. Although
uncommon, serious ticlopidine-associated adverse effects
include neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, thrombotic throm-
bocytopenic purpura, rash, hepatic cholestasis, and in rare
cases, aplastic anemia, pancytopenia, and agranulocytosis.
Clopidogrel
The beneficial effects of aspirin and clopidogrel combination
therapy in the prevention of major ischemic events after PCI
have been well described. Nonetheless, studies in which the
optimal dosing and timing for clopidogrel ­treatment before
PCI have been evaluated have yielded variable and ­conflicting
results owing in part to the broad range in the duration of
pretreatment (hours to days), wide interindividual variability
in the inhibitory response to clopidogrel, and differences in
study designs. The following section contains a discussion
of selected clinical trials evaluating the effectiveness of
clopidogrel pretreatment in patients undergoing PCI.
The PCI-CURE trial was among the first study in
which the beneficial effect of clopidogrel pretreatment in
patients undergoing PCI was demonstrated.4
Of more than
12,000 patients with non-ST elevationACS in the CURE study
who were randomly assigned to receive either ­clopidogrel or
placebo, 1,313 in the clopidogrel- and 1,345 in the placebo-
treated groups underwent PCI.A loading dose of clopidogrel
300 mg or matching placebo was given a median of 10 days
before PCI. After PCI, more than 80% of patients in both
groups received open-labeled thienopyridine for 4 weeks,
after which the study drug was restarted and continued for a
mean of 8 months. Compared to placebo, clopidogrel reduced
the risk of composite primary endpoint (cardiovascular death,
MI, or urgent revascularization by 30 days after PCI) by
nearly one third (RR 0.70, P = 0.03). The beneficial effect of
clopidogrel was seen before PCI, in the 4 weeks after PCI,
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
206
Pham et al
and in the months thereafter when clopidogrel was continued
long-term.There was no significant difference in major bleed-
ing between the two treatment groups at last follow-up (3–12
months after randomization).
In contrast to the PCI-CURE study, results gained from
the CREDO trial demonstrated that clopidogrel pretreatment
did not significantly reduce adverse cardiac events at 28 days.5
However, subgroup analysis suggested that at least 6 hours of
pretreatment is necessary to demonstrate a beneficial effect
of clopidogrel. In this study, aspirin-treated patients who
underwent elective PCI were randomized to receive 300 mg
clopidogrel loading dose (n = 1,053) or matching placebo
(n = 1,063) 3–24 hours before PCI followed by clopidogrel
75 mg/day through day 28 in each arm. Thereafter, patients
in the loading dose group received clopidogrel 75 mg/day
through month 12 whereas those in the control group received
a placebo. In the overall cohort, administration of a clopidogrel
loading dose did not significantly reduce the combined risks
of death, MI, or urgent target-vessel revascularization at
28 days. However, subgroup analysis demonstrated that among
patients in whom the study drug was initiated at least 6 hours
prior to PCI, those randomized to clopidogrel experienced a
38.6% relative reduction in the combined end points that was
of borderline statistical significance (P = 0.051). However,
post hoc analysis of the CREDO trial demonstrated that the
­difference in outcomes between placebo and ­clopidogrel
­pretreated patients was not significant until at least 15 hours
pre-treatment, with the optimal duration approaching
24 hours.6
Following PCI, long-term clopidogrel treatment
(1 year) was associated with a 26.9% relative reduction in the
combined risks of death, MI, or stroke (P = 0.02).
The beneficial effect of increasing clopidogrel load-
ing dose to 600 mg in achieving a more rapid and intense
platelet suppression and ameliorating outcomes has not been
consistently demonstrated. Results of theARMYDA-2 study
demonstrated that pretreatment with a 600 mg loading dose
of clopidogrel 4–8 hours before PCI (n = 126) significantly
reduced periprocedural adverse cardiac events compared
with the conventional 300 mg dose (n = 129). The primary
end point of death, MI, or target vessel revascularization at
30 days occurred in 4% and 12% of patients in the high- vs
conventional-loading dose groups, respectively (P = 0.041).
Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the 600 mg loading
dose was associated with a 50% reduction in the risk of
periprocedural MI (OR 0.48, P = 0.044).7
Safety data were
comparable between the two treatment groups. However, the
methodological aspects of the ARMYDA-2 trial have been
challenged by experts in the field because only a per-protocol
analysis (only patients who underwent PCI were included)
rather than an intention-to-treat analysis was performed.8
Furthermore, the study sample consisted of a small number
of patients (n = 255) and only moderate-risk patients were
enrolled in the study.
In contrast to theARMYDA-2 study, a retrospective study
of 445 patients with stable angina who underwent PCI failed
to demonstrate a beneficial effect of a high- vs conventional-
loading dose in reducing 30-day major adverse cardiac events.
Major bleeding was also similar between the two treatment
groups. The authors concluded that although 600 mg was
clinically safe, it was not associated with fewer periprocedural
events or improved 30-day outcomes compared to 300 mg
loading dose.9
Nevertheless, it should be noted that in this
study clopidogrel loading dose was administered immedi-
ately before the procedure, which might be inadequate for
providing protective antiplatelet aggregation in either treat-
ment group.
In a meta-analysis of 10 studies (7 randomized, 3 non-
randomized) consisting of over 1,500 patients (712 loaded
with 300 mg, 11 with 450 mg, 790 with 600 mg, and 54 with
900 mg), Lotrionte et al10
demonstrated that a high loading
dose was significantly superior to a standard loading dose
in preventing cardiac death or nonfatal MI (odds ratio 0.54,
95% CI 0.32 to 0.90, P = 0.02) without increasing the risk of
major or minor bleeding (P = 0.55 and P = 0.98, respectively).
Notably, meta-regression analysis suggested that the greatest
benefits of a high loading dose were seen in the highest risk
participants. Although most systematic reviews have some
inherent limitations and the results may not be applicable to
various patient populations, the authors concluded that the
robustness of the study was supported by the magnitude of
statistical significance, even in sensitivity analysis restricted
to randomized trials.
In concert with the ARMYDA-2 study, results gained
in the CURRENT-OASIS 7 study showed reduced com-
posite end points of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke
as well as reduced stent thrombosis through 30 days with
high-dose clopidogrel (600 mg loading followed by 150 mg
for one week) therapy in ACS patients undergoing PCI.
The reduction reached statistical significance but with an
increased CURRENT major and severe bleeding. There was
no significant difference in TIMI major, intracranial hemor-
rhage, or CABG-related bleeding.
The ISAR-REACT study investigators were among the
first to demonstrate that the duration of high-dose clopidogrel
pretreatment beyond 2 hours conferred no additional benefits
among low- to intermediate-risk patients undergoing PCI.11
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
207
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
In this study over 2,000 patients with CAD who underwent
PCI were randomized to receive adjunctive therapy with
either abciximab or placebo. All patients were treated with
600 mg oral loading dose of clopidogrel at least 2 hours
before elective PCI. Subgroup analysis of patients based on
the duration of clopidogrel pretreatment (2 to 3 h, 3 to 6 h,
6 to 12 h, or .12 h) showed no significant differences in the
30-day composite end points of death, MI, or urgent revas-
cularization or its individual components between patient
groups irrespective of assignment to abciximab or placebo
(P = 0.79 across groups). In the ISAR-CHOICE study, the
same group of investigators demonstrated that a single dose
of clopidogrel higher than 600 mg was not associated with
additional suppression of platelet function (P = NS).12
In their
single-center study, 60 patients with suspected or documented
CAD were randomly assigned to one of the three clopidogrel
loading dose (300, 600, or 900 mg). Pharmacokinetic studies
demonstrated that increasing clopidogrel loading dose from
600 mg to 900 mg resulted in no further increase in plasma
concentrations of the active metabolite and the unchanged
form of the drug (P . 0.38) and no further suppression of
ADP-induced platelet aggregation compared with the 600 mg
clopidogrel dose. It is speculated that the lack of further
beneficial response with doses higher than 600 mg may be
due to limited intestinal absorption.12
Clopidogrel trials and outcomes are summarized in
Table 2.
Prasugrel
Prasugrel is a potent third generation thienopyridine with a
more rapid onset of action than clopidogrel. Studies involv-
ing healthy participants suggest that orally administered
prasugrel provides faster, higher, and more consistent inhi-
bition of platelet aggregation compared to clopidogrel.13
Phase III clinical trials involving moderate- to high-risk
patients with ACS undergoing PCI have demonstrated that
prasugrel was superior to clopidogrel in reducing major
adverse cardiac events albeit with increased risk of TIMI
major hemorrhage.
TRITON-TIMI 38 was the first large-scale clinical events
trial in which it was assessed whether the higher level of inhi-
bition of platelet aggregation achieved by prasugrel resulted
in an improvement in clinical outcomes compared with stan-
dard clopidogrel pretreatment. In this study, 13,608 patients
with moderate- to high-risk ACS (10,074 with unstable
angina/NSTEMI and 3,534 with STEMI) and with scheduled
PCI were randomly assigned to receive prasugrel (60 mg
loading dose followed by 10 mg daily ­maintenance dose) or
clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose ­followed by 75 mg daily
maintenance dose for 6 to 15 months).14
The primary efficacy
end point (death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal MI, or
nonfatal stroke) occurred in 9.9% and 12.1% of ­prasugrel- vs
clopidogrel-treated patients (HR 0.81, P , 0.001). Prasugrel-
treated patients also showed a significant reduction in the
incidence of MI (7.4% vs 9.7%, respectively, P , 0.001),
urgent target-vessel revascularization (2.5% vs 3.7%, respec-
tively, P , 0.001), and stent thrombosis (1.1% vs 2.4%,
respectively, P , 0.001). However, major bleeding occurred
in 2.4% of patients receiving prasugrel compared to 1.8%
of those receiving clopidogrel (HR, 1.32, P = 0.03). Life-
threatening bleeding including nonfatal and fatal bleeding
was also significantly higher in the prasugrel-treated groups.
However, there were no significant differences between
treatment groups in the overall ­mortality rate (ie, cardio-
vascular death or death from any cause). Post hoc analysis
demonstrated that patients with a history of stroke or transient
ischemic attack (TIA) had a net harmful effect from prasugrel
whereas those older than 75 years of age, and those weigh-
ing less than 60 kg had no net clinical benefit from prasugrel
treatment. It should also be noted that in this study nearly
75% of patients received the study drug during PCI whereas
only 25% to 26% of patients in each arm received study drug
before PCI, which might not be relevant to current practice
guidelines.
In an analysis involving STEMI patients in theTRITON-
TIMI 38 study (n = 3,534), Montalescot et al15
demonstrated
that prasugrel was associated with a significant reduction in
the primary composite end points of cardiovascular death,
non-fatal MI, or non-fatal stroke at 30 days and 15 months
follow-up and there was no significant increase in major
bleeding risk between the treatment groups during the
study period. However, TIMI major bleeding after coronary
artery bypass graft surgery was significantly increased in
­prasugrel- compared to clopidogrel-treated groups (OR 8.19,
P = 0.0033).
In summary, the TRITON-TIMI 38 demonstrated that
prasugrel therapy was associated with significantly reduced
rates of ischemic events including stent thrombosis, but with
an increased risk of major bleeding in a subset of patients.
The drug was approved by the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) in July 2009 for use in patients with ACS
undergoing PCI. The clinical use of prasugrel will most
likely be in the setting of STEMI. There are no clinical ­trials
as of yet ­supporting the safety of “upstream” prasugrel use
in the setting of NSTEMI. Patients with NSTEMI in the
TRITON-TIMI 38 trial were not randomized until after
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
208
Pham et al
definition of the coronary anatomy was made by coronary
angiography. Prasugrel is not yet recommended for routine
use in elective PCI unless patients are felt to be at higher risk
of thrombosis by their interventional cardiologists. Prasugrel
is contraindicated in patients with a prior history of stroke
or TIA.The package insert recommends decreasing the daily
maintenance dosage from 10 mg to 5 mg in patients weigh-
ing less than 60 kg although there is no clinical evidence
supporting its safety.
The TRILOGY ACS is an ongoing trial comparing the
relative efficacy and safety of prasugrel and clopidogrel in
medically treated unstable angina/NSTEMIACS patients.This
trial has an expected completion date of October 2011.16
Thienopyridines current status
Currently available data support the use of high-dose clopi-
dogrel loading (600 mg) if given . 2–6 hours pre-PCI, and
standard-dose (300 mg) if given . 6–12 hours pre-PCI.
Pharmacokinetic study results suggest that clopidogrel
­loading doses higher than 600 mg offer no additional ben-
eficial effects on platelet function suppression due to limited
­clopidogrel absorption. However, large randomized trials
evaluating clinical end points are needed. Clopidogrel 75 mg
daily should be continued for a variable period depending
in part on stent type (eg, one month for bare metal stent,
one year with drug eluting stent except in patients at high risk
for bleeding – or three months for Cypher, and six months for
Taxus stent). For patients with ACS, clopidogrel should be
continued for at least one year regardless of stent type.
In STEMI patients undergoing primary PCI, the ACC/
AHA guidelines recommend administration of clopidogrel
300 mg or 600 mg, favoring the 600 mg dose, or prasugrel
60 mg as soon as possible (Class I; Level of Evidence C for
clopidogrel and B for prasugrel). If stents are implanted, BMS
or DES, clopidogrel 75 mg daily or prasugrel 10 mg daily
should be continued for at least 12 months unless the risk of
Table 2 Clopidogrel trials and outcomes
Trial Study drug N 10
endpoints Outcomes/comments
PCI-CURE 300 mg Clopidogrel loading
(Clopidogrel given median
10 days before PCI)
Placebo
1,313
1,345
Composite endpoints of CV
death, MI, or urgent revascularization
by 30 days after PCI
Compared with placebo,
clopidogrel ↓ the risks of
composite endpoints by nearly
1/3 (RR = 0.70, P = 0.03)
CREDO 300 mg Clopidogrel loading
Placebo
1,053
1,063
Combined risks of death, MI or urgent
revascularization @ day 28
No difference between the
2 treatment groups
Post-hoc: Clopidogrel better
if given .15 hrs before PCI
ARMYDA-2 600 mg clopidogrel loading 126 Combined risks of death, MI, or target 600 mg versus 300 mg, no
300 mg clopidogrel loading 129 vessel revascularization @ 30 days difference (P = 0.041)
Multivariate analysis:
50% ↓ peri-procedure MI
with 600 mg clopidogrel
Comparable safety
CURRENT-OASIS 7* Clopidogrel analysis:
600 mg loading, followed
by 150 mg × 7 days, then
75 mg daily 300 mg loading,
followed by 75 mg daily
12,508
12,579
Composite endpoints of
CV death, MI, or stroke
@ 30 days
600 mg versus 300 mg,no
difference (P = 0.37)
PCI subgroup:
↓ Composite endpoints
(HR 0.85,P = 0.036) and
↓ Definite stent thrombosis with
high dose (P = 0.001)
↓ Current major and severe
bleeding with high dose (P = 0.01)
ISAR-REACT Duration of 600 mg
clopidogrel treatment before
PCI with or without abciximab
(2–3 h, 3–6 h, 6–12 h, or .12 h)
2,159 Composite endpoints of death, MI, or
urgent revascularization @ 30 days
No incremental benefit with
clopidogrel pretreatment
.2–3 h (P = 0.79) with or
without abciximab
ISAR-CHOICE Clopidogrel 300 mg, 600 mg,
or 900 mg loading
60 Plasma concentrations of active
and inactive clopidogrel metabolites,
and unchanged clopidogrel; values
for ADP-induced platelet aggregation
4 h after clopidogrel
600 mg versus 900 mg
No further increase in
concentrations of metabolites
(P = 0.59) or ADP-induced
platelet aggregation (P = 0.39)
*Within each clopidogrel group (600 mg versus 300 mg loading), patients were randomized to receive high-dose or low-dose aspirin (300–325 mg or 75–100 mg).
Abbreviation: N, number of patients.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
209
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
bleeding outweighs the benefit (Class I). Prasugrel should
not be given as part of the dual antiplatelet therapy in patients
with a prior history of TIA or stroke (Class III).
Selected UA and NSTEMI patients undergoing invasive
therapy should also receive dual antiplatelet therapy includ-
ing aspirin with clopidogrel before or at the time of PCI or
prasugrel at the time of PCI (Class I; Level of Evidence A
for clopidogrel and B for prasugrel).17
Nonthienopyridines
Ticagrelor
Ticagrelor is the first reversible oral P2Y12
receptor antagonist
of the nonthienopyridine class. It has a rapid onset of action
and a half-life of approximately 12 hours. Phase II trial con-
ducted in stable atherosclerosis patients demonstrated a dose-
dependent increase in the level of inhibition with ticagrelor,
with levels significantly higher than those achieved with
clopidrogel.18
Similarly, in the phase-2 ­DISPERSE trial
involving NSTEMI patients who were randomized to receive
either ticagrelor 90 or 180 mg twice daily, or clopidrogel
300-mg loading dose, ticagrelor has been shown to exhibit
greater mean inhibition of ­platelet aggregation than a stan-
dard regimen of clopidogrel.19
Safety data profile showed an
increase in minor bleeding at the higher dose but no differ-
ence in major bleeding was observed. The rates of MI were
lower in the ticagrelor compared to the clopidrogel groups,
although this did not reach statistical significance.19
The phase III PLATO trial was a multicenter, double-blind,
randomized trial comparing ticagrelor (180 mg loading dose,
90 mg twice daily thereafter) with clopidogrel (300 mg to
600 mg loading dose, 75 mg daily thereafter) for the ­prevention
of cardiovascular events in over 18,000 patients admitted with
ACS, with or without ST-segment ­elevation.20
At 12 months
follow-up, ticagrelor as compared with clopidogrel signifi-
cantly reduced the primary composite end point of death from
vascular causes, MI, or stroke (9.8% vs 11.7% in the ticagre-
lor vs clopidrogel group, respectively, P , 0.001) without
an increase in the rate of overall major bleeding but with an
increase in the rate of non-procedural related bleeding and a
trend towards more hemorrhagic strokes in the ­ticagrelor- vs
the clopidogrel-group (0.2% vs 0.1% respectively; P = 0.10).
Other ticagrelor-related adverse events include dypsnea,
ventricular pauses, and slightly increased creatinine and uric
acid levels. Notably, discontinuation of the study drug due
to adverse events occurred in 7.4% of ­ticagrelor- vs 6.0% of
clopidrogel-treated patients (P , 0.01).
The advantages of ticagrelor vs clopidogrel were seen
in ACS patients with or without ST-segment elevation, in
patients undergoing invasive or non-invasive treatment, and
in patients who had or had not received the currently recom-
mended pretreatment of higher loading dose of clopidogrel.
The only exception was the attenuated benefit of ticagrelor in
patients weighing less than the median weight for their gender
in the study, in patients not taking lipid-lowering drugs at
randomization, and in patients enrolled in North America.
Ticagrelor has not been approved by the FDA in the US.
Cangrelor
Similar to ticagrelor, cangrelor is a nonthienopyridine that
binds reversibly to the platelet P2Y12
receptor. It has a rapid
onset of action (within seconds if a bolus dose is adminis-
tered), a rapid offset, and a half-life of a few minutes with
complete recovery of platelet function within 1 hour.21
The
CHAMPION PLATFORM trial was a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study randomizing over 5000 patients into the
cangrelor or placebo group at the time of PCI, followed by
administration of 600 mg clopidogrel.22
Enrollment was
stopped prematurely because an interim analysis failed to
demonstrate the superiority of cangrelor over placebo in
reducing the primary composite end points of death, MI, or
ischemia-driven revascularization at 48 hours (P = 0.17).
The pre-specified secondary end points, rate of stent throm-
bosis, and rate of death from any cause at 48 hours, were
significantly reduced in the cangrelor group but should be
interpreted with caution in the absence of a positive primary
end point finding. In addition, the rate of major bleeding in the
study group was higher mainly due to more groin hematomas
based on the GUSTO bleeding scale.
The CHAMPION PCI trial compared cangrelor with
600 mg of clopidogrel administered before PCI in nearly
9,000 patients with ACS.23
The primary efficacy end point,
a composite of death from any cause, MI, or ischemia-
driven revascularization at 48 hours occurred in 7.5% of the
cangrelor group and 7.1% of the clopidogrel group (odds
ratio 1.05; 95% CI 0.88–1.24; P = 0.59). Cangrelor was also
not superior to clopidogrel at 30 days. The secondary end
points of death from any cause, Q-wave MI, or ischemia-
driven revascularization showed a reduction trend favoring
cangrelor but were not statistically significant. As seen in
the CHAMPION PLATFORM trial, there was also a trend
towards more major bleeding in the cangrelor group based
on the GUSTO bleeding scale.
Despite the negative primary efficacy end points and
safety concerns with cangrelor from both CHAMPION trials,
cangrelor may be an attractive drug for “bridging therapy”
in the perioperative setting due to its rapid onset and offset
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
210
Pham et al
of action, and its reversibility. The BRIDGE study is an
­ongoing study designed to demonstrate that patients receiv-
ing cangrelor infusion before coronary artery bypass grafting
have an acceptable safety profile and can undergo surgery
without excessive bleeding perioperatively. This study has
an expected completion date of July 2010.24
Glycoprotein IIB/IIIA inhibitors
Inhibition of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors – the final com-
mon pathway of platelet-thrombus formation (Figure 1) – has
been shown to reduce thrombotic complications associated
with PCI.
Results gained in early studies demonstrated no clinical
benefit from routine early invasive management compared
with conservative ischemia-guided management in patients
with NSTEMI (eg, the TIMI IIIB trial, the VANQWISH
trial, and the MATE trial).28
However, with the advent of
coronary stents and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, inde-
pendent investigators have sought to evaluate the short- and
long-term outcomes of a routine invasive strategy compared
with a selective strategy in patients with UA and NSTEMI
in the pre- compared with the post-glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and
coronary stenting era. The TIMI IIIB and the TACTICS-
TIMI 18 were both trials of an early invasive strategy in
patients with UA/NSTEMI with nearly identical study
design and patient enrollment criteria.25,29
However, the
two studies were conducted 10 years apart, and the use of
upstream GP IIb/IIIa was mandated and coronary stenting
was routinely used in TACTICS-TIMI 18. Among patients
matched for similar degrees of baseline risks, patients in
TACTICS-TIMI 18 had significantly lower rates of the
composite end points of death, MI, or rehospitalization
for ACS through 6 months compared with patients in
TIMI IIIB, after adjusting for differences in baseline risk.
Although the favorable outcomes in theTACTICS-TIMI 18
compared with the TIMI IIIB trials were likely multifacto-
rial, including advances in the care of patients with UA/
NSTEMI, GP IIb/IIIa inhibition, and coronary stenting, the
investigators speculated that the differences in outcomes
most likely reflect the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors and
coronary stenting in TACTICS-TIMI 18.
Similar to the TACTICS-TIMI 18 trial, analysis of the
CRUSADE community-based registry database consisting
of over 55,000 NSTE MI patients demonstrated a beneficial
effect of early GP IIb/IIIa inhibition in reducing the risk of
in-hospital mortality in patients at all risk levels. Notably,
among troponin-positive patients, GP IIb/IIIa inhibition was
associated with an even lower adjusted mortality risk.30
Activated
platelet
G
P
Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
Abciximab
Eptifibatide
Tirofiban
Figure 1 Site of action of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors.
Aggregation requires activated platelets, glycoprotein receptor IIb/IIIa (GP), and fibrinogen. The latter acts as a bridge that attaches platelet to each other forming the initial
hemostatic plug. The current ACC/AHA guidelines recommend the use of GP IIb/IIIa antagonists in high-risk patients with STEMI-ACS and planned percutaneous coronary
intervention.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
211
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
Currently available GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors include
­abciximab, tirofiban, and eptifibatide. Selected trials involv-
ing the use of each individual GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor in patients
undergoing PCI are discussed.
Abciximab
Abciximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody with a high
affinity receptor binding and a long biological half-life. Unlike
eptifibatide or tirofiban which are selective for the GP IIb/IIIa
receptor, abciximab receptor binding is ­nonspecific. In the
early EPIC trial consisting of patients at high risk for throm-
botic complications after coronary intervention, abciximab
has been shown to reduce ischemic complications of coro-
nary intervention albeit with an increased risk of bleeding.31
Subsequent large randomized controlled trials extend the
findings of the EPIC trial on the beneficial role of GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors in patients undergoing PCI.
In a European meta-analysis of three randomized trials
(ISAR-2, ADMIRAL, and ACE) in which patients under-
going primary PCI and stenting for ST-elevation MI were
­randomized to receive abciximab (n  = 550) or placebo
(n = 551), Montalescot et al32
demonstrated a 37% relative
risk reduction in death or reinfarction in abciximab- compared
to placebo-treated groups (RR 0.633, P = 0.008). Similarly,
mortality rates were reduced in the abciximab- compared to
placebo-treated arms although this did not reach statistical
significance (P = 0.05). The impact of abciximab on the
primary outcomes was observed up to 3 years of follow-up.
Major bleeding occurred in 2.5% and 2.0% of abciximab
and placebo-treated groups, respectively (P = NS). Notably,
there was a 47.5% relative risk reduction in the primary
endpoint of death or MI, and an 85% relative risk reduction
in reinfarction in diabetics compared to their non-diabetic
counterparts (P = 0.022).
Eptifibatide
Eptifibatide is a small cyclic heptapeptide that is highly
specific for the GP IIb/IIIa receptor. It has a relatively low
binding affinity and rapidly dissociates from its receptor
after cessation of therapy, leading to an early restoration of
platelet function after discontinuation of infusion. Its time to
restoration of normal platelet aggregation after cessation of
therapy is 4 hours, compared to 72 hours for abciximab.
In the IMPACT-II trial consisting of 4,010 patients
undergoing elective, urgent, or emergency PCI who were
randomized to receive placebo or bolus eptifibatide followed
by two different dosing regimen of continuous infusion
therapy (135 µg/kg eptifibatide followed by an infusion of
0.5 µg/kg/min for 20–24 h or 0.75 µg/kg/min infusion), a
significant reduction in the primary composite end points of
death, MI, or urgent target vessel revascularization at 30 days
was demonstrated in the 135/0.5 treated-group (11.6% vs
9.1%, eptifibatide vs placebo, respectively, P = 0.035), with
a less substantial reduction in the 135/0.75 treated- group
(11.6% vs 10.0%, eptifibatide vs placebo, respectively,
P = 0.18). There was no significant increase in the primary
safety end point of major bleeding in eptifibatide-treated
groups.33
In a subsequent randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover-permitted ESPRIT trial (n = 2,064)
using double-bolus eptifibatide therapy followed by infusion
therapy at a dose that was 4-fold higher than that used in
the IMPACT-II study, O’Shea et al34
demonstrated that in
patients undergoing non-urgent PCI with stent implantation,
eptifibatide significantly reduced the primary composite end
points of death, MI, and urgent target vessel revasculariza-
tion within 48 h compared with placebo (0.3% vs 0.4%,
P = 0.027). The beneficial effect of adjunctive eptifibatide
therapy was maintained through six months of follow up.
Tirofiban
Tirofiban is a small nonpeptide tyrosine derivative GP IIb/IIIa
antagonist. Similar to eptifibatide, tirofiban is a selective
inhibitor of the GP IIb/IIIa receptor with a rapid onset of
action and a short half-life of 2–4 hours. Its action is rapidly
reversible upon cessation of therapy. Such reversibility may
have important clinical implications such as in the setting of
emergent coronary artery bypass graft surgery when rapid
reversal of antithrombotic effects is desirable.
Early studies in which lower-dose bolus tirofiban was used
failed to demonstrate the non-inferiority of tirofiban as com-
pared with abciximab in patients undergoing percutaneous
coronary revascularization with the intent to perform stenting
of a newly stenotic or restenotic atherosclerotic lesions of a
native vessel or bypass graft.35
However, subsequent trials
using high-dose bolus tirofiban support its efficacy in patients
with STEMI undergoing PCI. The ON-TIME 2 trial was the
first randomized, placebo-controlled trial evaluating whether
pre-hospital initiation of high-bolus dose tirofiban in addition
to dual antiplatelet therapy improved ST-segment resolution
and clinical outcome after PCI.36
A total of 984 patients with
STEMI who were candidates to undergo PCI were randomly
assigned to either high-bolus dose tirofiban (n = 491) or
placebo (n = 493) in addition to aspirin (500 mg), heparin
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
212
Pham et al
(5000 IU), and clopidogrel (600 mg). The study drug was
initiated at a median of 76 minutes after symptom onset
and 55 minutes prior to angiography/PCI. The cumulative
residual ST-segment deviation was significantly lower in
the tirofiban compared to placebo groups 1 hour post-PCI
(3.6 mm [SD 4.6] vs 4.8 mm [SD 6.3], P = 0.003). There
was no significant increase in the rates of major bleeding
between the two groups (4% vs 3%; P = 0.36). At 30 days
there was a significant reduction in the combined incidence
of death, recurrent MI, urgent target vessel revascularization,
or thrombotic bailout in the tirofiban compared to placebo
groups (26% vs placebo 32.9%, P = 0.02). Further analy-
sis suggested an association between the level of residual
ST-segment deviation and mortality.
Similarly, the MULTISTRATEGY trial involving
745 patients presenting with STEMI or new left bundle-
branch block demonstrated that high-dose bolus regimen
of tirofiban was superior to standard dose abciximab in
ST-segment recovery at 90 minutes following coronary
intervention.37
With regard to stent type, sirolimus-eluting
stent implantation was associated with a significantly
lower risk of major adverse cardiac events compared to
uncoated stents within eight months after intervention
owing primarily to a reduction of revascularization rates
(10.2% vs 3.2%). The incidence of ischemic and hemor-
rhagic outcomes was similar between the tirofiban and
abciximab groups.
Abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban
in the setting of PCI: meta-analysis
In a meta-analyis of 21 randomized trials comparing
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors with controls (in which 15 used
­abciximab, four used eptifibatide, and two used tirofiban),
Labinaz et al38
demonstrated that treatment with GP IIb/IIIa
in the setting of PCI significantly reduced 30-day mortality
rates, MI, and revascularization procedures.At 30 days there
was a significant 0.38% absolute reduction in the primary
outcome of all-cause mortality. The reduction in mortality
rate was seen as early as 7 days but the benefit appeared to
dissipate by six months and was of borderline significance
at one year. Similarly, the beneficial effect of GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors in reducing both MI and the need for repeat
revascularization was observed as early as seven days and
persisted to 30 days and six months. The early reduction in
clinical events associated with GP IIb/IIIa inhibition was
thought to be consistent with the pharmacodynamic effects
of these agents whereby potent GP IIb/IIIa antagonism
reduces local platelet deposition at the site of PCI. This
results in a reduction in the local platelet-mediated vasocon-
striction, distal vessel platelet-thrombin microembolization
and abrupt vessel closure – all of which may contribute to
the ­reduction in reinfarction risk and the subsequent need
for repeat ­revascularization procedures.38
The beneficial
effects of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are achieved at an increased
risk of thrombocytopenia (OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.10 to 1.81)
and minor bleeding (OR 1.80, 95% CI 1.47 to 2.21), but not
major bleeding (OR 1.29, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.68).
GP IIb/IIIa trials and outcomes are summarized in
Table 3.
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors current status
In selected STEMI patients, the ACC/AHA guidelines
recommend treatment with a GP IIb/IIIa receptor antago-
nist at the time of primary PCI with or without stenting
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence A for abciximab and B for
eptifibatide and tirofiban). The usefulness of these agents
as routine treatment in STEMI patients is uncertain (Class
IIb) but its beneficial effect may be greater in the presence
of inadequate thienopyridine loading or large thrombus
burden.
Patients with UA or NSTEMI undergoing early invasive
treatment may be administered GP IIb/IIIa receptor antagonist
or clopidogrel before angiography (Class I; LOE A). In the
setting of recurrent ischemia or high risk features includ-
ing positive troponin, both GP IIb/IIIa receptor antagonist
and clopidogrel may be given in addition to aspirin before
angiography (Class IIa; LOE B). Abciximab should not be
administered if PCI is delayed for over 24 hours (Class III).
Antithrombins
Indirect thrombin inhibitors
Unfractionated heparin
The heparins, Unfractionated heparin (UFH) are indirect
thrombin inhibitors that complex with antithrombin (AT)
and convert AT from a slow to a rapid inactivator of throm-
bin, factor Xa, and to a lesser extent, factors XIIa, XIa, and
IXa. UFH has been the standard adjunctive antithrombin
therapy during PCI for nearly three decades. However, there
are several intrinsic limitations to heparin therapy including
its inability to bind clot-bound thrombin. More importantly,
such clot-bound thrombin remains enzymatically active,
amplifying its own generation leading to further thrombus
formation. Other disadvantages of UFH include its depen-
dence on AT for inhibition of thrombin activity, sensitivity
to platelet factor 4, and marked interindividual variability in
therapeutic response. To overcome some of the limitations
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
213
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
of the heparins, newer agents with more predictable pharma-
cokinetics and anticoagulant effect are being evaluated for
their safety and efficacy in the setting of PCI. These include
enoxaparin, fondaparinux, and bivalirudin.
Enoxaparin
Enoxaparin is a low molecular weight heparin with a longer
half-lifeandgreateranti-XaactivitythanUFH,andlessplasma
and protein binding. It has a high bioavailability with signifi-
cantly less interindividual variation in therapeutic response
than UFH. In patients with normal renal function the drug
can be given subcutaneously without the need for laboratory
monitoring or dose adjustment. Enoxaparin has been shown
to be superior to UFH in reducing ischemic events in patients
treated conservatively for NSTEMI. However, studies of high-
risk patients undergoing early coronary intervention failed
to demonstrate the superior effectiveness of enoxaparin over
UFH.IntheSYNERGYtrialinvolving4,687high-riskpatients
withnon-ST-segmentelevationACSundergoingPCIwhowere
randomized to receive enoxaparin or UFH, White et al39
dem-
onstrated similar rates of death and MI at 30 days between the
two treatment groups (enoxaparin vs UFH: 13/1% vs 14.2%,
respectively, P = 0.289). The incidence of GUSTO severe
bleeding was comparable between the two treatment groups
(P = 0.289) whereas TIMI major bleeding was significantly
higher in the enoxaparin group (enoxaparin vs UFH: 3.7% vs
2.5%, respectively, P = 0.28). The authors concluded that in
high-risk patients undergoing PCI forACS, enoxaparin avoids
the need for monitoring and achieves similar effectiveness to
UFH but is ­associated with more bleeding.The routine recom-
mendation of enoxaparin use in high-risk patients undergoing
PCI awaits further study.
Table 3 Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa trials and outcomes
Trial Study drug N 10
endpoints Outcomes/comments
European
Meta-analysis
(ISAR-2, ACE,
ADMIRAL)
Abciximab
Placebo
550
551
Composite of death
or re-infarction;
up to 3 years of
follow-up
Compared with placebo,
abciximab ↓ the composite
endpoints by 37%
(RR = 0.633, P = 0.008)
Diabetics versus non-
diabetics: ↓ composite
endpoints and re-infarction
(P = 0.022)
No difference in major
bleeding
IMPACT-II Eptifibatide bolus followed
by two continous infusions
(Bolus 135 ug/kg, infusion
0.5 or 0.75 ug/kg/min ×
20–24 h)
Placebo
4,010 (total)
1,349 (infusion @ 50)
1,333 (infusion @ 75)
1,328 (placebo)
Composite of death,
MI, or urgent target vessel
revascularization @ 30 days
Eptifibatide 135/0.5 versus
placebo 11.6% versus 9.1%,
respectively (P = 0.035)
Eptifibatide 135/0.75
versus placebo
11.6% versus 10.0%,
respectively (P = NS)
No difference in major
bleeding in eptifibatide-
treated groups
ESPRIT
ON-TIME 2
Double-bolus eptifibatide
followed by high-
dose infusion
Placebo
Pre-hospital high-bolus
dose tirofiban + DAT + 
heparin
Placebo + DAT + heparin
1,040 (eptifibatide)
1,024 (placebo)
491
493
Composite of death, MI,
or urgent target vessel
revascularization through
6 months
Combined incidence
of death, recurrent MI,
urgent target vessel
revascularization,
or thrombotic bailout @
30 days; ST- segment
resolution
Eptifibatide versus placebo
(0.3% versus 0.4%,
P = 0.027)
Tirofiban versus placebo
26% versus 32.9%,
respectively
(P = 0.02) in STEMI
with PCI
Lower residual ST-segment
deviation 1 h after PCI
(P = 0.003)
No difference in rates of
major bleeding between
groups
Abbreviation: N, number of patients.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
214
Pham et al
TheATOLL trial is an ongoing randomized trial evaluating
enoxaparin vs unfractionated heparin in lowering ischemic
and bleeding events in patients with acute STEMI treated with
primary angioplasty. The trial has an expected completion
date of January 2012.40
Fondaparinux
Fondaparinux is an indirect synthetic factor Xa inhibitor
that binds to AT with a higher affinity than UFH or LMWH,
and causes a conformational change in AT that significantly
increases the ability of AT to inactivate factor Xa. The
binding of fondaparinux to AT causes rapid and predictable
inhibition of factor Xa. It has a half-life of 15 hours, with
linear pharmacokinetics and low inter- and intra-individual
variability obviating the need for laboratory monitoring.
However, it should be noted that unlike heparin, fondaparinux
is not inactivated by protamine and currently has no known
antidote.
In a pilot, phase II, randomized, multicenter, blinded
ASPIRE trial comparing two dosing regimen of fonda-
parinux with UFH in patients undergoing PCI, Mehta et al41
demonstrated similar bleeding complications and composite
efficacy outcome of all-cause mortality, myocardial ­infarction,
urgent revascularization, or need for a bailout GP IIb/IIIa
antagonist between UFH and the combined fondaparinux
groups. Bleeding was less common in the 2.5 mg- com-
pared to the 5 mg-fondaparinux group although this did
not reach statistical significance (P = 0.06). In a subse-
quent OASIS-6 trial involving 3,788 patients with STEMI
undergoing primary PCI who were randomized to receive
UFH for 4–48 hours vs fondaparinux 2.5 mg SQ daily for
up to 8 days in a placebo-controlled double-blind trial, the
30-day composite end points of death or reinfarction and
bleeding complications were comparable between UFH and
­fondaparinux groups (P = NS).42
However, there were higher
rates of coronary complications in the fondaparinux-treated
groups largely due to guiding catheter thrombosis. It should
be noted that in patients undergoing primary PCI, intrave-
nous heparin was used in all patients in the control group
(by protocol design) whereas only 21% in the fondaparinux
group received ­heparin. Further analysis demonstrated that
among 496 patients who received UFH prior to primary
PCI, the rates of clinical complications (coronary complica-
tions, catheter thrombus, and severe bleeding) were similar
between fondaparinux and control groups. The results of
both OASIS-5 (comparing fondaparinux vs enoxaparin in
ACS)43
and OASIS-6 trials suggest that using UFH with
fondaparinux during PCI substantially reduces the risk of
catheter thrombosis and related complications without an
increase in clinical complications or major bleeds. None-
theless, currently available data do not support a role for
fondaparinux during PCI for stable or unstable coronary
artery disease.
Indirect thrombin inhibitor trials and outcomes are sum-
marized in Table 4.
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Bivalirudin
Bivalirudin is a bivalent synthetic, reversible direct thrombin
inhibitor that overcomes several limitations of heparin includ-
ing its ability to inhibit clot-bound thrombin. Unlike heparin,
bivalirudin does not require cofactors and is not neutral-
ized by platelet product. In addition, it has a short half-life
(25 minutes) that allows for a rapid return to hemostasis.
Table 5 summarizes the advantages of bivalirudin over
heparin.
Early clinical trials conducted for patients with unstable
angina during PCI have shown that bivalirudin reduces
Table 4 Indirect thrombin inhibitor trials and outcomes
Trial Study drug N 10
endpoints Outcomes/comments
SYNERGY Enoxaparin
UFH
2,323
2,364
Composite of death
and MI @ 30 days
No difference between 2 groups
Trend towards ↑ TIMI major bleeding with enoxaparin
(P = 0.28)
No difference in GUSTO severe bleeding between 2 groups
OASIS-6 Fondaparinux 2.5 mg
UFH for 4–48 h
3,788 (total)*
1,890 (Fondaparinux)
1,898 (UFH)
Composite of death
or reinfarction
No difference in composite endpoints between 2 groups
No difference in bleeding complications
Increased catheter thrombosis with fondaparinux (P , 0.001)
Of the 21% in the fondaparinux group receiving UFH before
10
PCI, rates of coronary complications, catheter thrombosis,
and severe bleeding were similar to control group
Notes: *Patients with STEMI undergoing primary PCI.
Abbreviation: N, number of patients.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
215
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
ischemic complications and bleeding after angioplasty
compared with high-dose heparin.44
Subsequent pilot stud-
ies suggested that bivalirudin with planned or provisional
abciximab may be at least as safe and effective as low-dose
heparin plus abciximab during percutaneous coronary
intervention.45,46
Similarly, in a randomized, open-labeled,
phase III study (ACUITY) involving 13,819 patients with
ACS in whom urgent or early intervention was planned,
both bivalirudin plus a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and bivalirudin
monotherapy were found to be superior to heparin plus GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitor for the primary composite end points of MI,
unplanned revascularization or death from any cause at 30
days.47
The primary end point of major bleeding unrelated
to coronary artery bypass graft surgery was significantly
lower in patients receiving bivalirudin monotherapy com-
pared to those receiving heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor
after 30 days. In patients receiving bivalirudin plus a GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitor, bleeding complications were superior to a
regimen of heparin plus planned GP IIb/IIIa. At the 1-year
follow-up, the composite end points of ischemia and all-cause
­mortality was comparable among bivalirudin plus a GP IIb/
IIIa ­inhibitor-, bivalirudin monotherapy-, and heparin plus
a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor-treated groups.
The Randomized Evaluation in PCI Linking Angiomax
to Reduced Clinical events (REPLACE)-2 trial was among
the first large-scale randomized, double-blind, active
controlled trial designed to test the safety and efficacy of
bivalirudin and provisional GP IIb/IIIa blockade during PCI
compared with the standard practice of low-dose heparin
plus planned GP IIb/IIIa blockade.48
The study comprised
over 6,000 patients who were randomly assigned to receive
intravenous ­bivalirudin (0.75 mg/kg followed by 1.75 mg/kg
per hour for the duration of PCI; n = 2,999), or heparin
(65 U/kg) with planned GP IIb/IIIa inhibition (abciximab or
eptifibatide; n = 3,011). All patients received daily aspirin
and a thienopyridine for at least 30 days after PCI. There
was no statistically significant difference in the primary
end points of 30-day incidence of death, MI, urgent repeat
revascularization, or in-hospital major bleeding between
bivalirudin- and heparin-treated groups (9.2% vs 10.0%,
respectively, P = 0.32). Similarly, the secondary composite
end point was comparable between the two treatment groups.
Provisional GP IIb/IIIa was administered in 7.2% of patients
in the bivalirudin group. Notably, in-hospital major bleeding
rates were significantly reduced in bivalirudin-treated groups
(2.4% vs 4.1%, P , 0.01).
The encouraging results on the safety and efficacy of
bivalirudin alone (as compared with heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa)
observed in the REPLACE-2 trial have sparked interest in the
use of this antithrombotic regimen in the setting of primary
PCI in patients with ST-elevation acute MI. Results from the
HORIZONS-AMI consisting of 3,602 patients with STEMI
who were randomized to receive bivalirudin monotherapy and
provisional GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors or heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors demonstrated that bilivarudin monotherapy resulted
in significantly reduced 30-day rates of major bleeding and
net adverse clinical events (9.2% vs 12.1%; relative risk,
0.76, P = 0.005), compared to heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors (abciximab or eptifibatide) owing to a lower rate
of major bleeding (4.9% vs 8.3%, P , 0.001).49
Treatment
with bivalirudin alone, as compared with heparin plus
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors resulted in significantly lower 30-day
rates of death from cardiac causes (1.8% vs 2.9%; relative
risk, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.40 to 0.95; P = 0.03) and death from
all causes (2.1% vs 3.1%; relative risk, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.44
to 1.00; P = 0.047). There was an increased risk of acute
stent thrombosis within 24 hours in the bivalirudin group but
no significant increase was pre after 30 days. Glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa inhibitors were administered in 7.2% of patients
(129 patients) who were assigned to bivalirudin, in 47 because
of a sustained absence of reflow after PCI, in 32 because of
a giant thrombus after PCI, and in the rest for various other
indications. It is speculated that the early increase in stent
thrombosis with bivalirudin alone may be explained in part
by adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet activation before
maximal thienopyridine blockade by the P2Y12
receptor or
by residual thrombin activity after the discontinuation of
bivalirudin. Indeed, a clopidogrel loading dose ­administered
before the procedure might be inadequate to provide protective
Table 5 Advantages of bivalirudin over heparin
Heparin Bivalirudin
•  Indirect thrombin inhibitor • Direct thrombin inhibitor/Does not
require cofactors
• Nonspecific binding to:
  Serine proteases
 Endothelial cells
• Not inhibited by PF4 or anti-heparin
proteins
•  Action dependent on AT •  Action independent of AT
• Does not inhibit fibrin-bound
protein
•  Inhibits fibrin-bound protein
•  Causes platelet aggregation •  Does not cause platelet aggregation
•  Variable PK-PD • More predictable PK and
anticoagulation effect
•  Risk of HIT •  Does not cause thrombocytopenia
Abbreviations: AT, antithrombin; PK-PD, pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics;
HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; PF4, platelet factor4; PK, pharmacokinetics.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
216
Pham et al
antiplatelet aggregation, particularly in a subset of patients
with clopidogrel resistance. Approximately one third of
patients in each arm received clopidogrel 300 mg and two
thirds received a 600 mg ­loading dose. Whether ­pretreatment
with more rapidly acting and potent ­thienopyridine agent
(or higher loading dose regimen of clopidogrel), or a longer
course of bivalirudin, or both, may reduce the incidence of
early stent thrombosis without increasing the risk of bleed-
ing is unknown and remains to be studied. Nonetheless, it
should be noted that there is currently no agent to reverse the
antithrombotic effect of bivalirudin.
Analysis evaluating the predictive factors of acute,
subacute, and late stent thrombosis after acute MI primary
angioplasty in the HORIZONS-AMI trial revealed that the
rates of acute stent thrombosis at 24 hours were significantly
lower in those who received bivalirudin and pre-random-
ization heparin (bivalirudin + pre-randomization heparin)
compared to those who did not receive pre-randomization
heparin (bivalirudin, no pre-randomization heparin) [0.9%
vs 2.6%, respectively, P = 0.006].
Bivalirudin trials and outcomes are summarized in
Table 6.
Bivalirudin: current status
Currently available data suggest that bivalirudin may
be considered as an alternative strategy to heparin plus
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, particularly in patients at high risk for
bleeding complications. However, its use is relatively con-
traindicated in patients with chronic total occlusion because
there is currently no agent to reverse its antithrombotic
effects. For elective PCI, bivalirudin monotherapy (with
provisional GP IIb/IIIa for procedural complications) has
emerged as the antithrombin of choice, providing similar
protection from ischemic events as low dose UFH plus
routine GP IIb/IIIa (or high dose UFH alone) with mark-
edly less bleeding.
Antithrombins current status
In STEMI patients undergoing primary PCI, the ACC/AHA
guidelines recommend supportive anticoagulant therapy with
unfractionated heparin (UFH) (Class I, LOE C) or bivalirudin
(Class I, LOE B) in addition to aspirin and thienopyridine.
Patients who have already been on UFH should receive
additional boluses to maintain therapeutic activated clotting
time, taking into account whether a GP IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonist has been given. Patients who have not been given
a GP IIb/IIIa should have a target ACT 250–300 seconds
using a Hemotec device or target ACT 300–350 seconds
using a Hemochron device. Patients who have been given a
GP IIb/IIIa should have a target ACT of 200–250 seconds.
Enoxaparin may be considered as an alternative to UFH
(Class IIB). Bivalirudin may be administered with or without
Table 6 Direct thrombin inhibitor trials and outcomes
Trial Study drug N 10
endpoints Outcomes/comments
ACUITY Bivalirudin+GP IIb/IIIa
Bivalirudin monotherapy
Heparin (or enoxaparin)+
GP IIb/IIIa
2,609
2,619
2,561
Composite of death from
any cause, MI, or unplanned
revascularization @ 30 days;
major bleeding unrelated to CABG
Both bivalirudin regimen were
non-inferior to heparin
(or enoxaparin) + GP IIb/IIIa
Lower major bleeding with
bivalirudin monotherapy
Comparable composite of ischemia
and all-cause mortality among
3 groups at 1 yr
REPLACE-2 Bivalirudin+provisional
GP IIb/IIIa
Low-dose heparin+ 
planned GP IIb/IIIa
2,999
3,011
Composite of death, MI, urgent
repeat revascularization, or
in-hospital major bleeding @
30 days
No difference between 2 groups
↓ in-hospital bleeding in
7% of bivalirudin group not given
GP IIb/IIIa (P , 0.01)
HORIZONS- AMI Bivalirudin monotherapy+
provisional GP IIb/IIIa
Heparin+GP IIb/IIIa
1,800
1,802
Major bleeding; combined
adverse CV events (combination
of major bleeding & MACE*)
within 30 days or net adverse
clinical events
Bivalirudin monotherapy versus
Heparin GP IIb/IIIa (9.2% versus
12.1%, respectively, P = 0.005)
(↓ major bleeding in bivalirudin group,
P , 0.001) ↓ death from cardiac and
non-cardiac causes (P = 0.03 and
P = 0.047 respectively) ↑ stent
thrombosis with bivalirudin ,24 h
(P = 0.0007) but not by 30 days
*MACE: Major Adverse Cardiac Events defined as death, re-infarction, target vessel revascularization for ischemia and stroke.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
217
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
UFH and may be preferable in patients with high bleeding
risk (Class IIA; LOE B).
In NSTEMI patients selected for early invasive
­strategy, addition of UFH, enoxaparin, or bivalirudin
may also be considered. Both UFH and enoxaparin
have a Class I, LOE A indications. Bivalirudin have a
Class I, LOE B indications. Despite the updated AHA/
ACC guidelines regarding ­enoxaparin, it is not widely
used for procedural ­anticoagulation during PCI due to
the lack of a rapid bedside assay for monitoring its anti-
coagulative effects. Current data do not support a role for
fondaparinux during PCI. For patients undergoing PCI
with prior fondaparinux treatment, additional intravenous
therapy with an anticoagulant with anti-IIa ­activity should
be administered.
Antithrombotic dosing and bleeding risks
The advent of potent antiplatelet and antithrombin agents
over the past decade has resulted in significant improvement
in reducing ischemic events in ACS patients. However, the
use of antiplatelet and antithrombotic combination therapy,
often in the settings of PCI, has led to an increase in the risk
of bleeding. More importantly, such complications have
been reported to be associated with increased mortality,
myocardial infarction, and stroke risks.50–52
The CRUSADE
registry database revealed that over 42% of patients with
NSTEMI received one or more antithrombotic agents above
the recommended dosage range. Excessive dosing and
the number of agents administered in excess were found to
be directly related to the risks of bleeding. Suggested factors
associated with elevated bleeding risks included older age
defined as age . 65 years, (particularly age . 75), female
gender, chronic kidney disease, low body weight with
increasing risk for every 5 kg decrease in weight, diabetes,
and congestive heart failure. Proper dosing requires adjust-
ments based on body weight and renal function.53
Similar to
the CRUSADE registry study results, numerous researchers
have demonstrated that older age, female gender, low body
mass weight, and chronic kidney disease are powerful pre-
dictors of bleeding complications.51,52
Other suggested risk
factors include invasive procedures and baseline hemoglobin
and hematocrit values. In addition to the patient’s baseline
characteristics,thetype,degree,andrapidityof­anticoagulation
and platelet inhibition may play a contributory role in
bleeding complications.52
Assessment of bleeding risks
should be an integral part of risk stratification for ACS.
The judicious balance between antithrombotic effect and
risk of bleeding may further improve clinical outcomes of
patients with ACS.
Summary
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), including
angioplasty and coronary stent placement, is currently the
treatment of choice for patients withACS and STEMI. In such
patients, aspirin and clopidogrel dual therapy has remained
the cornerstone of oral antiplatelet therapy. ­Currently
­available data support the use of high-dose clopidogrel
­loading (600 mg) if given . 2–6 hours pre-PCI, and standard
loading dose (300 mg) if given . 6–12 hours pre PCI. For
elective PCI, clopidogrel 75 mg daily should be continued for
a variable period depending in part on stent type. For patients
with ACS, clopidogrel should be continued at least one year
regardless of the stent type. Studies in which the safety and
efficacy of higher loading and maintenance dose regimen
of clopidogrel versus standard dose regimen and high-dose
(.300 mg) vs low-dose aspirin (,100 mg) were evaluated
favor administration of high dose aspirin and high loading
and maintenance dose of clopidogrel inACS patients under-
going PCI. There was no statistically significant difference
in cardiovascular end point among patients taking high- vs
low-dose aspirin with the exception of the high-dose aspirin
and high-dose clopidogrel PCI supgroup. Due to the wide
interindividual variability in the response to clopidogrel, a
newer third generation thienopyridine drug was developed.
The TRITON-TIMI 38 trial involving moderate- to high-
risk patients with ACS undergoing PCI demonstrated that
prasugrel was superior to clopidogrel in reducing major
adverse cardiac events although its use was associated with
an increased risk of TIMI major hemorrhage in a subset
of patients. Prasugrel was recently approved by the FDA
for use in ACS patients undergoing PCI as an alternative
to clopidogrel. Its use may be preferable to clopidogrel in
patients with high thrombus burden or high risk for throm-
bus formation. Results from the PLATO trial demonstrated
that ticagrelor was also superior to clopidogrel in reducing
ischemic events but without an increased risk of bleeding.
Ticagrelor, however, has not been approved by the FDA for
use in ACS patients.
In addition to dual antiplatelet therapy, patients with ACS
should be given supportive anticoagulant therapy in the early
periproceduralperiod.AdministrationofUFHisstillregardedas
thegoldstandardantithrombotictherapy.Bivalirudinovercomes
severallimitationsofheparinandmaybeconsideredasanalter-
nativestrategytoUFHplusGPIIb/IIIainhibitorsparticularlyin
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
218
Pham et al
patients at risk for bleeding ­complications. However, its use is
relativelycontraindicatedinpatientswithchronictotalocclusion
becausethereis­currentlynoagenttoreversetheantithrombotic
effect of bivalirudin. Bivalirudin should be used with ­caution
in patients without UFH or clopidrogel pretreatment due to
increased risk of acute stent thrombosis. Although enoxaparin
hasbeensuggestedtobesuperiortoUFHanditsuseobviatesthe
need for laboratory monitoring, enoxaparin is associated with
increasedbleedingcomplications.Theroutinerecommendation
of enoxaparin use in high-risk patients undergoing PCI awaits
further studies. Similar to enoxaparin, fondaparinux causes
less interindividual ­variation in therapeutic response than UFH
and appears to be an attractive therapeutic option in patients
undergoing PCI. Nevertheless, fondaparinux has been shown
to result in higher rates of coronary complications compared to
UFH.Currentlyavailabledatadoesnotsupportaroleforfonda-
parinux during PCI. The use of fondaparinux and adjunctive
UFH during PCI has been suggested to provide the beneficial
effect of reducing the risk of catheter thrombosis and related
complications without an increase in clinical complications or
major bleeds. However, further studies are needed. Suggested
antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing PCI for ACS
or STEMI in the contemporary era of early invasive coronary
intervention are summarized in Figure 2.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Jolly SS, Pogue J, Haladyn K, et al. Effcets of asapirin dose on ischemic
events and bleeding after percutaneous coronary intervention: insights
from the PCI-CURE Study. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:900–907.
	 2.	 Mehta SR, Bassand JP, Chrolavicius S, et al. Design and rationale of
CURRENT-OASIS 7: a randomized, 2 × 2 factorial trial evaluation
optimal dosing strategies for clopidogrel and aspirin in patients with
ST and non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes managed with an
early invasive strategy. Am Heart J. 2008;156: 1080–1088.
	 3.	 Krumholz HM,Anderson JL, Bachelder BL, et al.ACC/AHA 2008 Per-
formance Measures forAdultsWith ST-Elevation and Non-ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction.A Report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:2046–2099.
	 4.	 Mehta SR, Yusuf S, Peters RJ, et al. Effects of pretreatment with
clopidrogel and aspririn followed by long-term therapy in patients
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: the PCI-CURE study.
Lancet. 2001;358:527–533.
	 5.	 Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, Mann JT, et al. Early and sustained dula oral
antiplatelet therapy following percutaneous coronary intervention.
JAMA. 2002;288:2411–2420.
	 6.	 Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, Brennan DM, et al. Optimal timing for the
initiation of pretreatment with 300 mg clopidrogel before percutaneous
coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:939–943.
	 7.	 Patti G, Colonna G, Pasceri V, et al. Randomized trial of high loading
dose of clopidrogel for reduction of periprocedural myocardial infarc-
tion in patients undergoing coronary intervention: results from the
ARMYDA-2 (Antiplatelet therapy for Reduction of Myocardial Dam-
age during angioplasty) Study. Circulation. 2005;111: 2099–2106.
	 8.	 Triocco P, Harrington RA. Letters regarding Article by Patti et al.
“Randomized trial of high loading dose of clopidrogel for reduction
of periprocedural myocardial infarction in patients undergoing coro-
nary intervention: results from the ARMYDA-2 (Antiplatelet therapy
for Reduction of Myocardial Damage during angioplasty) Study”.
­Circulation. 2005;112:e282.
	 9.	 Wolfram R,Torguson RL, Hassani S-E, et al. Clopidrogel loading dose
(300 versus 600 mg) strategies for patients with stable angina pectoris
subjected to percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:
984–989.
	10.	 Lotrionte M, Biondi-Zoccai GGL, Agostoni P, et al. Meta-analysis
appraising high Clopidrogel loading in patients undergoing percutane-
ous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100: 1199–1206.
	11.	 Kandzari DE, Berger PB, KastratiA, et al. Influence of treatment dura-
tion with a 600-mg dose of clopidogrel before percutaneous coronary
revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:2133–2136.
	12.	 von Beckerath N, Taubert D, Pogatsa-Murray G, et al. Absorption,
metabolism, and antiplatelet effects of 300-, 600-, and 900-mg loading
dosesofclopidogrel. Results oftheISAR-CHOICE(IntracoronaryStent-
ing and Antithrombic Regimen: Choose Between 3 High Oral Doses
for Immediate Clopidogrel Effect) Trial. 2005;112:2946–2950.
	13.	 Brandt JT, Payne CD, Wiviott SD, et al. A comparison of prasugrel
and clopidrogel loading dose on platelet function: Magnitude of platelet
inhibition is related to active metabolite formation. Am Heart J. 2007;
153:66–69.
	14.	 Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe C, et al. Prasugrel versus clopidrogel
in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:
2001–2015.
	15.	 Montalescot G,Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, et al. Prasugrel compared with
clopidrogel in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (TRITON-TIMI 38): double-
blind, randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:723–731.
Antithrombotic strategies in patients
undergoing early angiography (Moderate to high risk
ACS/STEMI)
Aspirin
Clopidogrel*
Pre-angio/PCI (preferred)
Aspirin
No Clopidogrel
Pre-loading
Bivalirudin alone**
(Provisional GP IIb/IIIa)
Bivalirudin alone**
(Provisional GP IIb/IIIa)
UFH + deferred
GP IIb/IIIa for PCI
OR
UFH + deferred
GP IIb/IIIa for PCI
OR
Figure 2 Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing early angiography.
Notes: *Clopidogrel 600 mg loading dose is preferred. Prasugrel may also be
considered in selected patients with STEMI undergoing PCI (see text).
**Bivalirudin is relatively contraindicated in patients with chronic total occlusion.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
219
Antithrombotic strategies in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention
	16.	 A Comparison of Prasugrel and Clopidogrel in Acute Coronary
­Syndrome Subjects (TRILOGYACS).This study is currently recruiting
participants. ClinicalTrials.gov.
	17.	 Kushner FG, Hand M, Smith SC Jr, et al. 2009 Focused Updates:ACC/
AHA Guidelines for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction (Updating the 2004 Guideline and 2007 Focused
Update) and ACC/AHA/SCAI Guidelines on Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention (Updating the 2005 Guideline and 2007 Focused Update):
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation.
2009:120:2271–2306.
	18.	 Husted S, Emanuelsson H, Heptinstall S, et al. Parmacodynamics,
pharmacokinetics, and safety of the oral reversible P2Y12 antagonoist
AZD6140 with aspirin in patients with atherosclerosis: a double-
blind comparison to clopidrogel with aspirin. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:
1038–1047.
	19.	 Cannon CP, Hudsted S, Harrington A, et al. Safety, tolerability, and
initial efficacy of AZD6140, the first reversible oral adenosine diphos-
phate receptor antagonist, compared with clopidrogel, in patients with
non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syndrome: primary results
of the DISPERSE-2 trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1844–1851.
	20.	 Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al, for the PLATO Investigators.
Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes.
N Engl Med J. 2009;361:1045–1057.
	21.	 Angiolillo DJ, Bhatt DL, Gurbel PA, et al. Advances in antiplatelet­
therapy: agents in clinical development. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:
40A–51A.
	22.	 Bhatt DL, Lincoff AM, Gibson CM, et al; for the CHAMPION PLAT-
FORM Investigators. Intravenous platelet blockade with cangrelor
during PCI. N Eng J Med. 2009;361:2330–2341.
	23.	 Harrington RA, Stone GW, McNulty S, et al. Platelet inhibition with
cangrelor in patients undergoing PCI. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:
2318–2329.
	24.	 Maintenance of Platelet Inhibition with Cangrelor (Bridge).This study
is currently recruiting participants. ClinicalTrials.gov.
	25.	 TheTIMI IIIB Investigators. Effects of tissue plasminogen activator and
a comparison of early invasive and conservative strategies in unstable
angina and non-Q-wave myocardial infarction: results of theTIMI IIIB
trial. Circulation. 1994;89:1545–1556.
	26.	 Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Crawford MH, et al. Outcomes in patients
with acute non-Q-wave myocardial infarction randomly assigned to
an invasive as compared with a conservative management strategy.
N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1785–1792.
	27.	 McCullough PA, O’NeilWW, Graham M, et al.A prospective randomized
trialoftriageangiographyinacutecoronarysyndromesineligibleforthrom-
botictherapy:resultsoftheMedicineversusAngiographyinThrombolytic
Exclusion (MATE) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32: 596–605.
	28.	 Arora RR, Rai F, Rai F. Antiplatelet intervention in acute coronary
syndrome. Am J Therapeutics. 2009;16,e29-e40.
	29.	 Cannon CP,WeintraubWS, Demopoulos LA, et al. Comparison of early
invasive and conservative strategies in patients with unstable coronary
syndromes treated with the glycoprotein GIIb/IIIa inhibitor tirofiban.
N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1879–1887.
	30.	 Hoekstra JW, Roe MT, Peterson ED, et al. Early glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitor use for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome:
patient selection and associated treatment patterns. Acad Emerg Med.
2005;12:431–437.
	31.	 Topol GJ, Califf RM, Weissman HF, et al. Randomized trial of coro-
nary intervention with antibody against platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
integrin for reduction of clinical restenosis: results at 6 months. The
EPIC investigators. Lancet. 1994;343:1430–1435.
	32.	 Montalescot G, Antoniucci D, Kastrati A, et al. Abciximab in primary
coronary stenting of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a European
meta-analysis on individual patients’ data with long-term follow up.
European Heart J. 2007;28:443–449.
	33.	 The Impact-II investigators. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial
of effect of eptifibatide on complications of percutaneous coronary
intervention. Impact-II. Lancet. 1997;349;1422–1428.
	34.	 O’Shea JC, Hafley GE, Greenberg S, et  al. ESPRIT Investiga-
tors. Platelet GP IIb/IIIa integrin blockade with eptifibatide in
coronary stent intervention: the ESPRIT trial. JAMA. 2001;285:
2468–2473.
	35.	 Topol EJ, Moliterno DJ, Herrmann HC, et al. Comparison of two platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, tirofiban and abciximab, for the preven-
tion of ischemic events with percutaneous coronary revascularization.
N Engl Med J. 2001;344:1888–1894.
	36.	 Van’t Hof AW, Ten Berg J, Heetermans T, et al. Prehospital intiation of
tirofiban in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction undergo-
ing primary angioplasty (On-TIME) 2: a multicentre, double-blind,
randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;16372:537–546.
	37.	 Valgimigli M, Campo G, Arcozzi C, et al. Comparison of angioplasty
with infusion of tirofiban or abciximab and with implantation of
sirolimus-eluting or uncoated stents for acute myocardioal infarction.
The MULTISTRATEGY randomized trial. JAMA. 2008; DOI:10.1001/
jama.299.15.joc80026.
	38.	 Labinaz M, Ho C, Banerjee S, et al. Meta-analysis of clinical efficacy
and bleeding risk with intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists
for percutaneous coronary intervention. Can J Cardiol. 2007;23:
963–970.
	39.	 White HD, Kleiman NS, Mahaffey KW, et al. Efficacy and safety
of enoxaparin compared with unfractionated heparin in high-risk
patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention in the SuperiorYield
of the New Strategy of Enoxaparin, Revascularization and glycopro-
tein IIb/III ainhibitors (SYNERGY) trial. Am J Heart. 2006;152:
1042–1050.
	40.	 STEMI Treated With Primary Angioplasty and Intravenous Lovenox
or Unfractionated Heparin (UFH) (ATOLL). This study is currently
recruiting participants. ClinicalTrials.gov.
	41.	 Mehta SR, Steg PG, Granger CB, et al. Randomized, blinded trial
comparing fondaparinux with unfractionated heparin in patients
undergoing contemporary percutaneous coronary intervention.Arixtra
Study in Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: a randomized evaluation
(ASPIRE) pilot trial. Circulation. 2005;111:1390–1397.
	42.	 The Oasis-6 Trial. Effects of fondaparinux on mortality and rein-
farction in patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction. The OASIS-6 Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2006;295(13):
1519–1530.
	43.	 Mehta SR, Granger CB, Eikelboom JW, et  al. Efficacy and
safety of fondaparinux versus enoxaparin in patients with acute
coronary syndromes undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-
tion: results from the OASIS-5 trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;50:
742–1751.
	44.	 Bittl JA, Chaitman BR, Feit F, et al; for the Bivalirubin Angioplasty
Study Investigators. Bivalirubin versus heparin during coronary
angioplasty for unstable for postinfarction angina: final report reanal-
ysis of the Bivalirubin Angioplasty Study. Am J Heart. 2001;142:
952–959.
	45.	 Lincoff AM, Kleiman NS, Kottke-Marchant K, et al. Bivalirubin
with planned or provisional abciximab versus low-dose heparin
and abciximab during percutaneous coronary revascularization:
results of the Comaprison of Abciximab Complications with Hirulog
for Ischemic Events Trial (CACHET). Am J Heart. 2002;143:
847–853.
	46.	 Lincoff AM, Bittl JA, Kleiman NS, et al. The REPLACE-1 Trial:
comparison of bivalirubin versus heparin during percutaneous
coronary intervention (The Randomized Evaluation of Percu-
taneous Coronary Intervention Linking Angiomax to Reduced
Clinical Events [REPLACE]-1 trial. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:
1092–1096.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/drug-design-development-and-therapy-journal
Drug Design, Development and Therapy is an international, peer-
reviewed open-access journal that spans the spectrum of drug design
and development through to clinical applications. Clinical outcomes,
patient safety, and programs for the development and effective, safe,
and sustained use of medicines are a feature of the journal, which
has also been accepted for indexing on PubMed Central. The manu-
script management system is completely online and includes a very
quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use. Visit
http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from
published authors.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2010:4submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
220
Pham et al
	47.	 White HD, Ohman EM, Lincoff AM, et al. Safety and efficacy of
bivalirubin with and without glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients
with acute coronary syndromes undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention: 1-year results from the ACUITY (Acute Catheterization
and Urgent Intervention Triage StartegY) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2008;52:807–814.
	48.	 LincoffAM, Bittl JA, Harrington RA, et al. Bivalirubin and provisional
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa blockade compared with heparin and planned gly-
coprotein IIb/IIIa blockade during percutaneous coronary intervention:
REPLACE-2 Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289(7):853–863.
	49.	 Stone GW, Witzenbichler B, Guagliumi G, et  al. Bivalirubin
­during primary PCI in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl Med J.
2008;358:2218–2230.
	50.	 Angiolillo DJ, Guzman LA, Bass TA. Current antiplatelet therapies:
benefits and limitations. Am Heart J. 2008;156:S3–S9.
	51.	 Bassand JP. Bleeding and transfusion in acute coronary syndromes:
a shift in the paradigm. Heart. 2008;94:661–666.
	52.	 de Luca L, Casella G, Lettino M, et al. Clinical implications and
­management of bleeding events in patients with acute coronary
­syndromes. J Cardiovasc Med. 2009;10(9):677–686.
	53.	 Alexander KP, ChenAY, Roe MT, et al. CRUSADE investigators. Excess
dosing of antiplatelet and antithrombin agents in the treatment of non-
ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. JAMA. 2005;294:
3108–3116.
