281
The first generation of antipsychotic drugs was discovered
in the 1960s and 1970s. These agents were effective in
treating psychosis, but were accompanied by significant
side effects, including severe parkinsonism and akathisia.
Second-generation antipsychotics were introduced in the
1990s. These drugs have at least equal efficacy to their pre-
decessors, but far fewer side effects. Some data suggest a
broader efficacy profile. Clozapine remains the only supe-
rior antipsychotic in terms of the magnitude of psychotic
symptom reduction. Clinical and animal studies are consis-
tent in suggesting that the antipsychotic component of
antidopaminergic treatments is initiated by dopamine
receptor blockade in the striatum and that the signal is
transmitted to the neocortex through the established basal
ganglia–thalamo–cortical neuronal circuits. Other neuro-
transmitter actions (eg, antiserotonergic) can be exerted
locally, in the neocortex. Defining tissue targets of drug
action may suggest additional strategies for developing
new antipsychotic drugs.
everal different classes of antipsychotic med-
ications have been reliably shown to reduce active psy-
chotic symptoms in schizophrenia and other psychoses1
;
all these drugs block the D2 family of dopamine recep-
tors. Unfortunately, the drug action is accompanied by
side effects, which have inevitably limited their use.The
first antipsychotic drug, chlorpromazin, was discovered
serendipitously by Delay and Deniker,2
who were testing
preanesthetic agents in schizophrenia for their “calm-
ing” action. Shortly after their discovery, a mechanism of
action was proposed,3
and subsequently many similar
drugs were synthesized and marketed; these are called
traditional or first-generation antipsychotics. Between
1975 and 1990, almost no new drug discovery occurred
in schizophrenia. Then, in the 1990s, a second genera-
tion of antipsychotic drugs was developed—drugs with
at least the same, possibly greater, antipsychotic action,
but with significantly reduced motor side effects.4
The
loss of motor side effects has produced a generation of
medications far better tolerated by psychotic patients,
and thus critically improving compliance.These second-
generation drugs still possess the ability to block the D2
family of dopamine receptors, but have broader receptor
affinity profiles, particularly affinity at the serotonin–2
(5-hydroxytryptamine–2 [5-HT2]) receptors.
The mechanism of the antipsychotic action of these drug
families certainly involves blockade of the D2 dopamine
receptor. However, the mechanism whereby the brain
translates this primary antidopaminergic action into a
reduction in psychosis remains unclear. Moreover, the
additional new “ingredients” of action in the second-
generation drugs also remain obscure, although 5-HT2
receptor antagonism has been often invoked.5
Recently,
new technologies have been applied to human brain
research to address these important questions, and the
Treatment mechanisms: traditional and new
antipsychotic drugs
Carol A.Tamminga, MD
Keywords: schizophrenia; therapeutics; basal ganglia; thalamus; new antipsy-
chotic drug; dopamine receptor
Author affiliations: Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, Department of Psy-
chiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md, USA
Address for correspondence: Carol A. Tamminga, Maryland Psychiatric
Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Box 21247, Baltimore, MD 21228, USA
(e-mail: ctamming@mprc.umaryland.edu)
S
P h a r m a c o l o g i c a l a s p e c t s
P h a r m a c o l o g i c a l a s p e c t s
282
results have been supplemented by data from new direc-
tions in animal pharmacology.
This paper will review the new antipsychotic agents, and
then propose an overall mechanism of antipsychotic
action.This “working” hypothesis of antipsychotic drug
action is itself testable using contemporary techniques of
human brain imaging.
Drug actions and side effects:
traditional and new drugs
The first antipsychotic to be discovered and developed
was chlorpromazine.Very soon after the initial reports of
its selective antipsychotic action, it was tested and
applied around the world in psychotic patients.1
The
drug was responsible for “emptying out” mental hospi-
tals worldwide. Today’s clinicians may underappreciate
the potency of chlorpromazine in those neuroleptic-
naive individuals: the average symptom diminution was
80% or more.Although a potent antipsychotic, the drug
has significant motor, sedative, and cardiovascular side
effects; consequently, its use in schizophrenia has grad-
ually diminished over the years.
After chlorpromazine, dozens of antipsychotics were
developed.All were characterized by dopamine receptor
blockade and catalepsy (in rats) or parkinsonism
(in humans). Gradually, the compounds became purer
dopamine receptor antagonists, without other monoamin-
ergic, cholinergic, or histaminergic blockade. Haloperidol
is a typical example of these newer agents, which still
acted predominantly via D2 dopamine receptor block-
ade. It was introduced in the 1960s, and soon became
the most widely used antipsychotic drug. Haloperidol
had the same antipsychotic potency as chlorpromazine,
but lacked several of its more significant side effects,
including cardiovascular side effects, and much of its
sedative effect.
The efficacy of haloperidol was established in controlled
trials in the 1960s, and it was used by clinicians thereafter
over a wide dose range, often up to hundreds of mil-
ligrams per day. Pharmacokinetic studies suggested that
its active antipsychotic dose range was 4 to 16 mg/day.6
However, a random assignment dose–response trial with
haloperidol was not carried out until the early 1990s.This
dose–response study compared doses of 0, 4, 8, and 16
mg/day.7
The results showed a significant difference only
between placebo and the 8 mg/day and 16 mg/day doses,
but no differences between any of the doses either statis-
tically or in overall magnitude of response. None of the
items of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) had a
linear dose–response relationship, not even the positive
symptom scores. Moreover, parkinsonism and akathisia
were significantly present with the 4 mg/day dose, and
remained at a maximal score at all higher dose levels.
These results demonstrate that haloperidol is a potent
antipsychotic and has significant motor side effects, even
at its lowest threshold of antipsychotic dose (4 mg/day).
Clozapine was the first of the “new” antipsychotics, even
though it was not new at all at the time of its introduc-
tion to the US market. It was marketed in Europe in
the 1970s, and its widespread European inpatient use
allowed the detection of its most serious side effect,
agranulocytosis. The clinical use of clozapine led to the
hypothesis that it was a superior antipsychotic, which
was tested by Kane et al in a controlled trial.8
Their ini-
tial study, carried out in fully treatment-resistant schizo-
phrenic individuals, was followed up by a clozapine vs
haloperidol comparison in schizophrenic “partial”
responders. In both studies, the data show that clozapine
has a significantly greater antipsychotic action than
chlorpromazine or haloperidol in schizophrenic individ-
uals. Clozapine remains the only antipsychotic whose
efficacy has been demonstrated to be superior to other
agents in the antipsychotic class.
Unfortunately, in addition to the serious side effect of
agranulocytosis (which can be successfully managed by
weekly plasma monitoring), clozapine also has a diverse
array of additional side effects, some of which are seri-
ous, others merely bothersome.These include tachycar-
dia, hypotension, sedation, seizures, akathisia, drooling,
and significant weight gain.The disincentives to clinical
use produced by these many side effects are significant,
but the drug is still used around the world, indicating its
superior efficacy. Most psychiatrists would agree that
clozapine is underutilized in the US, given its superior
antipsychotic efficacy.
Four new antipsychotics have since followed clozapine to
market.With these, there has been an attempt to reduce
motor side effects and increase treatment efficacy. To
some extent, this has been achieved with the new antipsy-
chotics; most prominently, they lack motor side effects.
The approval of the new compounds by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) (first risperidone, then
olanzapine, quetiapine, and finally ziprasidone) fails to
recognize the significant number of drugs that nearly
reached general approval, but failed for safety or effi-
283
Treatment mechanisms:traditional and new antipsychotic drugs -Tamminga Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience -Vol 2 . No.3 . 2000
cacy reasons. This list includes drugs like remoxipride,
which caused aplastic anemia; sertindole, which prolongs
the QT interval on the electrocardiogram; and M100907,
which failed because of reduced efficacy. These failures
illustrate some of the risks involved in developing a suc-
cessful antipsychotic.The difficulty in the development of
drugs for schizophrenia is primarily due to the lack of a
pathophysiologic understanding of the illness and, con-
sequently, the lack of a known drug target.Animal testing
to help focus drug candidate choices is not usually help-
ful because of the obvious difficulties in modeling psy-
chosis. Nonetheless, it is an area of the highest medical
need and, for that reason, pharmaceutical companies
continue to invest in antipsychotic drug development. It
is fortunate that each new drug candidate introduced to
the market to date has provided additional advances in
patient response and has been widely used.
Risperidone, the first drug to market after clozapine, is
predominantly a D2 dopamine receptor antagonist and a
5-HT2 receptor antagonist at clinical doses. It was shown
to be effective against placebo with an antipsychotic
response comparable to that of haloperidol. In several
studies, greater efficacy is apparent at a lower dose
(<6 mg/day). This initial observation by Marder et al9
preceded several later reports showing the same phe-
nomenon in “naturalistic” studies, that low daily dose
averages are 4 to 4.5 mg/day.10
At these dose levels,
risperidone’s motor side effects are minimal, although
they do increase at daily doses above 6 mg/day. Risperi-
done has been widely prescribed and well received.
Galactorrhea secondary to elevated prolactin levels is
one of its major side effects and a moderate weight gain
is apparent. Risperidone has been studied in psychosis of
dementia and found to be therapeutic at the lower dose
range of 1 to 2 mg/day.
Olanzapine was approved in the US approximately a
year after risperidone. The drug has a broad receptor
affinity profile, similar to that of clozapine, except for a
generally higher receptor affinity at each site. Its antipsy-
chotic action tested against haloperidol is at least com-
parable, with both drugs showing significantly better
effects than placebo.11
With respect to its therapeutic
action, olanzapine has broader effects than a traditional
compound like haloperidol, with some antianxiety, anti-
depressant, and arguably antinegative symptom actions
as well.12
Olanzapine has been tested in the psychosis of
bipolar illness and found to be therapeutic. Olanzap-
ine’s side effects are mostly benign, with no parkinson-
ism, mild akathisia, and no blood dyscrasias or prolactin
elevations. Significant weight gain and its consequences,
including adult-onset diabetes and hyperlipidemia, are
its most significant side effects.
Quetiapine was the third new antipsychotic to be
approved worldwide for psychosis.This low affinity but
broad spectrum compound (like clozapine) is an effec-
tive antipsychotic.13
Worldwide use has been relatively
low, despite its efficacy and attractive side-effect pro-
file:“placebo-level” parkinsonism and akathisia with no
prolactin elevation but moderate weight gain. Moreover,
quetiapine has been studied in the psychosis of demen-
tia with oral reports of good activity.14,15
Ziprasidone is
due to be released onto the US market in early 2001.
Efficacy and side-effect data for this promising com-
pound are forthcoming.
Amisulpride is an antipsychotic available in several
European countries, but not yet in the US. Its antipsy-
chotic efficacy has been demonstrated, together with a
low, but not “placebo” level, motor side-effect profile.
Several studies have suggested an antinegative symp-
tom profile for this drug. Such a unique characteristic
has not yet been rigorously demonstrated, but repeat-
edly suggested in the literature.
Even beyond these compounds, the industrial pipelines
for new antipsychotics are not dry.16
Newer drugs are
being tested in all stages of trials: phases 1 through 4.
Currently, all the compounds under study block D2
dopamine receptors, but additional novel strategies are
also being evaluated, like partial dopamine agonists17
and
indirect-acting N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)–sensitive
glutamate agonists.18
The discovery of a disease mecha-
nism will catapult the discovery process ahead. Currently,
discovery efforts are tending to focus on the different
mechanisms for the positive, negative, or cognitive man-
ifestations of schizophrenia.19
Evidence for mechanism(s) of action
Human
Basic to a full understanding of the biology of the mental
dysfunction in psychosis and the therapeutic action of
these drugs in psychosis is the concept of the brain as a
set of overlapping distributed neural systems, each of
which utilizes particular brain regions as needed to fulfill
their circuit function. The best understood set of these
distributed systems has been identified using motor out-
284
P h a r m a c o l o g i c a l a s p e c t s
puts, since motor end points can be most easily measured
in experimental situations.20,21
One set of distributed sys-
tems governing aspects of motor function is made up of
parallel, segregated neuronal circuits that project from
the frontal cortex, supplementary motor area (SMA), to
the basal ganglia, and then on to the thalamus, and there-
after return to the SMA.The frontal projections begin in
the neocortex, synapse in the caudate/putamen, and then
split into two pathways, an indirect pathway through the
globus pallidus (ultimately inhibitory) and a direct path-
way to the substantia nigra (ultimately facilitatory),
which both pass into the substantia nigra pars reticulata
and from there to the specific nuclei of the thalamus.The
segregated pathways project from the thalamus back to
their specific regions of the frontal cortex, presumably
carrying a subcortically modified neuronal signal back
from the basal ganglia to the frontal cortex.
D2 dopamine receptors, the putative site of action of
antipsychotic drugs, reside in very high concentrations in
the caudate and the putamen. Antipsychotic drugs are
believed to exert their primary therapeutic action here
in the basal ganglia. Yet, a mechanism to transmit this
action in the basal ganglia back to the neocortex, par-
ticularly the frontal cortex, would “deliver” such a basal
ganglia action to the neocortical brain areas, those pre-
sumably affected by schizophrenia.The transmission of
this “D2-receptor-modified” message through the basal
ganglia and thalamus, then back to frontal cortex, is the
mechanism that we have proposed to mediate the ther-
apeutic action of these drugs in humans.
Indeed, we have tested this hypothesis in our clinical lab-
oratory with patient volunteers using regional functional
imaging techniques with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and
positron emission tomography (PET) or regional cere-
bral blood (rCBF) flow with and without antipsychotic
drugs. Simply stated, schizophrenic volunteers received a
fixed dose of haloperidol (0.3 mg/kg/day) for 30 days;and
then an FDG/PET scan was done. The volunteers then
received the same dose of placebo (matched pill number)
with a repeat FDG/PET after the second period of 30
days. Computer subtractions were done between the
group-average “on drug” scan and its “off drug” counter-
part, showing the regions where haloperidol increased
and decreased neuronal activity.Haloperidol had the fol-
lowing actions in these volunteers: (i) it increased neu-
ronal activity in the caudate/putamen (presumably a dis-
inhibition); (ii) it increased neuronal activity in the
thalamus (presumably associated with a diminished
inhibitory reticulothalamic signal);(iii) it decreased ante-
rior cingulate neuronal activity (presumably secondary to
reduced activity in the thalamocortical excitatory affer-
ent pathway); and (iv) it decreased middle frontal corti-
cal activity (ie, the same explanation as for [iii]).22
The
“explanations” (given in parentheses above) represent
the interpretation we have made of the functional data to
shed light on the question of the neural mechanism of
antipsychotic drug action.We propose that the disinhibi-
tion that haloperidol (or any D2 dopamine receptor
antagonist) produces in the caudate/putamen is transmit-
ted through the basal ganglia and thalamus to ultimately
inhibit key areas of the neocortex. These PET findings
have been replicated in our laboratory using rCBF,23
and
the data are entirely consistent.
These results are consistent with many of the functional
imaging results from other laboratories doing similar
kinds of studies.24,25
Animals
Experiments in our laboratory over the last few years
have involved the administration of traditional and new
antipsychotic drugs to laboratory rats for subchronic time
periods (6 months) for the purpose of examining critical
neurotransmitter systems in the central nervous system
(CNS) regions (the basal ganglia–thalamocortical neural
circuit) and their alteration with chronic drug treatment.
We postulated that the neurochemical marker for D2
dopamine receptor blockade (D2 upregulation) and the
“transmitted” signals through this system would both
vary between the traditional and new drugs. We mea-
sured D2 dopamine receptor density in rat caudate,
GABAA (GABA: gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor
density and D1 dopamine receptor density in rat sub-
stantia nigra, and GABAA receptor density and glutamic
acid decarboxylase (GAD) mRNA expression in rat thal-
amus.With haloperidol, all these “markers” significantly
changed in each region, implying a potent drug action
in the caudate/putamen and a strong transmitted signal
through the rest of the basal ganglia to the thalamus and
thereafter to the cortex.26
These data are direct evidence
from the experimental animal of the idea of a transmit-
ted antipsychotic action through the basal ganglia and
the thalamus to the cortex.With the new antipsychotics,
these neurochemical changes were milder and not as
broad, but always involved the basal ganglia and the thal-
amus. While the dopaminergic component of antipsy-
285
Treatment mechanisms:traditional and new antipsychotic drugs -Tamminga Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience -Vol 2 . No.3 . 2000
Mecanismos de tratamiento: fármacos
antipsicóticos tradicionales y nuevos
La primera generación de fármacos antipsicóticos
se descubrió en los años ‘60 y ‘70. Estos agentes
fueron efectivos para el tratamiento de la psico-
sis, pero se acompañaron de significativos efec-
tos laterales, que incluyeron parkinsonismo seve-
ro y acatisia. La segunda generación de
antipsicóticos se introdujo en los ‘90. Estos fár-
macos son tan efectivos como sus predecesores,
pero con mucho menos efectos secundarios.
Algunos datos sugieren un perfil de eficacia
mayor. La clozapina se mantiene como el único
antipsicótico superior, en términos de la magni-
tud de la reducción de los síntomas psicóticos.
Tanto estudios clínicos como en animales son
consistentes al sugerir que el componente antip-
sicótico de los tratamientos antidopaminérgicos
se inicia por el bloqueo del receptor de dopami-
na en el estriado y que la señal se transmite al
neocórtex a través del circuito neuronal ganglio
basal-tálamo-cortical. Las acciones sobre otros
neurotransmisores (ej. antiserotoninérgica) se
pueden ejercer localmente en el neocórtex. El
definir tejidos blanco para la acción de fármacos
puede sugerir estrategias adicionales para el
desarrollo de nuevos fármacos antipsicóticos.
Mécanismes thérapeutiques : molécules
traditionnelles et nouveaux antipsychotiques
La première génération de médicaments anti-
psychotiques a été découverte dans les années 60
et 70. Ces produits étaient efficaces dans le trai-
tement des psychoses mais leurs effets secon-
daires, dont un syndrome extra-pyrimidal sévère
et une akathisie, étaient importants. Les antipsy-
chotiques de seconde génération sont apparus
dans les années 90. D’efficacité comparable aux
précédents, leurs effets indésirables se sont révé-
lés bien moins importants. Certaines données ont
suggéré un profil d’efficacité plus large. La clo-
zapine est le seul à induire une réduction plus
importante des symptômes psychotiques. Les
études cliniques et chez l’animal se rejoignent sur
l’origine probable de la composante antipsycho-
tique des traitements antidopaminergiques : blo-
cage des récepteurs dopaminergiques dans le
striatum et transmission du signal au néocortex
au travers des circuits neuronaux cortico-thalamo-
ganglions de la base. D’autres actions neurotrans-
mettrices (antisérotoninergiques par exemple)
peuvent s’exercer localement dans le néocortex.
La définition de nouvelles cibles tissulaires pour
l’action médicamenteuse pourrait constituer
d’autres stratégies de développement des nou-
velles molécules antipsychotiques.
chotic drug action is putatively mediated through these
defined neural circuits, other transmitter-specific com-
ponents of drug action (eg, antiserotonergic or anti-
adrenergic) are likely produced directly in the neocortex.
Working hypothesis and conclusion
It is our current hypothesis that both traditional and
new antipsychotic drugs exert the dopaminergic com-
ponent of their action in the caudate/putamen and that
this action is transmitted through the basal ganglia–thal-
amo–cortical system to the frontal cortex where the piv-
otal therapeutic action is delivered. Other neurotrans-
mitter influences are most likely exerted in all parts of
this circuit, in both the basal ganglia and the cortex.
Given this hypothesis, the obvious proposition is to
modulate the circuit’s activity at other neurochemical
sites in the circuit. This proposition may underlie the
putative therapeutic actions of glutamatergic27
and
GABAergic28
compounds in schizophrenia. ❑
286
REFERENCES
1. Klein DF, Davis JM. Diagnosis and Drug Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders. Bal-
timore, Md: Williams and Wilkins; 1969.
2. Delay J, Deniker P. Thirty-eight cases of psychosis treated by chronic treat-
ment with 4500 RP. In: Luxembourg MP, ed. Congrès des Médecins Aliénistes
et Neurologistes de France. MANF; 1952:497-502.
3. Carlsson A, Lindquist M. Effect of chlorpromazine and haloperidol of for-
mation of 3-methoxytyramine and normetanephrine in mouse brain. Acta
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1963:140-144.
4. Tamminga CA. Principles of the pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia. In:
Bunney BS, ed. Neurobiology of Psychiatric Disorders. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press; 1998:272-285.
5. Meltzer HY. Role of serotonin in the action of atypical antipsychotic
drugs. Clin Neurosci. 1995;3:64-75.
6. VanPutten T, Marder SR, Wirshing WC, Aravagiri M, Chabert N. Neu-
roleptic plasma levels. Schizophr Bull. 1991;17:197-216.
7. Zimbroff DL, Kane JM, Tamminga CA, et al. A controlled, dose–response
study of sertindole and haloperidol in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry.
1997;154:782-791.
8. Kane J, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H. Clozapine for the treatment-
resistant schizophrenic. A double-blind comparison with chlorpromazine.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:789-796.
9. Marder SR, Chouinard G, Jones B, et al. Risperidone. Clinical develop-
ment: North American results. A Canadian multicenter placebo-controlled
study of fixed doses of risperidone and haloperidol in the treatment of
chronic schizophrenic patients [published erratum appears in J Clin Psy-
chopharmacol. 1993;13:149]. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1993;13:25-40.
10. Conley, RR, Love, RC, Kelly, DL. A comparison of rehospitalization rates
between patients treated with atypical antipsychotics and those treated
with depot antipsychotics. Presented at the 54th Annual Scientific Conven-
tion of the Society of Biological Psychiatry, Washington DC, May 13-15, 1999.
11. Beasley CM, Tollefson GD, Tran P, Satterlee W, Sanger T, Hamilton S.
Olanzapine versus placebo and haloperidol. Acute phase results of the
North American double-blind olanzapine trial. Neuropsychopharmacology.
1996;14:111-123.
12. Tollefson GD, Sanger TM. Negative symptoms: a path analytic approach
to a double-blind, placebo- and haloperidol-controlled clinical trial with
olanzapine. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154:466-474.
13. Arvanitis LA, Miller BG. Multiple fixed doses of “Seroquel” (quetiapine)
in patients with acute exacerbation of schizophrenia: a comparison with
haloperidol and placebo. Biol Psychiatry. 1997;42:233-246.
14. Paillère-Martinot ML, Lecrubier Y, Martinot JL, et al. Improvement of
some schizophrenic symptoms with low doses of amisulpride. Am J Psychia-
try. 1995;152:130-133.
15. Boyer P, Lecrubier Y, Puech AJ, et al. Treatment of negative symptoms
in schizophrenia with amisulpride. Br J Psychiatry. 1995;166:68-72.
16. Lahti AC, Lahti RA, Tamminga CA. New neuroleptics and experimental
antipsychotics: future roles. In: Breier A, ed. The New Pharmacotherapy of
Schizophrenia. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1996:57-87.
17. Tamminga CA, Schaffer MH, Smith RC, Davis JM. Schizophrenic symp-
toms improve with apomorphine. Science. 1978;200:567-568.
18. Tamminga CA, Holcomb HH, Gao XM, Lahti AC. Glutamate pharmacol-
ogy and the treatment of schizophrenia: current status and future direc-
tions. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1995;10(suppl 3):29-37.
19. Green MF. What are the functional consequences of neurocognitive
deficits in schizophrenia? Am J Psychiatry. 1996;153:321-330.
20. Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL. Parallel organization of function-
ally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci.
1986;9:357-381.
21. DeLong MR. Primate models of movement disorders of basal ganglia
origin. Trends Neurosci. 1990;13:281-285.
22. Holcomb HH, Cascella NG, Thaker GK, Medoff DR, Dannals RF, Tamminga
CA. Functional sites of neuroleptic drug action in the human brain: PET/FDG
studies with and without haloperidol. Am J Psychiatry. 1996;153:41-49.
23. Lahti AC, Holcomb HH, Weiler MA, Kile I, Tamminga CA. Time course of
rCBF changes after acute haloperidol in patients with schizophrenia. Schiz-
ophr Res. 1998;29:173.
24. Bartlett EJ, Wolkin A, Brodie JD, Laska EM, Wolf AP. Importance of phar-
macologic control in PET studies: effects of thiothixene and haloperidol on
cerebral glucose utilization in chronic schizophrenia. Psychiatry Res.
1991;40:115-124.
25.Volkow ND, Brodie JD, Wolf AP, Angrist B, Russell J, Cancro R. Brain
metabolism in patients with schizophrenia before and after acute neu-
roleptic administration. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1986;49:119-1202.
26. Shirakawa O, Tamminga CA. Basal ganglia GABAA and dopamine D1
binding site correlates of haloperidol-induced oral dyskinesias in rat. Exp
Neurol. 1994;127:62-69.
27. Javitt DC, Zylberman I, Zukin SR, Heresco-Levy U, Lindenmayer JP. Ame-
lioration of negative symptoms in schizophrenia by glycine. Am J Psychiatry.
1994;151:1234-1236.
28. Tamminga CA, Gao XM, Lahti AC. Amino acids: evidence for GABAergic
and glutamatergic transmission abnormalities in schizophrenia. In: Fog R,
Gerlach J, Hemmingsen R, eds. Schizophrenia: An Integrated View. Copen-
hagen, Denmark: Munksgaard; 1995:96-111.
P h a r m a c o l o g i c a l a s p e c t s
