1414 VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 14 | October 2004 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Public Health Tracking | Mini-Monograph
The new millennium has brought unprece-
dented challenges and opportunities for the
advancement of public health. Scientific
breakthroughs provide new insights into the
genetic basis of health and disease, while ana-
lytical advances allow the identification and
measurement of previously unrecognized
threats. The translation of this new knowl-
edge to effective prevention will require new
approaches to evaluating the interaction of
health and environment. Despite the many
advances in identiﬁcation, measurement, and
control of contaminants in the environment,
fundamental questions about the role of envi-
ronmental exposures in human disease
remain unanswered. This information gap
includes a number of chronic diseases and
conditions that may be increasing in preva-
lence, including asthma, neurologic disorders,
developmental disabilities, and even diabetes.
The Pew Environmental Health
Commission at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health was established in
1998 to develop a blueprint to rebuild the
nation’s public health defenses against environ-
mental threats, including the ability to track
hazards, environmental exposures, and health
outcomes. Greater capacity in tracking can
help investigators a) identify populations at
risk and respond to outbreaks, clusters and
emerging threats; b) establish the relationship
between environmental hazards and disease;
c) guide intervention and prevention strategies,
including lifestyle improvements; d) identify,
reduce, and prevent harmful environmental
risks; e) improve the public health basis for
policymaking; f ) enable the public’s right to
know about health and the environment; and
g) track progress toward achieving a healthier
nation and environment.
In 1999–2000 the Pew Environmental
Health Commission’s Tracking Project (Pew
Environmental Health Commission 2000)
conducted an extensive evaluation of the
national environmental public health infra-
structure and found a fundamental informa-
tion gap in our understanding of the
relationship between environmental expo-
sures and the health of the public. In this arti-
cle, we present a series of methodologic
approaches used to identify priority health
conditions for environmental health tracking
and develop the recommendations of the Pew
Commission.
Methods
We describe a multistep approach to address
the goals of the Pew Commission’s tracking
project. First, we describe the development
and implementation of a tracking survey
administered to public health and environ-
mental practitioners. Second, we describe
steps taken to inform the selection of priority
health end points for environmental health
tracking, which included a synthesis of review
articles on environmental health indicators
and an examination of existing national envi-
ronmental emissions, health, and health care
databases to understand trends in environ-
mentally related health end points. Finally,
we discuss the process for translating the ﬁnd-
ings from our research to Pew Commission
recommendations.
State and local survey. State and local
public health practitioners were surveyed by
telephone to obtain information about their
environmental public health tracking pro-
grams. Questions focused on organization,
data collection and use, ﬁnancial and technical
resources, barriers, and priorities. State
respondents (n = 49) were primarily environ-
mental epidemiologists. Local respondents
(n = 21 counties) were mostly health depart-
ment directors who had expressed interest in
environmental public health, suggesting a
best-case scenario. Representatives included all
12 local representatives on the National
Association of City and County Health
Ofﬁcials (NACCHO) Environmental Health
and Prevention Advisory Committee in addi-
tion to 10 local health departments randomly
selected from a NACCHO list of 133 local
health departments that identified environ-
mental health as an interest area. Surveys were
conducted from March to September 2000. A
follow-up survey is under way in 2004.
Identiﬁcation of priority health conditions.
Tracking the health of a population is an
This article is part of the mini-monograph “National
Environmental Public Health Tracking,” which is
sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC).
Address correspondence to T. Burke, The Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Department of Health Policy and Management, 624
N. Broadway, Room 484, Baltimore, MD 21205
USA. Telephone: (410) 614-4587. Fax: (410) 614-
4535. E-mail: tburke@jhsph.edu
This article was supported by an environmental
public health tracking cooperative agreement from
CDC. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial
views of CDC.
The authors declare they have no competing
ﬁnancial interests.
Received 1 April 2004; accepted 3 August 2004.
Identifying Priority Health Conditions, Environmental Data, and Infrastructure
Needs: A Synopsis of the Pew Environmental HealthTracking Project
Jill Litt,1 Nga Tran,2 Kristen Chossek Malecki,3 Roni Neff,3 Beth Resnick,3 and Thomas Burke3
1University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, Denver, Colorado, USA; 2Exponent
Consulting, Washington, DC, USA; 3The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of Health Policy and
Management, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
In this article we describe the methodologic approaches of the Pew Environmental Health
Commission at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health used to identify priority
environmental health conditions and develop recommendations to establish a national environ-
mental public health tracking network. We present the results of a survey of public health and
environmental practitioners to uncover state and local health tracking needs and priorities. We
describe the steps that combined the ﬁndings from the state and local health tracking survey and a
review of the state of the science on environmental impacts on health to identify priority health
end points. Through an examination of national health and health care databases, we then
describe trends and public health effects of those diseases that may be linked to the environment.
Based on this analysis, respiratory diseases and neurologic diseases are recommended as priorities
for tracking. Speciﬁc end points recommended for tracking include asthma and chronic respira-
tory diseases, and chronic neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis. Based on trends in
reported prevalence, consideration should also be given to developmental disabilities, reproductive
disorders, and endocrine/metabolic disorders. Strengthening of current efforts to track cancer and
birth defects should also be included as components of a nationwide health tracking network.
Finally, we present the recommendations for environmental public health tracking. These recom-
mendations provided the groundwork for the development of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention’s National Environmental Public Health Tracking Progam that now includes
21 states, three cities, and three academic centers throughout the nation. Key words: biomonitor-
ing, disease surveillance, environmental health indicators, environmental public health tracking,
exposure, health policy, information systems. Environ Health Perspect 112:1414–1418 (2004).
doi:10.1289/ehp.7147 available via http://dx.doi.org/ [Online 3 August 2004]
essential component of effective public health
practice. However, given the many gaps in our
current understanding of the role of the envi-
ronment in disease, the Pew Commission was
faced with a fundamental question: “What
health end points should be tracked?” To
address this question, we developed an
approach to evaluate available national data to
identify health end points that may be appro-
priate for inclusion in a national environmental
health tracking network.
Step 1—Literature review of environ-
mental health indicators. We evaluated the
scientiﬁc literature to identify speciﬁc health
effects that have been related to environmen-
tal exposures and that may serve as environ-
mental health indicators. These indicators can
be useful in providing measures of population
health that can be related to environmental
exposures, thereby providing a public health
yardstick for measuring environmental
progress. This review included published
work by health and environmental agencies
identifying diseases or health end points
that have a possible link to environmental
exposures.
Step 2—Connecting environmental
releases and health conditions. We used the
Environmental Defense Scorecard analysis
that provides listings of chemicals that impact
human health (Environmental Defense 2000;
http://www.scorecard.org). These listings
were derived from toxicologic and epidemio-
logic studies and information from regulatory
agencies. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory
(TRI; http://www.epa.gov/tri/) served as the
starting point for the chemical listings. The
Scorecard ranking exercises combined the
TRI data with information on potential
health hazards of these substances. These
reports account only for pollution from
industrial facilities that reported to TRI in
1997 (the most recent year available for our
analysis) and include only the 644 chemicals
covered by TRI at that time.
Step 3—Examination of national health
databases. On the basis of Scorecard’s list of
substances, related broad health categories,
and the literature review, we analyzed avail-
able health outcome data at the national level
for selected end points to identify those with
high or increasing prevalence or those respon-
sible for heavy utilization of health care.
There is virtually no comprehensive national
tracking of noninfectious diseases (except can-
cer). However, four National Center for
Health Statistics (NCHS) national survey
data sets including the National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS), the National
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS),
the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey (NHAMCS), and the National
Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS) were
examined for this analysis and provided useful
insights into some of the end points identiﬁed
in steps 1 and 2 (NCHS 2000; 2004a; 2004c;
2004d).
Initially the analysis was intended to be
limited to environmental health outcomes that
are clinically observable and classiﬁable by the
International Classification of Diseases, 9th
Revision (ICD-9) codes and that have been
linked to identifiable exposures to environ-
mental agents (Health Care Financing Agency
1998). Because of the limitations of the avail-
able survey and emerging interests in a broader
range of health end points, the analysis
included a number of end points without
known environmental causes. Inclusion of a
disease in this analysis is not meant to imply
environmental etiology. Given the present
limitations of knowledge, even in most cases
where an environmental exposure has been
shown to contribute to the development of
adverse effects, it is not possible to quantify
the proportion of risk attributed to the
environment.
The NHIS provides valuable national-
level information on the prevalence of and
trends for some key health outcomes.
Published NHIS estimates for both chronic
and acute conditions are available as far back
as 1984. Categories of end points are grouped
by ICD-9 codes in a process known as the
NHIS recode (NCHS 2000). The 1997 sur-
vey was used to estimate rates of childhood
disorders previously not covered by NHIS
and adult conditions for comparison to earlier
years. These data were obtained from the
NCHS web site (NCHS 2004c), imported
into SAS (version 8.0; SAS Institute, Inc.,
Cary, NC), and were used to develop
estimates separately for children (< 18 years of
age) and adults (18 years +) using the
appropriate weights.
Depending on the disease category, these
groupings may or may not be speciﬁc to envi-
ronmental health end points. In addition,
these categories may include a limited num-
ber of end points and may provide a mislead-
ing estimate of the prevalence of disease in the
population. For example, the NHIS grouping
for neurologic diseases includes migraine
headaches but excludes diseases of growing
interest such as Alzheimer and Parkinson dis-
eases, thus resulting in an underestimation of
prevalence of neurologic diseases in the popu-
lation. This is a major limitation of the NHIS
data set when evaluating disease trends that
may be influenced by environmental expo-
sures. Conversely, respiratory diseases are cap-
tured more accurately by the NHIS recode.
The disease prevalence and incidence rates
give a better assessment of respiratory condi-
tions with environmental etiology such as
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
In addition to disease trends, we reviewed
health care information from the 1996
NHDS, NAMCS, and NHAMCS. Estimates
from the NHDS were obtained for 1996
(NCHS 2004d). This source provided esti-
mates of the number of discharges for indi-
vidual ICD-9 codes, already weighted to the
U.S. population. To estimate rates, U.S. cen-
sus data were used to obtain the total U.S.
population numbers for 1996, as well as popu-
lation estimates by age, region, and sex
(Population Estimates Program 1999a,
1999b).
Estimates from the 1996 NHAMCS and
the 1996 NAMCS were obtained from public
data sets available from the NCHS web site
(NCHS 2004d). For analysis, the data sets
were input into SAS, version 8.0. To estimate
the number of visits for a particular ICD-9
code, that code was selected as the principal
diagnosis and a weighted PROC FREQ com-
mand was used. To estimate the proportion
of office visits because of a particular condi-
tion, the total number of ofﬁce visits was used
as the denominator. To estimate visit rates,
the denominator was the 1996 U.S. popula-
tion, obtained from U.S. census publications
(Population Estimates Program 1999a,
1999b). Once weighted, these estimates rep-
resented U.S. population visits to physicians’
ofﬁces, hospital emergency departments, and
hospital outpatient clinics for medical care.
Environmental summit. As a follow-up to
the previous research steps, the Pew
Commission, in partnership with the
Association of State and Territorial Health
Ofﬁcials, NACCHO, and the Public Health
Foundation, hosted over 50 federal, state, and
local environmental health leaders for 2 days
to develop recommendations to establish and
implement national environmental health
tracking.
Results
State and local survey. Data collection and
use: hazards, exposures, and health outcomes.
Environmental public health tracking pro-
grams were diverse. In general, much of the
hazard tracking was handled by environmen-
tal agencies, while public health agencies,
especially at the state level, most frequently
handled health outcome tracking. Exposure
tracking was rare with the exception of lead
(81% of state public health agencies) and
personal air monitoring data (one-fourth of
state health agencies.) States reported the fol-
lowing for health outcome tracking activities.
Most states tracked cancer (94%), infectious
outbreaks (80%), and birth defects (69%),
but many did not track asthma (55%)
and few tracked emerging environmental
health concerns such as developmental
disabilities (16%), learning disorders (12%),
or autoimmune diseases (8%). Some of the
Mini-Monograph | Identifying priority health conditions
Environmental Health Perspectives • VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 14 | October 2004 1415
larger local public health agencies collected
significant quantities of tracking data,
but many locals relied on other agencies to
collect data, often seeing their role more in
dissemination and follow-up investigations.
Coordination. To improve their effective-
ness and leverage limited capacities, state and
local ofﬁcials worked with other federal, state,
and local agencies on environmental public
health issues. Often, state public health
departments facilitated relationships between
federal and local agencies. Given the coordi-
nation challenges, 53% of states and 81% of
local departments designated lead individuals
for overseeing tracking activities.
Financial and technical resources.
Among states, major sources of funding for
environmental public health tracking were
state general funds (81% of states), federal
funds from grants and cooperative agreements
with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), the Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR),
the U.S. EPA and the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (55, 45, 34
and 23%, respectively), prevention block
grants (32%), and fee-based regulatory pro-
grams (21%). At the local level, 90% of
departments received local general funds, and
86% received funds from fees and permits to
support their tracking activities. Forty-eight
and 38% of departments, respectively,
received state department of health and envi-
ronment funding, and only 33% received fed-
eral funding. (Some federal funds may have
been channeled through state programs.)
From a technologic perspective, 81% of
the states indicated that health and environ-
mental data were electronically available for
internal use, and 69% made health data avail-
able to the public in limited electronic formats
and geographic scales. Local public health
departments varied widely in their access to
current computer software and/or hardware,
and in their ability to use technology to its full
extent. The lack of standardization in state,
county, and other data systems hindered the
ability to access and interpret data.
Environmental public health tracking
priorities. States revealed a diverse set of pri-
orities for environmental public health track-
ing. Drinking water, metals, food protection,
asthma, cancer, and for some states, the need
to establish basic tracking capacity and assure
room for ﬂexible approaches to tracking were
top priorities. At the local level, top priorities,
as reflected by spending, were food protec-
tion, waste management, and water and air
quality. Further priority needs included
indoor air, bioterrorism and emergency
response, and land use issues.
Barriers. At both the state and local levels,
the greatest identiﬁed barrier to effective envi-
ronmental public health tracking was scarce
financial resources, followed by the related
need for staff. Respondents wanted flexible
funding strategies and increases in staff and
expertise. Local agencies were particularly
concerned about unfunded tracking recom-
mendations or requirements. Other impor-
tant barriers included a lack of political will,
limited reporting requirements, lack of estab-
lished databases, and their own organizational
structure. Further, some wanted guidance on
tracking system design, implementation, and
priorities.
Identiﬁcation of priority health conditions
results. Step 1—Literature review. Through
the literature review, we identiﬁed key health
outcomes partially determined by environ-
mental exposures. In 1993 the ATSDR
authored a report (Lybarger and Spengler
1993) that identified seven broad groupings
of health conditions where research is needed
to elucidate the exposure–disease relationship.
These conditions included respiratory dis-
eases, neurologic disorders, congenital anom-
alies, reproductive disorders, kidney diseases,
immune disorders, and cancer.
Rios et al. (1993) presented a review of
research on biologic susceptibility of minority
populations to environmental pollutants that
may result from genetic makeup, occupation,
pre-existing health conditions, exposure to
mixtures of pollutants, substance abuse,
unemployment, and other social inequalities
in health care, education, and political power.
The outcomes of concern included respiratory
diseases (e.g., asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease); chronic liver disease and
cirrhosis; heart disease; sickle cell anemia; kid-
ney disease; and endocrine disorders includ-
ing diabetes mellitus.
In 1994 Silbergeld (1994) identiﬁed three
health conditions whose etiologies remain
largely unexplained but where environmental
exposures are implicated. She suggested that
epidemiologic research on asthma, low birth
weight, and neurodegenerative diseases was
central to improving our environmental
health policies and their subsequent beneﬁts.
Turning to the international literature,
Kjellstrom and Corvalan (1995), as part of
the World Health Organization project
HEADLAMP (Health and Environment
Analysis and Indicators for Decision-Making)
identiﬁed seven indicators that would serve as
monitoring tools for the United Nations ini-
tiative on sustainable development. These
indicators included asthma; skin disorders;
aplastic anemia; birth defects, including con-
genital anomalies and low birth weight; spon-
taneous abortions and cancer.
Regarding the connections between air
pollution and mortality, particularly respira-
tory and cardiovascular mortality, Kelsall
et al. (1997) provided one example of
the growing body of epidemiologic work
establishing this association. They presented
scientiﬁc evidence that particular health con-
ditions increase human susceptibility to
environmental pollutants.
The U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (U.S. DHHS) Healthy
People initiative regularly tracks the public’s
health and has set objectives for quantiﬁable
reductions in disease and disability over the
past 20 years. Community health and envi-
ronmental health indicators drawn from
Healthy People objectives included asthma
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
chronic liver disease and cirrhosis, heart
disease, methemoglobinemia, congenital
anomalies, low birth weight, developmental
disabilities, kidney diseases, cancer and
endocrine disorders including diabetes
mellitus (U.S. DHHS 1998).
Step 2—Connecting environmental
releases and health conditions. Based on the
reviews of the Scorecard data and related
health categories, we found that substances
with potential respiratory effects were the
highest category of releases in 1997 and this
continues to be the highest ranking category
based on 2001 TRI data. Neurologic, skin,
gastrointestinal, and liver toxicants were next
highest categories in total pounds released.
Based on 2001 data, these categories have
shifted slightly, with skin disorders replacing
neurologic conditions in the second highest
category and gastrointestinal diseases moving
up to the third category. Other categories
included cardiovascular, developmental, and
reproductive effects.
Step 3—National health outcome and
health care databases. Figure 1 shows 10-year
trend data for the self-reported prevalence of a
number of broad categories of health condi-
tions, including respiratory conditions, skin
diseases, neurologic disorders, reproductive
and fertility conditions, endocrine and meta-
bolic conditions. Specifically, endocrine and
metabolic disorders show the greatest increase
(21.7%), followed by neurologic (20%) and
respiratory diseases (20%). As previously
noted, because of the NHIS recodes, these
broad categories of health conditions are com-
binations of conditions, reﬂecting end points
with and without known environmental
etiologies.
We also evaluated trend data over the
same time period within speciﬁc health cate-
gories. For example, within respiratory condi-
tions, asthma rates increased by 38.6% and
chronic bronchitis increased by 15.3%. For
endocrine and metabolic diseases, thyroid dis-
orders increased by 36.3% and diabetes
mellitus increased by 19.1% over this time
period. For neurologic diseases, multiple
sclerosis increased by 21.2% and migraine
headaches increased by 26%. Within
the reproductive health category, prostate
Mini-Monograph | Litt et al.
1416 VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 14 | October 2004 • Environmental Health Perspectives
diseases (noncancer including hyperplasia,
inflammation) increased by 48% and dis-
orders of female reproductive organs (e.g.,
ovarian cysts, disorders of the uterus and
cervix) increased by 28.6%.
We also summarized the number of
hospital discharges, emergency department
visits, hospital outpatient care visits, and doc-
tor office visits for six broad groupings of
health outcomes, including lung and respira-
tory conditions, neurologic conditions, repro-
ductive and fertility conditions, blood
disorders, liver disease, and cardiovascular dis-
orders. Specific disease end points within
these broad classifications were included
where information was available.
Cardiovascular diseases required the most
health care resources, including over 48 mil-
lion doctor visits and 4.6 million hospitaliza-
tions. Although pollution exposures have
been indicated for some types of cardiovascu-
lar diseases, many other environmental risk
factors, including lifestyle and obesity, have
been implicated as contributing causes. Lung
and respiratory diseases (33.6 million doctor
visits and over 3 million emergency depart-
ment visits) and neurologic conditions
(8.7 million doctor visits) also required large
amounts of health care services. Of all the
lung and respiratory health conditions
resulting in utilization of the health care
system, asthma and chronic bronchitis
accounted for the largest proportion of hospi-
tal, emergency department, outpatient and
doctor visits in 1996. Among the endocrine
conditions, diabetes resulted in the most
health care use (over 15 million physician vis-
its). Of the neurologic conditions requiring
health care, a relatively small fraction was due
to neurodegenerative diseases such as senility,
cerebral degeneration, and Alzheimer and
Parkinson diseases. However, these diseases
have a devastating impact on the quality
of life and require care that may not be
measured by these surveys.
Environmental Summit—
Stakeholder Priorities
Summit participants developed specific
recommendations for improving the national
environmental health infrastructure and capac-
ity for tracking. They did not identify speciﬁc
exposures or health end points for tracking.
Recognizing current scientiﬁc limitations con-
cerning the role of environment in disease and
state and regional differences in environmental
health priorities, they recommended a ﬂexible
tiered approach. Recommendations included
• National tracking of high priority exposures
and health outcomes
• A sentinel network to identify emerging
hazards
• A coordinated network of pilot regional,
state, and local tracking programs
• A supportive research program to guide and
evaluate tracking progress
These recommendations provided the
basis for the Pew Commission recommenda-
tions that have shaped the development of the
CDC Environmental Public Health Tracking
Program.
Conclusions
The surveys of state and local public health
department ofﬁcials provided baseline data on
the state of environmental public health
tracking in 2000. The surveys found great
variety in tracking organization, functions,
and resources among state and local health
departments. The overall infrastructure for
environmental public health tracking lacked
adequate support, personnel, coordination,
and data resources. Collection of these base-
line data will provide an opportunity to evalu-
ate the impact of the new tracking initiatives
and resources as well as increased focus on
preparedness since 2000.
The priority health condition analysis
identiﬁed a number of limitations that must
be addressed. These ﬁndings are constrained
by available epidemiologic and toxicologic
data and are driven by high-volume chemical
release reporting under the TRI. Multiple
health effects can be associated with an indi-
vidual toxicant, and complex interactions
between toxicants can further affect human
health. Nevertheless, this approach provided
the Pew Commission with a starting point for
identifying the categories of health end points
to be considered for tracking. Given the large
amount of toxic pollutants released, there is a
need to improve the tracking of population
exposures and look for any evidence of
adverse health impacts.
The end points identified through the
literature represent conditions for which
environmental exposures have been impli-
cated or are pre-existing health conditions
that may be exacerbated by exposure to envi-
ronmental pollutants. The end points also
reflect agency priorities, including ATSDR’s
seven broad categories of priority health con-
ditions and the U.S. DHHS Healthy People
objectives for community and environmental
health indicators (U.S. DHHS 1998, 2000).
Although this list of health end points is
culled from numerous sources with diverse
criteria, the categories and end points show a
general convergence that can shape priorities
for the developing tracking network.
An examination of available national
survey data indicated that the reported preva-
lence of several categories of disease poten-
tially related to the environment has been
increasing. Between 1986 and 1995 the
largest increases were reported in endocrine
and metabolic disorders (21.7%), followed by
neurologic (20%) and respiratory diseases
(20%). Reproductive disorders also increased
during this time (7.3%).
Available data on health care utilization
for these outcomes indicate that cardiovascu-
lar disease requires the greatest use of health
care, with respiratory (over 33 million doctor
visits and 3 million emergency department
visits) and neurologic diseases (over 8 million
doctor visits) also requiring large amounts of
health care services.
Based on this analysis of the weight of
evidence and trends in health outcomes and
impacts, respiratory diseases and neurologic
diseases are recommended as priorities for
Mini-Monograph | Identifying priority health conditions
Environmental Health Perspectives • VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 14 | October 2004 1417
Figure 1. Self-reported prevalence for selected categories of disease. Data from National Health Interview
Survey, 1986–1995 (NCHS 2004c). Changes in reproductive and fertility outcomes reﬂect years 1988–1995.
▲
■
▲▲
●
◆
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲ ▲
▲ ▲
■
▲▲
●
◆
■
■
■
■ ■
■ ■ ■ ■
▲▲
▲▲
▲▲●
●
●
◆
◆
◆ ◆
◆ ◆ ◆
▲▲
▲▲
▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲
▲▲
● ●
● ● ● ●
Mini-Monograph | Litt et al.
1418 VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 14 | October 2004 • Environmental Health Perspectives
tracking. Specific end points recommended
for tracking include asthma and chronic respi-
ratory diseases, and chronic neurodegenera-
tive diseases such as multiple sclerosis. Based
on increasing trends in reported prevalence
and the potential for environmental exposures
to increase population risks, consideration
should also be given to developmental disabil-
ities, reproductive disorders, and endocrine
and metabolic disorders. Strengthening of
current efforts to track cancer and birth
defects should also be included as compo-
nents of a nationwide environmental health
tracking network.
The role of the environment in the
etiology of these health outcomes remains
unknown. Identiﬁcation of speciﬁc outcomes
as tracking priorities should not be inter-
preted as an implication of environmental
causality. However, the increasing incidence
and prevalence of a number of diseases with
potential links to environmental exposures
underscores the need for improved tracking to
increase our understanding of risk factors,
identify populations at high risk, inform pri-
orities for research, and develop coordinated
prevention efforts.
Discussion
Advances in hazard identification, exposure
assessment, health outcome data collection,
and information technology provide mecha-
nisms for advancing tracking and improving
our understanding of the environment and
health. These advances, coupled with deep
public concern, provide a window of oppor-
tunity to strengthen the national infrastruc-
ture for environmental health information,
expand public access to this important infor-
mation, and protect the privacy of individu-
als. New technologies in biomonitoring have
the potential to transform the nation's capac-
ity to track exposures to pollutants and
understand their impacts on health. Advances
in communication and information technol-
ogy have expanded opportunities for public
access and given us new tools to analyze, map,
and disseminate health data. New technology
also can improve safeguards to protect the
conﬁdentiality of identiﬁable personal health
information.
Building on the ﬁndings and recommenda-
tions of the Pew Commission, CDC developed
the Environmental Public Health Tracking
Program (NCEH 2004). CDC was allocated
funds in ﬁscal years 2002 and 2003 for $14.2
and $14.6 million, respectively, to fund
24 state and local health departments and three
public health schools to a) build environmental
public health capacity, b) increase collaboration
between environment and health agencies,
c) identify and evaluate environmental and
health data systems, d) build partnerships
with nongovernmental organizations and
communities, and e) develop model systems
that link environmental and health data and
that other states or localities can use. Three
public health schools are funded to support
state and local health departments and investi-
gate possible links between health effects and
the environment (NCEH 2004).
In addition, CDC together with the
Center for State and Territorial Epidemiol-
ogists (CSTE) have developed a set of envi-
ronmental public health indicators that can
be used to assess baseline status and trends
and build core surveillance capacity in state
and local agencies (CSTE 2004). The U.S.
EPA has also contributed to the national
capacity for tracking by producing the Draft
EPA Report on the Environment (U.S. EPA
2003), which provides information on the
status of and trends in environmental condi-
tions and their effects on human health and
the nation's natural resources. These indicator
initiatives provide summary measures of envi-
ronmental health relationships that are funda-
mental to future environmental tracking
efforts (U.S. EPA 2003).
Beyond these indicator programs, the
CDC’s biomonitoring program and
“National Report on Human Exposure to
Environmental Chemicals” are enhancing our
abilities to measure environmental chemicals
in the human body (NCEH 2003). The data
are collected as part of the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NCHS
2004b), and specimens are analyzed as part of
the CDC biomonitoring program. Between
2001–2003 the number of chemicals being
measured and reported expanded from 27 to
116. The samples provide estimates of popu-
lation exposures to key contaminants of con-
cern and begin to fill a critical gap in our
ability to link exposure and health outcome
data (NCEH 2003).
Beyond strengthening the science and
supporting data, efforts are under way to bet-
ter link environment and health, including
new relationships and collaboration between
environment and health agencies. This inte-
grated thinking brings new understandings
and approaches to improve environmental
protection efforts, to better characterize and
control sources through public health surveil-
lance, and to understand the links between
adverse exposures and health effects.
The “building blocks” of knowledge
provided by a nationwide environmental pub-
lic health tracking network will enable scien-
tists to answer many of the troubling questions
we are asking today about what is making us
sick. The result will be new prevention strate-
gies aimed at reducing and ultimately prevent-
ing many of the chronic diseases and disabling
conditions that afﬂict millions of Americans.
REFERENCES
CSTE (Center for State and Territorial Epidemiologists). 2004.
Environmental Public Health Indicators. Atlanta,
GA:Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Environmental Defense. 2000. Scorecard. New York:Environ-
mental Defense.
Health Care Financing Agency. 1998. International Classiﬁcation
of Diseases, 9th Revision—Clinical Modification. Los
Angeles:Practice Management Information Corporation.
Kelsall JE, Samet JM, Zeger SL, Xu J. 1997. Air pollution and
mortality in Philadelphia, 1974-1988. Am J Epidemiol
146:750–762.
Kjellstrom T, Corvalan C. 1995. Framework for the development
of environmental health indicators. World Health Stat Q
48:144–154.
Lybarger JA, Spengler RF. 1993. Introduction. In: Priority Health
Conditions (Lybarger JA, Spengler RF, DeRosa CT, eds).
Atlanta, GA:Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, 1–11.
NCEH. 2003. Second National Report on Human Exposure to
Environmental Chemicals. Publ no 02-0716. Atlanta,
GA:National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
NCEH. 2004. CDC Environmental Public Health Tracking
Program in Brief. Atlanta, GA:National Center for
Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
NCHS. 2000. 1997 National Health Interview Survey Public Use
Data Release—NHIS Survey Description. Hyattsville,
MD:National Center for Health Statistics.
NCHS. 2004a. Ambulatory Health Care Data (NAMCS and
NHAMCS). Hyattsville, MD:National Center for Health
Statistics. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/
major/ahcd/ahcd1.htm [accessed 13 July 2004].
NCHS. 2004b. National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. Hyattsville, MD:National Center for Health
Statistics. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm
[accessed 13 July 2004].
NCHS. 2004c. National Health Interview Survey. Hyattsville,
MD:National Center for Health Statistics. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm [accessed 13 July
2004].
NCHS. 2004d. National Hospital Discharge Survey. Hyattsville,
MD:National Center for Health Statistics. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/hdasd/nhdsdes.htm
[accessed 13 July 2004].
Pew Environmental Health Commission. 2000. America's
Environmental Health Gap: Why the Country Needs a
Nationwide Health Tracking Network: Technical Report.
Baltimore, MD:Pew Charitable Trusts.
Population Estimates Program, Population Division. U.S.
Census Bureau. 1999a. Population Estimates for the US
Regions and States by Selected Age Groups and Sex:
Annual Time Series, July 1, 1990–July 1, 1999. ST-99-9.
Washington, DC:U.S. Census Bureau.
Population Estimates Program, Population Division. U.S.
Census Bureau. 1999b. Resident Population Estimates of
the United States by Age and Sex: April 1, 1990 to July 1,
1999 with Short-term Projection to April 1, 2000.
Washington, DC:U.S. Census Bureau.
Rios R, Poje G, Detels R. 1993. Susceptibility to environmental
pollutants among minorities. Toxicol Ind Health 9:797–820.
Silbergeld EK. 1994. Evaluating the success of environmental
health programs in protecting the public's health. In:
Hazardous Waste and Public Health: International
Congress on the Health Effects of Hazardous Waste
(Andrews JS, Frumkin H, Johnson BL, Mehlman M,
Xintaras C, Bucsela JA, eds). Atlanta, GA:Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry, 43–48.
U.S. DHHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services).
1998. Healthy People 2010: Objectives for Environmental
Health. Washington, DC:U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
U.S. DHHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services).
2000. Healthy People 2010: Understanding and Improving
Health. Washington, DC:U.S. Government Printing
Office. Available: http://www.health.gov/healthypeople/
Document/tableofcontents.htm [accessed 13 July 2004.
U.S. EPA. 2003. Draft Report on the Environment. Washington,
DC:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Available:
http://www.epa.gov/indicators/roe/ [accessed 13 July
2004].
