A 758 VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 13 | September 2004 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Environews Science Selections
ArnoldGreenwell/EHP
The Monster in the Closet
Mothballs’ Link to Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Each year, according to the American Cancer Society, about
54,300 Americans are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL), a cancer that originates in the lymph tissue, and about
19,400 people die from it. Several lines of evidence point to a
possible association with pesticides. The incidence of NHL has
roughly doubled since the 1970s, a few decades after a marked
rise in U.S. household and agricultural pesticide use, and previous
studies have found increases in chromosome aberrations and
micronuclei in lymphocytes among pesticides applicators and
some groups of farmers. This month, Ikuko Kato of Wayne State
University and colleagues report an increased risk of NHL among
New York State women with several types of pesticide exposure at
home and on the job [EHP 112:1275–1281].
In the retrospective case–control study, 376 women recruited at
NHL diagnosis in the late 1990s were compared to 463 age-matched
controls. Cases were identified through the New York State Cancer
Registry; controls were found through the Health Care Financing
Administration or state Department of Motor Vehicle records. All
participants answered a survey regarding past exposure to pesticides
of all types. Whereas most previous studies of the association
between cancer and pesticide exposure have focused on occupational
exposure, Kato and colleagues also asked about home exposure to
products such as mothballs, flea and ant killers, head lice treatments,
and house plant products.
The highest risk of NHL was associated with pesticide exposure
that began between 1950 and 1969. The authors speculate that this
relationship could reflect a long latency period for NHL, or the his-
toric use of compounds that are particularly toxic and now banned,
such as the organochlorine pesticides.
Among women who used pesticides at home, the 25% with the
highest use had a 62% greater chance of developing NHL than
women who never used such products. Also, NHL risk was 2.12
times greater among women who had worked at least 10 years on a
farm where pesticides were used, compared with women who never
worked on a farm.
When analyzing use of specific products, the researchers found
a significant correlation between use of mothballs and NHL,
although not a clear dose–response relationship. The authors note
that the active ingredients of mothballs may be inhaled or absorbed
through the skin during contact with treated clothing. Naph-
thalene and paradichlorobenzene, common active ingredients in
mothballs, are among the most common toxic chemicals detected
in indoor air. Earlier studies correlated these compounds with
blood diseases including aplastic anemia and hemolytic anemia. In
vivo and in vitro studies have shown cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, and
carcinogenicity for naphthalene, paradichlorobenzene, and their
metabolites.
The findings were limited by the possibility of recall bias—cancer
patients may be more motivated than controls to remember pesticide
exposure. However, a counterbalancing bias may have existed:
exposed controls, upon learning that pesticides were one of the major
research interests, may have been more interested in participating
than nonexposed controls. Additionally, fewer than 50% of the sub-
jects could recall the names of pesticides that had been used at their
workplaces. While establishing a correlation between exposure to
pesticides and disease does not prove that the pesticides caused dis-
ease, it does add detail to the growing picture of pesticide-caused
hematologic toxicity, and suggests a need for further study of moth-
balls in particular. –David J. Tenenbaum
Arsenic and Intellectual
Function
Bangladeshi Children at Risk
In Bangladesh, naturally occurring arsenic contaminates some
10 million tube wells that about 30–40 million people depend on
for drinking water. Scientists have already established that adults
with heavy exposure to arsenic can suffer adverse impacts on cogni-
tive functions such as learning and memory. However, there have
been no well-controlled studies of the neurological consequences of
arsenic exposure in children. This month, a group of U.S. and
Bangladeshi researchers led by Gail Wasserman of Columbia
University provides evidence that even modest exposure to arsenic
in drinking water is associated with reduced intellectual function in
children in Araihazar, Bangladesh [EHP 112:1329–1333].
The investigators studied a group of 201 10-year-old children.
The children’s parents were participating in an ongoing study of
arsenic exposure among residents in a 25-square-kilometer region
located about 30 kilometers east of Dhaka. The study site, Araihazar,
was chosen because of its wide range of arsenic concentrations in
drinking water.
The research team’s earlier survey of 6,000 contiguous tube
wells in the region showed concentrations in individual wells rang-
ing from less than 1 microgram per liter (µg/L) to 900 µg/L. Of the
wells surveyed, 75% exceeded the World Health Organization
(WHO) arsenic standard of 10 µg/L, and 53% exceeded the
Bangladeshi standard of 50 µg/L.
In the current study, children and their mothers came to the
research team’s field clinic for examination by a physician. The chil-
dren provided urine specimens for the measurement of urinary
arsenic and creatinine; about half also agreed to provide blood sam-
ples for measurement of blood lead and hemoglobin. Each child’s
mother provided information about the family’s primary source of
drinking water, and these sources were matched to the previously
surveyed wells. In an effort to control for sociodemographic vari-
ables, the research team asked parents about parental age, education,
and occupation, among other questions. The team also controlled
for drinking water exposure to manganese, another known neuro-
toxicant (in their earlier survey, they had found that 82% of wells
surveyed for manganese exceeded the WHO standard of 500 µg/L).
In addition to the medical evaluation, the children were
assessed using an adaptation of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children, version III (WISC-III). Because of the lack of standardized
Saves clothes, not health. The naphthalene and paradichlorobenzene in
mothballs may put those who use them at risk for non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Science Selections
Environmental Health Perspectives • VOLUME 112 | NUMBER 13 | September 2004 A 759
TrygveBolstad/PanosPictures
IQ measures in Bangladesh, Wasserman, a child psychologist,
adapted the WISC-III for this cultural context. The WISC-III is a
comprehensive series of tests that measures intellectual abilities such
as comprehension and problem solving. Verbal subtests together
provide a Verbal IQ, and a number of performance subtests (such
as Picture Completion, Coding, Block Design, and Mazes) together
provide a Performance IQ.
The researchers found that consumption of water contaminated
by arsenic was associated with reduced intellectual function in a
dose–response fashion. Children with exposures above 50 µg/L had
significantly lower Performance and Full Scale scores than children
with exposures under 5.5 µg/L. The children with the highest quartile
of water arsenic also had marginally reduced Verbal scores. Lead and
manganese exposures were not conclusively associated with impaired
intellectual function, likely due to the low number of blood samples
and confounding between arsenic and manganese, respectively.
The research team is working to curb exposure to arsenic in the
study region. Since arriving in 2000, U.S. researchers, along with
Bangladeshi colleagues, have overseen the installation of low-arsenic
private and community wells and implemented a village education
program that has successfully reduced some exposure. The authors
note that the associations between arsenic and intellectual function
were stronger for well-water concentrations than for urinary concen-
trations, which reflect recent exposure. The urinary concentrations at
the time of testing may not reflect the full magnitude of the children’s
earlier exposure, and the authors write that recently reduced exposure
may explain the weaker associations between intellectual function and
urine arsenic, compared to well-water arsenic. –John Tibbetts
Aflatoxin Exposure after
Weaning
Solid Food Contaminant Impairs Growth
Given the heat, humidity, and poor storage conditions of many
tropical developing nations, mold readily grows in harvested crops
such as maize and groundnuts. Such foods are dietary staples in
many of these countries, and their con-
sumption can lead to widespread expo-
sure to aflatoxin, a mold toxin produced
by Aspergillus species that is known to
cause liver cancer. Aflatoxin is also associ-
ated with impaired growth and immune
function in animals, but minimal data
exist regarding comparable effects in
humans. To examine a potential link
more closely, a team of researchers in the
United Kingdom and Benin built upon
an earlier cross-sectional study that
demonstrated impaired growth among
West African children with high aflatoxin
exposure [EHP 112:1334–1338]. The
researchers now present evidence from a
longitudinal study that aflatoxin does
impair growth in humans.
Previous studies indicated that afla-
toxin exposure is high in West African
populations, and dietary exposure begins
with the introduction of solid foods at
weaning. Maize, in the form of porridge,
is often the first solid food given to young
children here. To study the effects on
growth of probable aflatoxin exposure at a
young age, the team recruited 50 children from each of four villages
in the West African nation of Benin. The children were 16–37
months old when the study began in February 2001. The children’s
mothers were interviewed in February, June, and October to gather
information about each child’s diet, health, and other factors. Blood
samples collected from the children at each survey point were ana-
lyzed for levels of aflatoxin–albumin, a biomarker of recent aflatoxin
exposure. Vitamin A and zinc levels also were obtained as markers of
nutrition. The children and their mothers were weighed and mea-
sured at each survey point.
At the first survey point, the researchers found that levels of afla-
toxin–albumin were significantly higher in weaned children than in
those still partially breastfeeding. Throughout the study, more chil-
dren became fully weaned, and the levels of the biomarker increased
in these children. More than 98% of the children were positive for
aflatoxin–albumin at all three time points. Most exposure was likely
due to maize consumption, although eating other foods such as
groundnuts may have contributed.
Children with the highest levels of the aflatoxin biomarker grew
an average 1.7 centimeters less than those with the lowest levels. Poor
nutrition did not appear to be a factor in the reduced growth, as
blood concentrations of vitamin A and zinc were not correlated with
aflatoxin–albumin levels.
The mechanism by which aflatoxin could affect growth is cur-
rently being investigated. Defining aflatoxin’s effects is complicated
by confounding dietary variables (including co-contamination of
food with additional mycotoxins) and the presence of infection. For
example, previous research by this group revealed an association
between aflatoxin exposure and reduced levels of protective antibod-
ies in the saliva of Gambian children. The team therefore theorizes
that aflatoxin could affect growth by altering mucosal barriers and
lowering resistance to intestinal infection.
The group is now conducting research aimed at better under-
standing such relationships. They suggest that controlling for
many confounding factors will require a randomized intervention
study in which aflatoxin exposure would be reduced to assess the
toxin’s impact on children’s immunity, growth, and disease sus-
ceptibility. –Julia R. Barrett
A somber start. Maize porridge—a potential source of growth-limiting aflatoxin exposure—is often
the first solid food given to West African children such as this boy in Burkina Faso.
