Environews Science Selections
A Threat to Teen Workers
Disinfectants and Occupational Illness
Three out of four U.S. adolescents work at some time during their
junior and senior years of high school. Youth workplace injury and ill-
ness may be underreported because the majority of teen employees
work part-time, even during the summer; children may not enter the
workers’ compensation system and therefore may be missed by ongo-
ing surveillance. Are important trends being missed? This month,
Theresa A. Brevard of The Ohio State University and colleagues
report on the first study to measure the magnitude, incidence, and
nature of disinfectant-related occupational illness in young workers,
and they find room for improvement [EHP 111:1654–1659].
In 1996–1998, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 24.8%
of youth aged 15–17 worked during the school year, with that figure
swelling to 34.2% during the summer. In the food and beverage indus-
try, the most common workplace for minors, disinfectants are used to
keep preparation surfaces and equipment clean and germ-free.
Disinfectant exposure can happen in other industries, as well, including
recreation-related jobs such as lifeguarding (where workers may be
responsible for chlorinating the pool) and cleaning, manufacturing, and
service jobs.
Brevard and colleagues looked at data on disinfectant-related illness-
es for 1993–1998 from two sources: the Toxic Exposure Surveillance
System, maintained by a nationwide network of poison control centers,
and the California Department of Pesticide Regulation, which keeps
detailed data on known and suspected acute poisoning cases, including
those involving disinfectants. The team examined data for teen workers
under age 17 and, as a comparison group, adult workers aged 25–44.
The researchers tracked episodes of worker illness and injury relat-
ed to five classes of disinfectants: halogens including hypochlorites
(bleach and its relatives), quaternary ammonium compounds (hard-
surface cleaners that impede bacterial growth at high dilution), pheno-
lic agents (including coal tar disinfectants such as Lysol), products
containing pine oils (added more for their “clean” scent than their
cleansing properties), and “unspecified” agents (where the identity of
the specific disinfectant was not determined).
The researchers found that adolescents, with 307 episodes of ill-
ness, were more than four times as likely as adults to be injured or
made ill by workplace exposure to disinfectants. The most commonly
reported illnesses and injuries (59%) came from exposure to halogens,
and the skin and eyes were the most commonly affected organs.
Although overall risk was higher for adolescents than for adults, adults
working in the industries that employ the most young workers also
had more disinfectant-related illness than all other working adults.
Most of the reported effects, such as scratchy throat and watery
eyes, were characterized as mild, causing minimally bothersome,
rapidly resolved health issues. Less frequent but more serious effects
included corneal abrasions and second- and third-degree skin burns.
None of the cases examined involved severe injuries or fatalities. In
cases where data on personal protective equipment use were available,
65% of illness and injury fell to teens who were not using safeguards.
The authors raise the need for better enforcement of existing
health and safety regulations, especially those related to the appropri-
ate use of personal protective equipment, and suggest revision of the
Fair Labor Standards Act to include disinfectants as a hazard against
which young workers must be protected. They call for states to do a
better job of collecting information on disinfectant-related illness and
to establish uniform reporting requirements, which would make it
easier to establish how these injuries are impacting the work force.
–Victoria McGovern
Pesticides in Pregnant Women
Some Cumulative Exposures Exceed Safe Levels
Following passage of the 1996 Food Quality Protection Act, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) created new guidelines for
assessing risks associated with pesticide exposure. In contrast to earlier
risk assessment methodologies, the new guidelines provide a framework
for estimating the cumulative risk from multiple pesticides sharing a
common mechanism of toxicity. This month, Rosemary Castorina of
the Center for Children’s Environmental Health Research at the
University of California, Berkeley, and colleagues report on one of the
first case studies using the new guidelines [EHP 111:1640–1648].
Their results indicate that approximately 15% of the pregnant women
they studied may have experienced cumulative organophosphate (OP)
pesticide exposures exceeding a health-protective value.
OP pesticides are commonly used against insects in home and
agricultural environments, and exposure is widespread. Abundant data
indicate that low-level exposure to OP pesticides, prenatally and post-
natally, affects the growth and neurodevelopment of young animals.
These chemicals’ mechanism of toxicity is inhibition of cholinesterase,
an enzyme that helps control nerve transmission.
In its revised guidelines, the EPA has determined the quantity of
each of 33 OP pesticides that reduces brain cholinesterase activity in
test animals by 10%—the so-called oral benchmark dose10 (BMD10).
The BMD10 can be used to calculate a relative potency factor to
weigh the toxicities of different related pesticides in terms of a single
“index pesticide.”
Castorina and colleagues drew their study population from partici-
pants in the Center for the Health Assessment of Mothers and
Children of Salinas study, a longitudinal birth cohort study designed
Rubberball
A 716 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 13 | October 2003 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Super-sized exposure? A study showed that teens were more than four
times as likely as adults to be injured or made ill by workplace exposure to
disinfectants such as those used in the food and beverage industry.
Science Selections
Environmental Health Perspectives • VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 13 | October 2003 A 717
in part to investigate pesticide exposures and their effects in pregnant
women and children. Urine samples were collected twice during preg-
nancy and once after delivery, and were analyzed for 6 OP metabo-
lites. Complete data were available for 446 women. The team also
obtained reported pesticide use data for the corresponding time period
from the California Department of Pesticide Regulation.
The researchers used two methods to calculate pesticide dose
based on urinary metabolites. In the first, they assumed that all rele-
vant metabolites in a sample derived from exposure to a single pesti-
cide. This method yielded an upper limit for exposure to each of 8
pesticides representing many that are used heavily in the Salinas
Valley, an area of intensive year-round agricultural production. In the
second method, the metabolites were assumed to result from exposure
to multiple pesticides. A likely mixture was calculated based on report-
ed chemical use in the Salinas Valley, and a relative potency factor for
each constituent pesticide was calculated using chlorpyrifos as the
index chemical.
For this study, the team calculated a health-protective pesticide
reference dose by dividing each pesticide’s oral BMD10 by 100. Doses
higher than this were deemed to be of concern.
The results using the first method suggested that between 0%
and 36% of the study population may have exceeded safe levels of
exposure, depending on the pesticide analyzed. The results using the
second method indicated that 14.8% of the women had excessive
exposure, but due to uncertainty about the actual mixture, the range
spanned from 1% to 34%.
The researchers note that each method introduces its own uncer-
tainty. However, they believe that they have proposed a reasonable
approximation of exposures, and future studies will incorporate chemi-
cal-specific biomonitoring data to counter some of this uncertainty.
These preliminary results indicate a need for further research, especially
as the fetal dose from maternal exposure is unknown. –Julia R. Barrett
Livestock Drugs Infiltrate Dust
Another Hazard for Farmers
Recent research has investigated how human and veterinary drugs
enter the environment at subtherapeutic concentrations and what
the downstream effects of this contamination may be. Now
German researchers led by Gerd Hamscher of the Hannover
School of Veterinary Medicine have documented a new route of
entry for veterinary drugs into the environment, and they cite a
new potential risk for people who spend long periods inside
enclosed animal buildings: inhaling residues of antibiotics in the
dust in such buildings [EHP 111:1590–1594].
Antibiotics are given to livestock to preempt disease, treat out-
breaks of illness, control the spread of infection from sick to healthy
animals, and promote growth. Large-scale use of antibiotics in pig
production is widespread within the European Union and the
United States, although its use in the European Union is now
restricted to treating and containing infection.
The researchers used tandem mass spectrometry to retrospec-
tively analyze dust samples taken from a 350- to 420-head pig-fat-
tening farm from 1981 to 2000. Dust was collected using a metal
sampling frame placed 1.5 meters above the floor, the typical
breathing height of humans. From the 10–15 samples collected
inside the building each year, the researchers randomly selected 1
for analysis. The dust particles originated primarily from the ani-
mals’ feed and dried feces and urine.
In 18 of the 20 samples analyzed, as many as 5 different antibi-
otics were detected at levels of 0.2–12.5 milligrams per kilogram
(mg/kg) dust. Tylosin occurred in 16 samples, reaching a top con-
centration of 12.18 mg/kg. Sulfamethazine was present in 13 sam-
ples at levels up to 2.9 mg/kg. Several tetracyclines appeared in 12
samples at concentrations of 0.2–5.2 mg/kg. Both tylosin and sul-
famethazine can cause allergic reactions in susceptible people, and
the European Union banned tylosin as a feed additive in 1998.
Chloramphenicol was detected in 3 samples at concentrations of
2.0–9.1 mg/kg. Chloramphenicol is capable of causing severe side
effects in humans, including in rare cases aplastic anemia and gray
baby syndrome (another name for chloramphenicol toxicity in new-
borns, the often-fatal result of giving newborns the drug for bacterial
infection). The compound was prohibited in farming in 1994,
Hamscher says, because of its potential to damage DNA. Neither
tylosin nor chloramphenicol were found in samples taken after their
respective bans.
Pharmaceuticals have been detected in rivers and groundwater at
parts-per-billion levels ranging up to several micrograms per liter. In
contrast, says Hamscher, these dust samples yielded relatively high
drug content for an environmental sample—in the
parts-per-million range, representing concentrations
approximately three orders of magnitude higher.
Other studies have shown that chronic exposure to
subtherapeutic concentrations of antibiotics is optimal
for the development of resistance. Furthermore, the
same allergenicity risks posed by consumption or injec-
tion of antibiotics may also occur through inhalation.
No acceptable daily intake has been established for
drugs inhaled via dust.
Because of the potentially harmful effects of inhal-
ing antibiotic-laden dust, the study authors conclude
that the use of antibiotics in farm animals should be
reduced when possible. They also say further investiga-
tion with more frequent sampling rates is needed of the
dust in larger pig operations (this facility was relatively
small) as well as hen houses, where the potential for
dust production is even higher than in pig houses.
Future research on the risks to farmers of breathing
dust laden with microorganisms and allergens should
also examine antibiotic residues and their impact. Such
investigations should include monitoring farmers’
health and determining their state of antibiotic resis-
tance. –Carla Burgess
Corbis
Snout route. Research shows that veterinary pharmaceuticals can enter the environment
through barn dust, putting livestock farmers at risk for inadvertently inhaling these drugs.
