Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 82, pp. 267-281, 1989
Review and Update of Leukemia Risk
Potentially Associated with Occupational
Exposure to Benzene
by Susan M. Brett,* Joseph V. Rodricks,* and
Vernon M. Chinchillit
Since the 1980 U.S. Supreme Court decision on the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA)
proposal to lower the occupational benzene standard from 10 ppm to 1 ppm, numerous quantitative assess-
ments ofthe leukemia risk of benzene exposure have been prepared. The primary difference between these
risk assessments has been in the way in which benzene exposure has been estimated and in the models ap-
plied to describe the dose-response relationship. The more recent assessments, in attempting to estimate ben-
zene exposures on an individual basis, and in applying models which make maximal use ofthe available data
points, represent a substantial improvement over earlier assessments. In this paper, we will review the avail-
able risk assessments and the data upon which they are based and will present our own assessment, which
builds on prior efforts. Our reevaluation ofthe underlying data on the cohort that wejudged to be most suitable
for quantitative risk analysis suggested that past assessments may have overestimated risk by a factor of
3 to 24. In addition, we will present some recently made available data ofrelevance to the benzene exposure
histories of cohort ofconcern. These data provide additional suggestion that the total benzene exposure of
certain members ofthis cohort has likely been seriously underestimated, the extent to which remains to be
determined. Further analysis of these data and pursuit of additional sources to improve the characteriza-
tion of the benzene exposure of this cohort appear to be warranted in order to define more precisely the
benzene-leukemia dose-response relationship.
Introduction
The hazards of benzene exposure to humans and ex-
perimental animals are well documented (1-3). In hu-
mans, exposure to high levels ofbenzene has caused a va-
riety of disorders of the hematopoietic system, particu-
larly leukemia, especially ofthe acute myelogenous type,
and aplastic anemia (1,2,4). Evidence ofthe leukemogenic
properties of benzene has come both from collections of
case reports (3-6) and from epidemiological studies (7-9).
There is no substantial disagreement in the scientific
community that benzene exposure can cause leukemia in
highly exposed humans. What does remain uncertain,
however, is the relationship between a particular level of
benzene exposure and the resulting probability of devel-
oping leukemia. This uncertainty results from incomplete
data on the levels of benzene to which individuals in the
epidemiologic studies were exposed and a number of
other factors that affect the dose-response relationship.
Elevated frequencies of chromosome aberrations in
*Environ Corporation, 1000 Potomac Street, N.W., Washington, DC
20007.
tDepartment of Biostatistics, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298.
Address reprint requests to S. M. Brett, Environ Corporation, 1000
Potomac Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20007.
bone marrow cells and peripheral leukocytes have been
observed in a number of studies of individuals exposed
to benzene (1). It is not clear whether these are signifi-
cant indicators of health damage. Studies of the effects
ofbenzene exposure in animals have shown some similar-
ities to, and also some significant differences from, the ef-
fects observed in exposed humans. As with humans, the
hematopoietic system in the bone marrow is a critical tar-
get ofbenzene exposure, with anemia, lymphocytopenia,
and bone marrow hypoplasia as common responses to
repeated inhalation of benzene in the 100 to 300 ppm
range (1). Also, mice and rabbits exposed to benzene show
increased numbers of chromosome aberrations in their
bone marrow.
The major difference in response between humans and
the species and strains ofexperimental animals that have
been tested is that, although several cases of leukemia
have been attributed to benzene exposure by some re-
searchers, no animal model for benzene-induced leukemia
has been well established. Several other forms of ne-
oplasms have been found at elevated incidence in rats and
mice exposed to benzene by inhalation or ingestion how-
ever (10-15). The sites at which tumors have been
elevated in rodents include the Zymbal gland, the oral
cavity, the preputial gland, the Harderian gland, the
mammary gland, the lung, and ovaries, in addition to lym-
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
phomas and leukemia. The reasons for the differences in
response between species are not known, though in-
terspecies differences in metabolism and pharmacoki-
netics of benzene via different routes of exposure may
contribute.
The findings in experimental animals confirm qualita-
tively the carcinogenic potential ofbenzene. However, it
would be inappropriate to rely on such data to estimate
quantitatively the risks of exposure of humans to ben-
zene. Most expert groups, including, OSHA (16), U.S.
EPA (17,19), and the Office of Science and Technology
Policy (18) agree that where epidemiologic data of
reasonably good quality are available, they should be
used for risk assessment. Thus, although it may be ofin-
terest for the purpose of comparison to use the animal
data, greatest reliance should be placed on the more rele-
vant human data when such data are available.
In 1977, OSHA first proposed to lower the occupational
benzene standard from 10 ppm to 1 ppm on the basis of
its qualitative assessment of the leukemia risks of ben-
zene exposure. A permanent standard was, however, not
upheld by the United States Supreme Court on the ba-
sis that OSHA had not demonstrated that a significant
risk existed at the current standard, nor that this risk
would be significantly reduced by institution of the pro-
posed standard. Since this Supreme Court decision, quan-
titative risk assessments have been prepared by a num-
ber of investigators. In addition, exposure data of
relevance to the benzene leukemia dose-response rela-
tionship have recently become available and should be
considered when evaluating this issue.
In the following discussion, we will initially review the
epidemiologic data sets available for benzene risk assess-
ment and will consider factors arguing for and against
their application for this purpose. We will then review the
assessments that have been prepared and their associ-
ated strengths and limitations. The data recently made
available and their potential effect on the available ben-
zene risk estimates will be discussed. Finally, on the ba-
sis of this analysis, our conclusions regarding leukemia
risk associated with occupational benzene exposure will
be presented.
Epidemiologic Studies Available for
Risk Assessment
A number of epidemiologic studies have been used to
assess the risk ofleukemia mortality to persons exposed
to benzene. We will describe the four studies that have
been most frequently used for this purpose and their as-
sociated strengths and lirnitations for quantitative risk as-
sessment.
Description of Studies and Their
Limitations
Infante et al. and Rinsky et al. Infante et al. (1) and
Rinsky et al. (9,20,21) are reports representing continued
follow-up of the leukemia mortality experience ofa group
of Goodyear workers who had been exposed to benzene
in the manufacture of rubber hydrochloride (also known
as Pliofilm) at three facilities at two locations in Ohio. We
shall limit our discussion to the methodology and results
obtained in the latter two Rinsky reports, as these have
been the primary basis for the more recent risk assess-
ments.
Rinsky et al. (9) divided the Pliofilm cohort from the
three facilities into two groups according to the time
period worked in the Pliofilm department. Group 1 con-
sisted of 748 workers who worked at least one day be-
tween January 1, 1940, and December 31, 1949; group 2
consisted of258 workers whose first Pliofilm exposure oc-
curred between January 1, 1950, and December 31, 1959.
Vital status was ascertained to June 30, 1975, for 98% of
the cohort. For each group, the number of workers who
died from leukemia between January 1, 1950, and June
30, 1975, was compared to the expected number based on
U.S. white male mortality using a modified life table ap-
proach.
Among the 748 workers in the first group, 7 deaths
from leukemia occurred versus 1.25 leukemia deaths ex-
pected, resulting in a standardized mortality ratio (SMR)
of 560 (p < 0.001). It was noted that the mean duration
of benzene exposure was relatively brief, with 437 per-
sons (58%) of the cohort exposed for less than 1 year.
Upon data analysis by length ofemployment, a significant
excess in leukemia was observed among workers em-
ployed 5 or more years (5 leukemia deaths observed vs.
0.23 expected, SMR= 2100), but not among workers em-
ployed for less than 5 years (2 leukemia deaths observed
vs. 1.02 expected, SMR= 196, not statistically significant).
Among the 258 workers in the second group, only 1 death
from leukemia was observed vs. 0.46 expected, represent-
ing an increase that was not statistically significant.
Rinsky et al. (21) expanded the Pliofilm cohort by in-
cluding all nonsalaried, white males employed in a
Pliofilm department at the two locations for at least 1 day
between January 1, 1940, and December 31, 1965 (i.e., 6
additional exposure years). Vital status was ascertained
through December 31, 1981 (6.5 additional years offollow-
up). This resulted in a total cohort of 1165 white males
with at least 1 ppm-day (1 day ofemployment in a Pliofilm
department with at least 1 ppm average benzene concen-
tration) of cumulative benzene exposure.
In this cohort, a total of 9 leukemia deaths was ob-
served vs. 2.7 expected, resulting in an SMR of337 (95%
CI=154-641). Thus, during the additional 6.5 years of
follow-up of the original Rinsky et al. (9) 1981 cohort, 1
additional leukemia death was observed; no leukemia
deaths were observed in the subgroup ofworkers whose
employment began after 1959.
Rinsky et al. (21) further refined their analysis by
stratifying the cohort by cumulative benzene exposure.
To develop estimates of cumulative benzene exposure,
they created 10 broad exposure classes, each associated
with a specific job title in the Pliofilm operation. They
then constructedjob-exposure matrices, which associated
an average annual benzene exposure level with each ex-
posure class.
Rinsky calculated cumulative benzene exposure over a
268
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE
working lifetime for each individual based upon estimated
benzene concentration in a Plioflim job category during
the particular year(s) of exposure and the duration ofex-
posure in particular jobs. The cohort was then divided
into four cumulative exposure categories: 0.001-40 ppm-
years; 40-200 ppm-years; 200400 ppm-years; and greater
than 400 ppm-years, with SMRs of 109, 322, 1186, and
6637, respectively.
In addition, Rinsky et al. (21) performed a matched
case-control analysis using conditional logistic regression.
This aspect of the Rinsky et al. 1987 report will be dis-
cussed later in this paper when the available risk assess-
ments on benzene are reviewed.
There are number of limitations to this study, many of
which relate to the characterization of exposure. First,
environmental monitoring data for the two locations were
significantly less than complete for the years under con-
sideration. For location 1, the location on which the
majority of data was available, there were no measure-
ments available for the years prior to 1946 or for the
years 1951 to 1963. In 1963, the company began to record
benzene concentrations on a standard form. The fre-
quency of company surveys for atmospheric benzene for
the years 1963 to 1971, however, was quite low, with an
average of only 2.3 surveys/year during this time inter-
val, and an average ofonly 2.3 samples/year collected for
each ofthe 12 work areas considered. Thus, even for the
plant location at which monitoring data were more read-
ily available, the body of evidence may be considered
somewhat limited.
Environmental monitoring results for location 2 were
extremely limited. For plant 1 (oflocation 2), only three
sample points, determined in an industrial hygiene sur-
vey on one day in 1948, were available. Similarly, for
plant 2 (oflocation 2), the only environmental data avail-
able were believed to have been taken "around 1957."
Thus, apparently no sampling data were available for 27
of the 29 years during which Pliofilm was manufactured
at this location. Rinsky et al., for lack ofbetter monitor-
ing data, made the assumption that benzene exposures
at location 2 were similar to those at location 1. This as-
sumption has not been verified. This may be particularly
significant because it suggests that for greater than 40%
ofthe overall cohort and two-thirds ofthe leukemia cases,
no directly applicable monitoring data were available
upon which to base worker exposures.
These significant gaps in the available benzene monitor-
ing data for location 2 in general, and for many of the
years under consideration for location 1, necessitated
making a large number of assumptions in the investiga-
tors' attempts to estimate individual cumulative benzene
exposure, Clearly, this is an issue ofgreat importance if
one relies on this study to assess benzene-leukemia dose-
response relations.
Another area of uncertainty relates to the fact that
Rinsky et al. failed to consider all routes of benzene ex-
posure in this cohort of Pliofilm workers. During the 1977
OSHA hearings on benzene, testimony was presented
suggesting that dermal exposure in certain work areas
in the Pliofilm plants was significant. The Rinsky et al.
study, however, did not report on these exposure condi-
tions, nor did it consider that the dermal route might
have contributed significantly to total benzene exposure
of certain workers in the cohort. The possible contribu-
tion to total benzene exposure from the dermal route will
be considered later in this paper.
Rinsky et al. did not consider the extent ofbenzene ex-
posure that members ofthe Pliofilm cohort may have had
in non-Pliofilm jobs within the Goodyear plants. Through
a Freedom of Information Act request, the American
Petroleum Institute (API) has recently obtained the
Goodyearjob history records ofthe Rinsky cohort mem-
bers who have died. Review ofthesejob history records
indicates that most members of the cohort worked in a
variety of non-Pliofilm jobs throughout the Goodyear
plants, many ofwhich likely involved substantial benzene
exposure. As will be discussed, a review of some early
published reports by medical personnel of Goodyear sug-
gests that pure benzene or solvents with high benzene
concentrations were used by the company in several of
these non-Pliofilm operations. On the basis of these
reports it is suggested that the total benzene exposure
of the Pliofilm cohort may have been seriously underes-
timated by the failure to consider exposure, both by the
inhalation and dermal routes, to benzene in non-Pliofilm
jobs throughout the Goodyear plants involved in the
study.
Ofthe 9 leukemias observed in the overall cohort, 6 had
worked in location 2. This may be important because lo-
cation 2 is that for which almost no environmental
monitoring data were available for the Pliofilm opera-
tions. The higher rate of leukemia mortality in location
2 than in location 1 may be related to the higher poten-
tial for benzene exposure in the tire-building (non-
Pliofilm)job areas oflocation 2. The investigations made
the assumption, however, that benzene exposures at the
two locations were very similar. This assumption may
have been in error.
Ott et al. andBond et al. Ott et al. (8) studied the mor-
tality experience of 594 white males who were exposed
to benzene in three production areas of Dow Chemical
Company in Michigan. The workers had been employed
at the plant between 1940 and 1973, with no apparent
minimum length of employment required for inclusion in
the cohort.
Benzene concentrations in the three production areas
(i.e., chlorobenzol, alkyl benzene, and ethyl cellulose) were
characterized based upon environmental monitoring data
from 1944 to 1973. Overall, benzene levels ranged from
0 to 937 ppm, although the estimated time-weighted aver-
age benzene concentrations ranged from 0.1 to 35.5 ppm
in the various job categories. Exposures were further
categorized for specificjobs in the production areas based
upon time-weighted average benzene exposure. A total
of 3 leukemia cases was observed from 1940 to 1973
versus 0.8 expected, based upon incidence data from the
Third National Cancer Survey. This resulted in an SMR
of 375.
There are a number offactors that limit the usefulness
ofthis study for the purpose ofleukemia risk assessment.
269
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
First, it must be considered that workers at the Michi-
gan Dow plant were reportedly exposed to a large num-
ber of chemicals in addition to benzene, some of which
have been associated with carcinogenic effects. This lack
of specificity of exposure may have had a significant in-
fluence on the study results. This concern is magnified
upon examination of the work exposure histories of the
three leukemia cases, all of whom had documented mul-
tiple chemical exposures in past employment.
Another limitation of the study, in terms of its utility
for establishing causal associations, was the lack ofan ob-
served dose-response relationship. In addition, the small
size of the Ott et al. (8) study makes it of somewhat lim-
ited use for the purpose of risk assessment. Due to the
small study size, the standardized morbidity ratio of375
that was observed for leukemia had a 95% confidence in-
terval that ranged from approximately 77 to 1096. This
interval would generally be considered to be too wide to
provide confidence in the use ofthe SMR of375 as the ba-
sis for quantitative risk estimates.
This investigation has been recently updated in an un-
published report by Bond et al. (22). In this analysis, 956
Dow Michigan division employees potentially exposed to
benzene were studied. The period of observation was
1940 to 1982, representing an additional 9 years offollow-
up from the earlier investigation. Four leukemia deaths
were observed versus 2.1 expected based upon U.S.
white male mortality rates; this increase was not statisti-
cally significant. It was noted, however, that all 4 leuke-
mias were of the myelogenous type. When the mortality
for myelogenous leukemia was compared with that which
would be expected based upon National Cancer Institute
Surveillance, Epidemiology End Results (SEER) data, a
statistically significant excess was observed (4 observed
vs. 0.9 expected; p = 0.011). The investigators noted a
fifth leukemia case, who was the same individual whose
death certificate was classified to pneumonia in the Ott
et al. (8) study. Thus, this update identified two additional
leukemia deaths among benzene-exposed Dow Chemical
workers.
The Bond et al. (22) update has the same limitations for
use in risk assessment as the earlier study of the cohort.
Once again, the analysis failed to show a positive dose-
response relationship. The number ofleukemias observed
remains small, and consequently the confidence interval
around the risk estimate remains quite wide. The possi-
ble influence of additional exposures remains an impor-
tant issue for consideration.
A conditional logistic regression case-control analysis
of the Ott et al./Bond et al. studies (8,22) has been con-
ducted by the American Petroleum Institute in order to
investigate whether they represent evidence of a rela-
tionship between increasing cumulative benzene ex-
posure and increasing risk ofleukemia (23). The method
of analysis was consistent with that employed in the
Rinsky et al. (20,21) case-control study. Each leukemia
case was matched to 10 controls on date ofbirth and date
offirst employment in a benzene exposure job. On the ba-
sis ofthese analyses, there was not a statistically signif-
icant relationship observed between increasing cumula-
tive benzene exposure and increased risk ofleukemia (23).
Aksoy. Aksoy (6) reported that during 1967 to 1975, a
total of34 workers at shoe manufacturing facilities where
benzene was used were admitted to the hematology
departments ofa medical school in Istanbul, Turkey. The
total number of shoe workers in Istanbul was estimated
to be 28,500. The crude annual incidence of leukemia in
this population was estimated to be 13/100,000 person-
years of observation. The annual incidence rate ofleuke-
mia in the general population was reported by the inves-
tigators to be 6/100,000. The observed incidence was
reported to be significantly higher (p < 0.01) than the in-
cidence in the general population.
The Aksoy study reportedly evaluates the incidence of
leukemia among 28,500 shoe workers in Istanbul. In fact,
a study of 28,500 shoe workers was not actually per-
formed. Aksoy's study population represents a case
series of 34 shoe workers who were admitted to the
hematology departments of Istanbul Medical School with
a diagnosis of leukemia between 1967 and 1975. The fig-
ure of28,500 was taken from "official records" of Istan-
bul, which indicate that there are 28,500 workers in-
volved in the shoe, slipper, and handbag industry in
which benzene is used as a solvent. Thus, the leukemia
incidence in only a small percentage of the Istanbul shoe
worker population was 'actually directly examined.
For a standard population, Aksoy used data on the
leukemia mortality in the general population ofWestern
nations, which he obtained from a paper by Gunz (24).
Aksoy indicated during the 1977 OSHA hearings that the
leukemia incidence rate of2.5 to 3/100,000 for the general
population ofTurkey was not used in the analysis because
vital statistics reporting in Turkey could not be relied
upon to draw scientific conclusions.
Questions have been raised about the use of the Gunz
rate as a standard, however, because it was actually an
estimate of the leukemia mortality rate in Western na-
tions, as opposed to the leukemia incidence rate that was
being estimated in Aksoy's population. An additional
question in the interpretation ofAksoy's results was the
fact that his calculation used crude rates, without adjust-
ment for variations in age or leukemia cell types. Leuke-
mia rates are known to vary widely with age, thereby re-
quiring that comparisons be made between populations
with reasonably similar age distributions, or that age ad-
justment be performed prior to relative risk ascertain-
ment.
Perhaps the area ofgreatest uncertainty in the Aksoy
study was that ofcharacterization ofexposure. One must
assume that these shoe workers were exposed to a mix-
ture of volatile hydrocarbons, including benzene. In ad-
dition, workers may have been exposed to curing agents,
dyes, and other chemicals commonly used in the shoe in-
dustry. The leukemic effect observed may therefore have
been related to these other chemical exposures or to ben-
zene activity in combination with these materials. The ex-
posure data provided in the Aksoy studies were also very
limited. Aksoy (25) indicated that the concentration of
benzene was found to reach a maximum of210 to 650 ppm
when adhesives containing benzene were in use. During
270
BENZENE-LE UKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE
the OSHA benzene hearings in 1977, Aksoy indicated
that the concentration ofbenzene ranged between 15 and
30 ppm outside working hours and between 150 and 210
ppm during working hours. The number of mea-
surements upon which these ranges of benzene concen-
trations were based was not specified in any of the
reports. It is most likely, however, that only a very small
percentage of the workplaces under consideration were
actually sampled. Applying these environmental data to
the entire cohort, therefore, results in a very high degree
of uncertainty in any projected exposure-related leuke-
mia risks.
In addition, the Aksoy studies did not consider the is-
sue of dermal exposure to benzene. One can assume, how-
ever, that dermal exposure in this occupational setting
may have been substantial. In light ofrecent experimen-
tal evidence that suggests that dermal exposure to ben-
zene can result in a high degree of absorption, it would
be best advised that this matter be further investigated
to determine the likely contribution of dermal exposure
to the total benzene exposure of this cohort.
Wong. Wong (26) conducted a historical prospective
mortality study ofa group of4602 male chemical workers
from seven plants who were occupationally exposed to
benzene for at least 6 months between 1946 and 1976.
They were compared to a group of 3074 male chemical
workers from the same plants, but with no occupational
exposure to benzene. The vital status ofthe workers was
followed through December 1977 and underlying causes
of death coded to the 8th Revision of the International
Classification of Diseases. Cause-specific mortality was
assessed using a) the comparison group to obtain relative
risks and the corresponding Mantel-Haenszel chi-square
with one degree of freedom, and b) the U.S. male popu-
lation as a comparison for obtaining SMRs.
For leukemia, the SMR for the exposed group was
117.4 (7 deaths observed vs. 5.96 expected). This increase
was not statistically significant. The relative risk ofleuke-
mia could not be determined in the exposed group as com-
pared to the nonexposed group, however, as no deaths
from leukemia were observed in the internal control
population. The reason for this deficit in leukemia in the
unexposed group remains unknown.
The exposed cohort was divided into categories based
upon an exposure classification ofjobs. In the continuous
exposure group a total of 6 deaths from leukemia were
observed vs. 4.43 expected, yielding an SMR of 135,
which was not significant at the 0.05 level. In the inter-
mittent category, a deficit in leukemia occurred with only
1 leukemia death observed vs. 1.49 expected.
It should be noted that none of the leukemia deaths in
the exposed cohort were of the acute myelogenous type,
the cell type that has been most commonly associated
with benzene exposure in other occupational studies.
Rather, 4 of the leukemias were lymphatic, 2 were
chronic myeloid, and 1 was an acute leukemia (type un-
specified).
The study has a number of limitations, some of which
were acknowledged by the investigators. First, it should
be noted that each plant collected data on its own work-
ers. Consequently, it is likely that there was a lack of
uniformity in data collection procedures, which may have
biased the results. Second, data on benzene exposures
during the early part of the study were reported to be
limited for some of the plants, necessitating estimation
ofexposures on the basis ofuniform tasks in the majority
ofplants studied. Two ofthe plants, however, did not use
this approach, and estimates of exposures were derived
by supervisors or industrial hygienists. This lack of con-
sistency in the methodology for exposure estimation may
have further biased the study results, the direction of
such bias being impossible to determine. Third, workers
in the study were probably exposed to a large variety of
additional chemicals in their studiedjobs (and in past em-
ployment), which may have influenced study results.
Fourth, relative risk of leukemia could not be determined
between exposed and nonexposed workers, as there were
no leukemias observed in the unexposed group. Fifth, the
number ofleukemia deaths was quite small, limiting the
confidence that can be placed in any assessment of dose-
response relationships. Sixth, two ofthe nine plants that
originally participated in the early stages of the study
reportedly withdrew from the study because of difficul-
ties in data collection and in participation in the study as
designed. This occurred after the collection of death cer-
tificates, raising the suspicion that the data contained in
the death certificates themselves may have been related
to the decision to no longer participate in the study. It
should further be noted that during the OSHA benzene
hearings held in March of 1986, Wong indicated that in
his judgment the inadequacies in the benzene exposure
estimates made the Wong study (26) an inadequate basis
for quantitative risk assessment.
Conclusion
This review has emphasized data from epidemiological
studies that might be suitable for use in assessing
benzene-associated leukemia risk. On its basis, we con-
clude that the Rinsky et al. (20,21) cohort provides the
best basis for estimation ofbenzene-associated leukemia
risk. In ourjudgment, no other available study is suitable
for risk assessment, primarily because of a general lack
of quantitative exposure information.
Although there are significant limitations in the data
on the magnitude ofexposures ofthe Rinsky et al. cohort,
it nevertheless appears possible to estimate a dose-
response curve (or range of curves) with the degree of
reliability usually considered appropriate for such
studies. We note, however, that some additional informa-
tion on the exposures experienced by the Rinsky et al.
cohort has recently become available that may affect es-
timates of risk derived therefrom.
Review of Available Benzene Risk
Assessments
A large number ofassessments ofthe risk ofleukemia
associated with benzene exposure have been published
since OSHA first proposed its standard in 1977. In the fol-
271
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
lowing discussion, these risk assessments will be consid-
ered, beginning with the earlier assessments, all ofwhich
employ similar methodology, followed by the more recent
assessments that have attempted to make some distinct
improvements in exposure characterization and conse-
quent estimates of risk.
Earlier Risk Assessments Employing the
Linear Model
The Carcinogen Assessment Group of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency presented the
first major risk assessment toliowing the 1977 OSHA
hearings (2?). It considered three sets of occupational
epidemiology data, namely the studies of Infante et al. (7),
Aksoy (25,28,29), and Ott et al. (8). EPA assumed that for
low exposures, the lifetime probability of death from
leukemia may be represented by the linear equation:
P = A + Ox (1)
where A is the rate of leukemia mortality in the absence
of benzene exposure and x is the average lifetime ex-
posure to benzene in parts per million. The term P rep-
resents the increase in the leukemia mortality rate due
to each increase of 1 ppm average lifetime exposure to
benzene; this term may also be referred to as the slope
of the dose-response relation.
EPA assumed that the relative risk of leukemia is in-
dependent ofthe duration ofexposure or the age at which
exposure occurs in the worker population. Given this
assumption, through several algebraic transformations,
P can be derived as follows:
( _ P1(R - 1)/X2 (2)
where Pi is the lifetime probability of dying ofleukemia
with no or negligible benzene exposure, R is the relative
risk of leukemia for a benzene-exposed worker cohort
compared to the general population, and X2 iS the cumula-
tive occupational exposure to benzene, averaged over a
lifetime.
At least six additional risk assessments were subse-
quently developed by other groups, all accepting EPA's
general model (30-35). These risk assessments differed
primarily in their judgment of the adequacy for risk as-
sessment of the three studies originally considered by
EPA, and in their choice ofvalues for Pi, R, and X2 to be
used in deriving P; several of the assessments rejected
the Aksoy and Ott data sets entirely. This resulted in
these assessments producing a wide range of estimates
for the slope P ofthe linear dose-response function at low
doses.
Because of the limitations of the Ott et al. (8) and the
Aksoy studies (6,25,28,29) as described above, it is our
judgment that of the three epidemiologic data sets con-
sidered in these risk assessments, the Infante et al. (7)
and Rinsky et al. (9) data are the best suited for quantita-
tive risk assessment. Consequently, for the remainder of
this discussion ofthese seven risk assessments based on
the linear model, the results presented will be limited to
those derived from the Infante et al. (7)and Rinsky et al.
(9) studies.
Table 1 presents the ranges of additional lifetime leuke-
mia deaths predicted due to occupational exposure to ben-
zene in these seven risk assessments based upon the In-
fante et al. (7) and Rinsky et al. (9) data. Risks are
predicted specifically for workers exposed at the former
10 ppm standard for 45 years (450 ppm-years) and at the
new 1-ppm standard for 45 years (45 ppm-years),
assuming an average 70 year lifetime.
Because of variations in these risk assessments in
values selected for PI, R, and X2, the resultant predictions
of risk at 45 and 450 ppm-years varied by a factor of ap-
proximately 8. Variations in assumptions about exposure
(X2) had the greatest influence upon the range of
predicted leukemias in benzene-exposed workers. Differ-
ences in assumptions about background probabilities and
relative risks in the Infante/Rinsky cohort had a far less
significant influence.
Table 1. Comparision of risk assessments using a linear model based on epidemiological data of
Infante et al. (7) or follow-up reported by Rinsky et al. (9).
Assessment
U.S. EPA (27)
API/Lamm (30)
Hattis and Mendez (31)b
IARC (32)c
Luken and Miller (33)
A. D. Little (Gilbert) (34)b
ELI (35)
Relative
risk
9/1.25 = 7.2
7/1.25 - 5.6
9/0.84 = 10.7
7/1.25 = 5.6
7/1.25 = 5.6
9/0.84 = 10.7
7/1.25 = 5.6
Average lifetime
exposure, ppm
2.81
2.81
0.84
N.A.
1.30
3.27
Low 0.37
High 0.88
Assumed
background
probability
0.006732
0.006732
0.004517
0.007
0.006732
0.00452
0.006732
Lifetime risk
for an average
lifetime exposure of 1 ppma
0.015
0.011
0.052
0.009-0.037
0.024
0.013
0.084
0.035
Additional lifetime leukemia
risk/1000 workers due to
benzene exposure
45 ppm-years 450 ppm-years
2.1 21
1.6 16
7.4 74
1.4-1.7 14-17
3.3 33
1.88 18.8
4.9-11.8 49-118
'All based on a linear model of the dose-response relation. Note that IARC did not project the estimated slopes beyond the range of observed
dose-response relations.
"These authors use background rates for nonlymphatic leukemias only.
CIARC did not estimate average lifetime exposure.
272
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE
In our opinion, all seven of these risk assessments suf-
fer from poor characterization of the benzene exposure
history of this cohort and, consequently, little faith can
be placed in the risk estimates derived therefrom. Sub-
sequent risk assessments have attempted to make im-
provements in the characterization of exposure in the
Infante/Rinsky cohort.
White, Infante, and Chu. White, Infante, and Chu (36)
performed a risk assessment based upon the data pre-
sented in Rinsky et al. (9) and Ott et al. (8). For the
Rinsky et al. cohort, the risk assessment was based solely
on the experience of workers who had been employed for
5 years or more. It was further assumed that the upper
limit on duration of employment was 30 years, because
workers who had been employed for more than 30 years
contributed less than 0.01 to the number of leukemia
deaths expected. White, Infante, and Chu made the
general assumption that during the years 1941 to 1975,
workers were exposed to benzene at the environmental
concentrations recommended during these years. They
further assumed that benzene concentrations before 1941
were 50% higher than a recommended level for 1941. On
this basis, the range of cumulative benzene concentra-
tions for workers in the cohort with 5 to 30 years of expe-
rience was estimated to be 415 ppm-years (83 ppm x 5
years) to 1500 ppm-years (50 ppm x 30 years).
The one-hit model was then selected for low-dose ex-
trapolation, primarily because of its simplicity. This
model states that excess cancer risk (Pd) is related to the
dose (d) by the equation
Pd = [1 -
exp(-fl x d)](1 -
PO) (3)
where P represents the rate at which the excess proba-
bility of leukemia increases with each increment in dose,
d represents dose, and P0 is the background risk of can-
cer. Thus, the total risk of leukemia (Pt) to an individual
exposed to benzene is the sum ofthe background risk (PO)
and the risk associated with benzene:
(P, = PO + [1 - exp(-p x d)](1 - PO) (4)
The relative risk ofleukemia death in the Rinsky et al.
(9) study was approximated by the SMR. It was assumed,
for the purpose of this risk assessment, that:
Pt = SMR/100(P.) (5)
On the basis of Equations 4 and 5, it was shown that (,
the slope ofthe dose-response relation, can be determined
as follows:
= -ln[(1 - (SMRI100)Po/(1 - Po)]Id (6)
value were determined for the upper and lower range
of estimated exposure ofthe cohort. The excess leukemia
risk was thereby estimated to be 44 to 152 per 1000 work-
ers exposed for 45 years at 10 ppm benzene and 5 to 16
per 1000 workers exposed for 45 years at 1 ppm benzene.
(On the basis ofthe Ott et al. (8) study, which we consider
less suitable for risk assessment, the excess leukemia risk
was estimated to be 48 to 136 per 1000 workers exposed
for 45 years at 10 ppm benzene and 5 to 15 per 1000 work-
ers exposed for 45 years at 1 ppm benzene.)
In ourjudgment, one ofthe primary deficiencies in the
risk assessment was its bias in its elimination from con-
sideration ofworkers in the Rinsky et al. study who were
exposed for less than 5 years. It appears the 5-year period
was chosen arbitrarily. Clearly, it is inappropriate to ex-
lude the observed mortality data on workers who were
actually subject to the lower range of exposure to which
the model wvill actually apply. Rather, the entire exposed
cohort and its corresponding SMR should have been used
in the assessment of risk of this worker cohort.
Further, it should be realized that the range ofrisks es-
timated by White, Infante, and Chu on the basis ofthese
data is highly unlikely to represent the true range of
risks. The SMR selected (2100) represented the average
SMR for the subset of workers with 5 years or more of
exposure. White, Infante, and Chu applied this average
SMR to their range of cumulative exposure estimates.
This average risk estimate, however, does not correspond
to the risk at either the upper or lower estimates of ex-
posure. It would have been more appropriate to have ap-
plied this average SMR to an estimate ofthe average cu-
mulative exposure of the cohort.
Review of the environmental monitoring data in the
Rinsky et al. (9) study calls into question White, Infante,
and Chu's assumption that workers were exposed to ben-
zene at the environmental concentrations recommended
during the time periods under consideration. The data in-
dicated that in certain areas of location 1 (on which the
large majority of data were available), environmental
benzene concentrations well exceeded the recommended
concentrations for the respective time period. Thus, data
contained in the study itself suggest that White, Infante,
and Chu may have underestimated the exposure of the
Rinsky et al. (9) cohort.
Overall, it is our view that the White, Infante, and Chu
risk assessment, like the earlier risk assessments
described, was deficient primarily in its characterization
of exposure of the cohort. The method of exposure esti-
mation applied was relatively crude in its lack of consid-
eration of actual duration ofexposure ofindividuals in the
cohort or of exposure measurement data available for
specific work operations during the years under consid-
eration. Consequently, the risk estimates derived by
White, Infante, and Chu should be given less weight than
those obtained in more recent assessments that consid-
ered such data.
The general methodologies employed in the subsequent
risk assessments ofbenzene and leukemia, namely those
by Crump and Allen (37) and Rinsky et al. (20-21) are, in
our view, superior to those employed in the other ben-
zene risk assessments described. A description of these
latter assessments and their strengths and limitations is
given in the next section. We also add our own risk as-
sessment, based on a synthesis of the desirable features
of all available assessments.
Crump andAllen. Crump and Allen (37) made a signif-
icant improvement over earlier assessments of the
Rinsky et al. (9) cohort in their characterization ofits ben-
zene exposure history. In their analysis, an exposure pro-
file was constructed for each worker in the Rinsky et al.
273
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
(9) cohort. In order to accomplish this, they used the ben-
zene measurement data provided in the Rinsky et al.
study (9), an updated data tape on the cohort, and data
provided by Rinsky, permitting the association of work
areas with occupational codes.
Estimates ofbenzene exposure were based on available
measurements in eight major areas and were derived for
seven time periods that corresponded to the years in
which recommended occupational benzene concentrations
were changed. Time periods were so categorized based
upon the assumption that the company's procedures with
respect to benzene concentrations would remain un-
changed unless revisions in the recommendations or stan-
dards had occurred. Available measurements within time
periods were averaged, based upon the assumption that
roughly equivalent measurement procedures would have
been used within a given time period.
In the event there were no measurements for a given
area in a given period, Crump and Allen multiplied the
estimate from the following period by the ratio of the
recommended occupational concentration for the period
to the recommended occupational concentration for the
following period. The general assumption was made that
monitoring data from one plant location were applicable
to the other.
On the basis of these assumptions about exposure in
specific work areas during specific time intervals, esti-
mates ofcumulative benzene exposure in ppm-years were
determined for each worker. Crump and Allen included
dry-side workers in their analyses and recalculated the
SMRs for the cohort, both for all workers combined and
for six subgroups categorized by cumulative exposure.
Their calculations were also different from those in the
White, Infante, and Chu assessment [based on Rinsky et
al. (9)] because they included follow-up between 1940 and
1950, and between 1975 and 1978. For the overall cohort,
8 leukemias were observed versus 2.98 expected, result-
ing in an SMR of268 (p = 0.01). Mortality from leukemia
was dose related, with 6 of the 8 leukemias occurring in
the two highest cumulative dose categories.
Crump and Allen also used the data on leukemia mor-
tality from the Ott et al. (8) study for deriving their risk
estimates. The data tape from the study was furnished
to Crump and Allen so they could perform some addi-
tional calculations beyond those in the published study.
On the basis ofthis tape, the SMR for leukemia was es-
timated to be 208 (two leukemia deaths observed/0.96 ex-
pected) versus the SMR of375 estimated in the Ott et al.
analysis. Crump and Allen made the judgment that the
Ott et al. study, involving only two deaths from leukemia
and lack of a dose-response relationship, would not be
used independently to make risk estimates, but only in
conjunction with data from other studies.
Crump and Allen also used the data set ofWong et al.
(26) in deriving some of their risk estimates. They indi-
cated however, that without some explanation for the
leukemia deficit in the unexposed group, the Wong et al.
study does not provide strong evidence of a relationship
between occupational exposure to benzene and leukemia.
Crump and Allen, however, proceeded to use the Wong
et al. data set to estimate excess leukemia risk on the
basis of cumulative dose only.
Crump and Allen fit the available Rinsky dose-response
data to both the relative risk and the absolute risk linear
dose-response models. The relative risk model assumes
that the increased age-specific mortality from an agent
is proportional to the background mortality. The absolute
risk model, on the other hand, assumes that the added
benzene mortality is the same for all ages, given equal
doses. The relative risk model applied was as follows:
E(Oi) = aEi(1 + bdi) (7)
and the absolute risk model:
E(Oi) = Ei + (a + bdi)Yi (8)
where:
E(Oi) is the expected number of leukemia deaths in the
ith dose category;
a is a parameter which allows for the possibility that
the background leukemia rates in the cohort differ from
those of the reference population;
Ei is the expected number ofleukemia deaths in the ith
group based upon mortality rates in a comparison popu-
lation;
b is the potency of benzene for causing leukemia mor-
tality;
di is the average benzene dose in the ith group; and
Yi is the total number ofperson-years in the ith group.
Next, Crump and Allen described the four different
measures of dose that they selected to be fit to these
dose-response models. The first was cumulative dose,
which, in this analysis, represented cumulative dose in
ppm-years up to the beginning of the 5-year age interval
under consideration. The second measure was weighted
cumulative dose, in which all exposures occurring in the
last 2.5 years before the beginning of the 5 years of ob-
servation are assumed not to affect leukemia mortality;
exposures in the next earlier 5 years are given full
weight; those in the next earlier 5 years are given 1/3
weight; and all earlier exposures are given 1/6 weight.
The weighted cumulative dose methodology was based
upon data on the latency pattern of leukemia in Japanese
atomic bomb survivors.
The third measure was termed "window dose," in
which full weight is given to exposures during the 10-year
period between 2.5 and 12.5 years prior to the 5-year age
interval of interest, while exposures outside of this
10-year window are ignored. This window dose measure
assumes that doses further than 15 years in the past have
no effect on mortality from leukemia.
Finally, peak exposure dose calculations were defined
as cumulative exposure in ppm-years in work areas with
daily average concentrations above 100 ppm. Exposures
to short-term peak concentrations were not identified for
these calculations. As there were no areas with exposures
between 76 and 100 ppm, it was noted that, in effect, the
peak exposure measure assumed that only levels above
76 ppm contributed to leukemia risk.
The peak exposure measure was not used to develop
274
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEWAND UPDATE
risk estimates. This was because an analysis comparing
leukemia dose-response in workers in the Rinsky et al.
(9) study exposed to levels of benzene in excess of 100
ppm to those exposed to less than 100 ppm did not sup-
port the hypothesis that peak exposure has any effect
upon risk over that which can be explained by the con-
tribution of these exposures to cumulative dose. No at-
tempt was made to determine whether levels other than
100 ppm (to represent peak exposure) had a significant
effect.
Table 2 compares Crump and Allen's estimates of ex-
tra leukemia deaths per 1000 workers using both the rela-
tive and absolute risk models and three different mea-
sures of dose. Projections were based upon maximum
likelihood estimates and the most comprehensive data set
available under each model.
Crump and Allen also presented the estimates ofextra
leukemia deaths per 1000 workers based upon the Rinsky
et al. cumulative exposure data alone, to which the rela-
tive risk model was applied. For 40 years ofexposure be-
ginning at age 20, the estimated extra leukemia deaths
were 6.6/1000 workers exposed at 1 ppm and 63/1000
workers exposed at 10 ppm. Estimates based upon the
Rinsky et al. data alone using the alternative dose mea-
sures and the absolute risk model were not presented in
the Crump and Allen paper.
Crump and Allen received a comment on their report
which suggested that some of their exposure estimates
may have been too high, as levels above 200 ppm, as a
time-weighted average, would have been associated with
an increased rate of anemia in as little as 4 months, and
such an effect was not documented. Crump and Allen de-
veloped an alternative exposure matrix to respond to this
comment, which in effect instituted a ceiling of 131 ppm
for certain job categories. Crump and Allen indicate that
use ofthis alternative exposure matrix will increase risks
by about 25%. (This would result in an excess ofapprox-
imately 8 leukemia deaths/1000 workers exposed at 1
Table 2. Estimates of extra leukemia deaths per 1,000 workers
exposed to benzene using relative risk and absolute risk models
and three exposure measures.a
40 years of exposure
beginning at age 20
Model and exposure 1 ppm 10 ppm
Relative risk model
Cumulative exposure (8,9,26) 9.5 88
(b = 0.033)
Weighted cumulative exposure (8,9) 3.0 29
(b = 0.048)
Window exposure (8,9) 1.2 12
(b = 0.035)
Absolute risk model
Cumulative exposure (8,9) 2.0 19
(b = 1.6 x 10-6)
Weighted cumulative exposure (8,9) 1.5 15
(b = 4.1 x 10-6)
Window exposure (8,9) 1.1 11
(b = 3.1 x 10-6)
'All estimates based upon maximum likelihood estimates of dose-
response slopes.
ppm for 40 years, and of 79 leukemia deaths/1000 workers
exposed at 10 ppm for 40 years.)
In ourjudg-ment, the Crump and Allen estimates based
upon cumulative dose should be given the most weight.
The window exposure assumption that benzene ex-
posures more than 15 years in the past have no effect on
leukemia mortality seems improbable and is at variance
with data on leukemia mortality ofJapanese survivors of
the atomic bomb, in whom excess leukemia mortality has
been observed as late as 30 years after exposure. Fur-
ther, in ourjudgment, the data upon which the weighted
cumulative dose measure was reportedly based [leukemia
mortality in Japanese atomic bomb survivors (38)], pro-
vided an insufficient basis to support the development of
the weighted cumulative dose measure for leukemia. Spe-
cifically, the relative excess ofleukemia mortality in the
bomb survivor population does not appear to be indepen-
dent of age at exposure. In addition, the observations
that relative excess mortality decreased by 2/3 from the
second 5-year interval after exposure to the third 5-year
interval and further decreased by 1/2 in subsequent years
apply only to the subgroup exposed at ages 30 to 44; ob-
servations for subgroups exposed in the remaining adult
age groups showed inconsistent decreases in leukemia
mortality over time.
There is little available basis upon which to form an
opinion whether the absolute or relative risk model ap-
plied by Crump and Allen is most appropriate. Crump
and Allen indicate a preference for the relative risk model
because it seems most probable that the effect ofbenzene
should be larger when the background rate of leukemia
is higher. We tend to concur with this preference. On the
basis of expert hematological opinion submitted during
the 1986 OSHA benzene hearings, it is suggested that
there is little support for the Crump and Allen alternate
exposure matrix. Specifically, the apparent absence of
deaths related to bone marrow toxicity among workers
in Pliofilm areas (i.e., casting) with estimated benzene
concentrations in excess of 130 ppm does not indicate that
such estimated concentrations were higher than actual
concentrations (39,40).
According to Goldstein, the benzene literature indicates
that even in the worst of situations in the past (with re-
gard to high exposure to benzene), there were relatively
few individuals with clinically overt pancytopenia; simi-
larly, acute myelogenous leukemia has not been observed
in more than 1 to 2% of such highly exposed workers (39).
Bennett observed that the literature on benzene-induced
aplasias and cytopenias, although extensive, does not per-
mit reliable prediction ofa specific number of such cases
at any given exposure level. Further, given the relatively
small number ofPliofilm workers (approximately 50) who
experienced benzene levels that one would generally as-
sociate with aplastic anemia, the apparent absence of
cases is unexceptional (40). The opinions of these hema-
tology experts suggest that the Crump and Allen origi-
nal exposure estimates, derived from industrial hygiene
data, are preferable to the Crump and Allen alternative
estimates (37). Thus, in ourjudgment, application ofthe
relative risk model and the original Crump and Allen cu-
275
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
mulative dose measure to the Rinsky et al. data provides
the risk estimates that are the most plausible in the
Crump and Allen assessment.
Rinsky et al. In addition to the cohort analysis of 1196
white male Pliofilm workers described earlier Rinsky et
al. performed a matched case-control analysis on a sub-
set of this Pliofilm worker cohort (20,21). In this analy-
sis, each of the 9 leukemia cases was matched to 10 con-
trols by year of birth and year first employed. This
analysis was performed in an attempt to evaluate the ef-
fect of certain indicators of exposure on the relationship
between risk of death from leukemia and exposure to
benzene; to evaluate the effect of potential confounders
and effect modifiers on this relationship; and to identify
the functional form ofthe exposure-response relationship.
The investigators initially considered the following ex-
posure variables separately and fit a separate model for
each variable: cumulative exposure, duration ofexposure,
and average exposure rate. Cuimulative exposure, ex-
pressed in ppm-years, was reported to be the strongest
predictor of death from leukemia (p = 0.0126, 95% C.I.
- 0.0028 - 0.0224; x2 = 6.4; p = 0.011) (21).
An evaluation of the shape of the exposure response
function was performed in which several models for cu-
mulative exposure were applied. The finding indicated
that a log linear model best represented the observed
exposure-response relationship. On the basis of this
model, the equation describing the odds ratio (OR) for
leukemia in relation to cumulative benzene exposure was
reported to be OR = exp (0.0126 x ppm-years). At 45
ppm-years, the model predicts 5.3 excess leukemia deaths
per 1000 workers, and at 450 ppm-years, 667 excess
leukemia deaths per 1000 workers are predicted.
The Rinsky et al. (20,21) method of conditional logistic
regression is a valuable approach to analyzing dose-
response information, as it makes maximal use ofthe in-
formation available on individual exposure. In its inclu-
sion of individual exposure levels in the statistical analy-
sis, it avoids the loss of information and resultant
imprecision that may occur in analyses that dichotomize
[e.g., the earlier linear (27,30-35) and one-hit model risk
assessments (36)] or categorize (37) cumulative benzene
exposure.
It should be noted, however, that this methodology will
only result in truly improved risk estimates ifit is based
upon sound estimates ofindividual exposure. As was the
case in the Crump and Allen assessment involving in-
dividual exposure estimation, numerous assumptions
were necessarily made about past benzene exposure.
Further, complex decision rules were developed to esti-
mate exposures for individual years. The validity of the
assumptions and decision rules applied by both Rinsky
et al. and by Crump and Allen should be reconsidered in
light ofadditional relevant exposure information that has
recently been uncovered through searches conducted by
the American Petroleum Institute.
Present Authors
We have performed several additional analyses of the
Rinsky et al. data set (20), in which the case-control, con-
ditional logistic approach was applied. Because currently
there is uncertainty regarding actual past benzene con-
centrations in the Pliofilm plants of concern, we have per-
formed separate analyses in which the Rinsky et al. (20)
and the Crump and Allen (37) assumptions about ex-
posure were applied.
We have also examined the Rinsky et al. (20) data tapes
and noted several inconsistencies in the case-control data.
Specifically, upon examination ofthe work histories ofthe
controls selected by Rinsky et al. (20) (control set 1) it was
noted that 15 of the 90 controls had 0 ppm-day cumula-
tive exposure; according to the Rinsky et al. (20) study
criteria, individuals with less than 1 ppm-day ofbenzene
exposure in Pliofilm should have been excluded from the
cohort.
Upon examination of the Rinsky et al. (20) data tapes,
it was noted that the investigators had used inconsistent
cohort definition criteria for the case-control and the co-
hort studies. In the cohort study, Rinsky et al. apparently
considered only a smaller group of 1196 wet-side workers,
whereas in the case-control study, a larger group involv-
ing 1868 wet-side and dry-side workers was included. We
believe it is more appropriate to consider workers from
both the wet and dry side in the analysis, as there is evi-
dence ofbenzene exposure in both ofthese Pliofilm work
areas. In our reanalysisof the data tapes, we considered
all 1868 workers in our subsequent selection of controls.
We selected another group of 90 controls from the co-
hort, applying the Rinsky et al. matching criteria (control
set 2). In addition, we selected a third control group,
matched according to the criteria of Rinsky et al. (date
of birth and date of first employment), but applying the
additional criterion of matching according to plant (con-
trol set 3). We elected to match by plant because the two
plants were located more than 100 miles apart and be-
cause of differences in non-Pliofilm benzene exposure,
which may have influenced plant-specific mortality pat-
terns.
Table 3 presents our estimates ofthe additional lifetime
leukemia mortality risks (assuming a background leuke-
mia mortality risk of0.0071) for workers exposed to ben-
zene at 1 ppm for 45 years (45 ppm-years) and 10 ppm for
45 years (450 ppm-years), using the various exposure as-
sumptions and control sets described above. The Crump
and Allen I exposure assumptions are those originally
derived by these investigators. The Crump and Allen II
exposure assumptions are their alternate estimates in
which a ceiling of 131 ppm for each job category was en-
forced.
Our analyses demonstrate that use of the Crump and
Allen I (37) exposure assumptions instead of those of
Rinsky et al. (20) will reduce the leukemia mortality risks
projected substantially (by factors of approximately 10
and 77, at 45 and 450 ppm-years, respectively). Further,
use of control groups in which more stringent and alter-
native matching criteria are applied will also affect the
estimates of risk.
We propose that selection of controls from the larger
cohort, which included both the wet- and dry-side work-
ers, is appropriate. We believe our additional criterion of
276
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE
Table 3. Summary of present authors' analysis of Rinsky et al. (19) data using conditional logistic regression
and alternative exposure assumptions and control groups.
Additional lifetime leukemia deaths per 1000
workers due to benzene exposure
Exposure assumptions Control seta 45 ppm-years 450 ppm-years
Rinsky et al. (20) 1 5.1 (0.83-11.7)b 635 (15.6-986)
Rinsky et al. controls matched on:
date of birth
date of entering Pliofilm
Rinsky et al. (20) 2 6.4 (1.2-14.7) 819 (26.4-991)
Present authors controls matched on:
date of birth
date of entering Pliofilm
Rinsky et al. (20) 3 4.2 (1.0-8.7) 449 (21.3-953)
Present authors controls matched on:
date of birth
date of entering Pliofilm plant
Crump and Allen (37) I 1 0.5 (0.13-1.0) 8.3 (1.4-20.4)
Crump and Allen (37) I 2 0.7 (0.1-1.3) 11.0 (1.4-30.9)
Crump and Allen (37) I 3 0.5 (0.1-1.0) 7.9 (1.1-20.4)
Crump and Allen (37) II 1 1.3 (0.3-2.3) 29.8 (4.2-106)
Crump and Allen (37) II 2 1.6 (0.3-3.1) 47.0 (4.0-218)
Crump and Allen (37) II 3 1.2 (0.3-2.3) 27.8 (3.3-103)
aControl sets: 1) Rinsky et al. controls matched on date of birth, date entering Pliofilm work; 2) present authors controls matched on date of
birth, date entering Pliofilm work; 3) present authors controls matched on date of birth, date entering Pliofilm work, and plant.
bNumbers in parentheses are 95% confidence intervals.
matching by plant is also appropriate, because it
eliminates potential location bias. We therefore have a
preference for the risk estimates based upon our control
set 3. In the following section, we will describe additional
data on the benzene exposure history at the Pliofilm
plants studied by Rinsky et al. These data are of impor-
tance because they provide a basis for selection from or
adjustment of the various benzene risk assessments.
Additional Factors Regarding
Benzene Exposure in the Rinsky
Cohort
There are a number of additional factors that were not
accounted for in the assessment of the total benzene ex-
posure of the Rinsky et al. Pliofilm cohort that may sig-
nificantly affect the estimates ofrisk projected on its ba-
sis. First, employment of members of the cohort in the
non-Pliofilm jobs involving benzene exposure was not ac-
counted for in any of the exposure assessments of the
Rinsky et al. cohort. Preliminary review ofthe subset of
the job histories ofthe cohort (within the Goodyear plant)
indicates that a large percentage of the workers also
worked in non-Pliofilm jobs in other areas of the plant.
These jobs dated back to the early 1900s and involved
areas ofthe plant (e.g., tire building, cement mixing) for
which there is evidence that pure- or high-benzene con-
centration solvents were used up to at least 1942.
A review ofthe literature has indicated that in the early
decades ofthe 20th century, rubber workers appeared to
be highly exposed to benzene-containing solvents and
rubber cements (41). These substances were often applied
by hand or in relatively poorly ventilated environments.
Based upon a 1924 survey of the industry (42), benzene
vapor exposures ofrubber workers ranged between ap-
proximately 100 and 900 ppm. A survey of four rubber
plants in 1942 reported benzene levels ranging from 10
to 350 ppm (43).
Wilson (44) described the blood examinations and symp-
tomatology of 1104 workers at Goodyear who had used
benzol. He indicated that the concentration of benzol to
which patients seen at the company hospital were ex-
posed varied between 50 and 500 ppm, with an average
concentration of 100 ppm; occasional sharp exposures of
500 to 1000 ppm benzol were also cited. Of this group of
1104 workers, 83 (7.5%) showed mild blood changes, and
25 (2.2%) showed severe blood changes (aplastic anemia)
with symptoms of severe benzene intoxication. Three of
these 25 patients died as a result of the aplastic anemia.
At a 1942 conference on health hazards in the rubber in-
dustry, Conn of Goodyear specifically cited the spreader
operation of Pliofilm production as an area of elevated
benzene concentrations that resulted in two deaths from
severe aplastic anemia (45). He indicated that prior to the
introduction ofventilation measures, benzene exposures
ranged from 500 to 700 ppm directly above the spreaders.
Data contained in the work histories ofthe Rinsky et al.
Goodyear cohort indicate that during the 1940s a number
of hospitalizations and fatalities secondary to acute ex-
posure to high levels ofbenzene also occurred in the neu-
tralizer area ofthe Pliofilm plant (46). This is particularly
noteworthy in regard to the Rinsky et al. cohort, in which
6 of the 9 leukemia cases worked in the spreader-
neutralizer area during the 1940s, when other workers
performing the same jobs sometimes suffered fatal blood
dyscrasias. In addition, Davis (42), who was assistant
medical director of Goodyear, wrote of examining about
277
BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
7000 workers who had used various substances contain-
ing benzene over a 12-year period. These reports suggest
that Goodyear used benzene in various operations at least
as early as 1917 to 1942 or later.
A preliminary analysis of the work histories of the
leukemia cases and controls selected by Rinsky et al. (20)
indicated that the 9 cases had substantially more poten-
tial exposure to benzene than did the 90 matched con-
trols, both in Goodyear non-Pliofilm and Pliofilm opera-
tions. Overall, it was observed that the cases worked, on
average, nearly three times as long as controls in solvent-
related non-Pliofilmjobs, in which benzene exposure was
likely. When the analysis was broken down by time
periods, this distinction between cases and controls was
greatest during the years prior to 1942, when the use of
high benzene content solvents was most prevalent (48).
Another factor not considered in the available risk as-
sessments was the contribution of dermal exposure to
benzene, both within Pliofilm and non-Pliofilm jobs at the
Goodyear plants. There was testimony presented during
the 1977 OSHA hearings that certain workers in Pliofilm
were sometimes drenched in benzene. Further, in a study
recently conducted by NIOSH investigators (49), it was
estimated that workers in tire building (a non-Pliofilmjob
in which some ofthe Pliofilm workers had spent some of
their years at Goodyear) have 150 contacts ofthe palmar
surface per workday involving exposure to benzene in so-
lution. Assuming a 0.5% benzene content in the solvent,
150 cm2 of exposed palmar surface, 6.25 .iL solvent/cm2,
0.88 g/mL benzene density, and 1% dermal absorption,
they estimated that 6.19 mg benzene would be absorbed
per workday. Additional studies by Maibach (50-52),
Franz (53), and Hanke et al. (54), however, suggest that
the dermal absorption value applied by Susten et al. (49)
was possibly too high by a factor ofapproximately 3. This
would lower the amount of benzene absorbed in tire
building in which 0.5% benzene in solvent is presently
used to approximately 2 mg/day (vs. approximately 15
mg/workday absorbed from inhalation of 1 ppm for 8 hr)
(55). If 100% benzene were used, as was likely the case
in certain jobs prior to 1942, the amount absorbed by the
dermal route would increase by a factor ofapproximately
200, to a level of approximately 400 mg/workday (56).
The American Petroleum Institute has made some
preliminary estimates of the potential effect upon leuke-
mia risk ofthe addition ofnon-Pliofilm airborne and der-
mal benzene exposures to the Pliofilm-specific benzene
exposure estimates applied in the case-control analyses.
For these analyses, three different sets of exposure as-
sumptions were developed for the non-Pliofilm jobs ofthe
workers, representing potential low, moderate, or high
benzene exposure. At the time when these calculations
were performed, NIOSH had only made available a sub-
set ofthe work histories ofthe Rinsky et al. cohort. Con-
sequently, to perform these calculations it was necessary
to develop a procedure in which non-Pliofilm exposure of
workers for whom no work history was available was es-
timated from the experience ofworkers for whom a work
history was available (57).
These analyses suggested that the additional considera-
tion ofnon-Pliofilm airborne and dermal exposure ofthe
Rinsky et al. (20) cohort could result in a substantial
lowering of the excess leukemia risk associated with ben-
zene exposure. For example, on the basis ofthe high non-
Pliofilm benzene exposure assumptions, excess risk as-
sociated with 45 years ofexposure at 1 ppm in the work-
place would decrease by a factor of 17 assuming the
Rinsky et al. (20) exposure matrix, and by a factor of 2
assuming the Crump and Allen I exposure matrix. It
should be noted that these estimates are by necessity
crude as they were based on limited additional industrial
hygiene data for non-Pliofilm work areas and because
complete work histories were not available on all mem-
bers of the cohort at the time of the analysis.
Nevertheless, these estimates suggest that the lack of
consideration of inhalation and dermal absorption ofben-
zene in non-Pliofilm areas in calculating cumulative ex-
posure ofthe Rinsky et al. cohort resulted in an underes-
timation oftotal exposure and possibly an overestimation
of risk. API intends to investigate additional sources of
information on airborne benzene levels in non-Pliofilm
areas and on the extent of dermal exposure in Pliofilm
and non-Pliofilm jobs. Such data will be incorporated into
future assessments of benzene-associated leukemia risk.
Conclusions About Leukemia Risk
When epidemiological data of reasonably good quality
are available, these data should be used to assess risk to
human populations. In the case ofbenzene leukemogen-
esis, the Rinsky et al. study ofbenzene-exposed Pliofilm
workers (20,21), because ofits relatively large amount of
exposure information, appears the best suited for assess-
ing quantitatively the leukemia risk ofbenzene. The risk
assessments that have made use ofthe Rinsky et al. data
therefore form the basis ofour conclusions about the risk
of leukemia associated with occupational benzene ex-
posure.
We have reviewed seven earlier benzene risk assess-
ments of the Rinsky et al. cohort that employed the lin-
ear model (27,30-35); the assessment of White, Infante,
and Chu that employed the one-hit model (36); the Crump
and Allen assessment that used both the relative and ab-
solute risk linear models (37); the Rinsky et al. assess-
ment that used linear logistic regression for a case-control
subset ofthe cohort (20,21); and the present assessment
that used linear logistic regression with various modifi-
cations to the Rinsky et al. (20) case-control analysis.
The earlier assessments, and that of White, Infante,
and Chu (36), in our judgment, all inadequately charac-
terized the benzene exposure history of the cohort, and
consequently, estimates of risk derived from these as-
sessments should be considered more limited than those
of Rinsky et al. (20,21), Crump and Allen (37), and the
present report. Our conclusions about benzene-associated
leukemia risk are therefore based upon these three lat-
ter analyses.
The Crump and Allen (37) and the Rinsky et al. (20,21)
assessments should be considered preferable to the
earlier assessments as they both attempted to character-
278
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE
ize the benzene exposure histories ofindividual members
of the Pliofilm cohort, as opposed to making generaliza-
tions about benzene exposure of the cohort as a whole.
The manner in which exposure in individual work areas
ofthe Pliofilm plants was assessed appears to be the fac-
tor of greatest influence on the number of excess leuke-
mia deaths projected in these various assessments. The
Crump and Allen (37) methodology of exposure assess-
ment differed from that of Rinsky et al. (20,21) in a num-
ber of respects. Crump and Allen calculated time-
weighted average benzene levels over seven multiyear
time periods, whereas Rinsky et al. derived single-year
values on the basis of actual values or by linear interpo-
lation. In cases where there were no data available for
earlier time periods, Rinsky et al. extrapolated the ben-
zene concentrations for the earliest year back to the plant
opening. In fact, for 3 of the 10 exposure classes consid-
ered by Rinsky et al., levels from the 1960s were extrapo-
lated back into the 1930s. Crump and Allen, in the event
that there were no measurements for a given area for a
given period, multiplied the estimate from the following
period by the ratio ofthe occupational standard or recom-
mendation for the period to that of the occupational stan-
dard or recommendation of the following period.
Both groups used data from location 1 as a surrogate
for location 2. Crump and Allen used data from the two
locations interchangeably, whereas Rinsky et al. applied
data from location 2 only to this location. Rinsky et al. also
excluded from their estimates data documenting high
benzene levels in the storage area ofthe plant; these were
included by Crump and Allen in their average exposure
category. These various differences resulted in the ex-
posure estimates of Crump and Allen being generally
higher than those of Rinsky et al. for the majority of the
job titles and time periods covered.
In the absence of additional monitoring data, it is not
possible to render a judgment as to which methodology
best estimates the absolute exposures experienced by the
cohort. As described above, a major difference between
Rinsky et al. and Crump and Allen was in their metho-
dologies for estimating exposures in the earlier years,
when no industrial hygiene data were available. The re-
sult ofthis methodologic difference is that the Crump and
Allen estimates for the early years generally exceeded
those of more recent years, while the Rinsky et al. esti-
mates for early years were often the same as for more re-
cent years. We have a preference for the Crump and Al-
len methodology for estimating relative benzene
exposures during the earlier years, as it seems more plau-
sible that such exposures were higher than those mea-
sured more recently. A recent analysis in which an at-
tempt was made to correlate hematology data of the
Pliofilm cohort with both the Rinsky et al. and the Crump
and Allen exposure assumptions tends to further support
the methodology applied by Crump and Allen. In this
analysis, the Crump and Allen exposure estimates cor-
related more strongly than the Rinsky et al. estimates
with fluctuations in the white and red blood cell counts
of the cohort (58). Of the two exposure matrices pre-
sented by Crump and Allen, we prefer the original ma-
trix. As detailed earlier, the available data on human ben-
zene toxicity provide some support for this exposure
matrix, which was derived from existing industrial hy-
giene data.
We adopted the exposure methodologies developed by
both Crump and Allen and Rinsky et al. in our estima-
tions of benzene leukemia risk. Our analyses used the
matched case-control conditional logistic regression meth-
odology. We assessed the effect of applying the Crump
and Allen exposure methodology to the Rinsky et al. case-
control data set. We selected three additional sets of con-
trols: the first applying Rinsky's criteria ofmatching by
date ofbirth and date offirst employment in Pliofilm; the
second in which the controls were matched by plant in ad-
dition to the Rinsky matching criteria ofdate ofbirth and
date of first employment in Pliofilm; and the third in
which controls were matched by the Rinsky criteria,
plant, and date of last employment.
Table 4 presents the range ofadditional lifetime leuke-
mia deaths per 1000 workers associated with occupational
benzene exposure which were projected in the various as-
sessments in which the Crump and Allen (37) and the
Rinsky et al. (20,21) exposure methodologies were ap-
plied. In all cases, risk was associated with cumulative
benzene exposure. Based on this table at 10 ppm benzene
exposure for 45 years (450 ppm-years), a range of 7.9 to
819 additional leukemia deaths per 1000 workers would
be expected. By reducing the OSHA PEL to 1 ppm, again
assuming 45 years of exposure (45 ppm-years), approxi-
mately 0.5 to 7 additional leukemia deaths per 1000 work-
ers would be expected.
We have a preference for the conditional logistic regres-
sion approach adopted by Rinsky et al. (20,21) and sub-
sequently by ourselves because it makes maximal use of
the data points available. We also prefer the strict criteria
for matching that we have used, in which the cases were
matched by date of birth, date of first employment in
Pliofilm, and plant (control set 3). We prefer the use of
Crump and Allen's exposure matrices because they, in ef-
fect, assume exposures in earlier years exceeded those
in later years. Available data on benzene toxicity in hu-
mans appear to provide greater support for Crump and
Allen's original exposure matrix. This methodology and
choice ofcontrol group and exposure assumptions results
in our preferred estimate of 0.5 excess leukemia deaths
per 1000 workers exposed for 45 years to 1 ppm benzene,
and 7.9 excess leukemia deaths per 1000 workers exposed
for 45 years to 10 ppm benzene.
It should be noted, however, that these estimates do
not take into account the influence of benzene exposure
of workers via inhalation and dermal absorption in non-
Pliofilm areas of the plants studied by Rinsky et al. On
the basis of our preliminary analyses, it is suggested that
accounting for such exposures will likely result in a sub-
stantial lowering ofthe occupational leukemia risks which
were estimated on the basis of this study.
Additional data on the extent of inhalation and dermal
exposure to benzene in the Rinsky et al. cohort may be
revealed through the analysis ofGoodyear workers' his-
tory records recently made available by NIOSH and by
279
280 BRETT, RODRICKS, AND CHINCHILLI
Table 4. Comparison of available benzene risk assessments in which Crump and Allen (37) or
Rinsky et al. (20,21) exposure assumptions were applied.
Additional lifetime leukemia risk per 1000 workers
Exposure due to benzene exposure
Risk assessment Data set used assumptions Model applied 45 ppm-years 450 ppm-years
Rinsky et al. (21) Rinsky et al., 1986 Rinsky et al. 1986 Conditional 5.3 667
case-control analysis cumulative exposure logistic
estimated on an regression
individual basis
Present authors ia Rinsky et al., 1985 Rinsky et al. 1985 Conditional 4.2-6.4 449-819
alternate case- cumulative exposure logisitic
control analysis estimated on an regression
individual basis
Present authors Iia Rinsky et al., 1985 Crump and Allen Conditional 0.5-0.7 7.9-11.0
alternate case- 1984-I cumulative logistic
control analysis exposure estimated regression
on an individual
basis
Present authors IIIa Rinsky et al., 1985 Crump and Allen Conditional 1.2-1.6 27.8-47.0
alternate case- 1984-II cumulative logistic
control analysis exposure estimated regression
on an individual
basis
Crump and Allen (37) Rinsky et al., 1981 Crump and Allen Relative 6.6 (for 40 ppm-years) 63 (for 400 ppm-years)
cohort study (8 1984-I cumulative risk beginning at age 20 beginning at age 20
leukemias) exposure estimated (linear)
on an individual
basis
aRanges reflect the use of three different control groups.
pursuing additional sources of data ofpast exposure prac-
tices in the industry. Clearly further investigation ofthe
actual extent of additional benzene exposures of the co-
hort is warranted in order to improve susbsequent esti-
mates of the leukemia risk associated with human ex-
posure to benzene.
This paper is based upon work performed for the American Petroleum
Institute, whose support is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1. IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk
of Chemicals to Humans: Some Industrial Chemicals and
Dyestuffs, Vol. 29. International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France, 1982, pp. 93-148.
2. Goldstein, B. D. Hematotoxicity in humans. J. Toxicol. Environ.
Health (suppl.) 2: 69-105 (1977).
3. Goldstein, B. D. Benzene Toxicity: Review of Recent Literature.
Prepared for American Petroleum Institute, February 3, 1983.
4. Goldstein, B. D. Clinical hematotoxicity ofbenzene. In: Advances
in Modern Environmental Toxicology, Vol. 4 (M. A. Mehlman, Ed.),
Princeton Scientific Publishers, Princeton, NJ, 1977, pp. 51-61.
5. Vigliani, E. C. Leukemia associated with benzene exposure. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 271: 143-151 (1976).
6. Aksoy, M. Different types of malignancies due to occupational ex-
posure to benzene: a review of recent observations in Turkey. En-
viron. Res. 23: 181-190 (1980).
7. Infante, P. F., Rinsky, R. A., Wagoner, J. K., and Young, R. J.
Leukemia in benzene workers. Lancet ii: 76-78 (1977).
8. Ott, M. G., Townsend, J. C., Fishbeck, W. A., and Langner, R. A.
Mortality among individuals occupationally exposed to benzene.
Arch. Environ. Health 33: 3-10 (1978).
9. Rinsky, R. A., Young, R. J., and Smith, A. B. Leukemia in ben-
zene workers. Am. J. Ind. Med. 2: 217-245 (1981).
10. Maltoni, C., and Scarnato, C. First experimental demonstration
of the carcinogenic effects of benzene. Long-term bioassays on
Sprague-Dawley rats by oral administration. Med. Lav. 70: 352-357
(1979).
11. Maltoni, C., Cotti, G., Valgimigli, L., and Mandrioli, A. Zymbal
gland carcinomas in rats following exposure to benzene by inha-
lation. Am. J. Ind. Med. 3: 11-16 (1982).
12. Maltoni, C., Conti, B., and Cotti, G. Benzene: a multipotential car-
cinogen. Results oflong-term bioassays performed at the Bologna
Institute of Oncology. Am. J. Ind. Med. 4: 589-630 (1983).
13. Synder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A. R., Bromberg, I.,
Laskin, S., and Albert, R. E. The inhalation toxicology ofbenzene:
incidence ofhematopoietic neoplasms and hematotoxicity in AKR/J
and C57BL/6J Mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 54: 323-331(1980).
14. Goldstein, B. D., Synder, C. A., Laskin, S., Bromberg, I., Albert,
R. E., and Nelson, N. Myelogenous leukemia in rodents inhaling
benzene. Toxicol. Lett. 13: 169-173 (1982).
15. Huff, J. E. Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Benzene
(CAS No. 71-43-2) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F, Mice (Gavage
Studies). Technical Report Series 289. National Toxicology Pro-
gram, DHHS, Research Triangle Park, NC, 1986, pp. 277.
16. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Identification,
classification and regulation of potential occupational carcinogens.
Fed. Reg. 45: 5001-5296 (1980).
17. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Proposed guidelines for
carcinogen risk assessment. Fed. Reg. 49: 46294-46303 (1984).
18. Office of Science and Technology Policy. Chemical carcinogens: a
review of the science and its associated principles. Federal Reg.
50: 10372-10442 (1985).
19. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Interim Quantitative Can-
cer Unit Risk Estimates Due to Inhalation of Benzene. Prepared
for Office ofAir Quality Planning and Standards. Prepared by Car-
cinogen Assessment Group. EPA-600/X-85-022, February 15, 1985.
20. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young,
R. J., Okun, A. H., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and Leukemia:
21. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young,
R. J., Okun, A. H., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and Leukemia:
an epidemiologic risk assessment. N. Engl. J. Med. 316: 1044-1050
(1987).
BENZENE-LEUKEMIA RISK: REVIEW AND UPDATE 281
An Epidemiologic Risk Assessment. U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Cincinnati, OH, August 9, 1985.
21. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young,
R. J., Okun, A. H., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and Leukemia:
An epidemiologic risk assessment. N. Engl. J. Med. 316: 1044-1050
(1987).
22. Bond, G. G., McLaren, E. A., Baldwin, C., and Cook, R. R. An up-
date ofmortality among chemical workers exposed to benzene. Br.
J. Ind. Med. 43: 685-691 (1986).
23. Peterson, H. D. Case-Control Analysis of Ott et al. Cohort (letter).
OSHA Docket H-059C, Exhibit 247, Tab D, Attachment 2, 1986.
24. Gunz, F. W. Problems in leukemia etiology. Plenary Sessions
Scientific Contribution. XIII International Congress of Hematol-
ogy, Munich, Germany, August 2-8, 1970, p. 48.
25. Aksoy, M., Erdem, S., and Dincol, G. Leukemia in shoe-workers
exposed chronically to benzene. Blood 44: 837-841 (1974).
26. Wong, 0. An Industry-Wide Study of Chemicals Workers Occupa-
tionally Exposed to Benzene. Report to the Chemical Manufac-
turers Association, Environmental Health Associates, Berkeley,
CA, 1983.
27. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Final Report on Popula-
tion Risk due to Ambient Benzene Exposure. EPA, Washington,
DC, 1979.
28. Aksoy, M., Erdem, S., and Dincol, S. Types ofleukemia in chronic
benzene poisoning. A study in thirty-four patients. Acta Haematol.
55: 65-72 (1976).
29. Aksoy, M. Leukemia in workers due to occupational exposure to
benzene. New Istanbul Contrib. Clin. Sci. 12: 3-14 (1977).
30. American Petroleum Institute. Review of Carcinogen Assessment
Group's Final Report on Population Risk from Ambient Benzene
Exposure, November 6, 1980. EPA Docket No. OAQPD 79-3, Part
II, Section 3, 1980.
31. Hattis, D., and Mendez, W. Discussion and Critique ofthe Carcino-
gen Assessment Group's Report on Population Risk Due to At-
mospheric Exposure to Benzene. Center for Policy Alternatives,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 1980.
32. IARC. Annex: Some Aspects of Quantitative Risk Estimation.
IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of
Chemicals to Humans: Some Industrial Chemicals and Dyestuffs,
Vol. 29. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France, 1982, pp. 395-398.
33. Luken, R. H., and Miller, S. G. The benefits and costs of regulat-
ing benzene. J. Air Pollut. Control Assoc. 31: 1255-1259 (1981).
34, Little, A. D., and Gilbert, D. An Exposure and Risk Assessment
for Benzene. EPA Contract 68-01-5949, Final Report, 1982.
35. Environmental Law Institute. Benzene Health Effects in Humans
and Risk Assessment. Prepared for U.S. Occupational Safety and
Health Administration, Washington, DC, June 1983.
36. White, M., Infante, P., and Chu, K. A quantitative estimate of
leukemia mortality associated with occupational exposure to ben-
zene. Risk Anal. 2: 195-204 (1982).
37. Crump, K. C., and Allen, B. C. Quantitative Estimates of the Risk
of Leukemia from Occupational Exposure to Benzene. Prepared
for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Washing-
ton, DC, May 1984.
38. Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation. National
Academy of Sciences. The Effects on Population of Exposure to
Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation. National Academy of Sciences,
Washington, DC, 1980.
39. Goldstein, B. D. Letter to H. Derrick Peterson. OSHA Docket
H-059C, Exhibit 247, 1986.
40. Bennett, J. M. Post-Hearing Submission ofJohn M. Bennett, M. D.
on Medical Surveillance Issues of OSHA's Proposed Standard for
Occupational Exposure to Benzene. OSHA Docket H-059C, Ex-
hibit 247, Tab B, 1986.
41. American Petroleum Institute. A Preliminary Review of Litera-
ture Pertaining to Non-Pliofilm Rubber Worker Benzene Exposure
before 1970. OSHA Docket H-059C, Exhibit 204-7, 1986.
42. National Safety Council. Final Report of the Committee on Ben-
zol, Chemical and Rubber Sections, National Bureau of Casualty
and Surety Underwriters, May 1926.
43. Thomas, T. R., and Tebbens, B. D. Control of solvent exposures
in the rubber industry. Ind. Med. 12: 255 (1943).
44. Wilson, R. Benzene poisoning in industry. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 27:
1517-1521 (1942).
45. Proceedings of the Conference on Health Hazards in the Rubber
Industry. May 29, 1942, Akron, OH, pp. 37-38.
46. Kirkland and Ellis. Exhibits for Cross-Examination of Mr. Robert
Rinsky. Prepared for the American Petroleum Institute. OSHA
Docket H-059C, Exhibit 216, 1986.
47. Davis, P. A. Toxic Substances in the Rubber Industry. Part 1: Ben-
zol. The Rubber Age. pp. 367-368 (1929).
48. Peterson, H. D., and Gould, C. M. Benzene Exposure Potential of
NIOSH's Pliofilm Cases and Controls. OSHA Docket H-059C, Ex-
hibit 247, Tab D, Attachment 4, 1986.
49. Susten, A. S., Dames, B. L., Burg, J. R., and Niemeier, R. W. Per-
cutaneous penetration of benzene in hairless mice: an estimate of
dermal absorption during tire-building operations. Am. J. Ind.
Med. 7: 323-335 (1985).'
50. Maibach, H. I. Percutaneous Penetration of Benzene: Man. OSHA
Docket H-059, Exhibit 231-6, 1980.
51. Maibach, H. I. Percutaneous Penetration of Benzene: Man. II.
OSHA Docket H-059, Exhibit 231-7, 1980.
52. Maibach, H. I., and Anjo, D. M. Percutaneous penetration ofben-
zene and benzene contained in solvents used in the rubber indus-
try. Arch. Environ. Health 36: 256-260 (1981).
53. Franz, T. J. Percutaneous absorption ofbenzene. In: Applied Tox-
icology of Petroleum Hydrocarbons (H. N. MacFarland, C. E.
Holdsworth, J. A. MacGregor, R. W. Call, and M. L. Kane, Eds.),
Princeton Scientific Publishers, Princeton, NJ, 1984, pp. 61-70.
54. Hanke, J., Dutkiewicz, T., and Piotrowski, J. The absorption of
benzene through the skin in man. (OSHA translation). Med. Pracy
12: 413-426 (1961).
55. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Occupational ex-
posure to benzene; proposed rule and notice of hearing. Federal
Reg. 50: 50512-50538 (1985).
56. ENVIRON Corporation. Dermal ALcorption ofBenzene. Prepared
for American Petroleum Institute. OSHA Docket H-059C, Exhibit
201-5, 1986.
57. American Petroleum Institute. Non-Pliofilm Benzene Exposures
ofDeceased Akron Workers: Preliminary Estimates for Sensitivity
Analysis. OSHA Docket H-059C Exhibit 218D, 1986.
58. Kipen, H. M., Cody, R. P., Lioy, P. J., and Goldstein, B. D. Prelimi-
nary Report of Pliofilm Cohort Hematology. OSHA Docket
H-059C, Exhibit 204-7, 1986.
