The Mechanism of Benzene-induced
Leukemia: A Hypothesis and Speculations on
the Causes of Leukemia
Martyn T. Smith
School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, California
An overall hypothesis for benzene-induced leukemia is proposed. Key components of the hypothesis
include a) activation of benzene in the liver to phenolic metabolites; b) transport of these metabo-
lites to the bone marrow and conversion to semiquinone radicals and quinones via peroxidase
enzymes; c) generation of active oxygen species via redox cycling; d) damage to tubulin, histone
proteins, topoisomerase 11, other DNA associated proteins, and DNA itself; and e) consequent
damage including DNA strand breakage, mitotic recombination, chromosome translocations, and
aneuploidy. If these effects take place in stem or early progenitor cells a leukemic clone with
selective advantage to grow may arise, as a result of protooncogene activation, gene fusion, and
suppressor gene inactivation. Epigenetic effects of benzene metabolites on the bone marrow
stroma, and perhaps the stem cell itself, may then foster development and survival of the
leukemic clone. Evidence for this hypothesis is mounting with the recent demonstration that
benzene induces gene-duplicating mutations in human bone marrow and chromosome-specific
aneuploidy and translocations in peripheral blood cells. If this hypothesis is correct, it also potentially
implicates phenolic and quinonoid compounds in the induction of "spontaneous" leukemia in
man. - Environ Health Perspect 104(Suppl 6):1219-1225 (1996)
Key words: phenol, hydroquinone, benzenetriol, quinones, free radicals, oxygen radicals,
chromosome damage, aneuploidy, recombination, topoisomerase, carcinogenesis, leukemia
Introduction
Benzene is an established human leuke-
mogen, but the mechanism by which it
produces leukemia remains unclear. This
article presents a hypothesis of how ben-
zene produces leukemia. The hypothesis
has a number of themes which postulate
that benzene is an unusual carcinogen. For
example, I propose that a number of
metabolites work in concert to produce its
effects and that the genotoxic effects that
This paper was presented at Benzene '95:
An International Conference on the Toxicity,
Carcinogenesis, and Epidemiology of Benzene held
17-20 June 1995 in Piscataway, New Jersey.
Manuscript received 16 January 1996; manuscript
accepted 14 June 1996.
thank the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences (grants RO1 ES 06721, P42 ES04705
and P30 ES01896), the California Environmental
Protection Agency, and the National Foundation for
Cancer Research for financial support of my research.
am indebted to D. Eastmond, R. Irons, L. Zhang, N.
Rothman, L. Gold, and S. Rappaport for sharing their
ideas and important data with me and to L. Zhang
and L-Q. Xi for their help in preparing this manuscript.
Address correspondence to Professor M.T. Smith,
School of Public Health, University of California, 140
Warren Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-7360. Telephone:
(510) 642-8770. Fax: (510) 642-5815. E-mail:
martynts@uclink4.berkeley.edu
Abbreviations used: COMET, single-cell get assay;
GPA, glycophorin; MPO, myeloperoxidase.
these metabolites produce are not simple
point mutations, but rather recombination
and chromosomal aberrations. The article
compares benzene to more classical car-
cinogens and then outlines the hypothesis
in detail.
Benzene, Not a
"Classic" Carcinogen
Textbooks tend to narrow our thinking as
to the way in which chemicals produce
cancer. "Classic" carcinogens, such as
benzo[a]pyrene, aromatic amines, and
aflatoxin, are thought to be activated to a
single, ultimate carcinogenic metabolite.
Typically these metabolites are highly
electrophilic and bind strongly to DNA in
a covalent fashion. Covalent binding of
this type is readily measured as bound
radioactivity. Classic carcinogens and their
metabolites are also highly mutagenic in
the Ames Salmonella test producing point
mutations and small deletions.
Benzene presents the exact opposite
scenario. It does not form a single highly
electrophilic metabolite. Its epoxide, ben-
zene oxide, is highly unstable and rapidly
rearranges to the major metabolite phenol.
Alternatively, it is metabolized via epoxide
hydrolase and dihydrodiol dehydrogenase
to catechol. None of the prominent
metabolites of benzene are "hard" elec-
trophiles and thus little binding to DNA is
detected as bound radioactivity when radi-
olabeled benzene is administered to experi-
mental animals (1). Benzene and the
majority of its metabolites are also not
mutagenic in the Ames Salmonella test (2).
They do, however, produce chromosomal
damage both in vitro and in vivo (2-5).
How is Benzene
Carcinogenic?
If benzene is not a "classic" carcinogen
binding to DNA and causing point muta-
tions, how, then, is it carcinogenic? I pro-
pose that benzene is carcinogenic by its
phenolic metabolites acting in concert to
produce DNA strand breaks, topoiso-
merase II inhibition, and damage to the
mitotic spindle. This leads to mitotic
recombination, chromosome transloca-
tions, and aneuploidy (the loss and gain of
whole chromosomes). These genotoxic
events will, in turn, cause the activation of
key protooncogenes, loss of heterozygosity,
and inactivation of tumor suppressor
genes. If this takes place in bone marrow
stem or early progenitor cells, a leukemic
clone with selective growth advantage
could arise. Epigenetic effects of benzene
on the bone marrow stroma and progenitor
cells could then assist in the establishment
of a leukemic clone. Both genetic and epi-
genetic effects are therefore probably neces-
sary. Figure 1 outlines this hypothesis in
more detail.
The Role of Metabolism
and the Nature of the
Toxic Metabolites
To be carcinogenic, benzene must first be
metabolized in the liver, mainly via cyto-
chrome P4502E1. The major product is
phenol, which is either conjugated-primar-
ily to phenyl sulfate in humans-or further
hydroxylated by P4502E1 to hydroquinone.
Other major metabolites include catechol
and trans-trans-muconic acid. The latter is
presumed to be formed from the ring
opening of benzene epoxide via benzene
oxepin, or perhaps benzene dihydrodiol.
The intermediate product trans-trans-
muconaldehyde has genotoxic properties
and could play a role in benzene toxicity
(6,7). The selective toxicity of benzene to
blood and bone marrow would be hard to
explain if trans-trans-muconaldehyde were
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996 1219
M.T. SMITH
Benzene
+ P4502E1 (Liver)
Proximate toxic metabolites Phenolic Metabolites
4 Peroxidases
(bone marrow)
Ultimate toxic metabolites Quinones and Free Radicals
+Tubulin, topoisomerase ll, histones,Molecular targets DNA (oxidation and adduct formation)
Genetic consequences
Changes in stem cell
Disease
+DNA strand breaks,
mitotic recombination,
chromosome translocations,
aneuploidy
+Protooncogene activation
gene fusion,
suppressor gene inactivation
+ 1- Epigenetic
events)
Leukemic clone
Figure 1. A mechanistic hypothesis of benzene-
induced leukemia.
the sole toxic metabolite since it would
have to be formed in the liver, travel to the
bone marrow, and induce selective toxicity.
It is difficult to imagine significant quanti-
ties of trans-trans-muconaldehyde escaping
hepatic glutathione and reaching the bone
marrow. Indeed, studies have shown that
little or no trans-trans-muconaldehyde is
likely to leave the liver(8).
There is now strong evidence that
quinones and related free radicals are the
ultimate toxic metabolites of benzene.
Specifically, I believe that 1,4-benzo-
quinone and its semiquinone radical
derived from hydroquinone are the most
critical toxic intermediates. The conver-
sion of phenol to diphenoquinone and
radical intermediates could also play an
important role, as could oxidation prod-
ucts of 1,2,4-benzenetriol. The latter,
although formed in small quantities, has
potent effects, and its formation in higher
amounts in mice may partly explain that
species' susceptibility to benzene toxicity
(9). Active oxygen species are produced
through autoxidation of 1,2,4-benzenetriol
which can cause strand breaks, microtubule
damage, micronuclei, and aneuploidy in
human cells (10,11). The role, if any, of
1,2-benzoquinone derived from catechol
remains unclear.
1,4-Benzoquinone and trans-trans-
muconaldehyde are similar chemically,
since they are both aoB-unsaturated dike-
tones. They are therefore likely to hit simi-
lar molecular targets and to have similar
toxic effects. Indeed, the combination of
hydroquinone and trans-trans-muconalde-
hyde has been shown to be highly toxic (12).
An argument against the hypothesis
that quinones are the ultimate toxic
metabolites of benzene has been that their
precursors phenol, hydroquinone, and cat-
echol do not produce bone marrow toxicity
or leukemia. A logical explanation of this
apparent contradiction may be at hand,
however, related to the locations ofactivat-
ing and conjugating enzymes in the liver
(13). The liver is structurally divided into
three acinar zones labeled I, II, and III.
The primary site of conjugating enzymes is
in zone I whereas that of P4502E1 is zone
III. Blood flows from the hepatic portal
vein and artery first into zone I, then into
zone II, and finally into zone III before
exiting via a branch of the hepatic vein.
Thus, phenols and quinones entering the
liver will be conjugated immediately in
zone I, while benzene would escape conju-
gation and go directly to zone III where it
would be converted to phenol and hydro-
quinone and would then leave the liver in
both the free and conjugated forms. Far
more free, unconjugated phenols would be
expected to leave the liver after benzene
administration than after exposure to
phenol. Indeed, new pharmacokinetic mod-
eling predicts that bone marrow concentra-
tions of free phenol and hydroquinone will
be much higher after benzene administra-
tion than following phenol exposure. This
is the opposite to what we had previously
predicted with a pharmacokinetic model
that considered the liver a single, homoge-
neous compartment (14).
The new, heterogeneous liver compart-
ment model is likely to be much more
accurate, but experimental confirmation
will be difficult. This is because any free
phenol and hydroquinone reaching the
bone marrow is likely to be rapidly oxi-
dized via peroxidase enzymes to protein-
binding species. Only when this secondary
oxidation pathway approaches saturation at
very high benzene levels are there likely to
be free phenolic metabolites in the bone
marrow. Indeed, recent work by Henderson
and colleagues supports this idea (15).
Predicted metabolite concentrations would
therefore have to be measured as bound
and free forms.
A Role for Multiple
Metabolites
Evidence that multiple metabolites are
important in benzene toxicity has increased
in recent years. Together with David
Eastmond and Richard Irons, I reported
that phenol and hydroquinone, when
administered together, produced bone
marrow toxicity in mice that was very simi-
lar to that produced by benzene, whereas
alone they did not (16). We postulated
that peroxidase enzymes in the bone mar-
row, mainly myeloperoxidase (MPO), were
responsible for the secondary activation of
benzene's phenolic metabolites to toxic
quinones and free radicals (17). Further,
we showed that phenol would enhance the
MPO-dependent oxidation of hydro-
quinone to 1,4-benzoquinone. We next
showed that phenol increased the covalent
binding of hydroquinone in bone marrow
(18) and that catechol would also stimulate
the peroxidase-dependent activation of
hydroquinone (19). Catechol and hydro-
quinone also produced a synergistic geno-
toxic effect in human lymphocytes (20).
Barale and co-workers have performed
experiments in mice that support this idea
of an interaction being important, by
showing that various combinations of ben-
zene metabolites are genotoxic (21). Studies
by Bodell and co-workers (22) and our
group (23) also support a multimetabolite
mechanism ofgenotoxicity.
Of great interest is the recent finding
that the target organs for benzene carcino-
genicity in rodents are rich in both peroxi-
dase and sulfatase enzymes (24). The bone
marrow, Zymbal gland, and harderian
gland are all rich in peroxidases, which can
activate phenols to toxic quinones and free
radicals. Sulfatases, which remove conju-
gated sulfate forming free phenols, are also
present at high levels in these target organs.
The selective distribution of these two
types of enzymes in the body may explain
the accumulation of free phenol, hydro-
quinone, and catechol in the bone marrow
and the target organ toxicity ofbenzene.
Molecular Targets of
Benzene's Toxic Metabolites
All of the phenolic metabolites of benzene
can be oxidized by MPO and other peroxi-
dase enzymes to their respective semi-
quinone radicals and quinones (25). These
species are highly toxic by directly binding
to cellular macromolecules and generating
oxygen radicals through redox cycling. We
examined the ability of benzene and its
metabolites to produce oxygen radicals and
oxidative DNA damage in human cells in
vitro and in mice in vivo. (23) We used the
human myeloid cell line HL-60, which
contains high levels of MPO, for these
studies. HL-60 cells were incubated with
different benzene metabolites for 30 min,
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 19961 220
MECHANISM OF BENZENE-INDUCED LEUKEMIA
the DNA isolated and the amount of
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG)
measured by high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) with electro-
chemical detection. The formation of
8-OHdG is reflective of hydroxyl radical
attack on DNA. We found that phenol,
hydroquinone, and 1,2,4-benzenetriol all
increased the level of 8-OHdG in HL-60
cells. Catechol did not significantly increase
the 8-OHdG level, which is consistent with
the limited ability of its quinone oxidation
product to redox cycle. We followed up
these findings in HL-60 cells with in vivo
studies in B6C3F1 mice. We administered
benzene at various dose levels and for
different time periods. We found that ben-
zene (200 mg/kg) produced a highly
significant, 5-fold increase in 8-OHdG in
bone-marrow DNA 1 hr after administra-
tion. This level later decreased to back-
ground levels, probably because ofrepair. A
recent study ofItalian gas station attendants
supports these findings in mice and HL-60
cells by showing that benzene exposure
correlated with increased 8-OHdG levels
in the urine (26). The metabolites most
likely responsible for this effect are phenol,
hydroquinone, and 1,2,4-benzenetriol.
When injected as a single dose into mice,
only benzenetriol significantly increased the
level of 8-OHdG in bone marrow DNA
(23). However, various combinations of
phenol, catechol, and hydroquinone also
significantly increased the 8-OHdG level
with phenol plus hydroquinone being the
most effective (23). This suggests that mul-
tiple metabolites play a role in producing
benzene-induced oxidative DNA damage in
the bone marrow and adds further weight
to the hypothesis that multiple metabolites
are involved in benzene toxicity.
The formation of 8-OHdG in DNA
has been shown to cause point mutations,
especially G-T and A-C base substitu-
tions, and may also cause strand breakage if
not repaired. Plappert and co-workers (27)
recently used the single-cell gel (COMET)
assay to demonstrate that benzene clearly
has the ability to induce strand breakage in
mice. Earlier studies that did not find
strand breaks by alkaline elution simply
looked at inappropriate times (28). DNA
strand breaks were also increased in a dose-
dependent manner in mouse lymphoma
cells incubated with benzene and an S9
activating system or with its phenolic
metabolites (29).
Strand breakage may also result from
damage to key proteins associated with the
DNA. For example, recent studies using
accelerator mass spectrometry have shown
that metabolites ofbenzene bind selectively
to the histone fraction of mouse bone mar-
row cells (K Turtletaub, personal commu-
nication). Damage to histone proteins
could alter DNA folding and packaging
and assist in the production of strand
breaks. Another key protein target for the
quinone oxidation products of benzene's
phenolic metabolites may be topoisomerase
II. Chen and Eastmond (30) recently pre-
sented convincing evidence that 4,4'-diphe-
noquinone (a phenol oxidation product)
and 1,4-benzoquinone (a hydroquinone
oxidation product) are potent inhibitors of
topoisomerase II, but not topoisomerase I
(31). This action is similar to the epido-
phyllotoxins etoposide and teniposide,
which are used in cancer chemotherapy.
These agents have been shown to be highly
mutagenic (32) and have been associated
with the production of secondary acute
myelogenous leukemias (33).
Upon binding to topoisomerase II,
epidophyllotoxins and perhaps benzene's
quinonoid metabolites, convert the enzyme
to a DNA poison (34). The enzyme func-
tions inappropriately and instead ofuncoil-
ing the DNA and removing loops, it can
break the DNA strands. Strand breakage
resulting from this action has the potential
to produce aberrant mitotic recombination
through the joining of inappropriate DNA
strands. Likely outcomes of aberrant
recombination include cell death or the
production of stable structural chromo-
some aberrations, including chromosome
translocations, which may alter the differ-
entiation and growth activity of the cell. It
was recently shown that chromosome band
1 1q23 translocations are DNA topoiso-
merase II cleavage sites (35). Transloca-
tions involving band 1 1q23 occur with
high frequency in several types of human
leukemia, especially cases occurring in
infants and young children (35,36).
Induction of Mitotic
Recombination and
Chromosome Translocations
by Benzene and Its
Metabolites
Evidence that benzene and its metabolites
produce mitotic recombination is increas-
ing. In vitro studies with mouse lymphoma
L5178Y cells showed that benzene was
mutagenic at the TK± locus in the presence
ofrat liver S9, a metabolic activation system
(29). The metabolites hydroquinone, cate-
chol, 1,2,4-benzenetriol, 1,4-benzoquinone
and trans-trans-mucondialdehyde were all
mutagenic in this test system. The muta-
genicity occurred at doses that were also
shown to cause DNA strand breaks.
Recently, in a collaborative project with
the National Cancer Institute and Chinese
and California Environmental Protection
Agency investigators, we used the gly-
cophorin A (GPA) gene mutation assay to
examine the type ofmutations produced by
benzene in human bone marrow (37). The
GPA assay is able to detect a wide spectrum
of mutational mechanisms, including point
mutations, deletions, and chromosome-
wide events or autosomal chromosome
interactions, such as mitotic recombination.
The GPA assay measures somatic cell muta-
tion frequency in peripheral erythrocytes.
Because mature erythrocytes lack a nucleus,
mutations expressed in erythrocytes must
have occurred exclusively in precursor ery-
throid cells or stem cells in the bone mar-
row. Since bone marrow is the target of
benzene toxicity, the GPA assay is highly
appropriate for mutational studies. The
GPA locus codes for a surface protein that
exists in two allelic forms, M and N, on
erythrocytes. The assay measures the fre-
quency of variant cells that have lost
expression of the M form in blood of het-
erozygous (MN) individuals. The variant
cells are either the phenotype N0 or NN.
N0 cells are thought to arise from point
mutation, deletions, or gene inactivation,
whereas NNcells presumably arise from
mitotic recombination, chromosome loss
with reduplication, or gene conversion.
We measured GPA mutation frequency
in 24 workers heavily exposed to benzene
and 23 matched controls in Shanghai,
China. We found that benzene caused a
highly significant increase in NNvariant
frequency, but not in N0. These results
suggest that benzene produces gene-dupli-
cating mutations, but not gene-inactivating
ones, at the GPA locus in human bone
marrow. The most likely mechanism by
which benzene does this is via mitotic
recombination. Further studies are needed
to confirm this finding and to examine the
ability of benzene metabolites to induce
mitotic recombination in human cells.
As outlined earlier, the most likely con-
sequence of aberrant recombination caused
by benzene metabolites is the production
of stable chromosome translocations.
These are a common feature of leukemic
cells (38). The Philadelphia chromosome,
which results from a reciprocal transloca-
tion between chromosomes 9 and 22, is
centrally involved in chronic myelogenous
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996 1221
M.T. SMITH
leukemia (39). The most common translo-
cation found in acute myelogenous
leukemia is a reciprocal translocation
between chromosomes 8 and 21 (t8;21)
(40). This results in the fusion of the
AML-l and ETO genes and produces a
highly active transcription factor that pro-
motes excessive growth and differentiation
paralysis in myeloid progenitor cells
(40-42). The t(8;21) translocation and
translocations at 1 lq23 are commonly
found in myeloid leukemias resulting from
treatment with epidophyllotoxins (43).
Since benzene metabolites appear to act in
a similar fashion to epidophyllotoxins
inhibiting topoisomerase II, causing DNA
strand breaks and structural aberrations, we
hypothesized that benzene may also cause
the t(8;21) translocation.
We are currently testing this hypothesis
using chromosome painting to detect
translocations between chromosomes 8 and
21 in the peripheral blood cells of workers
exposed to high levels of benzene (44).
Preliminary results suggest that benzene
increases the rate of translocations between
8 and 21 in highly exposed workers (45).
The t(8;21) has also been observed in con-
ventional cytogenetic analyses of leukemias
associated with benzene or other chemical
exposures (46,47). The production of
t(8;21) translocations is therefore likely to
be involved in at least one pathway of
benzene-induced leukemogenesis.
The Role of Aneuploidy
Another common genetic abnormality
found in leukemias is aneuploidy, the loss
and gain ofwhole chromosomes. Numerical
changes in C-group chromosomes 6 to 12
and X have been detected in the blood and
bone marrow of patients with benzene-
induced myelogenous leukemia, myelodys-
plastic syndrome, and pancytopenia. One
of these patients showed a clonal expansion
ofcells with trisomy 9, and a nonclone was
found in another. We have reported that
the benzene metabolite, 1,2,4-benzenetriol
induces aneuploidy of chromosome 9 in
HL-60 cells (48). Eastmond and co-work-
ers reported similar findings following
exposure of human lymphocytes to hydro-
quinone (49). Elsewhere in this issue (50),
we report that benzene induces aneuploidy
of chromosome 9 in the lymphocytes of
exposed workers in a dose-dependent man-
ner. Benzene and its metabolites are there-
fore able to produce chromosome-specific
aneuploidy, which most likely plays a role
in leukemogenesis. Also in this volume,
Irons and Stillman (51,52) argue that
clonal cytogenetic abnormalities involving
the loss of all or part of chromosomes 5
and 7 are commonly detected in patients
who develop myelogenous leukemia after
antineoplastic therapy and benzene/solvent
exposure. The q arms of chromosomes 5
and 7 are thought to contain key genes,
perhaps suppressor genes, involved in
myeloid leukemia, and loss of this genetic
material could be a critical event. We have
therefore developed a procedure that uses
fluorescence in situ hybridization to detect
the loss of 5, 5q31, 7 or 7q in metaphase
spreads. We plan to apply this technique
on spreads prepared from the population
of benzene-exposed workers we began to
study in 1992 (44). Preliminary results
suggest a selective effect of benzene on
chromosome 7 (45), which would be
intriguing if borne out by further analysis
because of the proposed role of genes on
7q in leukemogenesis.
There are numerous mechanisms by
which chemicals can induce aneuploidy in
cells. These include damage to micro-
tubules in the mitotic spindle, kinetochore
detachment, and centriole damage (52,53).
More than 15 years ago, Irons and co-
workers showed that 1,4-benzoquinone
would selectively target tubulin and disrupt
microtubules in vitro. Further, they showed
that 1,4-benzoquinone was one ofthe most
potent disrupters known and proposed
tubulin as a key target in benzene toxicity
(54,55). Recently, we demonstrated that
hydroquinone and 1,2,4-benzenetriol
would disrupt the microtubular structure
of intact human cells using fluorescent
immunocytochemistry with an antitubulin
antibody (48). A generic mechanism for
aneuploidy production by benzene may
therefore be microtubule disruption.
It is difficult to imagine, however, how
disruption of microtubules would lead to
selective aneuploidy. Indeed, it may not.
Benzene's quinonoid metabolites may pro-
duce random aneuploidogenic on specific
chromosomes, but some alterations may be
lethal or cause premature apoptosis. Only
cells with nonlethal chromosome abnormal-
ities would then survive to be detectable.
It seems almost certain, however, that
chromosome-specific aneuploidy plays a
key role in the development and progres-
sion of leukemia, as it does for many other
cancers (52,55).
Role of Epigenetic Events
It is clear that benzene is a genotoxic
carcinogen. However, other epigenetic phe-
nomena may play a role in benzene-induced
hematotoxicity. For example, Kalf and
co-workers have reported that benzene tox-
icity to the bone marrow can be prevented
by IL-1 administration (57). They postu-
late that hydroquinone is oxidized to
benzoquinone, which then inhibits the
conversion of pre-IL-1 to the active form,
IL-1 (57). Further, they propose that this
effect occurs within the stromal cells of the
bone marrow, preventing the normal mat-
uration of progenitor cells, and that this
plays an important role in benzene-induced
aplastic anemia. Irons and co-workers (58)
have also shown an interesting effect of
hydroquinone pretreatment on the granu-
locyte-macrophage lineage of hematopoi-
etic progenitor cells. His group has shown
that hydroquinone pretreatment increases
the number of colonies formed by recom-
binant GM-CSF-induced CFU-GM. At
concentrations as low as 10-9 molar,
hydroquinone produces this stimulatory
effect. This would suggest that hydroqui-
none causes the recruitment of hematopoi-
etic progenitor cells into the granulocyte-
macrophage pathway. In theory, this
recruitment could provide more targets for
the genotoxic effects of hydroquinone and
other metabolites (59). It also has been
shown that this phenomenon is specific to
chemicals that cause myeloid leukemias.
Leukemia may therefore result from ben-
zene inducing both altered differentiation
and genotoxic damage leading to a selective
growth advantage for immature cells.
Hypothesis Overview
I propose that benzene is an unusual
carcinogen that does not produce cancer
through simple gene mutations. It may
actually represent an example of a separate
class of carcinogens that act by a similar
mechanism. This class may include diethyl-
stilbestrol, estrogen, and arsenic. I propose
that benzene is metabolized in the liver to a
variety of metabolites, which travel to the
bone marrow and act in concert to produce
its toxicity. I believe the phenolic metabo-
lites are the proximate toxic metabolites
and that the selective toxicity of benzene is
caused by the fact that its target organs are
rich in peroxidase and sulfatase enzymes.
The phenolic metabolites phenol, hydro-
quinone, catechol and benzenetriol are all
metabolized by peroxidases, such as MPO,
to highly toxic semiquinone radicals and
quinones. These, I believe are the ultimate
toxic metabolites ofbenzene, which produce
the characteristic pattern of benzene toxic-
ity in humans (leukopenia, aplastic anemia,
leukemia) and multiorgan carcinogenicity
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 19961 222
MECHANISM OF BENZENE-INDUCED LEUKEMIA
in peroxidase/sulfatase-rich tissues of
rodents (e.g., the Zymbal and Harderian
glands). Active oxygen species generated
by the redox cycling of quinone metabo-
lites may also play an important role. Of
interest is the recent finding that glu-
tathione conjugates of hydroquinone also
redox-cycle and these may be involved in
benzene toxicity (59).
The key molecular targets of quinones
and oxygen radicals generated from benzene
are most likely tubulin, histone proteins,
topoisomerase II, and other DNA-associ-
ated proteins. Damage to these proteins
would potentially cause DNA strand break-
age, mitotic recombination, chromosome
translocations, and malsegregation of chro-
mosomes at anaphase to produce aneu-
ploidy. Ifthese effects took place in stem or
early progenitor cells a leukemic clone with
selective advantage to grow may arise, as a
result of protooncogene activation, gene
fusion, and suppressor-gene inactivation.
Epigenetic effects of benzene metabolites
on the bone marrow stroma, and perhaps
the stem cell itself, may then foster devel-
opment and survival of this leukemic
clone. Irons and Stillman (51,58) provide
further insights into the details of these
epigenetic events and propose that recom-
binational/aneuploidy changes in chromo-
somes 5 and 7, which produce losses ofkey
genetic material, are important in benzene-
induced leukemia. Our work supports the
hypothesis that changes in chromosome 7
play a key role. It is also possible that the
t(8;21) translocation and trisomy are also
involved in the development of leukemia
from benzene.
We are currently examining the role of
changes in chromosome 5, especially in the
5q31 region. There may be a number of
genetic pathways to benzene-induced
leukemia, but evidence is mounting that
the metabolites ofbenzene produce genetic
changes that are known causative factors in
myeloid leukemia, i.e., t(8;21) and aneu-
ploidy ofchromosomes 7, 8, and 9. We are
therefore close to understanding the mech-
anisms of benzene-induced leukemia, and
perhaps will soon have biological markers
that are of use in monitoring its effects in
exposed humans and predicting future
disease outcome.
Implications and Speculations
on the Causes of Leukemia
As part of the above hypothesis, I propose
that the proximate carcinogenic metabo-
lites of benzene are its phenolic metabo-
lites, phenol, hydroquinone, catechol, and
1,2,4-benzenetriol. These compounds are
quite common dietary constituents and
many are used in pharmaceutical prepara-
tions. For example, hydroquinone and cat-
echol are present in coffee and cigarette
smoke at quite high levels; phenol is pre-
sent in many foodstuffs and is a common
ingredient in numerous skin lotions, lip
balms, and mild anesthetics; hydroquinone
is also present in photographic developer.
It is perhaps not surprising that significant
background levels ofadducts deriving from
these compounds are found on human
blood proteins and in rodent bone marrow
(61). These compounds may therefore play
an important role in the development of
"spontaneous" leukemia in the human
population. It is also possible that environ-
mental benzene exposure plays some role in
this regard, since its effects may be addi-
tional and linear on the background. This is
discussed in greater detail elsewhere (62).
One must also consider that there are
numerous compounds in our diet, herbs,
pharmaceutical preparations, etc., that are
similar to the phenolic metabolites of ben-
zene. Phenols and quinones are widespread
in nature (63). Numerous compounds
have been found to be inhibitors of topoi-
somerase enzymes (32,34). These com-
pounds could be especially important in
producing infant and early childhood
leukemias, since these commonly show
cytogenetic abnormalities at band 11q23
and t(8:21). As pointed out by Greaves
(36), in utero exposure is the most likely
cause of these leukemias. Topoisomerase
inhibitors may also contribute significantly
to adult leukemia incidence.
In narrowing our search for the causes
of human leukemia, which apart from ion-
izing radiation remain largely unknown,
perhaps we should concentrate on pheno-
lics and compounds that affect the function
of tubulin/microtubules and topoisomerase
II. In this manner we may be able to pre-
vent the more than 80,000 leukemia/
lymphoma deaths that occur in the United
States each year and the multitude of
others that occur elsewhere in the world.
REFERENCES
1. Lutz W. Quantitative evaluation of DNA binding data for risk
estimation and for classification of direct and indirect carcino-
gens. Cancer Res Clin Oncol 112:85-91 (1986).
2. Dean BJ. Recent findings on the genetic toxicology ofbenzene,
toluene, xylenes and phenols. Mutat Res 154:153-81 (1985).
3. Sasiadek M, Jagielski J. Genotoxic effects observed in workers
occupationally exposed to organic solvents. Pol J Occup Med
3:103-108 (1990).
4. Wolman SR. Cytologic and cytogenetic effects of benzene. J
Toxicol Environ Health Suppl 2:63-68 (1977).
5. Yager JW, Eastmond DA, Robertson ML, Paradisin WM,
Smith MT. Characterization of micronuclei induced in human
lymphocytes by benzene metabolites. Cancer Res 50:393-399
(1990).
6. Goldstein BD, Witz G, Javid J, Amoruso MA, Rossman T.
Muconaldehyde, a potential toxic intermediate of benzene
metabolism. Adv Exp Med Biol 136A:331-339 (1982).
7. Glatt H, Witz G. Studies on the induction of gene mutations
in bacterial and mammalian cells by the ring-opened benzene
metabolites trans.,trans-muconaldehyde and trans,trans-
muconic acid. Mutagenesis 5:263-266 (1990).
8. Brodfuehrer JI, Chapman DE, Wilke TJ, Powis G.
Comparative studies of the in vitro metabolism and covalent
binding of 14C-benzene by liver slices and microsomal fraction
of mouse, rat, and human. Drug Metab Dispos 18:20-27
(1990).
9. Orzechowski A, Schwarz L, Schwegler U, Bock K, Snyder R,
Schrenki D. Benzene metabolism in rodent hepatocytes: role of
sulphate conjugation. Xenotiotica 25:1093-1102 (1995).
10. Zhang L, Robertson ML, Kolachana P, Davison AJ, Smith
MT. Benzene metabolite, 1,2,4-benzenetriol, induces micronu-
clei and oxidative DNA damage in human lymphocytes and
HL60 cells. Environ Mol Mutagen 21:339-48 (1993).
11. Zhang L, Smith MT, Bandy B, Tamaki SJ, Davison AJ. Role
of quinones, active oxygen species and metals in the genotoxic-
ity of 1,2,4-benzenetriol, a metabolite of benzene. In: Free
Radicals in the Environment, Medicine and Toxicology. Vol 8
(Nohl H, Esterbauer H, Rice-Evans C, eds). London:Richelieu
1994;521-562.
12. Guy RL, Peidi H, Witz G, Goldstein BD, Snyder R.
Depression of iron uptake into erythrocytes in mice by treat-
ment with the combined benzene metabolites p-benzoquinone,
muconaldehyde and hydroquinone. J Appl Toxicol
11:443-446 (1991).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996 1223
M.T. SMITH
13. Medinsky MA, Kenyon EM, Seaton, MJ, Schlosser PM.
Mechanistic considerations in benzene physiological model
development. Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl
6):1399-1404 (1996).
14. Bois F, Smith M, Spear R. Mechanisms ofbenzene carcinogen-
esis: application of a physiological model ofbenzene pharmaco-
kinetics and metabolism to ypothesis testing. Toxicol Lett
00:283-298 (1991).
15. Henderson RF. Species differences in the metabolism ofbenzene.
Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl 6):1 173-1175 (1996).
16. Eastmond DA, Smith MT, Irons RD. An interaction of ben-
zene metabolites reproduces the myelotoxicity observed with
benzene exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 91:85-95 (1987).
17. Smith MT, Yager JW, Steinmetz KM, Eastmond DA.
Peroxidase-dependent metabolism of benzene's phenolic
metabolites and its potential role in benzene toxicity and car-
cinogenicity. Environ Health Perspect 82:23-29 (1989).
18. Subrahmanyam V, Doane-Setzer P, Steinmetz K, Ross D,
Smith M. Phenol-induced stimulation of hydroquinone bioac-
tivation in mouse bone marrow in vivo: possible implications in
benzene myelotoxicity. Toxicology 62:107-116 (1990).
19. Subrahmanyam VV, Kolachana P, Smith MT. Metabolism of
hydroquinone by human myeloperoxidase: mechanisms of
stimulation by other phenolic compounds. Arch Biochem
Biophys 286:76-84 (1991).
20. Robertson M, Eastmond D, Smith MT. Two benzene metabo-
lites, catechol and hydroquinone, produce a synergistic geno-
toxic response in cultured human lymphocytes. Mutat Res
249:201-209 (1990).
21. Barale R, Marrazzini A, Betti C, Vangelisti V, Loprieno N,
Barrai I. Genotoxicity of two metabolites of benzene: phenol
and hydroquinone show strong synergistic effects in vivo.
Mutat Res 244:15-20 (1990).
22. Levay G, Bodell WJ. Potentiation ofDNA adduct formation in
HL-60 cells by combinations ofbenzene metabolites. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 89:7105-7109 (1992).
23. Kolachana P, Subrahmanyam VV, Meyer KB, Zhang L, Smith
MT. Benzene and its phenolic metabolites produce oxidative
DNA damage in HL60 cells in vitro and in the bone marrow in
vivo. Cancer Res 53:1023-1026 (1993).
24. Low L, Lambert C, Meeks J, Naro P, Mackerer C. Tissue-
specific metabolism of benzene in Zymbal gland and other
solid tumor target tissues in rats. J Am Coll Toxicol 14:40-60
(1995).
25. Subrahmanyam WV, Ross D, Eastmond DA, Smith MT.
Potential role of free radicals in benzene-induced myelotoxicity
and leukemia. Free Rad Biol Med 11:495-515 (1991).
26. Lagorio S, Tagesson C, Forastiere F, lavarone I, Axelson 0,
Carere A. Exposure to benzene and urinary concentrations of
8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, a biological marker of oxidative
damage to DNA. Occup Environ Med 51:739-43 (1994).
27. Plappert U, Barthel E, Raddatz K, Seidel HJ. Early effects of
benzene exposure in mice. Hematological versus genotoxic
effects. Arch Toxicol 68:284-290 (1994).
28. Lee EW, Garner CD. Effects ofbenzene of DNA strand breaks
in vivo versus benzene metabolite-induced DNA strand breaks
in vitro in mouse bone marrow cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
108:497-508 (1991).
29. Mackerer C, Blackburn G, Reddy M, Angelosanto F. Benzene
Mechanistic Research Project: Final Report. Princeton,
NJ:Mobil Oil Corporation, 1991.
30. Chen H, Eastmond D. Topoisomerase inhibition by phenolic
metabolites: a potential mechanism for benzene's clastogenic
effects. Carcinogenesis 16:1963-1969 (1995).
31. Frantz CE, Chen H, Eastmond DA. Inhibition of human
topoisomerase II in vitro by bioactive benzene metabolites.
Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl 6):1319-1323 (1996).
32. Anderson RD, Berger NA. International Commission for
Protection against Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens.
Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of topoisomerase-interactive
agents. Mutat Res 309:109-42 (1994).
33. Whitlock JA, Greer JP, Lukens JN. Epipodophyllotoxin-related
leukemia. Identification ofa new subset ofsecondary leukemia.
Cancer 68:600-604 (1991).
34. Chen AY, Liu LF. DNA topoisomerases: essential enzymes and
lethal targets. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 34:191-218
(1994).
35. Felix C, Lange B, Hosler M, Fertala J, Bjornsti M-A.
Chromosome band 11q23 translocation breakpoints are DNA
topoisomerase II cleavage sites. Cancer Res 55:4287-4292
(1995).
36. Greaves M. A natural history for pediatric acute leukemia.
Blood 82:1043-1051 (1993).
37. Rothman N, Haas R, Hayes RB, Li GL, Wiemels J,
Campleman S, Quintana PJ, Xi LJ, Dosemeci M, Titenko-
Holland N, Meyer KB, Lu W, Zhang L, Bechtold W, Wang
YZ, Kolachana P, Yin SN, Blot W, Smith MT. Benzene
induces gene-duplicating but not gene-inactivating mutations
at the glycophorin A locus in exposed humans. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 92:4069-4073 (1995).
38. Kagan J. Molecular biology of chromosomal aberrations in
leukemia/lymphoma. Hematol Pathol 7:159-201 (1993).
39. Rabbitts TH. Chromosomal translocations in human cancer.
Nature 372:143-149 (1994).
40. Nucifora G, Rowley JD. AMLI and the 8;21 and 3;21 translo-
cations in acute and chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 86:1-14
(1995).
41. Downing JR, Head DR, Curcio-Brint AM, Hulshof MG,
Motroni TA, Raimondi SC, Carroll AJ, Drabkin HA, Willman
C, Theil KS. An AMLI/ETO fusion transcript is consistently
detected by RNA-based polymerase chain reaction in acute
myelogenous leukemia containing the (8;21)(q22;q22) translo-
cation. Blood 81:2860-2865 (1993).
42. Erickson PF, Robinson M, Owens G, Drabkin HA. The ETO
portion of acute myeloid leukemia t(8;21) fusion transcript
encodes a highly evolutionarily conserved, putative transcrip-
tion factor. Cancer Res 54:1782-1786 (1994).
43. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Rowley JD. The balanced and the unbal-
anced chromosome aberrations of acute myeloid leukemia may
develop in different ways and may contribute differently to
malignant transformation. Blood 83:2780-2786(1994).
44. Rothman N, Smith MT, Hayes RB, Li G-L, Irons RD,
Dosemeci M, Haas R, Stillman WS, Linet M, Xi L-Q,
Bechtold WE, Wiemels J, Campleman L, Zhang L, Quintana
PJE, Titenko-Holland N, Wang Y-Z, Lu W, Kolachana P,
Meyer KB, Yin S-N. An epidemiologic study of benzene's early
biologic effects in heavily exposed workers in Shanghai, China.
Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl 6):1365-1370 (1996).
45. Smith M, Rothman N, Zhang L, Wang Y, Hayes R, Yin S-N.
Molecular cytogenetics of humans exposed to benzene.
Toxicologist 30:Abstr 911 (1996).
46. Mitelman F, Nilsson PG, Brandt L, Alimena G, Gastaldi R,
Dallapiccola B. Chromosome pattern, occupation, and clinical
features in patients with acute nonlymp ocytic leukemia.
Cancer Genet Cytogenet 4:197-214 (1981).
47. Li Y-S, Zhao Y-L, Jiang Q-P, Yang C-L. Specific chromosome
changes and nonoccupational exposure to potentially carcino-
genic agents in acute leukemia in China. Leuk Res 13:367-376
(1989).
48. Zhang L, Venkatesh P, Creek MLR, Smith MT. Detection of
1,2,4-benzenetriol induced aneuploidy and microtubule dis-
ruption by fluorescence in situ hy6ridization and immunocyto-
chemistry. Mutat Res 320:315-327 (1994).
49. Eastmond DA, Rupa DS, Hasegawa LS. Detection of hyper-
diploidy and chromosome breakage in interphase human lym-
phocytes following exposure to the benzene metabolite
hydroquinone usint multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridiza-
tion with DNA probes. Mutat Res 322:9-20 (1994).
50. Zhang LP, Rothman N, Wang X, Hayes RB, Bechtold W,
Venkatesh P, Yin S, Wang Y, Dosemeci M, Li G, Lu W, Smith
MT. Interphase cytogenetics of workers exposed to benzene.
Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl 6):1325-1329 (1996).
51. Irons RD, Stillman WS. The process of leukemogenesis.
Environ Health Perspect 104 (Suppl 6):1239-1246 (1996).
1224 Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996
MECHANISM OF BENZENE-INDUCED LEUKEMIA
52. Oshimura M, Barrett JC. Chemically induced aneuploidy in
mammalian cells: mechanisms and biological significance in
cancer. Environ Mutagen 8:129-159 (1986).
53. Bond DJ. Mechanisms of aneuploid induction. Mutat Res
181:257-66 (1987).
54. Irons RD, Neptune DA. Effects of the prinicipal hydroxy-
metabolites of benzene on microtubule polymerization. Arch
Toxicol 45:297-305 (1980).
55. Irons RD, Pfeifer RW, Aune TM, Pierce CW. Soluble immune
response suppressor (SIRS) inhibits microtubule function in
vivo and microtubule assembly in vitro. J Immunol
133:2032-2036 (1984).
56. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal
tumorigenesis. Cell 61:759-767 (1990).
57. Renz JF, Kalf GF. Role for interleukin-1 (IL-1) in benzene-
induced hematotoxicity: inhibition of conversion of pre-IL-1
alpha to mature cytokine in murine macrophages by hydro-
quinone and prevention of benzene-induced hematotoxicity in
mice by IL-I alpha. Blood 78:938-944 (1991).
58. Irons RD, Stillman WS, Colagiovanni DB, Henry VA.
Synergistic action of the benzene metabolite hydroquinone on
myelopoietic stimulating activity of granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
89:3691-3695 (1992).
59. Irons RD, Stillman WS. Cell proliferation and differentiation
in chemical leukemogenesis. Stem Cells 11:235-242 (1993).
60. Lau SH, OA, Highet R, Monks T. Sequential oxidation and
glutathione addition to 1,4-benzoquinone: correlation of toxic-
ity with increased glutathione substitution. Mol Pharmacol
34:829-836 (1988).
61. McDonald TA, Yeowell OCK, Rappaport SM. Comparison of
protein adducts of benzene oxide and benzoquinone in the
blood and bone marrow of rats and mice exposed to
[14C/13C6]benzene. Cancer Res 54:4907-4914 (1994).
62. Smith M. Mechanistic studies of benzene toxicity: implications
for risk assessment. In: Biological Reactive Intermediates V
(Synder R, Sipes GI, Kalf GF, eds). New York:Plenum Press,
1995;259-266.
63. Smith MT. Quinones as mutagens, carcinogens, and anticancer
agents: introduction and overview. J Toxicol Environ Health
16:665-672 (1985).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996 1225
