Critical Issues in Benzene Toxicity and
Metabolism: the Effect of Interactions with
Other Organic Chemicals on Risk Assessment
Michele A. Medinsky, Paul M. Schlosser, James A. Bond
Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
Benzene, an important industrial solvent, is also present in unleaded gasoline and cigarette smoke. The hematotoxic effects of benzene are well
documented and include aplastic anemia and pancytopenia. Some individuals exposed repeatedly to cytotoxic concentrations of benzene develop
acute myeloblastic anemia. It has been hypothesized that metabolism of benzene is required for its toxicity, although administration of no single
benzene metabolite duplicates the toxicity of benzene. Several investigators have demonstrated that a combination of metabolites (hydroquinone
and phenol, for example) is necessary to duplicate the hematotoxic effect of benzene. Enzymes implicated in the metabolic activation of benzene
and its metabolites include the cytochrome P450 monooxygenases and myeloperoxidase. Since benzene and its hydroxylated metabolites (phenol,
hydroquinone, and catechol) are substrates for the same cytochrome P450 enzymes, competitive interactions among the metabolites are possible.
In vivo data on metabolite formation by mice exposed to various benzene concentrations are consistent with competitive inhibition of phenol
oxidation by benzene. Other organic molecules that are substrates for cytochrome P450 can inhibit the metabolism of benzene. For example,
toluene has been shown to inhibit the oxidation of benzene in a noncompetitive manner. Enzyme inducers, such as ethanol, can alter the target
tissue dosimetry of benzene metabolites by inducing enzymes responsible for oxidation reactions involved in benzene metabolism. The dosimetry
of benzene and its metabolites in the target tissue, bone marrow, depends on the balance of activation processes, such as enzymatic oxidation, and
deactivation processes, like conjugation and excretion. Biologically based dosimetry models that incorporate the important determinants of benzene
flux, including interactions with other chemicals, will enable prediction of target tissue doses of benzene and metabolites at low exposure
concentrations relevant for humans. -Environ Health Perspect 102(Suppl 9):119-124 (1994)
Key words: benzene, benzene-toluene interactions, benzene-ethanol interactions, phenol, hydroquinone, competitive inhibition
Introduction
Benzene is a ubiquitous industrial and
environmental pollutant (1). It is present
in automobile emissions, both evaporative
and combustive, and has been detected in
cigarette smoke (2,3). Benzene is also com-
monly used as an industrial solvent in the
workplace. Because of its uses in industry
and its presence in common human envi-
ronments, exposure to benzene is most
likely associated with co exposure to other
volatile organic chemicals normally present
in these environments.
Benzene is hematotoxic and carcino-
genic at high concentrations. Epidemiology
studies have shown that people develop
blood dyscrasias, such as pancytopenia,
aplastic anemia, and acute myelogenous
leukemia following repeated exposure to
high concentrations of benzene (4,5). In 2-
This article was presented at the IV European ISSX
Meeting on Toxicological Evaluation of Chemical
Interactions: Relevance of Social, Environmental, and
Occupational Factors held 3-6 July 1992 in Bologna,
Italy.
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial sup-
port, in part, through a grant from the American
Petroleum Institute.
Address correspondence to Michele Medinsky,
Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, P.O. Box
12137, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. Telephone
(919) 558-1250.
year carcinogenicity studies, rats and mice
developed hematotoxicity and tumors in
multiple organs, including preputial,
Zymbal and Harderian glands, liver, and
lymphomas (6). Benzene also induces
chromosomal aberrations and aneuploidy
in laboratory animals (7,8).
A number of studies have suggested
that metabolism ofbenzene is a key in ben-
zene-induced toxicity (9-11). The metabo-
lism of benzene involves a series of
oxidations of the benzene ring by the
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases. One
current hypothesis regarding the role of
benzene metabolites in hematotoxicity sug-
gests that following absorption into the
blood and translocation to the liver, ben-
zene is metabolized by cytochrome
P4502E1 to its major metabolite, phenol
(Figure 1) (12). Phenol can be further oxi-
dized, most likely by the same cytochrome
P450, to the polyhydroxylated metabolite,
hydroquinone. Alternatively, phenol is suf-
ficiently stable that it can directly partition
into the blood and be distributed to other
tissues. Similarly, hydroquinone produced
from the oxidation of phenol can also par-
tition into the blood. Both phenol and
hydroquinone are substrates for phase 2
conjugating enzymes, such as the sulfo-
transferases and glucuronyl transferases.
Phenyl and hydroquinone sulfates and glu-
curonides are major metabolites excreted in
the urine of animals exposed to benzene
(13). Once in the blood, both phenol and
hydroquinone can partition into the bone
marrow. Eastmond et al. (10) demon-
strated that the myeloperoxidase-depen-
dent metabolism of hydroquinone to the
reactive metabolite, benzoquinone, is stim-
ulated by the presence of phenol.
Benzoquinone is myelotoxic and clasto-
genic (14,15) and may be responsible for
some ofbenzene's toxic effects.
The multiplicity of benzene's metabolic
pathways provides opportunities for modu-
lation of benzene metabolism, either by
competition with other organic chemicals
for the available enzyme sites, by induction
or inhibition of the oxidation or conjuga-
tion enzymes, or by direct competition
between benzene and its metabolites.
Specific examples of these interactions and
the net effect on the formation of benzene
metabolites and resultant hematotoxicity or
genotoxicity are discussed below.
Effect ofCoexposure to Benzene and
Toluene on Genotoxidty
Exposure to benzene causes genetic dam-
age to bone marrow cells. Analysis of
micronuclei in polychromatic erythro-
Environmental Health Perspectives 119
MEDINSKYETAL.
Lung
Benzene
Conjugates
Conjugates ~-o m
Figure 1. Proposed mechanisms for benzene-induced myelotoxicity. BQ, benzoquinone. Solid lines represent bio-
chemical pathways for metabolism of benzene or its hydroxylated products (PH and HQ). Dashed lines represent
transport of benzene or its metabolites in blood. From Smith et al. ( 12); reproduced with permission of
Environmental Health Perspectives.
cytres provides information about recent
bone marrow clastogenic or aneugenic
damage (7). Micronuclei occur as a
result of the exclusion of acentric chro-
mosomal fragments or lagging chromo-
somes from daughter. nuclei during
cytokinesis. Gad-El-Karim et al. (16)
investigated the genotoxicity of benzene
in male and female CD-i mice treated
with two oral doses of benzene, or com-
binations of benzene and toluene,
administered 24 hr apart. At 6 hr after
the second dose, bone marrow from each
femur was analyzed for micronuclei or
metaphase chromosomes.
The toluene used in these studies was
redistilled prior to use and was demon-
strated to be entirely devoid of detectable
clastogenic activity at a dose of 1720
mg/kg (Table 1). Benzene, however, was
clastogenic to bone marrow cells and ele-
vated numbers of micronucleated poly-
chromatic erythrocytes were detected in
both male and female mice receiving
440 mg benzene/kg, compared to controls
receiving only olive oil (Table 1). When
both benzene (440 mg/kg) and toluene
(1720 mg/kg) were coadministered, the
clastogenic effect of benzene was reduced
(Table 1). The protective effect of toluene
was also seen following lower administered
doses of toluene (860 mg/kg). The clasto-
genic effect of benzene did not seem to be
as great for female mice compared to male
mice. Because of the decreased response
observed in females, Gad-El-Karim et al.
were not able to demonstrate a statistically
significant protective effect of coexposure
to toluene.
Gad-El-Karim et al. (16) also exam-
ined the frequency of chromosomal aberra-
tions in metaphase chromosomes after
coexposure to benzene and toluene.
Following benzene administration, various
Table 1. Effect of benzene or benzene-toluene mixtures on the formation of micronucleated-polychromatic ery-
throcytes in bone marrow of mice.'
MPCE/1 000 PCEc
Chemical, mg/kgb Sex Mean a5 Range
Control (olive oil) M 2.4 1.3 2-4
F 1.4 1.7 0-3
Benzene (440) M 16.7 2.4 7-74
F 5.8 2.5 2-22
Toluene(1 720) M 1.9 1.4 1-3
F 2.9 1.3 2-4
Benzene (440) + tolIuene (1720) M 7.2 1.8 4-13
F 4.2 1.2 3-5
aFrom Gad-EI-Karim et al. (16): reproduced with permission of Mutation Research. bChemical or control vehicle
administered by oral gavage once followed by a second dose 24 hr later. cMicronucleated polychromatic erythro-
cytes per 1000 polychromatic erythrocytes in bone marrow of femurs taken from mice 6 hr after second oral dos-
ing; data are sample geometric mean, geometric standard deviation, and range of four to five mice per group.
types of chromosomal lesions were noted,
including cells with at least one gap or
break (damaged cells), cells with >10 aber-
rations/cell (severely damaged cells), and
pulverized cells (those with >20 aberra-
tions). As noted with the micronuclei,
coadministration of toluene both at 1720
and at 860 mg/kg dose protected against
the formation of chromosomal aberrations
following benzene exposure in male mice.
The investigators hypothesized that
toluene inhibited the metabolism of ben-
zene and that one or more metabolites of
benzene were responsible for the myelo-
clastogenic effects.
Effect of Toluene Coexposure on
Benzene Hematotoxicity
Exposure to benzene causes a decrease in
the production of erythrocytes, leukocytes,
and thrombocytes in bone marrow. The
incorporation of 59Fe into maturing red
blood cells is used as a measure of erythro-
poiesis by many investigators. Toxic effects
on the developing bone marrow cells
reduces the percentage of iron that is incor-
porated into the cells compared to con-
trols. Benzene inhibits the incorporation of
59Fe into developing erythrocytes in a
dose-dependent manner and inhibition
becomes maximal 48 hours after the
administration of a single dose of benzene.
Andrews et al. (17) used radio-iron uptake
to evaluate the effects of benzene on the
hematopoietic system of mice. Intra-
peritoneal injections of benzene, toluene,
or mixtures of benzene and toluene in corn
oil were given to male Swiss albino (ICR)
mice. The mice were injected with 59Fe 48
hr later and, after an additional 24 hr,
blood samples were assayed for 59Fe. The
percentage of iron taken up by the erythro-
cytes of treate'd mice was compared to con-
trol animals given only corn oil injections.
Additional groups of mice were also given
doses of benzene containing [3H]benzene
to determine the extent of benzene metabo-
lism with and without toluene coexposure.
When the 3H-benzene was adminis-
tered to mice at two dose levels (440 and
880 mg/kg), a larger percentage of the dose
appeared as benzene met'abolites in the
urine following the smaller dose compared
to the larger dose (Table 2). Coadminis-
tration of toluene (1720 mg/kg) with
either dose of benzene resulted in a reduc-
tion in the quantity of benzene metabolites
measured in the urine to 30 or 40% of the
response in the benzene-exposed group for
the low and high doses, respectively.
Coexposure to toluene also counteracted
the benzene-induced reduction of red cell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Environmental Health Perspectives
Liver )
Benzene
-Phenol -.o
(PH)
Hydroquinone a
(HQ)
Bone Marrow
40 PH(u >
*4IhmmHQ 2&BQ
120
INTERACTIONS IN BENZENE TOXICITYAND METABOLISM
59Fe uptake seen in mice given 440 or 880
mg/kg benzene alone (Table 2). While
toluene itself did not affect radio-iron
uptake, it completely prevented the depres-
sion in s9Fe uptake produced by
440 mg/kg benzene and partially offset the
greater depression induced by 880 mg/kg
benzene. Thus, toluene both reduced ben-
zene metabolism and protected against
benzene-induced depression of 59Fe utiliza-
tion by red cells.
In separate studies Andrews et al. (17)
also determined the effect of simultaneous
exposure to benzene and toluene on the
disposition of 3H-benzene and its metabo-
lites in target and nontarget tissues. Mice
were injected subcutaneously with 3H-ben-
zene alone in olive oil or 3H-benzene/
toluene mixtures (880 mg/kg and
1720 mg/kg, respectively). Concentrations
of benzene in various tissues (fat, liver,
spleen, blood, or bone marrow) from mice
given only benzene were very similar to
those in which benzene was combined with
toluene. A representative time course is
shown in Figure 2 for benzene concentra-
tions in blood and bone marrow. The simi-
lar benzene concentrations for the benzene-
alone and benzene-toluene groups sug-
gested that coadministration of toluene did
not alter the disposition of benzene itself
(Figure 2A,B). In contrast, the concentra-
tion of benzene metabolites in tissues of
mice given benzene alone were
much higher than those found when ben-
zene was coadministered with toluene
(Figure 2C,D). Coadministration of
toluene did not delay the appearance of
benzene metabolites in tissues but
markedly reduced the concentration of
metabolites found in each tissue for all
time periods.
E
c
0)
'aC
co
N
C
a)0
a
£
0
.0
0
a)
BloodA B Bone Marrow
6 8 0 2
Hours After Injection
Figure 2. Effect of coadministration of toluene on the accumulation of [3H]benzene in blood (A) and bone marrow
(B) or [3H]benzene metabolites in blood (C) bone marrow (D) of mice given subcutaneous injections of benzene
(880 mg/kg) or benzene plus toluene (1720 mg/kg). From Andrews et al. (17); reproduced with permission of
Biochemical Pharmacology.
In summary, the observations made in
this study, that toluene reduced the level of
urinary metabolites of benzene and also
reduced the benzene-induced inhibition of
erythrocyte 59Fe uptake, suggest that
metabolism of benzene is closely related to
its hematotoxicity. Inhibition of benzene
metabolism by toluene is supported by
observations that toluene coexposure
markedly reduced bone marrow concentra-
tions of benzene metabolites but had no
significant effect on the concentration of
benzene in bone marrow. Thus, it seems
Table 2. Effects of co exposure to toluene on benzene metabolism and red blood cell 59Fe utilization in mice.9
Chemical (mg/kg) % Metabolizedb % 59Fe Utilizationc
Control (olive oil) - 24.2 ± 4.7
Benzene (440) 35.8 ± 1.1 15.7 ± 4.8
Toluene (1720) - 23.3 ± 4.6
Benzene (440) +toluene (860) 10.9 ± 7.5 22.0 ± 5.9
Control (olive oil) - 18.4 ± 6.2
Benzene (880) 22.6 ± 5.7 4.9 ± 3.4
Toluene (1720) - 15.8 ± 5.5
Benzene (880) +toluene (860) 9.9 ± 3.9 9.9 ± 4.5
aFrom Andrews et al. (17); reproduced with permission of Biochemical Pharmacology. bPercent of the adminis-
tered benzene excreted in the urine as benzene metabolites. Data expressed as mean percent ± standard deviation
of 6 to 17 mice per group. CPercent uptake of a single injected dose of 59Fe into circulating red blood cells. Data
expressed as mean percent ± standard deviation of 17 to 28 mice per group.
likely that toluene protects against ben-
zene-induced inhibition oferythrocyte 59Fe
uptake by reducing the level of benzene
metabolites in the bone marrow through
suppression ofbenzene metabolism.
Effect ofCoexposure to Benzene and
Toluene on Benzene Metabolism in
Humans
The previous study suggested that coexpo-
sure to large bolus doses of benzene and
toluene can reduce both the amount of
benzene that is metabolized and the result-
ing benzene-induced toxicity in animals.
The direct relevance of these exposures in
predicting risk for humans is uncertain
since human exposures are typically by
inhalation at much lower exposure concen-
trations for longer durations. However,
there is some evidence to suggest that
mutual metabolic suppression between
benzene and toluene does occur in people
exposed to concentrations of benzene and
toluene in certain workplace environments.
Inoue et al. (18) examined both the
exposure concentration during a workshift
and the benzene metabolite concentrations
in the shift-end urine of male Chinese
workers exposed to either benzene, toluene,
or a mixture of both chemicals. Addition-
ally, these investigators looked at nonex-
Volume 102, Supplement 9, November 1994 121
MEDINSKYETAL.
A Phenol B Hydroquinone
100 0
Benzene in Air (ppm)
50 100
Figure 3. Comparison of urinary excretion of two benzene metabolites, phenol (A) and hydroquinone (B) in work-
ers exposed to benzene alone or mixtures of benzene and toluene. The regression lines describe the relationship
between benzene exposure (time-weighted average ppm) and metabolite excretion (mg metabolite/l urine) for
benzene exposed (solid line) or toluene/benzene exposed (dashed line) groups. From Inoue et al. (18); reproduced
with permission of Intemational Archives ofOccupational and Environmental Health.
posed male workers (control group). The
time-weighted average (TWA) vapor con-
centration in the breathing zone of each
worker was determined using a diffusive
sampler that was placed on the lapel of the
worker from the beginning ofthe workshift
until the time of urine collection, which
was at the end of the workday. The rela-
tionship between the TWA benzene con-
centration and the concentration of the
individual metabolites (i.e., phenol, cate-
chol, and hydroquinone from benzene, and
hippuric acid and o-cresol from toluene) in
urine was analyzed for each group by
regression analysis. Comparison of the
regression lines describing the relationship
between exposure and metabolite levels
indicated that urinary levels of phenol and
100 IToluene
10
0.1
Co-exposure
Single/V
0
hydroquinone were lower in the group
exposed to both toluene and benzene com-
pared to the group exposed to benzene
alone (Figure 3). The investigators hypoth-
esized that biotransformation of benzene to
its hydroxylated metabolites in people is
suppressed by coexposure to toluene. These
findings suggest that when workers are
exposed to toluene in addition to benzene,
the amounts of phenol and hydroquinone
excreted in urine will be lower than those
expected for exposure to only benzene at
similar concentrations. These investigators
also noted that the formation of hippuric
acid and o-cresol from toluene were also
reduced by coexposure to benzene; how-
ever, the extent ofthis reduction was not as
10
Co-exposure
0 1
Hours After End of Exposure
Figure 4. Clearance of benzene and toluene from blood of humans; concentrations of toluene (left) or benzene (right)
measured in the blood from human volunteers exposed to 25 ppm benzene and 100 ppm toluene for 2 hr. Squares and
solid lines represent blood concentrations of benzene or toluene determined when volunteers were exposed to the
single chemical. Circles and dashed lines represent blood concentrations when volunteers were exposed to a mixture.
Sato and Nakajima (19); reproduced with permission of Toxicology andAppliedPharmacology.
dramatic as the effect of toluene on ben-
zene metabolism.
Sato and Nakajima (19) determined
the concentrations ofbenzene and toluene
in the blood of humans who inhaled
either 25 ppm benzene or 100 ppm
toluene or a mixture of benzene and
toluene in controlled laboratory experi-
ments for 2 hr (Figure 4). Their data indi-
cated no difference in the disappearance
rate of benzene or toluene from the blood
after the end of exposure between the sin-
gle or combination exposures. These stud-
ies with humans exposed to benzene or
toluene by inhalation are consistent with
the results of Andrews et al. (17) using
experimental animals and bolus doses
(Figure 2A). Both studies suggest that
while the kinetics of benzene in the blood
may be unchanged by coexposure to
toluene the formation of the metabolites
may be significantly altered by coexpo-
sure. The results of both human and ani-
mal studies suggest that analysis of
metabolite levels may be a more sensitive
indicator of interactive effects of benzene
and other solvents than analysis of blood
or tissue levels ofbenzene alone.
Alcohol/Benzene Interactions
Consumption of ethanol is an important
social factor that might have a considerable
impact on the pharmacokinetics and
metabolism of benzene. Ethanol is known
to induce CYPIIEl, one ofthe cytochrome
P450 enzymes responsible for benzene and
phenol metabolism (20,21). Studies con-
ducted by Nakajima et al. (22) have shown
that pretreatment of rats with ethanol
altered the in vitro metabolism of benzene
and its major metabolite, phenol.
Male Wistar rats were maintained for
3 weeks on a nutritionally adequate liquid
diet (basal diet) or an ethanol diet (2 g of
ethanol added to 80 ml ofbasal diet with a
reduced sucrose content). At the end of the
3-week period, the animals were either sac-
rificed to obtain hepatic microsomes for
assay of in vitro metabolic activity or were
exposed to 500 ppm benzene for 2 hr to
determine the clearance of benzene from
blood. The in vitro experiments indicated
that preexposure to ethanol increased the
rate of metabolism of benzene by hepatic
microsomes 6-fold and phenol metabolism
by 4-fold. Clearance of benzene from the
blood following a 2-hr exposure to
500 ppm was significantly faster in the
ethanol-treated rats (Figure 5), indicating
that for benzene the increased rates of
metabolism noted in vitro were reflected in
increased rates ofbenzene clearance in vivo.
Environmental Health Perspectives
c
0
C
a)Ce
cJ a)
o °5
.0 E
0
0
rn
1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 5
122
INTERACTIONS IN BENZENE TOXICITYAND METABOLISM
Presumably, the more rapid clearance of
benzene from the blood in the pretreated
animals was due to increased metabolism.
Previously, Baarson et al. (23) determined
that treatment of C57Bl/6J male mice with
5 or 15% ethanol in drinking water
increased the hematotoxic effects following
13 weeks of exposure to 300 ppm benzene
for 6 hr/day, 5 days/week. Anemia and
lymphocytopenia in the peripheral blood
and hypocellularity of the bone marrow
and spleen were observed in both benzene
and ethanol-benzene exposed groups, but
were more severe in the ethanol-benzene-
exposed groups. These studies are consis-
tent with the results ofNakijima et al. (22)
and suggest that ethanol administration, by
inducing benzene and phenol metabolism
in liver, results in a faster clearance of ben-
zene from blood, and presumably higher
concentrations of active metabolites in tar-
get tissues. These metabolites, in turn,
result in an increased hematotoxicity.
Interacdve Effect ofBenzene and Its
Metabolites
Previous studies in laboratory animals
exposed to benzene by various routes of
administration have demonstrated the
dose-dependent metabolism of benzene
(13). For example, in mice exposed to ben-
zene by gavage, there is a decrease in the
percent of the total amount of urinary
metabolites eliminated as hydroquinone
10000 I
V
00
0
0
0
c
a)
N
c
0)
0)
1000
100
10-)
Control Rats
Ethanol-treated Rat
0
glucuronide and muconic acid as the ben-
zene dose is increased from 1 mg/kg to 200
mg/kg (Figure 6). In contrast, the glu-
curonide, sulfate and glutathione conju-
gates of phenol represent an increasing
percent of the total metabolites eliminated
in urine with increasing dose. This dose-
dependent metabolism of benzene can be
explained in part by the interactive effects
of benzene and its major metabolites. For
example, it has been demonstrated that
both benzene and phenol are substrates for
the same cytochrome P450 enzyme,
CYPIIE1 (20). Thus, at high exposure
concentrations benzene could competi-
tively inhibit the further metabolism of
phenol to hydroquinone. Presumably, con-
centrations of phenol in liver would be
much less than concentrations of benzene.
Studies by Rickert et al. (24) demonstrated
that blood concentrations of benzene in
male F-344 rats at the end ofa 6-hr inhala-
tion exposure to 500 ppm benzene were
10-fold higher than those of phenol. As
indicated in Figure 1, benzene-derived
phenol is also metabolized by the phase 2
conjugation enzymes. Therefore, it is likely
that during exposures to high concentra-
tions of benzene, the subsequent oxidation
ofphenol is inhibited by the higher hepatic
concentrations ofbenzene. The free phenol
formed would be removed by enzymatic
50-
-5 40-
C_
cUU)oc
CC c 30-
a 20
oE_
a.) X 00 1
2 4 6 8
Hours After End of Exposure
Figure 5. Decline in concentration of benzene in blood
of rats after a 2-hr inhalation exposure to 500 ppm ben-
zene. Rats were exposed to a basal diet or an ethanol
diet (2 g of ethanol added to 80 ml of basal diet with a
reduced sucrose content) for 3 weeks prior to exposure.
From Nakajima et al. (22).
conjugation with UDP-glucuronic acid or
phosphoadenosine-phosphosulfate (PAPS).
This mechanism is consistent with the
decrease in total hydroquinone conjugates
and the increase in phenyl conjugates
formed with exposure to increasing doses
ofbenzene.
Conclusion
There have been a number of reports sug-
gesting that in both laboratory animals and
humans, benzene metabolism is modulated
by coexposure or prior exposure to other
organic chemicals. In addition, the metab-
olism of benzene itself appears to exhibit
dose-dependent behavior, with the propor-
tion of the metabolites formed changing
considerably depending upon the dose of
benzene administered. As a result, the net
effect of inhibition of metabolism by coex-
posure or stimulation of metabolism by
previous exposure to volatile organic chem-
icals can be quite complex. The use of bio-
logically based mathematical models to
quantitatively describe the disposition of
benzene, its hydroxylated metabolites, and
the ultimate concentrations of the active
metabolites in the target tissue is probably
the most fruitful approach for quantita-
tively assessing the risks of benzene expo-
sure as a consequence of these numerous
interactions.
PS PPMA
) mg/ kg
MUC PG PMA HQS
Figure 6. Urinary metabolites expressed as percent of the total metabolite eliminated in urine; Male B6C3F1 mice
were given 1, 10, or 200 mg of 14C benzene per kg of body weight by oral exposure. After exposure, animals were
placed in metabolism cages. The urine was collected for 24 hr and the amount of each metabolite was determined
by injecting a sample of the urine onto a high pressure liquid chromatograph and quantitating the radioactivity
using liquid scintillation spectrometry. HQG, hydroquinone glucuronide; MUC, muconic acid; PG, phenyl glu-
curonide; PMA, phenyl mercapturic acid; HQS, hydroquinone sulfate; PS, phenyl sulfate; PPMA, prephenyl mercap-
turic acid. Sabourin et al. (13); reproduced with permission of Toxicology andApplied Pharmacology.
Volume 102, Supplement 9, November 1994 123
MEDINSKYETAL.
REFERENCES
1. Runion HE, Scott LM. Benzene exposure in the United States
1978-1983: an overview. Am J Ind Med 7:385- 393 (1985).
2. Wallace L. Major sources of exposure to benzene and other
volatile organic chemicals. Risk Anal 10(1):59-64 (1990).
3. Wallace LA, Pellizzari ED. Personal air exposures and breath
concentrations of benzene and other volatife hydrocarbons for
smokers and non-smokers. Toxicol Lett 35:113-116 (1986).
4. Goldstein BD. Hematotoxicity in humans. J Toxicol Environ
Health Suppl 2:69-105 (1977).
5. Rinsky RA, Smith AB, Hornung R, Filloon TG, Young RJ,
Okun AH, Landrigan PJ. Benzene and leukemia, and epidemi-
ological risk assessment. N Engl J Med 316:1044-1050 (1987).
6. HuffJE, Haseman JK, DeMarini DM, Eustis S, Maronpot RR,
Peters AC, Persing RL, Chrisp CE, Jacobs AC. Multiple-site
carcinogenicity of benzene in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F1
mice. Environ Health Perspect 82:125-163 (1989).
7. Tice RR, Ivett JL. Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow dam-
age. In: Toxicology ofthe Blood and Bone Marrow (Irons RD,
ed). New York:Raven Press, 1985;1 19-140.
8. Au WW, Ramanujam VMS, Ward JB Jr, Legator MS.
Chromosome aberrations in lymphocytes of mice after sub-
acute low-level inhalation exposure to benzene. Mutat Res
260:219-224 (1991).
9. Irons RD. Quinones as toxic metabolites of benzene. J Toxicol
Environ Health 16:673-678 (1985).
10. Eastmond DA, Smith MT, Irons RD. An interaction of ben-
zene metabolites reproduces the myelotoxicity observed with
benzene exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 91:85-95 (1987).
11. Barale R, Marrazzini A, Betti C, Vangelisti V, Loprieno N,
Barrai I. Genotoxicity of two metabolites of benzene: phenol
and hydroquinone show strong synergistic effects in vivo.
Mutat Res 244:15-20 (1990).
12. Smith MT, Yager JW, Steinmetz KL, tastmond DA.
Peroxidase-dependent metabolism of benzene's phenolic
metabolites and its potential role in benzene toxicity and car-
cinogenicity. Environ Health Perspect 82:23-29 (1989).
13. Sabourin J, Bechtold WE, Griffith WC, Birnbaum LS, Lucier
G, Henderson RF. Effect of exposure concentration, exposure
rate, and route of administration on metabolism of benzene by
F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
99:421-444 (1989).
14. Snyder R, Dimitriadis E, Guy R, Hu P, Cooper K, Bauer H,
Witz G, Goldstein BD. Studies on the mechanism of benzene
toxicity. Environ Health Perspect 82:31-35 (1989).
15. Erexson GL, Wilmer JL, Kligerman AD. Sister chromatid
exchange induction in human lymphocytes exposed to benzene
and its metabolites in vitro. Cancer Res 45:2471-2477 (1985).
16. Gad-El-Karim MM, Harper BL, Legator MS. Modifications in
the myeloclastogenic effect of benzene in mice with toluene,
phenobarbital, 3-methylcholanthrene, Aroclor 1254 and SKF-
525A. Mutat Res 135:225-243 (1984).
17. Andrews LS, Lee EW, Witmer CM, Kocsis JJ, Snyder R.
Effects oftoluen5 on the metabolism, disposition and hemopoi-
etic toxicity of [ H]benzene. Biochem Pharmacol 26:293-300
(1977).
18. Inoue 0, Seiji K, Watanabe T, Kasahara M, Nakatsuka H, Yin
S, Li G, Cai S, Jin C, Ikeda M. Mutual metabolic suppression
between benzene and toluene in man Int Arch Occup Environ
Health 60:15-20 (1988).
19. Sato A, Nakajima T. Dose-dependent metabolic interaction
between benzene and toluene in vivo and in vitro. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 48:249-256 (1979).
20. Koop DR, Laethem CL, Schnier GG. Identification ofethanol-
inducible P450 isozyme 3a (P45011E1) as a benzene and phenol
hydroxylase. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 98:278-288 (1989).
21. Guengerich FP, Kim D-H, Iwasaki M. Role of human
cytochrome P-450 IIEI in the oxidation of many low molecu-
lar weight cancer suspects. Chem Res Toxicol. 4:168-179
(1991).
22. Nakajima T, Okuyama S, Yonekura I, Sato A. Effects of
ethanol and phenobarbital administration on the metabolism
and toxicity ofbenzene. Chem Biol Interact 55:23-38 (1985).
23. Baarson KA, Snyder CA, Green JD, Sellakumar A, Goldstein
BD, Albert RE. The hematotoxic effects of inhaled benzene on
peripheral blood, bone marrow, and spleen cells are increased
by ingested ethanol. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 64:393-404
(1982).
24. RickertrDE, Baker TS, Bus JS, Barrow CS, Irons RD. Benzene
disposition in the rat after exposure by inhalation. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 49:417-423 (1979).
124 Environmental Health Perspectives
