Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 64, pp. 219-232, 1985
Free-Radical-Mediated DNA Binding
by Peter J. O'Brien*
Free-radical metabolites can be generated metabolically by a one-electron reductase-catalyzed reaction
or a "peroxidase" catalyzed oxidation or by photoactivation of a wide variety of aromatic xenobiotics.
Radicals may also be generated during lipid peroxidation. Some radicals can react with DNA or bind
covalently or noncovalently as a dismutation product or as a dimer, trimer or polymeric product. Modi-
fication to the DNA can result in singlestrand breaks, loss of template activity, and crosslinking. The
binding can prevent enzymic digestion. In some cases, the radicals react with oxygen, resulting before
conversion to DNA reactive oxygen species. Most radicals probably do not interact with DNA.
Introduction
As a result of the realization in the early 1940s that
free radicals produced by ionizing radiation and ultra-
violet radiation can lead to carcinogenesis, there has
been interest in the possibility that free-radical metab-
olites of xenobiotics are possible toxic intermediates or
proximate carcinogens. The most widely accepted the-
ory for the initiation of processes leading to carcino-
genesis is that carcinogens elicit their activity after con-
version to electrophiles that interact with a nucleophilic
region of a macromolecule. Binding to DNA in a way
that causes errors in replication during cell division
could result in initiation. Subsequent proliferation of
these cells may lead to the neoplasmic state. It would
be expected that such binding should result in a minimal
change in the physical structure of the DNA so as to
avoid setting into motion the highly effective in vivo
repair mechanisms. On the other hand, cytotoxicity
could also occur if the binding to DNA prevents normal
repair processes and the damage to the DNA results in
an inhibition of RNA synthesis or DNA replication. In
the case of the toxic and carcinogenic effects of irradia-
tion, the importance of free-radical interactions with
DNA have been reviewed previously (1).
*Department of Biochemistry, Memorial University of Newfound-
land, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada AlB 3 x 9.
The metabolic activation of chemical carcinogens in
the liver is generally thought not to involve free radicals
but rather electrophiles, e.g., nitrenium ions in the case
of arylamines, carbonium ions in the case of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons. The first step in this activation
is believed to involve a two-electron oxidation catalyzed
by a cytochrome P-450-dependent mixed-function oxi-
dase of the arylamine to the N-hydroxyarylamine and
the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon to an epoxide. Fur-
thermore, the structure of the DNA adducts formed in
the liver and some other target organs in vivo is iden-
tical to that formed in vitro with the proximate carcin-
ogen formed by this pathway (2). However, one-elec-
tron oxidative or reductive activation of carcinogens
involving free radicals and leading to extensive DNA
binding has been proposed by various investigators for
different carcinogens and certain target organs. The
enzyme catalysts involved include peroxidases, pros-
taglandin synthetase and various reductases. In most
nonhepatic tissues, these activities are often much more
active than mixed function oxidase activity. Reviews on
the prostaglandin synthetase catalyzed mechanism have
appeared (3,4). There are also reviews available com-
paring one-electron and two-electron oxidative mecha-
nisms for carcinogenic arylamines (5) and polycyclic ar-
omatic hydrocarbons (6). Reductase catalyzed
activation by the formation of organic and oxygen rad-
P. J. O'BRIEN
icals have also been reviewed (7,8).
Several investigators, however, believe that target
tissues activate the detoxified conjugates released from
the liver and transported in the blood or bile, e.g., by
enzymic hydrolysis (9).
The present paper reviews various studies on DNA
interactions with the free radicals ofoxygen, anticancer
drugs, mutagenic dyes, and a wide range ofcarcinogens.
The reactive radicals can be generated from these com-
pounds by reductive or oxidative metabolism or in some
cases, by reductive or oxidative photoactivation. Oxy-
gen radicals can also be generated by autoxidation of
these radicals or other reduced metabolites. The nature
ofthe DNA products formed and the effects on the DNA
secondary and tertiary structure and consequences on
DNA function are also discussed.
Noncovalent Binding
Many small positively charged molecules interact
with nucleic acids. One general class of compounds
which seem to intercalate between the bases in the dou-
ble helix are those compounds with the structure I,
I
For acridines, X = N, Y = C; for phenazines, X = N,
Y = N; phenothiazines, X = N, Y = S; actinomycin,
X = N, Y = 0. When base specificity is determined
by differential dialysis of DNA bound by a series of
proflavine and acridine orange analogs against DNA
samples of differing G-C content, it is found that G-C
specificity increases as the visible absorbance band of
the chromophore moves to longer wavelength. This im-
plies that as the G-C pair is more polar than A-T, it
should interact more favorably with an easily polarized
chromophore (10).
Other dyes used for staining chromosomes for which
intercalation seems improbable as a result of their non-
coplanar arrangement, include the common triphenyl-
methane dyes such as p-fuchsin, methyl green, crystal
violet, and malachite green as well as the carcinogen
auramine. All of these compounds show pronounced A-
T specificity and bind to the outside of DNA in associ-
ation with the negative phosphate groups (11). They
can be removed from the DNA solutions at high salt
concentration by two or three extractions with isopro-
panol.
Dye molecules ofthe aminoacridine class have frame-
shift mutational activity and the cationic form at a neu-
tral pH form noncovalent complexes with DNA. At low
concentration, the dye intercalates, but at high concen-
trations, binding to the outside of the double helix oc-
curs (12). The intercalating dye can cause frame-shift
mutation in which a base is either inserted or deleted,
resulting in a loss of register for the triplet code. The
N-methylphenazinium cation radical formed by a one-
electron reduction of phenazine methosulfate binds to
the DNA more strongly than the cation and the DNA
stabilizes the cation radical against air oxidation and
increases cation stability (13). The binding of both cat-
ions is reversed by raising the pH or ionic strength or
by the presence of divalent cations. Binding of both
cations also does not occur with single-stranded DNA
(14). Proflavine binds equally well to double-stranded
and single-stranded DNA indicating that ionic attrac-
tion of the phosphates for the cation dye is more im-
portant. However, NMR studies confirm the existence
of 7r-wr stacking between adenine bases and the N-meth-
ylphenazinium cation radical in the intercalation model
(15).
Many antitumor drugs in clinical use may function as
a result of their ability to bind noncovalently to DNA
by intercalation (16). The anthracycline quinone, Adri-
amycin, is used to treat leukemias and solid tumors.
Adriamycin and daunomycin intercalate DNA but favor
G-C base pairs (17). This results in an increase of the
DNA melting point. This stabilization of the DNA dou-
ble helix could inhibit the formation of the single-
stranded templates required by DNA and RNA poly-
merase and explains the inhibition of DNA replication
and RNA transcription. Actinomycin D (containing a
phenoxazone ring and peptide loop) intercalates and
binds tightly to DNA at specific sequences (18) with a
preference for G-C basepairs and causes very strong
inhibition ofpolymerase action, particularly in some re-
gions. By using a dry bound double-stranded plasmid
pBR313 DNA and nick translation from a specific site,
the sites at which bound drug molecules interfere with
DNA polymerase action can be pinpointed. Ethidium
bromide also seems to have a preference for intercalat-
ing G-C basepairs (17,19) but this is not a strict re-
quirement. Distamycin A, with planar pyrrole rings
connected by peptide bonds, preferably binds in A-T
rich regions, probably in the minor groove (17). The
inhibition of polymerase action may also be relevant to
its antitumor action. The affinity ofdiacridines for DNA
are greatly increased if the linker methylene chain is
increased from four to eight carbon atoms, as both ac-
ridines can now intercalate between different pairs of
adjacent DNA bases as measured by the removal and
reversal of the supercoiling of covalently closed DNA.
Much less binding to single-stranded DNA occurs (20).
The phenothiazine derivative, chlorpromazine, is
widely used as a tranquilizer and an antipsychotic drug.
The sulfoxide and the hydroxylated derivatives are the
major in vivo metabolites and are also formed from the
cation radical produced by a one-electron oxidation or
by ultraviolet irradiation (21,22). The cation radical dif-
fers from chlorpromazine in being less folded and car-
rying a positive charge. The aromatic ring systems of
phenothiazine cation radicals are flatter than phenothi-
azines as a result of less folding along the S-N axis of
the ring system (23) and explains the formation of par-
tial intercalation complexes with DNA. Evidence that
intercalation, rather than external binding of DNA is
220
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING
involved in the concomitant increased viscosity and the
requirement for a double helix for stabilization of the
cation radical (24). DNA shields the cation radical from
reacting with peroxidase and nucleophilic buffer con-
stituents. ESR spectral evidence of oriented DNA fi-
bers from DNA solutions spin-labeled with the radical
cation indicate that the DNA helix is perpendicular to
the aromatic molecular plane ofcomplexed cation radical
(25). The radical is highly cytotoxic to Salmonella strains
used for mutagenesis studies. However, evidence ofre-
pairable DNA damage was obtained for E. coli (24).
Bioreductive Activation
Mitomycin C is an anticancer drug that is selectively
toxic to hypoxic tumor cells located in solid tumors that
contain areas of vascular insufficiency. These oxygen-
deficient cells are an obstacle to curative therapy, as
the hypoxic stem cells are relatively resistant to X-
irradiation. Mitomycin C is reduced by nuclear and mi-
crosomal NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase (27) to
a semiquinone radical anion (26). Loss of methanol and
a nucleophilic attack then results in covalent binding to
DNA to form cis and trans monofunctional adducts.
These adducts may then undergo secondary reduction
and condensation reactions to yield bifunctional adducts
which result in DNA crosslinking. The highly reactive
quinone methides may be the alkylating species in-
volved (28). Mitomycin C has also been shown to cause
DNA strand scission in vivo and in vitro. Deoxyribose
degradation readily occurs at even a low concentration
Of 02. Metal chelators markedly inhibited and hydroxyl
radical scavengers partly inhibited. The responsible hy-
droxyl radicals were suggested to arise from a Fenton-
type sequence in which the semiquinone radical reacts
with H202 or reduces the ferric catalyst (29).
Although antitumor anthracycline quinone drugs
could function by noncovalent binding to DNA (16), it
is now widely accepted that radical-mediated DNA
strand breaks are more important in accounting for cell
death. The autoxidizable semiquinone-free radicals may
be forned by microsomal or nuclear cytochrome P-450
reductase (30). Some DNA adduct formation with se-
miquinone radicals have been reported which was sug-
gested to correlate with the ability of Adriamycin to
induce sister chromatid exchanges (31). However, many
fewer strand breaks occurred under nitrogen, indicating
that activated oxygen species were involved.
Both anthracycline quinones (Adriamycin and dau-
nomycin) have a high affinity for Fe3+, and the com-
plexes can undergo a self-reduction involving an intra-
molecuular electron transfer, to form an iron II complex
with the semiquinone radical (32). Superoxide radicals
are then formed by autoxidation ofFe2 , which can form
H202 by dismutation and subsequently form OH by a
Fenton reaction. A species with a similar reactivity to
hydroxyl radicals seem to be responsible for the sub-
sequent degradation of deoxyribose and stimulation of
lipid peroxidation (33). The Adriamycin-Fe3+ complex
binds to DNA and catalyses its oxidative destruction.
Intercalated Adriamycin is not available for iron bind-
ing. In the presence of thiols and 02, the DNA cleaved
(34). Furthermore, it has been found that the DNA-
Adriamycin-Fe3+ ternary complex (unlike the corre-
sponding bleomycin complex) is much more effective
than the Adriamycin-Fe3+ complex in forming hy-
droxyl radicals from H202 (35). They also proposed that
the iron chelation site of Adriamycin is between the
hydroxyl at C1l and the carbonyl at C12. One note of
caution is recent evidence that membrane binding,
rather than DNA changes, is responsible for the ability
ofAdriamycin to kill tumor cells (36). In this connection,
the adriamycin-iron complex can bind to erythrocyte
ghost membranes and in the presence of glutathione
catalyzes the oxidative destruction ofthese membranes
(37). In vivo lipid peroxidation has also been reported
(38). Adriamycin also forms a strong electrostatic com-
plex with cardiolipin, a phospholipid specific for this
inner mitochonodrial membrane. The subsequent mem-
brane lipid peroxidation enables this complex to trans-
port electrons and thereby interfere with normal mi-
tochondrial electron transport (39).
Nitropyrene, nitrofurazone, and carcinogenic nitro-
furans can be reductively activated to form nitrofuran-
DNA adducts (40-42). However, in the case of the car-
cinogen N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide,
the nitro anion free-radical product has been measured,
but was found not to interact with DNA (43). This sug-
gests that the DNA-reactive species is nitroso, nitrox-
ide, or hydroxylamine formed by further reduction.
DNA binding also occurred with the oxygen-insensitive
E. coli reductase, even though no anion radical is
formed. An oxidative activation to a different range of
products with prostaglandin synthetase is also possible
(44).
Adams and Dewey first suggested that other elec-
tron-affinic compounds could mimic the radiosensitizing
effect of oxygen on hypoxic cells. Support for this sug-
gestion is that these sensitizers have no radiation effect
on aerated cells, and the ability to sensitize is closely
correlated with the one-electron reduction potential, a
measure of electron affinity determined by pulse radi-
olysis (45). Some nitroheterocycles, however, may be
ineffective because metabolism reduces the effective
drug concentration too rapidly. Various nitrohetero-
cycles e.g., nitrofurazone, misonidazole, metronidazole
(flagyl) have been shown to increase the sensitivity of
hypoxic tumor cells to ionizing radiation. They are also
useful for their selectivity as cytotoxic agents for hy-
poxic cells. The cytotoxicity seems to involve the de-
pletion of GSH, thembrane damage and DNA damage
resulting in mutational activity. The latter may be im-
portant in explaining their carcinogenic activity. GSH
depletion may be due to GSH adduct fornation with
nitroso compounds formed following reduction. Besides
enhancing the effect of radiation on DNA, the radi-
osensitizers also act by removing GSH, thereby pre-
venting repair processes from operating and thus fur-
ther radiosensitizing hypoxic cells. Metronidazole,
following reduction by microsomal reductases forms ac-
221
P. J. O'BRIEN
tive metabolites which bind to DNA and have mutational
activity. The species involved may originate from hydrox-
ylanino compounds fonned following reduction (46).
Oxygen Radicals
In the interaction ofhydroxyl radicals with DNA, 80%
of the radicals add to the bases and less than 20% ab-
stract an H atom from the sugar moiety (47). The for-
mation of 8-OH-guanine (48) and thymine glycol (49)
could prove to be useful for the determination of hy-
droxyl radical-mediated DNA damage in vivo. It has
also been proposed that OH adds to the double bond
of the nucleic acid base to generate a radical which
reacts with 02 to form a peroxyl radical. The latter
reacts with the sugar base of another nucleotide and
can result in a cleavage of the sugar. The sugar radical
adds oxygen and the products hydrolyze, resulting in a
strand break (50). Cleavage of the sugar also results in
malondialdehyde formation (51) and has been used as a
method for determining hydroxyl radicals in in vitro
systems.
Exposure of DNA to superoxide-generating systems
causes extensive strand breakage and deoxyribose deg-
radation. Hydroxyl radical scavengers markedly pro-
tect (52). Similar results were obtained with rat liver
nuclei incubated with Fe2+/02 and may be relevant to
iron overload toxicity (53). Chromosome damage in
mammalian cells also occurred (54).
The clinical effectiveness of bleomycins, a glycopep-
tide class of antibiotics, against Hodgkins lymphomas
and squamous cell carcinomas and tumors of the testis,
correlates with their capability to degrade DNA. Fe2+
complexes of bleomycin and oxygen readily cleave pBR
322 DNA, preferentially at G-C (5'-3') and G-T (5'-
3') sequences. This specificity may be due to the inter-
action between the bleomycin bithiazole terminal amine
moiety and the DNA guanine base. The metal binding
site is thought to be the imidazole group. For effective
DNA strand scission, the drug must deliver a metal ion
to the site of the DNA helix attacked by the activated
oxygen (55). Bleomycin can also preferentially degrade
the DNA sequences in open chromatin within isolated
nuclei (56). Hydroxyl radical formation has been dem-
onstrated with certain spin traps (57) but it is not clear
whether this radical is responsible for the strand scis-
sion. DNA strand scission seems to occur as a result of
base propenal formation from an unstable 4-hydrope-
roxide formed by a radical abstraction of the hydrogen
from the deoxyribose C4 position. Malondialdehyde is
released in the process (58). The release of free bases,
however, is not due to a radical attack and can result
in strand scission upon alkaline treatment (59).
The formation of active oxygen products such as hy-
droxyl radicals from the reaction of the mitomycin C
semiquinone radical and bleomycin with oxygen may be
responsible for the life-threatening interstitial pulmo-
nary fibrosis in their clinical use (60,61). Myelosuppres-
sion occurs with most anticancer drugs, but not with
bleomycin. Whether hydroxyl radical-induced DNA
strand scission is responsible for the cytotoxicity to-
wards lung cells remains to be determined (62). Simi-
larly, hydroxyl radicals formned by the autoxidation of
the semiquinone radical formed by the reductive acti-
vation of Adriamycin (doxorubicin) may be responsible
for the cardiomyopathy side effect (63,64). Lipid per-
oxidation readily occurs and has been implicated in the
toxicity (33,65). Only after depletion of the mitochon-
drial GSH supply does extensive lipid peroxidation and
damage to the plasma membrane ofthe intact cell occur
(66). The cardiac myocyte may be a target because of
the very low levels of catalase, superoxide dismutase,
and the unusually large number of mitochondria in the
cell. Active oxygen species may also be responsible for
the Adriamycin-induced DNA strand scission found in
tumor cells (30,67).
Adriamycin and daunomycin also degrade deoxyri-
bose when enzymically reduced. Traces of dioxygen and
ferric salts were required for the formation of a species
with reactivity similar to that of a hydroxyl radical. It
is possible an activated oxygen ferrous complex is re-
sponsible (68,69). Lipid peroxidation also occurs (33)
when mitomycin C is enzymically reduced. However,
effective anticancer drugs can act against well oxygen-
ated as well as hypoxic cells in a gland tumor. Surpris-
ingly though, activated oxygen is still formed under
hypoxic conditions (29).
Toxic side effects are also a problem restricting the
clinical use of the radiosensitizer misonidazole in the
treatment of cancer. These include the development of
a peripheral neuropathy and central nervous system
damage. Nitrofurantoin treatment also results in pul-
monary edema and fibrosis. This toxicity appears to be
associated with an oxygen-sensitive reductive metab-
olism ofthe drug. The oxygen-sensitive nitroreductases
reduce these radiosensitizers to nitro-anion free radicals
which are oxidized by 02 back to the radiosensitizer. In
the process, superoxide radicals and H202 are formed
and would also help to deplete GSH in the cell. DNA
single-strand breaks observed with misonidazole in cul-
tured mammalian cells (70) may be due to hydroxyl
radical formation or radicals formed from nitro-anion
free radicals.
Exposure ofisolated rat hepatocytes to 2-methyl-1,4-
naphthoquinone results in intracellular production ofsu-
peroxide, oxidation of glutathione, plasma membrane
bleb formation and loss of cell viability (71). A 27%
increase in the fraction of single-stranded DNA was
observed with 50 ,M menadione. DNA binding, appar-
ently by semiquinone, was also observed. Active oxygen
species are believed to be responsible forthe glutathione
loss and DNA and membrane damage. The DNA strand
breaks were actively repaired. Intracellular DT-dia-
phorase, which catalyzes the two electron reduction of
menadione directly to the hydroquinone, protects the
cells from the toxic effects by competing with the one-
electron reduction pathways. Thus dicumarol, an inhib-
itor of DT diaphorase, markedly enhances cell toxicity
(72).
Active oxygen, such as superoxide and H202, has re-
222
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING
cently been shown to act as a promoter of transfor-
mation in mouse embryo fibroblasts (73) and induce
chromosomal aberrations in human lymphocytes (74).
Preneoplastic tissue is usually attacked by inflammatory
leukocytes. Clastogenic factors are released by these
leukocytes to induce chromosomal damage and interfere
with normal intracellular metabolic cooperation asso-
ciated with tumor promotion (75,76). The clastogenic
factor may consist of free arachidonic acid and arachi-
donic acid hydroperoxides (77). Thus tumor promotion
can be prevented by superoxide dismutase or biomi-
metic analogs (particularly with catalase), antioxidants
or phospholipase inhibitors (73). These inhibitors also
prevent the induction ofornithine decarboxylase in mice
skdn by a tumor promoter (75,78).
Oxidative Activation
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
A one-electron oxidation of polycycic aromatic hy-
drocarbons (PAH) can result in cation radical formation.
The covalent binding of PAH radical cations to nucleo-
philes depends on high localization at the most positive
carbon atom in the radical cation. If the potential is
below 7.35, the PAH binds to DNA, suggesting that
only these PAH are activated by a one-electron oxi-
dation (77). Peroxidase-hydrogen peroxide catalyzes the
formation of a 6-(14C)-methylbenzo(a)pyrene adduct
with DNA. NMR analysis ofthe isolated adduct showed
a covalent bond between the 6-methyl group of the 6-
methylbenzo(a)pyrene andthe2-aminogroupofdeoxy-
guanosine. A similar adduct coeluted with this adduct
in a HPLC profile in an enzymic hydrolyzate of DNA
isolated from the mouse skin 4 hr after a skin application
of 6-(14C)-methylbenzo(a)pyrene to mice. However,
other adducts eluting before this adduct were not iden-
tified. The expected diol-epoxide adduct was not found
(79). It was suggested that the radical cation reacts with
nucleophilic groups of DNA by a prior loss of a methyl
proton and an electron to generate a benzylic carbonium
ion. The 6-methyl derivative was chosen because it spe-
cifically reacts with one-electron oxidants at the 6-
methyl group. Benzo(a)pyrene binding to DNA also oc-
curs during a peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation and the
quinone products found are typical of a one-electron
oxidation (80).
N-Oxidation
Hydrazine derivatives are widely used in medicine
but often have tumorigenic and mutagenic properties.
The nature of the lesions induced in the genetic appa-
ratus is not known. A review on the biochemical toxi-
cology of hydrazines is available (81). The monosubsti-
tuted hydrazines are readily oxidized by
oxyhemoglobin, peroxidase, prostaglandin synthetase
or cytochrome P-450 to carbon-centered radicals which
can inactivate the heme catalyst (82,83). The tumori-
genic hydrazine derivative 2-phenylethylhydrazine,
used as an antidepressant, is readily oxidized with oxy-
hemoglobin by a one-electron oxidation or microsomal
mixed function oxidase mechanism. At the same time,
strand breaks can be induced in supercoiled pBR 322
plasmid DNA, converting it to the open circular form.
Spin trapping was used to show that the carbon radical
yield correlated with the DNA nicking. Interestingly,
oxygen was not required for the nicking, even though
the inactivation of transforming DNA by other mono-
substituted hydrazine derivatives has previously been
ascribed to the active oxygen species formed (84). The
metabolically generated carbon radical is therefore re-
leased from its site of formation and can induce DNA
strand scission (81).
DNA binding readily occurred during the peroxidase-
H202 catalyzed oxidation of the carcinogen aminoflu-
orene, phenylenediamine and benzidine derivatives and
methylaminoazobenzene (85). Radical cations are likely
to be the first formed intermediates, so that it is of
interest to investigate the role of these radicals in the
binding. DNA was found to increase the stability ofthe
radical cation for chlorpromazine, benzidine, or
N,N',N,N'-(CH3)4-benzidine which, presumably, could
reflect a more planar structure, able to intercalate
DNA. The cation radical for durenediamine or phenyl-
enediamine was also stabilized by DNA, although the
cation radical for N,N-dimethylphenylenediamine was
less stable (results not shown).
Aminofluorene is oxidized by a H202-peroxidase re-
action system to a purple intermediate product absorb-
ing at 385 and 615 nm which is relatively stable at pH
5, but decays rapidly at pH 7.4. DNA stimulates the
rate of formation of this intermediate, but inhibits its
decay. At the same time, the intermediate forms a com-
plex with the DNA with absorption maxima at 390 and
660 nm. The purple intermediate has been identified as
2-iminodifluorenylamine (86,87). Thus DNA enhances
the rate ofdimerization ofaminofluorene cation radicals
involved in 2,3-diaminofluorenylamine formation. Sim-
ilar results were obtained with 2,3'-difluorenylamine,
so that it is concluded that the monocation from the
imine forms a complex with DNA. Most of the binding
was non-covalent in nature and was removed by reduc-
tion and ethyl acetate extraction. The rest ofthe dimer
and polymers could be removed with phenol treatment
and protease treatment. However, with 14C-aminoflu-
orene, a small amount of radioactivity (approx. 0.5%)
was covalently bound to the DNA.
At a neutral pH, the aminofluorene cation radical is
probably uncharged, and N-N coupling resulting in azo-
fluorene formation occurs. DNA seems to enhance the
rate of dimerization by the cation radicals and by com-
plexing the imine may hinder polymerization. The poly-
mer is also complexed to the DNA. Thus an ethyl
acetate extract shows much less dimer and polymer
formation in the presence of DNA (86). It is unlikely
that the DNA complexes with oxidation products in-
volve intercalation, as single-stranded DNA is twice as
effective as double-stranded DNA in binding the prod-
ucts (88). The aminofluorene DNA adduct seems to in-
223
P. J. O'BRIEN
volve the guanine base and to a lesser extent adenine
as "4C-aminofluorene binds to polyriboguanylic acid
much more than polyriboadenylic acid. Little binding
occurred to polyribouridylic acid and polyribocytidylic
acid (88). DNA adduct analysis shows a small amount
of C8-guanine adduct, presumably as a result of nitro-
sofluorene fornation, but the major early eluting adduct
is unidentified (89).
Both liver and mammary gland ofthe male and female
rat, respectively, are the sites of carcinogenic action of
N-hydroxy-N-2-fluorenylacetamide (90). A one-electron
oxidation of this carcinogen to the nitroxyl free radical
has been shown on incubating rat mammary gland cells
with arachidonate (91). A similar oxidation occurs with
peroxidase-H202 (92). As mammary gland has very low
levels of cytochrome P-450 (93), it has been suggested
that the active catalysts are lipoxygenase (91) or cy-
tochrome c (93). The nitroxyl free radicals dismutate to
equimolar amounts ofnitrosofluorene and N-acetoxy-N-
2-fluorenylacetamide, and the latter forms a covalent
adduct with nucleic acids when a peroxidase-H202 sys-
tem was used as the one-electron oxidizing system for
forming the nitroxyl free radicals (92). The reactive spe-
cies involved in the peroxidase-H202-catalyzed DNA
binding of N-hydroxy-N-2-fluorenylacetamide are dif-
ferent from that for aminofluorene (88).
Phenylenediamine derivatives are components ofper-
manent and semipermanent hair dye formulations and
synthetic rinses. The peroxidase-H202 system also
readily oxidizesp-phenylenediamine and 2,4-diaminoan-
isole to cation radicals, which are further oxidized or
disproportionate to form a very reactive diamagnetic
benzoquinonediimine. The latter is then oxidized to tri-
mers known as Brandowski's base. DNA binding ac-
companies this oxidation at pH 5 (5). Furthermore,
DNA binding still occurred even ifthe DNA was added
5 min after the reaction was stopped. Hydrogen per-
oxide also greatly enhances the mutagenicity of several
phenylenediamines and has been attributed to the tri-
mer Brandowski's base (94). Brandowski's base was
synthesized from p-phenylenediamine and was found to
bind to DNA to forn a purple complex only after per-
oxidase-H202 catalyzed oxidation. This suggests that
the imine derivatives ofthese trimers bind to DNA (5).
The DNA binding was resistant to extraction with or-
ganic solvents or phenol or protease incubation. How-
ever, enzymic digestion of the bound DNA to nucleo-
tides shows that most of the binding was noncovalent
in nature. Similar results were obtained with 2,4-dia-
minoanisole orp-aminophenol. Again, the DNA binding
was due to complex formation with the imine derivative
of the equivalent Brandowskd's base (5).
The cation radical for p-phenylenediamine (as deter-
mined by ESR) can be stabilized by N-CH3 or O-CH3
substitution (95,96). Thus the radical cations of
N,N' ,N,N'-(CH3)4-p-phenylenediamine (known as
Wurster's Blue) and durenediamine are stable. The rad-
ical cations of the N-CH3 substituted p-phenylenedi-
amine exist as stable paramagnetic salts. Durenedi-
amine andN,N-(CH3)2-p-phenylenediamine did not bind
to DNA after a peroxidase-H202 catalyzed activation.
DNA also had no effect on the N-demethylation ofN,N-
(CH3)2-p-phenylenediamine as measured by HCHO for-
mation or cation radical (Wurster's Red) formation. Ca-
tion radical decay, however, was enhanced by DNA.
N,N',N,N'-(CH3)4-benzidine was much less effective
than benzidine in binding to DNA after a peroxidase-
H202 catalyzed activation. The binding was found to
occur following N-demethylation. Phenol conjugate for-
mation also occurred following N-demethylation to
N,N-(CH3)2-benzidine (97).
Benzidine and benzidine congener-based dyes are
widely used in dye manufacturing, textile dyeing, paper
printing and leather industries (98). The incidence of
urinary bladder cancer is also elevated among industrial
workers exposed to benzidine-based dyes. Of concern
to the public is that mutagens and monoacetyl benzidine
appear in the urine ofrats or humans treated with ben-
zidine congener-based azodyes (99). DNA-bound ben-
zidine metabolites were also found in the livers of rats
(100). Anaerobic intestinal bacteria are probably largely
responsible for the azoreduction of these dyes and but
liver azoreductases could be involved in the liver car-
cinogenicity (101).
In a comparison of a wide range of various phenols
and arylamines in a peroxidase-H202 reaction mixture,
the most extensive DNA binding occurred with benzi-
dine (85). Similar results were found in another system,
i.e., prostaglandin synthetase-arachidonate (102). Blad-
der transitional epithelial microsomes from dog, on ad-
dition ofarachidonate, also catalyzed the bindingofben-
zidine or o-dianisidine to DNA (103). The nature of the
oxidation products including the first formed cation rad-
ical in a peroxidase-H202 catalyzed oxidation has been
reviewed (104). The effects of DNA (105) on this re-
action sequence are as follows. DNA does not affect the
conversion of benzidine to radical cation but slows the
rate of formation of quinonediimine from benzidine ca-
tion radical. DNA forms a complex with the quinone-
diimine of 3,3',5,5'-(CH3)4-benzidine, 3,3'-(CH3)2-ben-
zidine or 3,3'-(OCH3)2-benzidine. This DNA interaction
results in a spectral shift of the absorbance maxima of
the quinonediimine of 6-12 nm to a longer wavelength.
No complex is formed with single-stranded DNA. This
suggests that the quinonediimine is planar and inter-
calates the base pairs. An electrostatic interaction be-
tween the monoprotonated diimine and the negative
charge on the sugar phosphate groups may also be in-
volved.
In the case of benzidine and 3,3'-(CH3)2-benzidine,
DNA catalyzes a rapid decay of synthesized quinone-
diimine. At pH 6.5, azo compounds and polymer are the
products but are bound to the DNA and cannot be ex-
tracted with ethyl acetate (85). At pH 5, a stable charge
transfer complex and polymer bind to the DNA. The
DNA therefore accelerates the conversion of quinone-
diimine to azo and polymer compounds. With single-
stranded DNA and polyribonucleotides, no bound
charge-transfer complex was formed although quino-
nediimine decay was accelerated. This suggests that the
224
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING
intercalated diimine can form a charge-transfer com-
plex. The reaction mixture containing DNA forms a
thick gel if the DNA is at a concentration of 1 mg/mL
which could also explain the stability of the charge-
transfer complex.
MgCl2 could prevent the enhanced quinonediimine de-
cay by DNA suggesting that the negative phosphate
groups of the DNA were involved. Up to 97% of the
benzidine binds to the DNA following a peroxidase-cat-
alyzed oxidation. The bound benzidine is not removed
by butanol extraction, by phenol treatment, or pronase
digestion. However, acid digestion releases the bound
benzidine as polymeric material. Most of the bound
DNA resists enzymic digestion by DNAase, phospho-
diesterase, or alkaline phosphatase. Of the nucleotide:
benzidine adducts, 7% extract into n-butanol. Separation
of the adducts on HPLC showed that the major adduct
(82% of the radioactivity) had a UV spectra with an
absorbance maxima at 295 nm and a shoulder at 265
nm. The adduct was also degraded by 70°C for 1 hr or
on adjusting the pH to 1 resulting in its conversion to
an adduct having a maximal absorbance at 255 nm (85).
These properties were similar to those reported for the
N-acetylbenzidine adduct formed in rat liver in vivo
(105), suggesting that the adduct is N-(deoxyguanosin-
8-yl)-benzidine.
Recently, a N-acetylcysteine conjugate has been iso-
lated from a peroxidase-H202-benzidine-N-acetyl-
cysteinereactionmixtureandalsoidentifiedas3-(N-acet-
ylcysteine-S-yl)-benzidine (106). An analogous GSH
conjugate has also been isolated from a prostaglandin
H synthase-arachnidonate-benzidine-GSH reaction
mixture (107). The DNA adducts isolated from the dog
bladder after the in vivo 14C-benzidine administration
was 10% N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)[N'-acetylbenzidine
but the rest was unidentified. In dog liver, less than 1%
of the adducts were identified as this adduct (108). Re-
cently, the N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-benzidine has been
identified as the major adduct isolated from the dog
bladder. A similar adduct was found when benzidine-
diimine was reacted with DNA (109).
A comparison of the various benzidine derivatives
show that all of them bind to the DNA except 3,3',5,5'-
(CH3)4-benzidine (110,111). This suggests that an un-
substituted ortho position is required for binding. This
derivative is also noncarcinogenic in short-term tests
(112), and azo dyes have recently been prepared for this
derivative with the hope ofmaking noncarcinogenic azo
dyes available (113).
The above results also suggest that the major part of
the binding may involve very tightly bound benzidine
"melanin" which prevents enzymic digestion. Benzidine
bound polyriboguanylic acid also resisted ribonuclease
digestion. This suggests that such binding in vivo would
not be repairable and should be highly cytotoxic.
When covalently closed circular plasmid DNA pBR
322 is reacted with the benzidine oxidation products and
subjected to gel electrophoresis, the bound DNA did
not migrate or enter the gel. This suggests extensive
crosslinking as the reaction conditions did not involve
gel formation, and intercalation seems unlikely, as the
DNA still stained with ethidium bromide. Crosslinking
was suggested to involve the benzidine diimine acting
as a bifunctional alkylating agent (85).
N,N-Dimethyl-4-aminoazobenzene (DAB) is a well
known liver carcinogen in rats and induces bladder tu-
mors in dogs. Nonextractable DNA binding occurs dur-
ing the N-dealkylation catalyzed by a peroxidase-H202
system. Methyl-4-aminoazobenzene (MAB) bound more
effectively. Bladder microsomes and arachidonate also
catalyzed this DNA binding. This was prevented by the
prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor indomethacin (114).
Lipid peroxides in the presence of heme also catalyzed
the N-dealkylation ofDAB, and in the presence ofGSH,
the GSH conjugate GS-CH2-aminoazobenzene was iso-
lated (86). This conjugate was also isolated from a re-
action mixture of peroxidase-H202-MAB. When DAB
is given in uninduced rats, the GS-CH2-aminoazoben-
zene forms the major biliary metabolites. Indeed GSH
depletion in vivo markedly decreased the biliary excre-
tion 1 (115). It is believed that this GSH conjugate is
formed during N-demethylation ofMAB by cytochrome
P-450-dependent mixed-function oxidase. It is interest-
ing that the same conjugate may also be formed by one-
electron oxidative systems involving free radicals.
The main products formed by the peroxidase cata-
lyzed oxidation of MAB at a neutral pH were identified
as dimers formed by N-N coupling whereas at pH 5, N-
C coupling predominated. The DNA binding was no-
nextractable and up to 5% of the MAB could be bound.
However, the binding was noncovalent and enzymic
digestion was required to release the radioactivity. A
spectral analysis of the MAB bound DNA showed that
the binding species was a dimer or polymer.
Many carcinogenic or genotoxic arylamines, e.g., 4-
aminobiphenyl, 2-aminofluorene and benzidine or phen-
ylenediamine derivatives are N-acetylated by the liver
in many species in vivo. Little N-acetylation, however,
occurs in the dog. Furthermore, the target organ in
rodent species is the liver but in the dog, it is the blad-
der. N-acetylated arylamine:DNA adducts are among
the DNA adducts isolated from rodent liver after the
in vivo administration ofthese carcinogenic arylamines.
By contrast, the adducts isolated from rodent nonhe-
patic tissues or dog liver were not acetylated (5). This
suggests that the N-acetylated adducts may play a role
in liver cancer. We have shown that N-acetylation of
these arylamines prevents their oxidation by various
one-electron oxidizing systems and enhances their rate
of N-hydroxylation by liver cytochrome P-450-depen-
dent mixed-function oxidase. However, in the presence
ofliver microsomes or esterase, the N-acetylarylamines
are readily oxidized by one-electron oxidizing systems
and that paraoxon completely prevents this oxidation
to DNA reactive species. Clearly microsomal deacety-
lase activity is involved in this activation (88,116). The
acetylase activity versus the deacetylase activity of a
tissue may therefore be as important as the "peroxi-
dase" activity versus the mixed-function oxidase activ-
ity in deciding whether free radicals are involved in the
activation ofthese arylamines by various target tissues.
Thus, the Zymbal gland may be an important target
225
P. J. O'BRIEN
organ because of its high deacetylase activity and per-
oxidase activity (88).
Phenols
Diethylstilbestrol induces genital tract tumors in
young women whose mothers were treated with this
synthetic estrogen during gestation. It is also carcino-
genic in rodents. The hornonal activity ofthis estrogen
is not sufficient to explain its tumorgenicity (117,118).
The uterus has an estrogen-inducible peroxidase and
prostaglandin synthetase activity (but no mixed-func-
tion oxidase activity) and peroxidative metabolism re-
sults in DNA binding (119,120) and genotoxic effects
not including bacterial mutagenicity (121). In a recent
study of various analogs, it was concluded that only
those able to form phenoxy radicals bound and that the
stilbene moiety was not required (122). The phenoxy
radical (diethylstilbestrol-4',4"-semiquinone) is an in-
termediate for the formation of 4',4"-quinone which in
protic solvents is converted to dienestrol. This conver-
sion also occurs in vivo (121). It has been shown that
DNA catalyzes the conversion of quinone to dienestrol
and that in the process, the quinone binds to calfthymus
DNA. The binding decreases with increasing reaction
time (123). The bound diethylstilbestrol cannot be re-
moved, but no bound nucleotides were found on enzymic
digestion which indicates that the binding is noncovalent
(unpublished data).
A chronic exposure of benzene produces hemopoietic
toxicity and in severe cases results in aplastic anemia.
It has also been implicated as a leukemogen (124). Ben-
zene requires metabolic activation to produce its tox-
icity and a metabolite ofphenol, not benzene oxide, was
responsible for the majority ofin vitro covalent binding
to microsomal protein (125). Recently, we have shown
that a peroxidase found in bone marrow oxidizes 14C-
phenol to various dimers and polymers via phenoxy rad-
icals and in the process, up to 50% of the radioactivity
bound to DNA (126). No catechol or hydroquinone was
formed. No DNA binding occurred with the microsomal
mixed-function oxidase with phenol, hydroquinone or
catechol although protein binding did occur. Phenol was
metabolized to hydroquinone and catechol in this system
(127). Binding to mitochondrial DNA in rabbit bone
marrow incubated with 14C-benzene has also been re-
ported recently (128). The nature ofthe reactive species
formed from phenoxy radicals that bound to DNA was
found to be a polymer of 5 phenol residues formed in
the reaction mixture from o,o-biphenoxy and phenoxy
radicals. Most of the binding was non-extractable but
noncovalent as enzymic digestion released the radio-
activity (129).
Ellipticine has been found to be an effective drug
against murine leukemia L210 and several solid tumors.
The mechanism seems to involve a metabolic conversion
to the 9-hydroxy derivative which can intercalate DNA
or undergo a one-electron oxidative activation to au-
toxidisable quinoneimine radicals which can bind to or
damage DNA or bind covalently to protein (130,131).
The anticancer drug etoposide (VP-16) has been shown
to form a phenoxy radical on oxidation by a peroxidase-
H202 -system. This radical has been implicated in the
DNA-breakage and cytotoxicity (132).
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
Carcinogenesis induced by chlorinated hydrocarbons,
hydrazines, hypolipidemic drugs or choline-methionine
deficiency is associated with in vivo lipid peroxidation
(133). In the case of chlorinated hydrocarbons or hy-
drazines, various radical or electrophilic metabolites
could also be responsible for initiating the carcinogen-
esis. The induction of peroxisomes by hypolipidemic
drugs suggests that H202 could also be involved in the
initiation (134). However, the only initiating species re-
ported for the induction of liver cancer by a choline-
methionine-deficient diet (in the absence ofadded chem-
ical carcinogens) may be formed as a result of the as-
sociated lipid peroxidation in the nuclei (135,136).
Various studies have appeared on the modification of
DNA by lipid peroxidation. DNA isolated from a ves-
icular gland microsome-14C-arachidonate reaction mix-
ture was found to be irreversibly bound with 14C-ar-
achidonate oxidation products. Furthermore, DNA
isolated from a peroxidizing arachidonate reaction mix-
ture containing microsomes from lung, kidney, plate-
lets, brain and testes was found to fluoresce with Eexcit
at 350 nm and Eem at 430 nm. Prostaglandin synthetase
appeared to be the catalyst as indomethacin prevented
this (137). The similarity of this fluorescence to lipofus-
cin and to DNA reacted with a malondialdehyde, a
breakdown product of lipid peroxides, (138) suggests
that aldehyde decomposition products may react with
the amine groups of nucleic acid bases to form fluores-
cent Schiff bases. DNA reacted with malondialdehyde
at pH 4.2 or temperatures exceeding 60°C results in a
loss of template activity and decreased hyperchromic-
ity, probably as aresult ofinterstrand crosslinking. This
has recently been demonstrated in liver and testes nu-
clei isolated after feeding 1,3-propanediol to rats sug-
gesting that the crosslinking is not repairable in vivo
(139). The crosslinking seems to involve interstrand
guanine-cytosine bases in the interior of DNA rather
than paired bases which could explain why they may
not easily be recognized by a repair system. Enzymic
digestion by the DNA, however, failed to release flu-
orescent nucleotide adducts. Malondialdehyde also
crosslinked DNA to histones (138). However, the mu-
tagenicity of malondialdehyde is probably due to DNA
adduct formation rather than interstrand crosslinking
or polymerization (140).
Incubation of linoleic acid hydroperoxide with super-
coiled pBR 322 plasmid resulted in nicking ofthe DNA.
The site of cleavage was determined by DNA sequence
analysis using 3'-end and 5'-end-labeled DNA frag-
ments as substrates. Cleavage occurred at the position
ofguanine nucleotide (141), presumably following a per-
oxy radical attack ofthe purine ring. Single-strand DNA
breaks can also be produced in isolated rat liver nuclei
226
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING
with organic peroxy radicals (142). ESR evidence by
other investigators indicates that a guanine radical is
formed which is stabilized in the DNA. Polyriboguanylic
acid, but not other polyribonucleotides, gave a similar
signal (143). The energy of the highest occupied molec-
ular orbital of guanine is the highest and thus the most
easily oxidized of the nucleic acid bases (144).
Oxidative Activation in Intact Cells
The polymorphonuclearleukocyte has apowerful oxy-
gen activation mechanism used to carry out its bacte-
ricidal function. Phagocytosis or interaction of the
plasma membrane with a variety of stimulatory agents
(including the tumor promoter phorbol myristate ace-
tate) results in a greatly increased cyanide respiration
leading to the production of activated oxygen species.
We have shown that 14C-phenol, benzidine, N-methyl-
aminoazobenzene, and aminofluorene incubated with
leukocytes are co-oxidized and bind irreversibly to leu-
kocyte nuclear DNA only ifthe leukocytes are activated
(85,149,150). The binding was dependent on oxygen and
was decreased by sulfhydryl inhibitors and phenolic an-
tioxidants that inhibit the respiratory burst triggered
by the phorbol myristate. Both the binding and the
respiratory burst were increased by low concentrations
ofazide, presumably as a result ofenhanced H202 levels
due to intracellular catalase inhibition. However, higher
azide and cyanide concentrations prevented binding
without affecting the respiratory burst, indicating that
myeloperoxidase is a catalyst for the binding. Granules
from the activated leukocytes or myeloperoxidase also
catalyzed extensive binding to calf thymus DNA with
H202 and had a similar sensitivity to cyanide as the
leukocytes. A 20- to 40-fold higher level of binding was
found, indicating that proteins and hydrogen donors
protect the nuclear DNA in the intact cell (150). A leu-
kocyte-catalyzed activation of carcinogens may play a
role in explaining the enhanced incidence of cancer as-
sociated with chronic inflammatory states. Further-
more, these cells or precursor cells found in bone mar-
row may play a role in benzene-induced leukemia as a
result of activation of the phenol metabolite.
ofazide, presumably as a result ofenhanced H202 levels
due to intracellular catalase inhibition. However, higher
azide and cyanide concentrations prevented binding
without affecting the respiratory burst, indicating that
myeloperoxidase is a catalyst for the binding. Granules
from the activated leukocytes or myeloperoxidase also
catalyzed extensive binding to calf thymus DNA with
H202 and had a similar sensitivity to cyanide as the
leukocytes. A 20- to 40-fold higher level of binding was
found, indicating that proteins and hydrogen donors
protect the nuclear DNA in the intact cell (150). A leu-
kocyte-catalyzed activation of carcinogens may play a
role in explaining the enhanced incidence of cancer as-
sociated with chronic inflammatory states. Further-
more, these cells or precursor cells found in bone mar-
row may play a role in benzene-induced leukemia as a
result of activation of the phenol metabolite.
Photoactivation
Photodermatological toxic reactions can often occur
within a few hours oftaking certain drugs. Photoallergic
reactions involving an immunological mechanism is
often involved resulting in eczema or bullous eruptions.
These drugs include the tranqulllizer phenothiazines
(e.g., chlorpromazine and promazine); the antihistamine
phenothiazines (e.g., promethazine); the antibiotic te-
tracycline, and anticancer anthracycines. The reactive
species formed that bind to macromolecules or cause
membrane damage often include organic radicals or hy-
droxyl radicals.
Promazine photoexitation results in the formation of
cation and hydroxy radicals which cause DNA single-
strand breaks but do not photobind (151). The hydroxy
radical is suggested to be formed by a Haber-Weiss
reaction from superoxide formed by a reaction between
molecular oxygen and the photoejected electrons. Pho-
toexcited chlorpromazine rapidly undergoes photodech-
lorination, yielding chlorine and promazynyl radicals
which photobind to the guanine of DNA (152). Chlor-
promazine complexed with DNA photobinds much less
readily (152). The anthracycine antitumor agent, dau-
nomycin, can produce photodermatological side effects
including contact dermatitis and severe skin damage.
Photosensitized daunomycin can result in hydroxyl rad-
ical mediated DNA strand breaks (153).
Light and acridine orange induce the formation of
peroxide radicals in DNA (154). It is believed that the
excited dye triplet state reacts with thymine to form
anion radicals and with guanine to form cation radicals.
Photosensitized guanine modification and hydroxyl rad-
ical mediated DNA strand breakage with proflavine has
been reported (155). Base substituted mutations are
also formed rather than the frame-shift mutations
formed in the dark (156).
A mixture of hematoporphyrin derivatives, when
given intravenously, is retained selectively in malignant
tumor and tumor necrosis occurs when red light is then
applied to the tumor (157). This method is now used in
the treatment of various cutaneous and cancers of the
bladder, bronchii, and gynecological organs. Guanine
residues of DNA are modified by the singlet oxygen or
hydroxyl radicals formed. Hydroxyl radical formation
in cellular species has been detected by 5,6-dihydroxy-
dihydrothimine formation and spin adduct formation
(158).
Blood transfusion can result in the transmission of
Chagas disease and the triarylmethane dye, gentian vi-
olet (crystal violet) is widely used by blood banks in
attempts to eliminate this. Gentian violet is also used
for the control of fungal and intestinal parasites in hu-
mans. Visible light also catalyzes the trypanocidal ef-
fects of the triarylmethane dye, gentian violet (159).
Light acts by catalyzing the reductive activation by a
hydrogen donor to a carbon-centered free radical as
demonstrated by ESR. Genetic toxicity was also en-
hanced (160).
2227
228 P. J. O'BRIEN
Conclusion
Free-radical metabolites can be generated metaboli-
cally by a one-electron reductase-catalyzed reduction or
a "peroxidase" catalyzed oxidation orby photoactivation
of a wide variety of aromatic xenobiotics. Radicals may
also be generated during lipid peroxidation. Some rad-
icals can react with DNA directly and probably result
in guanine radical formation. Other radicals may inter-
calate DNA or bind covalently or noncovalently as a
dismutation product or as a dimer, trimer or polymeric
product. Modification to the DNA can result in single-
strand breaks, loss of template activity, and crosslink-
ing. The binding can prevent enzymic digestion. In some
cases, the radicals react with oxygen, resulting initially
in its reduction to superoxide anion radical before con-
version to DNA reactive oxygen species. Most radicals
probably do not interact with DNA.
The author's research has been supported by the National Cancer
Institute of Canada and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. I thank Cindy O'Brien for careful manuscript
preparation.
REFERENCES
1. Myers, L. S. Free radical damages of nucleic acids and their
components. Free Radicals in Biology, Vol. IV (W.A. Pryor,
Ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1982, pp. 95-115.
2. 2.Miller, E. C., and Miller, J. A. Mechanisms of chemical car-
cinogenesis. Cancer 47: 1055-1056 (1982).
3. Eling, T., Boyd, J., Reed, G., Mason, R., and Sivarajah, K.
Xenobiotic metabolism by prostaglandin endoperoxide synthe-
tase. Drug Metab. Rev. 14: 1023-1053 (1983).
4. Marnett, L. J. Hydroperoxide-dependent oxidations during
prostaglandin biosynthesis. In: Free Radicals in Biology, Vol.
VI (W. A. Pryor, Ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1984, pp.
64-95.
5. O'Brien, P. J. Multiple mechanisms for the metabolic activation
of carcinogenic arylamines. In: Free Radicals in Biology, Vol.
VI (W. A. Pryor, Ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1984, pp.
289-324.
6. Cavalieri, E. L., and Rogan, E. G. One-electron and two-elec-
tron oxidation in aromatic hydrocarbon carcinogenesis. In: Free
Radicals in Biology, Vol. VI (W. A. Pryor, Ed.), Academic
Press, New York, 1984, pp. 324-370.
7. Mason, R. P. Free-radical intermediates in the metabolism of
toxic chemicals. In: Free Radicals in Biology, Vol. V (W. A.
Pryor, Ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1982, pp. 161-222.
8. Biaglow, J. G., Vames, M. E., Koch, C. J., and Sridhar, R. The
metabolic activation ofcarcinogenic nitro compounds to oxygen-
reactive internediates. In: Free Radicals and Cancer (R. A.
Floyd, Ed.), Marcel Dekker, New York, 1982, pp. 441-452.
9. Kadlubar, F. F., Miller, J. A., and Miller, E. C. Hepatic mi-
crosomal N-glucuronidation and nucleic acid binding of N-hy-
droxy-arylamines in relation to urinary bladder carcinogenesis.
Cancer Res. 37: 805-814 (1977).
10. Muller, W., and Crothers, D. M. Interactions ofheteroaromatic
compounds with nucleic acids. 1: The influence of heteroatoms
and polarizability on the base specificity ofintercalating ligands.
Eur. J. Biochem. 54: 267-277 (1975).
11. Muller, W., and Gautier, F. Interactions ofheteroaromatic com-
pounds with nucleic acids: A:T specific non-intercalating DNA
ligands. Eur. J. Biochem. 54: 385-394 (1975).
12. Blake, A., and Peacocke, A. R. The interaction ofaminoacridines
with nucleic acids. Biopolymers 6: 1225-1253 (1968).
13. Akasaka, K., and Dearman, H. H. Charge effect on the inter-
action of free radicals from phenazine methosulfate with DNA.
Biochemistry 10: 178-185 (1971).
14. Ishizu, K., Dearman, H. H., Huang, M. T., and White, J. R.
Interaction of the 5-methylphenazinium cation radical with
DNA. Biochemistry 8: 1238-1246 (1969).
15. Nosaka, Y., Akasaka, K., and Hatano, H. Determination of
structures of molecular complex in solution using unpaired elec-
tron induced nuclear magnetic relaxation. Application to adenine
5'-monophosphate and N-methylphenazinium cation radical. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 100: 706-713 (1978).
16. Waring, M. J. DNA modification and cancer. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 50: 159-192 (1981).
17. Robie, M., and Wilkins, R. J. Identification of the specific sites
of interaction between intercalating drugs and DNA. Chem.-
Biol. Interact. 49: 189-208 (1984).
18. Wilkins, R. J. Selective binding ofactinomycin D and distamycin
A to DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 10: 7273-7282 (1982)
19. Chaires, J. B., Dattagupta, N., and Crothers, D. M. Studies on
interaction of anthracycline antibiotics and DNA: equilibrium
studies on interaction of daunomycin with DNA. Biochemistry
21: 3933-3940 (1982).
20. Le Pecq, J. B., Lebret, M., Barbet, J., and Roques, B. DNA
polyintercalating drugs: DNA binding of diacridine derivatives.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 72: 2915-2919 (1975).
21. Sackett, P. H., Mayansky, J. S., Smith, T., Kalus, S. and
McGreery, R. L. Side-chain effects on phenothiazine cation rad-
ical reactives. J. Med. Chem. 24: 1342-1347 (1981).
22. Saucin, M. Mechanisms of photosensitisation of phenothiazine
derivatives. Arch. Int. Phys. Biochem. 87: 1051-1052 (1979).
23. Hester, R. E., and Williams K. P. J. Free radical studies by
resonance Raman spectroscopy. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin II, 1981,
852-858.
24. Demol, N. J., Posthuma, R. M., and Mohn, G. R. Induction of
repairable DNA damage in Escheria Coli and interaction with
DNA in vitro by the radical cation of chlorpromazine. Chem.-
Biol. Interact. 47: 223-237 (1983).
25. Porumb, T., and Slade, E. F. Electron-spin-resonance studies
of a chlorpromazine derivative bond to DNA fibres. Eur. J.
Biochem. 65: 21-24 (1976).
26. Pan, S., Andrews, P. A., Glover, C. J., and Bachur, N. R.
Reductive activation of mitomycin C and mitomycin C metab-
olites catalysed by NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase and
xanthine oxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 959-966 (1984).
27. Kennedy, K., Sligar, S. G., Polomski, L., and Sartorelli, A. C.
Metabolic activation of mitomycin C by liver microsomes and
nuclei. Biochem. Pharmacol. 31: 2011-2016 (1982).
28. Antonini, I., Tai-Shun, L., Cosby, L. A., Yao-Ren, D. and Sar-
torelli, A. C. Methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone derivatives as poten-
tial bioreductive alkylating agents. J. Med. Chem. 25: 730-735
(1982).
29. Gutteridge, J. C., Quinlan, G. J., and Wilkins, S. Mitomycin C
- induced deoxyribose degradation inhibited by superoxide dis-
mutase. FEBS Letters 167: 37-41 (1984).
30. Berlin, V., and Haseltine, W. A. Reduction of adriamycin to a
semiquinone-free radical by NADPH cytochrome P-450 reduc-
tase produces DNA cleavage in a reaction mediated by molecular
oxygen. J. Biol. Chem. 256: 474-482 (1981).
31. Sinha, B. K., and Gregory, J. L. Role of one-electron and two-
electron reduction products of Adriamycin and daunomycin in
deoxyribonucleic acid binding. Biochem. Pharmacol. 30: 2626-
2629 (1981).
32. Sugioka, K., and Nakana, M. Mechanisms of phospholipid per-
oxidation induced by ferric ion-ADP-Adriamycin-coordination
complex. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 713: 333-343 (1982).
33. Gutteridge, J. M. C. Lipid peroxidation and possible hydroxyl
radical formation stimulated by the self-reduction of a doxorub-
icin-iron (III) complex. Biochem. Pharmacol. 33: 1725-1728
(1984).
34. Eliot, H., Gianni, L., and Myers, C. Oxidative destruction of
DNA by the Adriamycin-ion complex. Biochemistry 23: 928-936
(1984).
35. Mundi, J. R. F., Sinha, B. K., Gianni, L., and Myers, C. E.
Hydroxyl radical production and DNA damage induced by an-
thracycline-iron complex. FEBS Letters 172: 226-230 (1984).
36. Tritton, T. R., and Yee, G. The anticancer agent adriamycin can
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING 229
be actively cytotoxic without entering cells. Science 217: 248-
250 (1982).
37. Myers, C. E., Gianni, L., Simone, C. B., Klecker, R., and Green,
R. Oxidative destruction of erythrocyte ghost membranes cat-
alyzed by the doxorubicin-iron complex. Biochemistry 21: 1707-
1713 (1982).
38. Tanizawa, H., Sazuka, Y., and Takino, Y. Change of lipid per-
oxide levels in mouse organs after Adriamycin treatment. Chem.
Pharm. Bull. 31: 1714-1718 (1983).
39. Pollakis, G., Goormaghtigh, E., and Ruysschaert, J. M. Role of
the quinone structure in the mitochondrial damage induced by
antitumor anthracyclines. FEBS Letters 155: 267-272 (1983).
40. Tatsumi, K., Kitamura, S., and Yoshimura, H. Binding of ni-
trofuran derivatives to nucleic acids and protein. Chem. Pharm.
Bull. (Tokyo) 25: 2948-2952 (1977).
41. Swaminathan, S., Lower, G. M., and Bryan, T. T. Nitrored-
uctase-mediated metabolic activation of2-amino-4-(S-nitro-2-fu-
ryl)thiazole and binding to nucleic acids and proteins. Cancer
Res. 42: 4479-4484 (1982).
42. Howard, P. C., and Beland, F. A. Xanthine oxidase catalysed
binding of 1-nitropyrene to DNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 104: 727-732 (1981).
43. Polnaszek, C. F., Peterson, F. J., Holtzman, J. L., and Mason,
R. P. No detectable reaction of the anion radical metabolite of
nitrofurans with GSH or macromolecules. Chem. Biol. Interact.
51: 265-272 (1984).
44. Zenser, T. V., Pamier, M. O., Mattammal, M. B., Bolla, R. I.,
and Davis, B. B. Comparitive effects ofprotaglandin H synthase
catalyzed binding of two 5-nitrofuran urinary bladder carcino-
gen. J. Pharmacol. Explt. Therap. 227: 139-143 (1983).
45. Adams, G. E., and Jameson, D. Mechanism of radiosensitiser
action. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 17: 95-106 (1980).
46. LaRusso, N. F., Tomasz, M., Muller, M., and Lipman, R. In-
teraction ofmetronidazole with nucleic acids in vitro. Mol. Phar-
macol. 13: 872-882 (1977).
47. Scholes, G., Willson, R. L., and Ebert, M. Pulse radiolysis of
aqueous solutions of deoxyribonucleotides and of DNA: reaction
with hydroxyl-radicals. Chemical Soc. J. Sect. D: 17-18 (1969).
48. Kasai, H., and Nishimura, S. Hydroxylation of deoxyguanonine
at the C-8 positon by ascorbic acid and other reducing agents.
Nucleic Acids Res. 12: 2137-2145 (1984)
49. Demple, B., and Linn, S. 5,6-Saturated thymnine lesion in DNA:
production by UV or H202. Nucleic Acids Res. 10: 3781-3789
(1982).
50. Schulte-Forhlinde, D., and Bothe, E. Identification of a major
pathway of strand break formation in poly induced by OH rad-
icals in presence ofoxygen. Z. Naturforsch. 39c: 315-319 (1984).
51. Halliwell, B., and Gutteridge, J. M. C. Formation of a thiob-
arbituricacid-reactive substance from deoxyribose in the pres-
ence of iron salts. FEBS Letters 128: 347-352 (1981).
52. Brown, K., and Fridovich, I. DNA strand scission by enzymi-
cally generated oxygen radicals. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 206:
414-419 (1981).
53. Shires, T. K. Iron-induced DNA damage and synthesis in iso-
lated rat liver nuclei. Biochem. J. 205: 321-329 (1982).
54. Weitberg, A. B., Weitzman, S. A., Destrempes, M., Lath, S.
A., and Stossel, T. P. Stimulated human phagocytes produce
cytogenetic changes in cultured mammalian cells. New Engl. J.
Med. 308: 26-30 (1983).
55. Umezawa, H., Takita, T., Suguira, Y., Otsuka, M., Kobayashi,
S., and Ohno, M. DNA-bleomycin interaction. Nucleotide se-
quence-specific binding and cleavage ofDNA by bleomycin. Tet-
rahedron 40: 501-509 (1984).
56. Kuo, M. Preferential damage of active chromatin by bleomycin.
Cancer Res. 41: 2439-2443 (1981).
57. Oberley, L. W., and Buettner, G. R. The production ofhydroxyl
radicals by bleomycin and iron (II). FEBS Letters 97: 47-49
(1979).
58. Burger, R. M., Berkowitz, A. R., Reisach, J., and Homitz, S.
B. Origin of malondialdehyde from DNA degraded by Fe(II)-
Bleomycin. J. Biol. Chem. 255: 11832-11838 (1980).
59. Lu, J. C., Kozarich, J. W., and Stubbe, J. The mechanism of
free-base formation of DNA by bleomycin. J. Biol. Chem. 258:
4694-4697 (1983).
60. Komujama, T., Kikuchi, T., and Sugiura, Y. Generation of hy-
droxyl radical by anticancer quinone drugs, carbazilquinone, mi-
tomycin C, aclarinomycin A and adriamycin, in the presence of
NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase. Biochem. Pharmacol. 31:
3651-3656 (1982).
61. Ozols, R. F., Hogan, W. M., Ostechega, Y., and Young, R. C.
Mitomycin, vinblastine and progesterone: a second line regimen
in ovarian cancer with a high incidence of pulmonary toxicity.
Cancer Treat. Repts. 67: 721-722 (1983).
62. Trush, M. A., Minnaugh, E. C., Ginsburg, E., and Gram, T. E.
Studies on the interaction of bleomycin A2 with rat lung micro-
somes. J. Pharmacol. Exptl. Therap. 221: 159-165 (1982).
63. Lown, J. W., Sim, S. K., Majumdar, K. C., and Chang, R. Y.
Strand scission of DNA by bound Adriamycin and daunonibicin
in the presence of reducing agents. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 76: 705-710 (1977).
64. Bachur, N. R., Gordon, S. L., and Gee, M. A general mechanism
for microsomal activation of quinone anticancer agents to free
radicals. Cancer Res. 38: 1745-1755 (1978).
65. Mimnaugh, E. G., Trush, M. A., and Gram, T. E. Stimulation
by adrianmycin of rat heart and liver microsomal NADPH-de-
pendent lipid peroxidation. Biochem. Pharmacol. 30: 2797-2804
(1981).
66. Meredith, M. J., and Reed, D. J. Depletion in vitro of mito-
chondrial glutathione in rat hepatocytes and enhancement of
lipid peroxidation by Adriamycin and 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-
nitrosourea (BGNU). Biochem. Pharmacol. 32: 1383-1388
(1983).
67. Sinka, B. K., and Chignell, C. F. Binding mode of chemically
activated semiquinone free radicals from quinone anticancer
agents to DNA. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 28: 301-308 (1979).
68. Bates, D. A., and Winterbourn, C. C. Deoxyribose breakdown
by the adriamycin semiquinone and H202: evidence for hydroxyl
radical participation. FEBS Letters 145: 137-142 (1982).
69. Gutteridge, J. M. C., and Toeg, D. Adriamycin-dependent dam-
age to deoxyribose: a reaction involving iron, hydroxyl and se-
miquinone free radicals. FEBS Letters 149: 228 (1982).
70. Knight, R. C., Rowley, D. A., Skolimowski, I., and Edwards,
D. I. Mechanism of action of nitroimidazole antimicrobial and
antitumour radio-sensitizing drugs. Effects of reduced misoni-
dazole on DNA. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 36: 367-377 (1979).
71. Thor, H., Smith, M. T., Hartzell, P., Bellamo, G., Jewell, S.,
and Orrenius, S. The metabolism of menadione (2-methyl-1,4-
naphthoquinone) by isolated hepatocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 257:
12419-12425 (1982).
72. Morrison, H., Jernstrom, B., Nordenskjold, M., Thor, H., and
Orrenius, S. Induction ofDNA damage by menadione (2-methyl-
1,4-naphthoquinone) in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 33: 1763-1769 (1984).
73. Zimmerman, R., and Cerutti, P. Active oxygen acts as a pro-
moter of transformation in mouse embryo fibroblasts. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 81: 2085-2087 (1984).
74. Emerit, I., Keck, M., Levy, A., Feingold, J., and Michelson,
A. M. Activation oxygen species at the origin of chromosome
breakage and sister-chromatid exchanges. Mutat. Res. 103: 165-
170 (1982).
75. Friedman, J., and Cerutti, P. The induction of ornithine decar-
boxylase by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate or by serum is in-
hibited by antioxidants. Carcinogenesis 4: 1425-1427 (1983).
76. Lawrence N. J., Parkinson, E. K., and Emmerson, A. Benzoyl
peroxide interferes with metabolic cooperation between cultured
human epidermal keratinocytes. Carcinogenesis 5: 419-421
(1984).
77. Cavalieri, E. L., Rogan, E. G., Roth, R. W., Sangier, R. K.,
and Hakaam, A. The relationship between ionization potential
and horseradish peroxidase/hydrogen peroxide-catalyzed bind-
ing of aromatic hydrocarbon to DNA. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 47:
87-110 (1983).
78. Kozumba, W. J., Seed, J. L., and Kensler, T. W. Inhibition by
butylhydroxyanisole and other antioxidants of epidermal orni-
thine decarboxylase activity induced by 12-0-tetradecanoyl-
phorbol-13-acetate. Cancer Res. 43: 2555-2559 (1983).
230 P. J. O'BRIEN
79. Rogan, E. G., Hakaam, A., and Cavalieri, E. L. Structure elu-
cidation of a 6-methylbenzo(a)pyrene-DNA adduct formed by
horseradish peroxidase in vitro and mouse skin in vivo. Chem.-
Biol. Interact. 47: 111-122 (1983).
80. Yagi, K. Oxidation of benzo(a)pyrene and 7,8-dihydro-7,8-dih-
ydroxy benzo(a)pyrene by horseradish peroxidase-H202 inter-
mediate. Cancer Biochem. Biophys. 7: 155-174 (1984).
81. Maloney, S. J., and Prough, R. A.. Biochemical toxicology of
hydrazines. In: Reviews in Biochemical Toxicology, (E. Hodg-
son, J. R. Bend, and E. M. Philpot, Eds.), Vol. 5, Elsevier
Biochemical Press, New York, 1983, pp. 313-348.
82. Sinha, B. K. Enzymatic activation of ITydrazine derivatives. J.
Biol. Chem. 258: 796-801 (1983).
83. Augusto, O., Faljoni-Alario, Luciana, C. C., and N6brega, F.
G. DNA strand scission by the carbon radical derived from 2-
phenyl-ethylhydrazine metabolism. Carcinogenesis 5: 781-784
(1984).
84. Freese, E., Sklarow, S., and Freese, E. B. DNA damage by
antidepressant hydrazines and related drugs. Mutat. Res. 5:
343-348 (1968).
85. O'Brien, P. J., Gregory, B., Fourney, B., Davison, W., Rahim-
tula, A. D., and Tsuruta, Y. One electron oxidation in cell tox-
icity. In: Microsomes and Drug Oxidations, (A.R. Boobis, J.
Caldwell, F. Matteis, and C.R. Elcombe), Ellis Horwood Publ.,
London, 1985, p. 284-295.
86. Rahimtula, M., Marshall, W., Gregory, B., and O'Brien, P. J.
Xenobiotic adduct formation with DNA or GSH following oxi-
dation by lipid peroxidation of H202-peroxidase. In: Effects of
Nutrition on Xenobiotic Metabolism, (J. Finley, Ed.), Advances
in Chemistry, Vol. 277, American Chemical Society, Washing-
ton, DC, 1985, pp. 97-110.
87. Boyd, J. A., and Eling, T. E. Evidence of a one-electron mech-
anism of2-aminofluorene oxidation by prostaglandin H synthase
and horseradish peroxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 13885-13896
(1984).
88. Marshall, W., and O'Brien, P. J. Multiple mechanisms for the
activation of the carcinogen acetylaminofluorene, In: Icosanoids
and Cancer (H. Thalerdao, A. C. D. Paulet, and R. Paoletti,
Eds.), Raven Press, 1984 pp. 44. 49-62.
89. Krauss, R. S., Reed, G. A., and Eling, T. E. Prostaglandin
synthetase catalyzed aminofluorene binding to DNA. Cancer
Res. 25: 84 (1984).
90. Miller, E. C., Miller, J. A., and Hartmann, H. A. N-Hydroxy-
2-acetylaminofluorene: a metabolite of 2-acetylaminofluorene
with increased carcinogenic activity in the rat. Cancer Res. 21:
815-824 (1961).
91. Wong, P. K., Hampton, M. J., and Floyd, R. A. Evidence for
lipoxygenase peroxidase activation of N-hydroxy-2-acetylami-
nofluorene by rat mammary gland parenchymal cells. In: Pros-
taglandins and Cancer. (T.J. Powles, R.S. Bockman, K.V. Honn,
and P. Ramwell, Eds.), Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York, 1982, p.
167-179.
92. Bartsch, H., Miller, J. A., and Miller, E. C. One-electron non-
enzymatic and enzymatic oxidation products of various carcin-
ogenic aromatic acethydroxamic acids. Biochem. Biophys. Acta
273: 40-52 (1972).
93. Malejka-Giganti, D., Ritter, C. L., and Ryzewski, C. N. Pa-
thobiologic and metabolic aspects of mammary gland tumori-
genesis by N-substituted aryl compounds. Environ. Health Per-
spect. 49: 175-182 (1983).
94. Ames, B., Kammen, H., and Yamasaki, E. Hair dyes are mu-
tagenic: identification of a variety of mutagenic ingredients.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 72: 2423-2427 (1975).
95. Bolton, J. R., Carrington, A., and D , Santos-VeiJa, J. Rein-
terpretation of the Wursters Blue n spectrum. Mol. Phys. 5:
615-619 (1962).
96. Kalyanaraman, B., and Sivarajah, K. The electron spin reso-
nance study offree radicals formed during the arachidonate acid
cascade and cooxidation of xenobiotics by prostaglandin syn-
thase. In: Free Radicals in Biology, Vol. VI, (W. Pryor, Ed.),
Academic Press, New York, 1984, pp. 149-198.
97. O'Brien, P. J., and Gregory, B. Peroxidase catalyzed N-oxida-
tion and activation of N,N',N,N'-tetramethylbenzidine. In: Bi-
ological Oxidation of Nitrogen in Organic Molecules, (J.W. Gor-
rod, Ed.), Ellis Horwood Publ., London, in press.
98. Haley, T. J. Benzidine revisited: review of the literature and
problems associated with the use ofbenzidine and its congeners.
Clin. Toxicol. 8: 13-42 (1975).
99. Cerniglia, C. E., Freeman, J. P., Franklin, W., and Pack, L.
D. Metabolisms ofbenzidine and benzidine-congener based dyes
by human, monkey and rat intestinal bacteria. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Res. Comm. 107: 1224-1229 (1982).
100. Martin, C. N., Beland, F. A., Kennelly, J. C. and Kadlubar, F.
F. Binding of benzidine, N-acetyl-benzidine, N,N-diacetylben-
zidine and direct blue 6 to rat liver DNA. Environ. Health Per-
spect. 49: 101-109 (1983).
101. Kennelly, J. C., Herzog, P. J., and Martin, C. N. The release
of4,4'-diaminobiphenyls from azodyes in the rat. Carcinogenesis
3: 947-951 (1982).
102. Kadlubar, F. F., Frederick, C. B., Weiss, C. C., and Zenser,
T. V. Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthetase-mediated metab-
olism of carcinogenic aromatic amines and their binding to DNA
and protein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 108: 253-259
(1982).
103. Wise, R. W., Zenser, T. V., Kadlubar, F. F., and Davies, B.
B. Metabolic activation of carcinogenic aromatic amines by dog
bladder and kidney prostaglandin H synthase. Cancer Res. 44:
1893-1897 (1984).
104. Josephy, P. D. Oxidative activation of benzidine and its deriv-
atives by peroxidases. Environ. Health Perspect. 63: 000-000
(1985).
105. Martin, C. N., Beland, F. A., Roth, R. W., and Kadlubar, F.
F. Covalent binding ofbenzidine and N-acetylbenzidine to DNA
at the C-8 atom of deoxyguanosin in vivo and in vitro. Cancer
Res. 42: 2678-2696 (1982).
106. Josephy, P. D., and Iwaniw, D. C. Identification ofthe N-acetyl
system conjugate of benzidine formed in the peroxidase acti-
vation system. Carcinogenesis 5: 155-158 (1985).
107. Wise, R. W., Zenser, T. V., and Davis, B. B. Prostaglandin H
synthase oxidation of benzidine and o-dianisidine: reduction and
conjugation ofactivated amines by thiols. Carcinogenesis 6: 579-
583 (1985).
108. Beland, F. A., Baranek, D. T., Dooley, K. L., Heffick, R. H.,
and Kadlubar, F. F. Arylamine DNA adducts in vitro and in
vivo: their role in bacterial mutagenesis and urinary bladder
carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 49: 125-134 (1983).
109. Kadlubar, F. F. The role ofarylamine-DNA adducts in benzidine
carcinogenesis and mutagenesis. Third International Sympos-
ium on Biological Reactive Intermediates, Md., Abstracts, No.
14 (1985)
110. Tsuruta, Y., Josephy, P. D., Rahimtula, A., and O'Brien, P. J.
Properties of the DNA reactive benzidine product formed by a
peroxidase catalyzed oxidation. Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res.
25: 350 (1984).
111. Tsuruta, Y., Josephy, P. D., Rahimtula, A., and O'Brien, P. J.
Peroxidase-catalyzed benzidine binding to DNA and other ma-
cromolecules. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 54: 143-158 (1985).
112. Garner, R. C., Walpole, A. L., and Rose, F. L. Testing of some
benzidine analogues for microsomal activation to bacterial mu-
tagen. Cancer Letters 1: 39-42 (1975).
113. Josephy, P. D., and Weerasoorija, R. Azo dyes based on
3,5,3',5'-tetramethylbenzidine: potential substitutes for carcin-
ogenic azo dyes. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 49: 375-378 (1984).
114. Vasdev, S., Tsuruta, Y., and O'Brien, P. J. Prostaglandin syn-
thetase mediated activation of p-dimethylaminoazobenzene. In:
Prostaglandins and Cancer, (T.J. Powles, R.S. Bockman, K.V.
Honn, and P. Ramwell, Eds.), Alan R. Liss Inc., New York,
1982, p. 155-158.
115. Coles, B., Srai, S. K. S., Waynforth, H. B., and Ketterer, B.
Major role of glutathione in the metabolism and excretion of
dimethylaminoazobenzene. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 47: 307-323
(1983).
116. O'Brien, P. J. Lipid peroxide catalyzed chemical carcinogenesis.
J. Am. Oil Chemists Soc. 61: 1904-1907 (1984).
117. Liehr, J. G. 2-Fluoroestradiol. Separation of estrogenicity from
carcinogenicity. Mol. Pharmacol. 23: 278-283 (1983).
FREE RADICAL-MEDIATED DNA BINDING 231
118. Li, J. J., Li, S. A., Klicka, J. K., Parsons, J. A., and Lam, L.
K. T. Relative carcinogenic activity of various synthetic and
natural estrogens in the Syrian hamster kidney. Cancer Res.
43: 5200-5204 (1983).
119. Metzler, M., and McLachlan, J. A. Peroxidase mediated oxi-
dation, a possible pathway for metabolic activation of diethyl-
stilbestrol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 85: 874-880 (1978).
120. Bennett, S., Marshall, W., and O'Brien, P. J. Metabolic acti-
vation ofdiethylstilbestrol by prostaglandin synthetase as mech-
anism for its carcinogenicity. In: Prostaglandins and Cancer,
(T.J. Powles, R.C. Bockman, H.V. Honn, and P. Ramwell,
Eds.), Alan R. Liss Inc. New York, 1982, p. 143-148.
121. Metzler, M. Diethylstilbestrol: reactive metabolites derived
from a hormonally active compound. In: Biochemical Basis of
Chemical Carcinogenesis, (H. Greim, R. Jung, M. Kramer, H.
Marquadt, and F. Oesch, Eds.), Raven Press, New York. 1984,
p. 69.
122. Metzler, M., and Epe, B. Peroxidase mediated binding of di-
ethylstilbestrol analogs to DNA in vitro: a possible role for a
phenoxy radical. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 50: 351-360 (1984).
123. Liehr, J. G., DaGue, B. B., Ballatore, A. M. and Henkin, J.
Diethylstilbestrol quinone: a reactive intermediate in DES me-
tabolism. Biochem. Pharmacol. 32: 3711-3718 (1983).
124. Snyder, R., Longaire, S. L., Witmer, C. M., Koesis, J. J., An-
drews, L. S. and Lee, E. W. Biochemical toxicology ofbenzene.
In: Biochemical Toxicology, (E. Hodgson, J.R. Bend, and R.M.
Philpot, Eds.), Vol. 3, Elsevier/North Holland, New York. 1981,
pp. 123-153.
125. Turiek, A. K., Platt, K. L., Pryzbylski, M., and Oesch, F. Multi-
step metabolic activation of benzene, effect of superoxide dis-
mutase on covalent binding to macromolecules and identification
of glutathione conjugates using high pressure liquid chromatog-
raphy and field desorption mass spectrometry. Chem.-Biol. In-
teract. 33: 1-12 (1980).
126. Subrahmanyan, V. V., and O'Brien, P. J. Peroxidase mediated
"4C-phenol binding to DNA. Xenobiotica, 15: 859-872 (1985).
127. Sawahata, T., and Neal, R. A. Biotransformation of phenol to
hydroquinone and catechol by rat liver microsomes. Mol. Phar-
macol. 23: 453-460 (1982).
128. Rushmore, T., Snyder, R., and Kalf, G. Covalent binding of
benzene and its metabolites to DNA in rabbit bone marrow
mitochondria in vitro. Chem. Biol. Interact. 49: 133-154 (1984).
129. Subrahmanyan, V. V., and O'Brien, P. J. The nature of the
reactive species involved in the peroxidase mediated "4C-phenol
binding to DNA. Xenobiotica, 15: 873-886 (1985).
130. Auclair, C., and Paoletti, C. Bioactivation of the anticancer
drugs 9-hydroxyellipticine and derivatives by a peroxidase-H202
system. J. Med. Chem. 24: 289-295 (1981).
131. AuClair, C., Meunier, B., and Paoletti, C. Peroxidase-catalyzed
covalent binding of the antitumor drug, 2N-methyl-9-hydroxy-
ellipticine to proteins. Biochem. Pharmacol. 32: 3883-3886
(1983).
132. Maanen, V., and Pinedo, H. M. Phenoxy radical formnation from
etoposide (VP-16). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res. Abstr. (1984).
133. O'Brien, P. J. Oxidation of lipids in biological membranes and
intracellular consequences. In: Autoxidation ofUnsaturated Lip-
ids, (H. Chan, Ed.), Academic Press, London, in press.
134. Reddy, J. K., and Lalwai, N. D. Carcinogenesis by hepatic per-
oxisome proliferators: evaluation of the risk of hypolipidemic
drugs and industrial plasticizers to humans. C.R.C. Crit. Rev.
Toxicol. 12: 1-60 (1983).
135. Ghoshal, A. K., and Farber, E. The induction of liver cancer by
dietary deficiency of choline and methionine without added car-
cinogens. Carcinogenesis 5: 1367-1370 (1984).
136. Rushmore, T. H., Lim, Y. P., Farber, E. and Ghoshal, A. K.
Rapid lipid peroxidation in the nuclear fraction of rat liver in-
duced by a diet deficient in choline and methionine. Cancer Let-
ters 24: 251-255 (1984).
137. Vasdev, S., and O'Brien, P. J. The involvement ofprostaglandin
intermediates in binding to nucleic acids and in ageing pigment
formation. In: Prostaglandins and Cancer, (T.J. Powles, R.S.
Bockman, H.V. Honn, and P. Ramwell, Eds.), Alan R. Liss
Inc., New York, 1982, pp. 163-166.
138. Summerfield, F. W., and Tappel, A. L. Determination by flu-
orescence quenching ofthe environment ofDNA crosslinks made
by malondialdehyde. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 740: 185-189
(1983).
139. Summerfield, F. W., and Tappel, A. L. Cross-linking of DNA
in liver and testes of rats fed 1,3-propanediol. Chem.-Biol. In-
teract. 50: 87-96 (1984).
140. Basu, A. K., Marnett, L. J., and Romano, L. J. Dissociation of
malondialhehyde mutagenicity in Salmonella typhimurium
from its ability to induce interstrand DNA crosslinks. Mutat.
Res. 129: 39-46 (1984).
141. Inouye, S. Site-specific cleavage of double strand DNA by hy-
droperoxide of linoleic acid. FEBS Letters 172: 231-234 (1984).
142. Cohen, A. M., Aberroth, R. E., and Hochstein, P. Inhibition of
free radical induced DNA damage by uric acid. FEBS Letters
174: 147-150 (1984).
143. Nakayama, T., Kodoma, M., and Nagata, C. Free radical for-
mation in DNA by lipid peroxidation. Agr. Biol. Chem. 48: 571-
572 (1984).
144. Nagata, C., Imamura, A., and Fuji, K. Electronic structure of
nucleic acid bases: their spectroscopic properties, chemical reac-
tivities and biological activities. In: Advances in Biophysics Vol.
IV (M. Kotani, Ed.), University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1973,
pp. 1-102.
145. Degen, G. H., Eling, T. E., and McLachlan, J. A. Prostaglandin
systhetase catalyzed activation ofdiethylstilbestrol. Cancer Res.
42: 919-927 (1982).
146. Boyd, J. A., Barrett, J. C., and Eling, T. E. Prostaglandin
endoperoxide synthetase dependent cooxidation of (+) trans-
7,8-dihydroxy-7,8-dihydrobenzo(a)pyrene in C3J/1OT'/2 Clone 8
cells. Cancer Res. 42: 2628-2632 (1982).
147. Sivarajah, K., Jones, K. G., Fonts, J. R., Devereux, T., Shirley,
J. E., and Eling, T. E. Prostaglandin Synthetase and cyto-
chrome P-450 dependent metabolism of benzo(a)pyrene 7,8-dih-
ydrodiol by enriched populations of rat Clara cells and alveolar
type II cells. Cancer Res. 43: 2633-2636 (1983).
148. Wong, P. K., Hampton, M. J., Floyd, R. A. Evidence for li-
poxygenase peroxidase activation of N-hydroxy-2-acetylamino-
fluorene by mammary gland cells. In: Prostaglandins and Can-
cer: First International Conference, Alan R. Liss, New York,
1982, pp. 167-179.
149. Takanaka, K., O'Brien, P. J., Tsuruta, Y., and Rahimtula, A.
D. Tumor promoter stimulated irreversible binding of N-meth-
ylaminoazobenzene to polymorphonuclear leukocyte DNA. Can-
cer Letters 15: 311-315 (1982).
150. Tsuruta, Y., Subrahmanyan, V. V., Marshall, W., and O'Brien,
P. J. Peroxidase mediated irreversible binding ofarylamine car-
cinogens to DNA in intact polymorphonculear leukocytes acti-
vated by a tumor promoter. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 53: 25-35
(1985).
151. Decuyper, J., Piette, J., Lopez, M., Merville, M. P., and Van
de Vorst, A. Induction breaks in deoxyribonucleic acid by pho-
toexcited promazine derivatives. Biochem. Pharmacol. 33:4025-
4031 (1984).
152. Fujita, H., Hayaishi, H., and Suzuki, K. Spectrofluorometric
study on photochemical interaction between chlorpromazine and
nucleic acids. Photochem. Photobiol. 34: 101-105 (1981).
153. Gray, P. J., Phillips, D. R., and Wedd, A. G. Photosensitized
degradation of DNA by daunomycin. Photochem. Photobiol. 36:
49-57 (1982).
154. Houba-Herin, N., Calberg-Bacq, C. M., and Van de Vorst, A.
Photodynamic activity of acridine orange: peroxide radical in-
duction in DNA and synthetic polynucleotides. Int. J. Radiat.
Biol. 45: 487-495 (1984).
155. Piette, J., and Moore, P.D. DNA synthesis on phototreated
template. Photochem. Photobiol. 35: 705-710 (1982).
156. Speck, W. T., and Rosenkranz, H. S. Proflavin: an unusual mu-
tagen. Mutat. Res. 77: 37-43 (1980).
157. Hariharan, P., Courtney, J., and Eleczko, S. Production ofhydroxy
radicals in cell systems exposed to hematoporphyrin and red light.
Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 37: 691-694 (1980).
158. Kessel, D. Hematophorphyrin and HPD: photophysics, photo-
chemistry and phototherapy. Photochem. Photobiol. 39:851-858
(1984).
232 P. J. O'BRIEN
159. Docampo, R., Moreno, S. N. J., Muniz, R. P A., Cruz, E S.,
and Mason, R. P Light enhanced free radical formation and try-
panocidal action of gentian violet (crystal violet). Science 220:
1292-1294 (1983).
160. Levin, D. E., Lovely, T. T., and Klekowski, E. Light enhanced
genetic toxicity of crystal violet. Mutat. Res. 103: 283-288
(1982).
