Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 52, pp. 83-92, 1983
Session III: Discussion
DR. DAVID G. HOEL (NIEHS): My particular in-
terest in this area is with the use of models in
quantitative risk estimation. This exercise has
become very popular. I am pleased to see that
OSHA is even becoming involved, perhaps as a
result of encouragement of judges. Also, my bi-
ases come from the area of toxicology, in terms of
how we can incorporate toxicology into the risk
estimation process and couple it with the epide-
miology findings. The usual situation occurs
when we find something in an animal study, then
people say: where is the human evidence? I no-
ticed with the pancreatic cancer and coffee find-
ings that the statement was: but where are the
animal studies?
I guess we really need both. In terms ofincorpo-
ration of toxicological information, I think it will
provide us with some mechanistic hypotheses
which oftentimes are difficult to derive from
purely epidemiological studies. The National Tox-
icology Program, including the NCI cancer bioas-
say program, is particularly interested in bring-
ing more scientific studies into the process, as
opposed to purely the testing and screening of
chemicals. Along this line, I think that the epide-
miologist should look to the toxicology informa-
tion for those cases where we do have reasonably
good quantitative information on humans, to
make sure we have a good quality and sufficient
studies in animals. In risk estimation this type of
comparative data is used to extrapolate from the
animal to man. Dr. Dietz in his presentation
discussed the pharmacokinetics and comparative
pharmacology among species.
I would like to discuss the data of Meselson
from a 1974 National Academy ofScience's report
on pesticides, that relate potency in rodents to
potency in man. Meselson selected six agents
where we do have quality experimental and epi-
demiological data. There are several dose
measures. The one Meselson used was total life-
time dose per body weight. This quantitative ex-
posure is somewhat similar to what Carol Red-
mond spoke of earlier, when she used a weighted
cumulative amount of exposure. Now we more
commonly use a daily dose rate per body weight
basis. The potencies in animal and man are pretty
much within an order of magnitude. Now, these
data may have been selective in terms of how it
was put together, but from Meselson's total dose
one can translate to a daily dose rate and obtain
good agreements.
Earlier the use of dose per surface area, which
relates to metabolic rates for species extrapola-
tion was mentioned. This dose measure is much
the same as dose per body weight. The important
issue in all this is how one handles data from less
than lifetime studies. The difficulty is that if an
Armitage-Doll multistage model is appropriate,
then the time factor may be a high power of
duration of exposure. Now, this has an important
application when we are dealing with occupa-
tional studies. For example, if we are to compare
lifetime animal data with human data, which
have less than lifetime exposures, how do you
extrapolate out to a full lifetime?
I believe Meselson in his work assumed a mul-
tistage model with three or four stages. There-
fore, we need careful modeling for that purpose.
Secondly, how should we incorporate worker pop-
ulations into estimating risks for a full lifetime of
worker exposure, or extrapolate occupational
data to environmental exposures? Dr. Wagoner
mentioned exposures to vinyl chloride outside the
plant and how would he make that extrapolation.
By simply taking the ratio of cumulative inci-
dence for a lifetime to a short exposure, and
depending on the number of stages to be assumed
in the Doll model, very large differences in rela-
tive incidence can be attained. This means that if
we believe that the mechanism we are dealing
with for a particular carcinogen is multistage,
then we have to be very careful how we handle
the duration of exposure when we attempt to
extrapolate over various lengths of time.
With all this in mind, we saw in the three
papers a full range oftypes ofcompounds. First of
all, with the coke ovens we are dealing with
mixtures ofmaterials. We are not even sure what
all of the materials are. So we really can't fall
back on any animal models to describe possible
mechanisms and number ofstages, ifit is a multi-
stage process. With benzene, we are dealing with
a compound that has been extensively studied.
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
People mention that arsenic is carcinogenic in
man but there are no animal data. The second
compound mentioned is benzene, although
Maltoni has shown positive effects in rats after
oral intubation. Finally, we heard about vinyl
chloride, which is probably one of the most stud-
ied chemical carcinogens in rodents. Considerable
dose-response work has been done by Maltoni and
other investigators. Also important pharmaco-
kinetics work has been done by Gehring and
others at Dow laboratories. These studies are all
very carefully done and we have a good idea
about the mechanisms and how one can model the
carcinogenic effects.
With the coke oven data, because we are deal-
ing with lung cancer, it is unfortunate that we do
not have data on smoking. For example, I was
curious about the rise in the relative risk over
time and then the dropback. We could be dealing
with some sort of susceptible subgroups that are
being eliminated, given that smokers may be a
possible susceptible subgroup. Also when one is
calculating a risk, although there is some synergy
between the coke oven and cigarette smoking,
would one set risks based on the smoker or the
nonsmoker? I think these are relevant problems.
Also, with the termination of exposure, there has
been some work by Whittemore, Day and Brown,
in terms of looking at multistage models. When
you stop exposure, does the risk continue as
though you had not stopped it? This would be the
case, for example, ifit was an early stage that was
affected by the material. Alternatively, does risk
taper offvery quickly? This would be so ifit was a
late stage having more of a promotional effect.
These issues will be very important when one
becomes involved with time extrapolation. Ciga-
rettes, for example, appear to effect both an early
and a late stage, at least from the analysis of the
British doctors that Peto and Doll have been
working on.
In the megamouse study at the National Center
for Tbxicology Research, there was a suggestion of
both types of effects (early and late stage effects).
I think with these animal models we can get at
possibly what the mechanism is, particularly as a
function of time, and help to understand how we
should deal with the risk extrapolation based on
human data. Often times there just are not suffi-
cient human data to differentiate between differ-
ent models, but yet model choice can make tre-
mendous differences in the risk estimations when
you extrapolate over time.
With respect to benzene, I had one question for
Peter Infante. In one risk estimation I saw, the
author commented that leukemia was only
present with aplastic anemia, and the aplasia
may in fact have a threshold, and hence leukemia
may have a threshold. I wondered if he had
thought about that issue and its implications to
risk estimates.
For vinyl chloride, I was interested in the envi-
ronmental study. In Brady's study, mentioned by
Dr. Wagoner, about half of the angiosarcomas
were later related somehow to exposures to vinyl
chloride, arsenic or thorium dioxide. Would one
speculate that the other half are related to some
other agents, or is there a natural spontaneous
rate of angiosarcomas? Some years ago the EPA
worked out risk estimates for environmental ex-
posures to vinyl chloride, I would be curious as to
whether there is a quantitative reasonableness of
those number of environmental cases with risk
estimates that had been done by EPA in terms of
the surrounding environment of vinyl chloride
plants and what these levels are.
Finally, directed to all ofthe authors: we heard
a little about cytogenetic effects with respect to
benzene. Recently at NIEHS and other places
there has been considerable effort in terms of
developing methods for analysis ofbody fluids for
mutagenic activity using microbial tests. There
has also been considerable effort in terms of de-
veloping assays for genetic toxicity. We have the
lymphocytic assay of Albertini, we have sister
chromatid exchange, we have unscheduled DNA
repair, we have mutant sperm assays and we are
looking at mutant red cells by using fluorescent
antibodies. There is a whole collection ofgene-tox
measures or indicators that we hope to apply to
environmental groups. Now, there has not been
shown a direct relationship to a health endpoint.
But my question is: Is this an appropriate scien-
tific direction for occupational epidemiology to
go? I find when we are dealing purely with mor-
bidity and mortality data, the precision and
power of the tests to be frustrating. Are these
gene-tox measures the approach to take to im-
prove the precision ofthe detection process?
DR. P. E. ENTERLINE (Univ. of Pittsburgh): I
think Dr. Hoel made a couple of points about
smoking, which also would occur to me. I might
add I also noticed this rise in nonmalignant re-
spiratory disease. Could that have been related to
smoking? In other words, is smoking compound-
ing that effect in any way?
DR. C. K. REDMOND (Univ. ofPittsburgh): Bill
Lloyd noted when he did the very first analysis of
the coke oven worker data for the period 1953 to
1961 that the mortality rates in the steelworker
population as a whole very closely resembled
those of the smoking population rather than the
84
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
United States general population. Comparisons of
lung cancer rates for heavy smokers to those in
topside coke oven workers indicate that the latter
rates far exceed what could be explained on the
basis of smoking alone. Thus there seems little
doubt that coke oven exposure increases the lung
cancer risk, but we cannot address the issue of a
possible synergism between smoking and the
coke oven effluents.
One of the potential problems in risk assess-
ment is that usually comparisons have been made
to the general population, and for that reason
some of these risk estimates may be overesti-
mates. But how to deal with synergism, where
one has no data to establish whether or not it
exists, we cannot really address at this time. I
agree with Dr. Hoel that I think it would be very
interesting to know whether the risk diminished,
for instance, for workers who are no longer ex-
posed, and exploration ofmultistage models more
in utilizing our data set might be a good direction
to head.
DR. P. INFANTE (OSHA): The first question
raised to me was, perhaps there is a threshold for
bone marrow aplasia, and ifthat is the case, then
would there in fact be a threshold for leukemia?
First of all, I don't know of any basis for conclud-
ing that there is a threshold for aplastic anemia. I
have heard the arguments that if you could pre-
vent individuals from developing aplastic ane-
mia, then you could prevent them from develop-
ing leukemia. And, in fact, a number of
individuals with aplastic anemia are diagnosed
later on with leukemia. I don't think there is a
current basis, though, for making the statement
that in order to develop leukemia you have to go
through an aplastic anemia stage. I have not seen
data to support that idea; one cannot conclude
that aplastic anemia is a necessary precursor to
leukemia. Obviously there are individual thresh-
olds for carcinogens, at least conceptually, since
not everyone exposed to carcinogens develops the
cancers that are known to be associated with
them. But on a group basis, I know ofno evidence
to demonstrate thresholds.
In terms of the other comment that you made
about the gene-tox program, I think it is very
important to be doing some kind ofmonitoring of
workers to determine what the current carcino-
genic risks may be. It could be very important to
develop this kind of information for monitoring
workers in standard-setting activities. For exam-
ple, as part of our standards development, we
always have medical surveillance. Let us say you
have something like arsenic, vinyl chloride or
coke oven emissions, where you are aware of
several different sites of cancer that are asso-
ciated with exposure to these substances. So you
initiate a program where you are going to take
medical X-rays every 5 or every 10 years, to
detect lung cancer earlier. But this does not pre-
vent the cancer from occurring. In terms ofmedi-
cal surveillance, we need to try to intercept dis-
ease earlier. There are no data I am aware of to
demonstrate that medical surveillance for lung
cancer increases longevity in workers who are
exposed to bronchial carcinogens. Ifthat in fact is
the case, what are we really doing with medical
surveillance? Maybe we could intervene at an
earlier stage where we could analyze some types
of body fluid to see if there is latent genetic
damage, perhaps some chromosomal monitoring
to see what is going on.
We are talking about long-term chronic dis-
ease. Cancers may not show up for 20 to 30 or
more years. If we could in some way intervene
and, perhaps, eliminate exposure or transfer the
individual out for at least those carcinogens that
are not only initiators but promoters as well,
maybe we could accomplish something. But the
whole concept ofmedical surveillance is to reduce
the incidence ofdisease, and from the way that we
do it in general, I don't see that taking place. It
would be good if we could develop some short-
term tests to find out what is going on today with
persons who are known to be exposed to carcino-
gens.
DR. J. K. WAGONER: Dr. Hoel raised a question
with reference to the study by Brady et al. and the
inability of those investigators to document, for
30 to 50% of the cases of angiosarcoma of the
liver, any exposure to arsenic, thorium dioxide or
vinyl chloride, three agents known to cause that
disease. In response to that question I think one
has to recall our experience with asbestos before
arriving at any firm conclusion regarding the
contribution of "idiopathic liver angiosarcoma."
It was not so many years ago that a large
portion ofcases ofmesothelioma were reported as
having no known exposure to asbestos. I believe
the latest opinions on that subject by the IARC
are that upwards of 80 to 90% of all mesothe-
liomas have an asbestos etiology. More recently
Cochrane and Webster have reported that nearly
100% ofall mesotheliomas have had a prior expo-
sure to asbestos. Thus, as was clearly shown to be
the case for mesothelioma, the true proportion of
liver angiosarcomas having an idiopathic etiology
will be determined only following more in-depth
study which elicits an adequate consumer, envi-
ronmental or occupational exposure history.
With regard to the significance of the study by
Brady et al. to the EPA risk assessment for vinyl
chloride effluents, although the study did not in-
85
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
dicate any monitoring data, the findings do indi-
rectly address that issue. However, I am led to
believe that this study was not considered in the
EPA decision regarding the control of vinyl chlo-
ride effluents. In light of that, EPA may wish to
reassess the safety oftheir effluent standard.
DR. JOSEPH MEYER (Squibb Corp.): Dr. Red-
mond and I believe Dr. Wagoner showed some
instances of a lower relative risk of cancer mor-
tality with increasing years in the plant. Is it
conceivable that this effect is partially the func-
tion of competing risks? In other words, one won-
ders what the relative risks would look like if
they were based on net mortality rates rather
than crude mortality experience. I think it is a
very interesting question to know whether this
apparent inverse relationship is a function of
extrinsic factors, such as people dying through
other causes, compared with cancer mortality
rate changing as the result ofsome kind ofintrin-
sic mechanism. The question is: what would these
relative risks look like if they were based on a
data set that was cleaned out for competing risks?
As the workers get older they die due to other
causes. Fewer may be dying of cancer simply
because ofthese other competing causes.
DR. C. K. REDMOND (Univ. of Pittsburgh): To
some extent these estimated relative risks have
been adjusted in a formal sense for the competing
risks, so I guess I am missing the problem that
you have with interpreting these results. There is
adjustment for other causes ofmortality in a kind
of multiple decrement fashion in the life tables.
Ofcourse, that can't address the issue ofwhether
the causes are associated with one another and I
don't really know of any very good way to handle
that issue.
It is not clear to me at this point why these
relative risks tend to diminish with time. This is
a closed cohort. In other words, we do not have
new individuals coming in and obtaining expo-
sure over time, and that may possibly have some-
thing to do with why the risks diminished. Maybe
other issues are important, such as those raised
by Dr. Hoel, as more and more individuals are
leaving the actual work environment and are no
longer exposed. Depending on the way the car-
cinogen acts there could be a possibility of a
diminishment in risk. And there could also be the
possibility of diminishing exposures within the
work environment contributing to that level of
risk. So I really see that as a very difficult issue to
sort out from the data that are available to us at
present.
DR. EDWARD RADFORD (Univ. Pittsburgh): I
have a comment and a question for the panel at
large. The comment has to do with the effect of
smoking, which I think we all agree creates diffi-
culties in any study where it is not possible to be
controlled for. Ifyou consider the history ofsmok-
ing in the U.S. population, which is often the one
used as a control, one can make assumptions as to
what the likelihood would be that any occupa-
tional group would have, say 70% smokers or 80%
smokers, and even include the likelihood that
they might have been heavier smokers than the
U.S. population as a whole. I have done this
exercise and it appears to me that you might get
as much as a relative risk of about 1.5 for that
type ofcomparison, but not above about 1.5.
So I think ifyou are talking about relative risks
of 5 or 10 for lung cancer, you are way out of any
likelihood that it could be explained by differ-
ences in smoking, and I think that is the point Dr.
Redmond made earlier.
DR. REDMOND: I have a slide which I didn't
show which shows for lung cancer mortality, the
standardized mortality ratios of total steelwork-
ers compared to the United States population. For
white steelworkers the standardized mortality
ratio is about 35% greater than the total United
States ratio. For blacks it was somewhat greater
than that. But if you took out the coke plant
workers, where we know there is an excess risk of
lung cancer, there was about 35% greater risk
than the total United States lung cancer rates.
That difference is possible, if virtually all of the
workers were heavy smokers. For that reason, we
have relied in most of our analyses on internal
comparisons so we could get at the specific occu-
pational risks. And it was only in this latter risk
assessment that the general United States rates
were used. I think it is fair to point out, however,
that smoking may have elevated the relative risk
somewhat in these occupational studies.
DR. RADFORD: My question for the panel at
large is related to the difficulty in achieving con-
trol of these three agents. In the case of vinyl
chloride, a shift ofthe occupational exposure lim-
its from 50 parts per million to 1 part per million
was accomplished readily, although not without a
certain amount of difficulty, and it has been im-
plemented quite effectively by the industry. The
appropriate coke oven limits, which came along a
little later, have had a more checkered career. I
am not quite sure exactly where that issue stands
at this point, but I guess the standard is in place
and control is being achieved. The benzene stan-
dard, on the other hand, has not been imple-
mented, as Dr. Infante pointed out. Now, the
question I would ask is: Do you think that there is
a correlation between the difficulties that the
86
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
standard has had and the number or effectiveness
of the epidemiologic studies on which it was
based?
DR. WAGONER: No. I would say that the degree
and sophistication of epidemiological data has
little or no bearing whatsoever in terms of the
rapidity of public health decision-making in the
occupational setting. With regard to vinyl chlo-
ride, when the United States chose to go from 500
ppm to 250 ppm it was on the basis ofexperimen-
tal toxicological data, from 250 ppm to 50 ppm it
was on the basis of limited carcinogenesis bioas-
say data and isolated case reports of liver an-
giosarcoma, and from 50 ppm to 1 ppm it was on
the basis of more complete carcinogenesis bioas-
say data and one or two preliminary epidemiolog-
ical studies.
DR. INFANTE: As one example, I might cite acry-
lonitrile. I think our standard for acrylonitrile
went through pretty quickly. The only epidemio-
logic study done there was one by du Pont which
suggested excesses of lung and colon cancer. The
standard, for the most part, was based on experi-
mental data and the results of one epidemiologic
study. So acceptance of a standard really isn't
related to the quality of epidemiologic evidence,
but it is related to cost of implementing the stan-
dard, which is often ofoverriding importance.
DR. MICHAEL MOSER (Division of Health Ser-
vices, State ofNorth Carolina): First a comment,
and then a question. Both are addressed to the
entire panel. Much was made yesterday of the
proposition that the scientist-researcher should
stay separate from the decision-maker, whether
the individual decision-maker be the worker, the
bureaucrat or the legislator; whatever type of
decision-maker. We have heard a fair amount
today about sophisticated studies that have been
done in the epidemiology of these occupational
problems. Have any of the panelists any experi-
ence with translating that sort of information to
workers, to the individual we were talking about
yesterday who was going to make that ultimate
decision about whether to expose themselves or
not?
More particularly, since quantitative risk as-
sessment is something that has become quite
fashionable today, do you feel that quantitative
risk assessment is a valid means to approach the
nonscientist decision-makers and attempt to give
them vital information?
DR. INFANTE: If I understood your question cor-
rectly, it is: How do we inform the nonscientists
about what the relative risks or attributable risks
are for workers exposed to various carcinogens? I
think that is a difficult question to answer.
In my opinion, according to the Supreme Court
decision, we failed to demonstrate that there was
significant risk with the present benzene stan-
dard and, furthermore, that we should have dem-
onstrated a benefit in terms ofa significant reduc-
tion ofthat hazard. In light ofthe Supreme Court
decision, we will certainly make an attempt to
quantify risks. But I think one has to put large
confidence intervals around those estimates. Be-
cause you arejudicially prompted to do something
doesn't mean that you will always have the tech-
nical or scientific ability to do it. I think you have
to qualify whatever we do in terms of risk assess-
ment with the current state of the art, particu-
larly when you are basing risk assessment of
epidemiologic data where you can't always char-
acterize the past exposures.
DR. MOSER: Before OSHA was declared a reg-
ulatory agency that had no business in education,
had they made any attempt to address directly
the education of workers as to risk? And what
success have they had from going from an epide-
miologic 1 in 106 risk over 45 years to something
that can be understood by the guy who works on
top ofthe coke ovens?
DR. INFANTE: I certainly think we have a re-
sponsibility to explain the risks as best we can to
workers. For carcinogens in the workplace, we
don't ban substances, we set standards, which
means that we don't eliminate substances. In our
standards up to this point in time, the last several
years at least, we have had what is called a
regulatory analysis where we have determined
the costs to industry. In the past we have not
taken data indicating adverse health effects and
said, we are going to go to this level on the basis of
the health effect data.
There are other aspects to establishing a per-
missible exposure level. One is the feasibility for
industry to get to a specified level. According to
my interpretation of the Supreme Court deci-
sion-and everyone has his own interpretation-
ifyou were able to demonstrate significant risk at
a level which the industry could not attain, then
the standard would be set at the level the indus-
try could attain, even though there was a subse-
quent significant risk associated with that expo-
sure level.
But I think it is very important to educate
workers, and, in fact, to educate the general popu-
lation about carcinogens. We were talking yester-
day about acceptability ofrisk, that workers may
choose to work in areas where they are exposed to
carcinogens. Well, that riay be because they have
no other opportunity for employment. They are
trapped. They are willing to sacrifice their lives in
87
8DISCUSSION: SESSION III
order to educate and feed their families so that
they could have a better life. Perhaps we need to
do some education in high schools. Recently I
have talked to a number of men and women
graduating from high schools. They know nothing
or relatively little about anything that causes
cancer. Education may change their pattern of
decision-making. They may decide not to be a
blue collar worker if they are aware of a number
of substances that are known to cause cancer to
which they could be exposed to in those jobs. But
we are not educating high school students about
occupational carcinogens, so they are making the
choice after they are already into the technology
and have no alternative, for the most part.
DR. WAGONER: I should like to comment on that
subject. I am now serving as a consultant to the
Workers Institute for Safety and Health, an affili-
ate of the AFL-CIO. We believe that worker edu-
cation is extremely important. However, in any
education program concerning risk assessment I
think we must get a more open acceptance of
those factors which are impediments to the free
choice on the part of workers as to what they are
willing to accept. We saw during the days of the
vinyl chloride debate the situation of a 45-year
old man sitting with his fingers crossed behind
his back and saying it couldn't happen to him.
This man had two children who were soon to be of
college age, and he was being told that hisjob was
in danger if industry had to close due to strict
government standards. In addition this man had
little opportunity for employment in another in-
dustry because under present day worker's com-
pensation law the last employer bears liability.
Clearly that man had absolutely no ability to
make any free choice concerning risk assessment.
The constraints of our society clearly are factors
that must be removed prior to any meaningful
discussion ofrisk assessment on the part ofwork-
ers in the United States.
I also would suggest that any formal education
program ought to involve the wife ofthe worker. I
say that on the basis of a very interesting experi-
ence involving uranium miners. Recently one
uranium miner who had seven girls and one boy
was informed of published data showing an al-
tered sex ratio in the offspring ofuranium miners
in Europe. He stated that it's one thing to get
cancer by the age of55 or 60; however, ifby going
underground he was going to face the traumatic
danger of falling beams or the possibility of ge-
netic damage affecting his offsp-ring, then risk
assessment has no meaning to him or his family.
DR. REDMOND: I agree with the difficulties that
are inherent in terms of risk assessment but I
personally feel that it is very important to have
strong worker education programs in terms of
making clear to them what the actual risks are,
as well as some of the quantitative work that is
done relative to extrapolation ofrisk over a work-
ing lifetime. Since many of the standards are
obviously not being set so that one cin assure
absolute protection, workers are not involved in
the process. They may not have very clear-cut
choices in terms of being exposed or not being
exposed, but certainly there should be a strong
commitment to convey as much of that informa-
tion directly to the worker as possible, as much as
one can glean from the epidemiologic studies and
from the quantitative risk assessment in ways
that the worker himselfcan understand.
DR. DAVID BATES (Univ. of British Columbia,
Vancouver): I would like to make one comment on
the observation about sputum cytology made a
moment ago. The only example I know which is
encouraging in relation to sputum cytology in
lung cancer is a small group of nickel workers
from Sudbury, Canada, 25 men in the sintering
plant. The 5-yr survival from lung cancer in situ
is now significantly above predicted. Eighteen
lung cancers have been prospectively diagnosed
by sputum cytology. This experience has been
published recently in the Journal ofCardiovascu-
lar Thoracic Surgery. But that is the' only exam-
ple I know where there is encouragement with
early diagnosis. There was an interesting paper
in the Journal of Occupational Medicine recently
on a coke oven worker who faced difficult logistic
decisions when his sputum converted from nor-
mal to malignant. This is an example of a prob-
lem faced by an individual worker whose sputum
converted over a 5-yr period of surveillance, re-
sulting in detection of a pinhead-sized carcinoma
and removal of a lobe ofthe lung.
I have two questions. Tb Dr. Redmond, is there
reasonable consistency in the steelworker mortal-
ity data in different jurisdictions? There is, for
instance, an analysis of steelworker mortality
from Hamilton, Ontario, in the Journal of Occu-
pational Medicine, considering cigarette smoking
in the total data, suggesting that all steelworkers
have an SMR of about 250 compared to other
industrial workers, not just the top oven coke
people. I wondered whether internationally it
looks the same from Holland and from Britain
and from Allegheny County, and whether there is
a consistency in the international data in this
particular industry, not just top coke oven work-
ers but in the industry as a whole.
To Dr. Wagoner, is there anything in the animal
exposure data about vinyl chloride which helps
88
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
you to answer the question of the comparison of
risk between long-term low level exposure com-
pared to occasional high episodic exposure? Peo-
ple are still exposed to high vinyl chloride concen-
trations. They have to go in to clean out a tank, or
where there is an accident of some kind. These
are very hard to avoid, even if you have continu-
ous control; the occasional high episodic exposure
is very likely to occur with the best resources in
the world. Do the animal data help to answer the
question of comparative risk between low level
continuous exposure and occasional episodic high
exposure?
DR. REDMOND: One of your questions had to do
with the extent to which there is consistency
internationally in the results that are cited or
noted for coke oven workers. First, let me say we
studied 12 coke plants, 11 in the United States
and one in Canada. We noted quite good consist-
ency in terms of the estimated levels of relative
risk, as I tried to point out in my discussion. It is
true that there are some differences among plants
but the thing that one must take into account is
that the sample sizes also varied considerably
among plants, and from time to time the issue
would be raised about a plant with a hundred
workers and no lung cancers observed. This result
is to be expected from the nature of the magni-
tude of the risk. Other factors can be the age of
the plant and so on. In taking into account the
consistency of the data I think we look very
closely at issues like length of exposure, where
people work, sample sizes, and so on, and find
within our own data closer agreement than what
I thought we would.
We have never noted risk as high as 250% for
steelworkers in general. As I commented earlier,
they seem to be around 35 to 40%. But most ofthe
plants are in urban areas. If you compare the
steelworker rates to those of other individuals
living in that same urban area, one tends to find
that they are usually very similar. So issues
would arise not just about smoking but other
kinds of environmental risks to which people
might be subjected, associated with urbanization
in general. But I would not know what would be
an explanation for a 250% excess that would
carry across such a very diverse industry as the
steel industry.
With respect to studies in other countries, the
British studies I believe have tended to get some-
what lower estimates of risk than we have noted
in this country for lung cancer. I really don't have
an explanation ofwhy that might be so.
DR. WAGONER: I am going to throw the question
on vinyl chloride about the dose rate concept to
Dr. Infante. However, I think it is important to
look at the human data and the NIOSH study.
Angiosarcomas in the NIOSH study clustered
among autoclave cleaners. With regard to brain
cancer there were markedly fewer individuals
who had been employed in that operation. For
lung cancer, employment as a reactor cleaner was
almost nonexistent. If one is to go back to experi-
mental models, with regard to the dose rate con-
cept, are you going to base your judgement on
angiosarcoma findings, are you going to base it on
lung cancer findings, or are you going to do it
disregarding the organ system that you are talk-
ing about?
DR. INFANTE: The Consumer Product Safety
Commission funded a study where they exposed
two different groups of animals to the same total
amount of vinyl chloride, but in one exposure
group they administered the vinyl chloride in
very high exposure levels, something like 5000
ppm, and the other group they exposed to the
same total amount but over a long period oftime.
I am sorry, but I don't know the results of the
study. It is available from the Consumer Products
Safety Commission. There is one problem,
though, I have noted with the study design. They
used two different strains of the same species.
Why they did that, I don't know.
I might just make one other point in terms of
cancer induction in some of the models that peo-
ple are working on. Older animals exposed to
vinyl chloride have a shorter time to tumor for
the induction of angiosarcoma of the liver com-
pared to younger animals. I think this is an
important concept that we have to begin to look
at. I don't know if you can extrapolate the result
to humans and conclude that older individuals
have a shorter time to tumor and perhaps poorer
repair mechanisms. We can't always assume a
constant latency period.
DR. WAGONER: With regard to Dr. Infante's com-
ment, about 5 years ago someone in Lyon, France,
associated with the International Agency for Re-
search on Cancer, suggested an alternative way
of controlling occupational cancer problems: to
hire older employees on the assumption that due
to competing risks they would die due to natural
diseases before manifesting cancer.
DR. C. W. STALLARD (Standard Oil): Tire han-
dling in the rubber industry, and also handling of
Pliofilm, indicated that skin exposure to benzene
might be a substantial route of exposure. In 1979
Howard Maibach completed his experiments,
which were referred to in the Supreme Court
hearing. Up to that time I think the prevalent
opinion was that benzene did not penetrate the
89
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
intact skin readily. It turned out it does, quite
readily; in fact, penetration is enhanced if it is
absorbed from an octanol or a gasoline vehicle.
Now, this is equally true for both intact and
abraded skin, and these reports have been in the
general literature since 1979. There are some
newer and not yet published data by Maibach and
by Blank. Absorption has occurred in simian and
cadaver skin, the palms ofhuman volunteers, and
abraded skin in the monkey. So skin exposure of
benzene can now be considered to be a relatively
important route of exposure. In looking back at
the exposure characteristics of the population in
rubber workers, perhaps this is a factor that
needs to be considered.
My other comment is that in chest films, one
cubic millimeter of cancer cells is equivalent to
one million cells. One cubic centimeter is equiva-
lent to one billion cells. I think you need say no
more about the sensitivity ofthe chest roentgeno-
gram as a means ofpreventing cancer, because it
is very difficult if not actually impossible to pick
up a 1 mm lesion. The Bureau of Radiologic
Health, I think, is beginning to compare the risks
ofmedical radiation with the benefit ofthis sort of
examination. I think their feeling about it is
negative at this point.
You did mention another chemical, and that is
acrylonitrile. I point out that O'Berg's study, in
its original and incomplete form, did indicate an
increased colon cancer. When it was eventually
published in July 1980, an increased incidence
did not appear: there is apparently no increase in
colon cancer in the populations of acrylonitrile
workers who have been studied. I don't imply that
these studies are satisfactorily adequate from an
epidemiologic standpoint, but there doesn't ap-
pear to be any positive data.
The last thing, Dr. Wagoner, the question of
manifestation and exposure, the Sixth Circuit
Court of Appeals within the last several months
has ruled that exposure is the prevailing doctrine
rather than manifestation. Consequently the em-
ployee who was exposed a long time ago is at a
different risk with regard to the way he would be
handled or treated from an employment or com-
pensation standpoint, at least in the area where
the doctrine would prevail.
DR. WAGONER: I would hope that the data I
presented on vinyl chloride does not leave one
with the lasting impression that, in addition to
the quantitative extrapolation of carcinogenesis
from the animal models to the human model, we
can also predict the exact target organ on the
basis ofthe experimental data in humans. So the
observations of the lack of cancer of the central
nervous system in the human populations ex-
posed to acrylonitrile, while the animal data did
demonstrate that effect, would not necessarily
surprise me. If I am not wrong, I believe the
O'Berg study did show an increased risk ofcancer.
DR. STALLARD: The animal data also did not
show an increased risk ofcolon cancer.
DR. INFANTE: I think the point Dr. Wagoner was
making is that you can't always extrapolate site-
to-site from animals to humans. The acrylonitrile
study that I have reviewed did demonstrate a
significant excess of lung cancer (J. Occup. Med.
22: 245-252, 1980). Ifyou are saying there is new
information, is this the analysis whereby the
comparison group was changed and the excess
then washed out? Is this the study you are speak-
ing of?
DR. STALLARD: Yes, I am. This is what I am
saying.
DR. INFANTE: I think as an epidemiologist, one
has to be concerned about changing the standard
population and drawing different conclusions.
Since I haven't actually reviewed the study you
are speaking of, I can't comment further about it.
It may be appropriate and it may not be.
IfI could comment on benzene and skin absorp-
tion, I am aware ofthe studies done by Maibach. I
think they were presented at the OSHA hearing
on the basis of, I believe, two monkeys, and the
toxicologist that we had review those studies did
not have much confidence in their results. I can't
comment further on them because I am not a
toxicologist. You also mentioned a case just now
where you said benzene was painted on the fore-
arms and hands of human volunteers, is that
correct?
DR. STALLARD: This is correct.
DR. INFANTE: I wonder, who were these volun-
teers? And what do you think about the medical
ethics of painting a human carcinogen on hu-
mans? Were they prisoners or what?
DR. STALLARD: I am sure that passed the re-
quirements of the committee that dealt with the
study at the university at which it was per-
formed. But I would like to return to O'Berg's
study. The initial data were incomplete and in-
conclusive. I used the words that were in their
report. The completed study, when it was finally
ready for peer review and publication, did not
show an increased incidence ofcolon cancer.
DR. M. A. MCCLELLAN (Gulf Oil): I am Dr.
McClellan, Medical Director of Gulf Oil. I would
just like to reply briefly. One of our studies was
commented on earlier, so I would like to add a
little information at the present time. Dr. Infante
has spoken to our study that was reported to us by
90
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
Irving Tabershaw. That study was done on one of
our refinery groups and it was done primarily to
establish whether or not the groups that might
have been exposed to benzene over a number of
years showed any excess ofleukemia. In interpre-
tation of Dr. Infante's slide, I think it might not
have been clear to the audience that the exposed
group did not show an excess of leukemia.
The excess leukemia that Dr. Infante referred
to was found in the control group. I would like to
add a little information on that, just an update.
That control group was a 10% sample of the
working group. We are engaged in a complete
sampling of the group from which controls were
chosen at the present time. The particular finding
of an excess of leukemia in the control group has
been cited here notwithstanding the further ex-
pansion ofthe study. The study will be reported in
due time. In other words, leukemia isn't showing
up as an excess in the entire working group. The
initial result is probably not going to withstand
the test oftime.
Secondly, Dr. Infante referred to Shottenfeld's
study. That was a very preliminary report of a
study that Memorial Sloan-Kettering is doing for
the American Petroleum Institute on all petro-
leum workers. As Dr. Infante reported, there was
a statistical excess of leukemia found in this
study, however, there are two things to consider.
First, the distribution and the type ofleukemia in
that study make one view it with caution. Second,
this is a very preliminary report ofan early study
that is going to go on for many years, and all of
the findings must be interpreted with caution
because ofthe small numbers ofcases thus far.
I would hate to leave the audience with the
impression that at this point in time lymphatic
leukemia has been proved to be connected with
petroleum refining.
DR. INFANTE: I would like to comment, if I may.
First, I am aware of Tabershaw's study where he
took a 10% sampling of refinery workers. He
demonstrated a significant excess of leukemia.
Subsequently, individuals who were known to be
exposed to benzene were studied. This was a
study that was done by Wen as part of a compan-
ion paper. There were 443 individuals exposed to
benzene in that subcohort. No leukemia cases
were identified. But nevertheless that study was
statistically insensitive. In fact, the author him-
self concluded that he would have had only a 50-
50 chance of identifying a 19-fold risk of leuke-
mia.,
Now, I think these are the things that this
meeting on occupational and environmental epi-
demiology is about. The point is that latter study
is too insensitive to make any conclusion about
benzene exposure and leukemia.
DR. MCCLELLAN: Then, Dr. Infante, what was
your earlier point about it?
DR. INFANTE: My comment was that individuals
in petroleum refining are demonstrating an ex-
cess ofcancer. In Tabershaw's study two ofthe six
cases were lymphatic cancer, and in Schotten-
feld's study, there was a significant excess of
lymphatic leukemia. Now when you say you don't
know how to interpret this study, because the
distribution ofthe leukemia isn't what you would
expect, I am concerned that we don't put on our
blinders and become myopic. The point is, the
epidemiologic studies ofbenzene-exposed persons
that have been conducted to date, and there are
only two, the study I did and the study conducted
by Ott, are not sensitive even to detect a 5-fold
risk of cell types other than myelomonocytic leu-
kemia; in fact Wen's study had only have a 50-50
chance of detecting a 19-fold risk of total leuke-
mia.
DR. MCCLELLAN: Dr. Infante, you are abso-
lutely correct. It takes large groups to detect
anything, and this is precisely what Dr. Schotten-
feld is engaged in at the present time and the
reason for his study. I simply caution against
premature interpretation of any results. Prema-
ture interpretation leaves us in a position, when
true results are reported from a completed study,
where arguments go on forever. So my point at
the present time, that I think you verify, is simply
that Dr. Tabershaw's study was incomplete. There
is now a more complete study of that group that
will become a part ofan even larger study, and as
time goes on these things you speak of will be
developed fully.
There are not at the present time any data from
which one can draw final epidemiologic judge-
ments. It is not a matter of epidemiologic conclu-
sions. It is not a matter of putting on blinders. It
is a matter of interpreting things properly.
DR. ROBERT WILSON (Ontario Hydro): Dr. In-
fante, you indicated that standards are not going
to be setjust on health effects, and ifI understood
you correctly you also said you probably have to
consider feasibility and cost. Now, assuming that
the health effects justify a reduction in standard,
and that it is feasible-and I don't understand the
distinction between feasibility and cost, you
know, when one can put a man on the moon-but
if $300 million to prevent a fatality was consid-
ered too much, what do you feel is a reasonable
cost that might well be accepted to prevent a
fatality?
DR. INFANTE: Are you asking: what is the rea-
91
DISCUSSION: SESSION III
sonable cost to save one life? First of all, $300
million to save one life in terms of benzene expo-
sure is an absurd estimate. I think OSHA made
an error of law, not an error of science. I say an
error of law, because we lost the case OSHA took
the position that it wasn't OSHA's mandate to do
a risk assessment with the benzene standard. But
the Supreme Court disagreed, and that's where
we are today. But I would never attempt to put a
dollar figure on a human life.
92
