Integrated Defense System Overlaps as a
Disease Model: With Examples for Multiple
Chemical Sensitivity
Steven C. Rowat
Grantham's Landing, British Columbia, Canada
The central nervous, immune, and endocrine systems communicate through multiple common
messengers. Over evolutionary time, what may be termed integrated defense system(s) (IDS)
have developed to coordinate these communications for specific contexts; these include the
stress response, acute-phase response, nonspecific immune response, immune response to
antigen, kindling, tolerance, time-dependent sensitization, neurogenic switching, and traumatic
dissociation (TD). These IDSs are described and their overlap is examined. Three models of
disease production are generated: damage, in which IDSs function incorrectly; inadequate/
inappropriate, in which IDS response is outstripped by a changing context; and evolving/learning, in
which the IDS learned response to a context is deemed pathologic. Mechanisms of multiple
chemical sensitivity (MCS) are developed from several IDS disease models. Model 1A is pesticide
damage to the central nervous system, overlapping with body chemical burdens, TD, and chronic
zinc deficiency; model 1 B is benzene disruption of interleukin-1, overlapping with childhood
developmental windows and hapten-antigenic spreading; and model 1C is autoimmunity to
immunoglobulin-G (IgG), overlapping with spreading to other lgG-inducers, sudden spreading of
inciters, and food-contaminating chemicals. Model 2A is chemical and stress overload, including
comparison with the susceptibility/sensitization/triggering/spreading model; model 2B is genetic
mercury allergy, overlapping with: heavy metals/zinc displacement and childhood/gestational
mercury exposures; and model 3 is MCS as evolution and learning. Remarks are offered on
current MCS research. Problems with clinical measurement are suggested on the basis of IDS
models. Large-sample patient self-report epidemiology is described as an alternative or addition to
clinical biomarker and animal testing. Environ Health Perspect 106(Suppl 1):85-109 (1998).
http.//ehpnet1.niehs.nih.gov/docs/1998/Suppl-1/85-1O9rowat/abstract.html
Key words: integrated defense system, multiple chemical sensitivity, disease model, IDS,
MCS, traumatic dissociation, TD, pesticide, benzene, IL-1, vinyl chloride disease, autoimmune,
overload, mercury allergy
Integrated Defense System
Overlaps as a Disease Model
Nervous, Immune, and Endocrine
Integrated Defense Systems
Over past decades researchers have identified
several context-specific response systems
that are combinations of the central ner-
vous, immune, and endocrine systems and
their messengers. In this paper these are
termed integrated defense systems (IDSs).
The following IDS have been studied and
reported in the literature: time-dependent
sensitization (TDS), immune response to
antigen (IRA), kindling, nonspecific
immune response (NIR), acute-phase
response (APR), stress response (SR), neu-
rogenic switching (NS), tolerance, and
traumatic dissociation (TD).
As Figure 1 illustrates neuroimmune-
endocrine interactions of these IDSs are
complex. There are homeostases within
Manuscript received at EHP4 June 1997; accepted 9 October 1997.
Thanks to B. Bellin for research contributions and comments on the manuscript.
Address correspondence to Dr. S.C. Rowat, P.O. Box 175, 812 Port Mellon Highway, Grantham's Landing,
British Columbia Canada VON 1X0. Telephone: (604) 886-0670. Fax: (604) 886-0670. E-mail: steven rowat@sun-
shine.net
Abbreviations used: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; APR, acute-phase response; BPD, borderline personak
ity disorder; CNS, central nervous system; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; cdp, direct or partial; EMU, envi
ronmental medical unit; GABA, -taminobutyric acid; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor;
IDS, integrated defense system; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IRA, immune response to antigen; MBP, man-
nan binding protein; MCS, multiple chemical sensitivity; MeHg, methyl mercury; MPD, multiple personality disor-
der; MT, metallothionen; NIR, nonspecific immune response; NK, natural killer; NS, neurogenic switching; OP,
organophosphate; PCB, polychlorinated biphenyl; PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder; SR, stress response; TD,
traumatic dissociation; TDS, time-dependent sensitization; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor alpha; VIP, vasoactive
intestinal peptide.
each of the central nervous, immune, and
endocrine systems with multiple messengers
running between them. Many of these
messengers travel between two sets of the
systems such as thymic peptides, adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone (ACTH), tumor necro-
sis factor alpha (TNF-a), and interleukins,
or between all three such as ,-endorphins
and interferons. This overlap indicates not
only that any one IDS is likely to invoke
wide systemic responses but also that over-
laps and cross-interactions among the IDSs
themselves are possible.
Overlaps and Interactions among
Integrated Defense Systems
Many IDSs are involved regularly in defense
response. In exploring possible significant
interactions among them, the following
points can be made.
* All IDSs have a range of known symp-
tomatic response that extends across at
least two ofthe nervous, endocrine, and
immune systems, and several encom-
pass all three. This is shown graphically
in Figure 2.
* Many of the IDSs use identical messen-
gers, cells, and tissues to accomplish
their responses (interleukin-l [IL-11],
interferons, ACTH, endorphins, T cells,
substance P, neurotransmitters, etc.)
Some known overlaps are collated into
Table 1. (Also see "Range of Physical
Action" in the individual IDS descrip-
tions in the following section.) Because
we are still discovering messengers at an
appreciable rate [for instance, substance
P (1) and the range of effect of the
interleukins (2)], actual overlaps may be
greater than we know at present.
* Many IDSs have identical inciters
(Table 1). For instance, eight of the
nine IDSs are known to be incited by
exogenous chemicals and six by
microorganisms. There is either direct
or partial evidence that all nine are
induced by physical stress, seven by
endogenous chemicals, seven by psy-
chological stress, etc.
* Many of the IDSs have a long
time-range [for instance, months or
years with TDS (3), TD, tolerance,
kindling (4), and aspects of IRA (5)].
Temporally overlapping activity of sev-
eral is therefore possible. With multiple
or chronic stressors, some temporal
overlap becomes inevitable.
* Many IDSs are reported to operate
through a threshold mechanism [TDS
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 85
S.C. ROWAT
Figure 1. Messenger overlaps between the nervous, immune, and endocrine
systems. Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-
releasing hormone; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide.
Figure 2. Overlaps in range of symptomatic response of nine IDSs across the
nervous, immune, and endocrine systems.
Table 1. Reported range of physical action and inciters for IDSs.
; - . - oIDS
Action and inciters TDS IRA Kin NIR APR SR NS Tol TD
Rangaof physical action
Cortexand higherbrain
Peripheral CNS celIs
Serotonin and GABA:A
Proht;agl4ndi- -. --- * *
NEx onu chemicals * oZirncrandsMTs
Abbreviatiens:Kin,kindIiit T
Complement 0-o*O
........... ---
_
Pscol
M1~~ ~ ~1
AIbbrweiationw:;1Kii;idn1n -ta,lerancd ;.O. imct evidence of involvement. o, Partial evidence of involvement.
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 106, Supplement 1 a February 1998
.Y2WC
86
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
(3), kindling (4), SR (6), IRA (7)] and
conceivably all do. In some cases a
threshold is even fired by other IDSs in
a chain reaction; for instance, the NIR
can lead to the APR, which can lead to
the SR.
Conditioning-associative learning-
among the central nervous, immune,
and endocrine systems has been docu-
mented and reviewed (8-10). For
instance, selective immune parameters
can be trained to change with central
nervous system (CNS)-endocrine sig-
nals derived from taste (11), smell (12),
audiovisual signals (13), and psycho-
logic stress (8,14-16). CNS-endocrine
emotions such as fear (17) can be con-
ditioned to perceptions (sound, con-
text), and CNS-endocrine symptoms
such as anxiety, sleep disorders, irritabil-
ity, and depression have been suggested
to be classically conditioned responses
to environmental odors (18).
The foregoing overlap data infer that
there is strong potential for interactions
between IDSs. For example Table 1 shows
that there is direct or partial (d/p) evidence
that psychological stress can incite seven of
the nine IDS-TDS, IRA, NIR, SR, NS,
tolerance, and TD. If we look at the ranges
of physical action of these seven IDSs, we
find that many are using the same messen-
gers. For instance, all seven have d/p evi-
dence of using IL-1, IL-2, T and B cells,
and other immune cells; six have d/p evi-
dence for using mast cells, TNF, other
interleukins, Zn, and metallothionein;
(MT); five have d/p evidence of using
ACTH, ,-endorphins, immunoglobulins,
and proteins of the classic or alternative
pathways of the complement cytolysis
system; four have d/p evidence ofusing lim-
bic brain, cortex, peripheral nerve cells,
dopamine and norepinephrine, substance P,
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), somato-
statin, and other hormones, and three have
d/p evidence of using other brain structures,
serotonin andy-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
prostaglandins, and histamine.
Ifthis overlap data is combined with the
points listed above-the IDSs similarities in
their range of symptomatic responses, the
use of thresholds by the IDSs (some of
which chain), long timeframes of certain
IDSs, and conditioned learning, which
cross-fertilizes inciters and triggering cues-
there is potential for confounded activity
among the IDSs that may include long-term
learning of new thresholds of response.
Such activity conceivably includes some
existing diseases and syndromes. It may be
especially useful to consider problematic
diseases and syndromes like fibromyalgia,
chronic fatigue, and multiple chemical sen-
sitivity (MCS), which defy conventional
analysis and often are postulated to be mul-
tifactorial conditions. Example models are
generated for MCS in "MCS Mechanisms
Generated from IDS Overlap Models."
IDS Disease Production ModelTypes
To narrow the vast list of IDS interactions
we are faced with in Table 1, it may be
useful to examine types of IDS disease pro-
duction. Ifwe posit a rapidly changing envi-
ronmental context-a human immersed in
levels of chemicals and stress that are out-
stripping the evolutionary time required
originally to build the IDSs-we might see
these three types ofnew interactions:
* Damage to IDSs, in which one or more
of the IDSs no longer functions cor-
rectly because of a physical distortion
or loss of one of its parts and in which
its/their interactions with the other
IDSs are also crippled.
* Inadequate or inappropriate response
from IDSs, in which a radically chang-
ing context includes new inciters or
new concentrations of known inciters
that induce pathologically inadequate
responses from one or more IDSs.
* Evolving or learning IDSs, in which a
changed context is mirrored by novel
learning, including genetic learning, by
one or more IDSs, giving rise to a new
range ofresponse.
When faced with a puzzling disease
entity, we may then ask the following three
questions about each IDS. Has the IDS
been damaged? Has the context to which
the IDS responds been changed so much
that the IDS's range ofresponse is no longer
adequate? Has the IDS learned a new range
ofresponse to reflect a changed context?
Depending on the answers to these
questions, we can build a combining
hypothesis for the disease mechanism with
several IDSs involved. This mechanism can
include more than one type ofIDS change.
For instance (in a random example for
illustration only): a) benzene can damage
the immune response to antigen (19);
b) continuous ambient air pollution such
as NO2 produces a tolerance response, but
with rising levels tolerance is eventually
inadequate and is exhausted (20) and is
followed by pathologic tissue changes; c) a
child raised in an environment of severe
abuse and neglect and without any caring
adult support frequently will evolve a cop-
ing pattern that includes changes in,
among other things, SR to aggressive
situations, involving catecholamine, cortisol,
serotonin, and endogenous opioid response
changes (21).
If all three of these IDS changes were
to occur in one person specific repeatable
symptoms would be observed based on the
interaction between the damaged IRA, the
exhausted tolerance to NO2, and the mod-
ified (evolved) SR. If this specific constel-
lation of IDS changes was to occur among
a large number of people, reflecting a
broad environmental context change in
benzene concentration, NO2 concentra-
tion, and frequency of child abuse, then
the resulting similarity of symptoms across
separate patient case histories could be
called a syndrome.
In this paper it is suggested that working
backward from case histories using the IDS
framework can in some instances reveal
which IDS interactions cause the syndrome.
Individual IDS Descriptions
In "MCS Mechanisms Generated from
IDS Overlap Models" MCS mechanisms
are modeled as malfunctions and interac-
tions of the nine IDSs. To accomplish this
an understanding of the individual charac-
teristics of IDSs is useful. Definitions
drawn from the scientific literature, as well
as a range of physical action, are given for
each IDS. It is assumed that most readers
will be familiar with most but not all the
IDSs; therefore, more detail for each IDS,
including a description of mode of action
and inciters, is confined to the Appendix.
Range of physical action and inciters are
summarized in Table 1.
The full description ofTD is included at
the end of the listing below rather than in
the Appendix, and readers are encouraged to
examine it. The recent research into severe
psychological trauma, including severe child
abuse, has shown that it frequently produces
permanent biological changes, and severe
child abuse recently has been convincingly
linked to well-known adult psychiatric dys-
functions. This background may be useful
in understanding how TD could be an
appreciable factor in widespread IDS inter-
actions. The nine IDSs considered, along
with referenced definitions and ranges of
physical action, are listed below.
Time-Dependent Sensitization. "TDS
refers to the ability of mild stressors-
whether pharmacological or environmen-
tal-to induce physiological and behavioral
effects which then progress, i.e., get stronger,
entirely as a function of the passage of time
since stressor presentation" (3).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 87
S.C. ROWAT
"TDS is the progressive and persistent
amplification of behavioral, neurochemi-
cal, endocrine, and/or immunological
responses to repeated intermittent stimuli
over time" (22).
The range of physical action includes
neurotransmitters such as dopamine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, GABA, and
aspartate (3); hormones (corticosterone,
ACTH, J-endorphin); and immune system
(3). Zinc is implicated in GABA (23-25)
function.
Immune Response to Antigen. "The
main feature that separates vertebrate from
invertebrate immune systems is the ability
to generate antigen-specific lymphoid
cells" (26).
"[T]he immune system...learns to recog-
nize foreign organisms and exhibits the
property of memory. It remembers that it
has seen a foreign organism and on its sec-
ond encounter with that organism, it attacks
more rapidly and more efficiently" (27).
The range of physical action for the
IRA includes T- and B-cell receptors for
specific antigens; thymus-directed T-cell
growth processes including gene encoding
for receptors (28); T- and B-cell multipli-
cation; B-cell production of antigen-spe-
cific immunoglobulin antibody molecules
including immunoglobulin (Ig)A, IgG,
IgE, and IgM; T-cell production and
reception of messengers including inter-
leukins (IL-1 through IL-8). The range
also includes TNF (2); platelet-activating
factor (29); T- and B-cell production and
reception of hormones including ACTH
and 3-endorphin (30,31); T- and B-cell
receptors for CNS messengers such as sub-
stance P (1,32), VIP (32,33), and somato-
statin (32), and for endocrine hormones
such as thymulin (34). Zinc is required for
thymulin activation. For a review ofdozens
of messengers between the nervous and
immune systems, see Plata-Salaman (29).
Kindling. "[K]indling refers to neural
processes that mediate lasting changes in
brain function in response to repeated, tem-
porally spaced application of neurobehav-
iorally active agents" (35).
"Partial limbic kindling is a progressive
and persistent lowering ofthe threshold for
eliciting electrical after-discharges, but not
motor seizures, in certain brain structures
such as amygdala and hippocampus;
behavioral consequences include increased
avoidant behaviors" (22).
The range ofphysical action for kindling
includes various brain structures, e.g., the
cortex (36) and especially the limbic brain
including the olfactory bulb and amygdala
(37). Changes in brain chemistry are
found, including a decrease in acetyl-
cholinesterase enzyme activity that parallels
the increase in sensitivity (37). Calcium-
binding protein and tyrosine hydroxylase
activity are reportedly reduced, and there
are changes in 3-noradrenergic binding
(36). Benzodiazepine receptor binding is
modified (36), as are transmitter GABA
and N-methyl-D-aspartate functions (4).
Zinc may be implicated through GABA
(23-25). Superoxide dismutase may also be
involved (38). "These changes may be irre-
versible" (37).
Nonspecific Immune Response. "Long
before the appearance of antigen-specific T
cells or antibodies, the body is able to
deploy an impressive array of humoral fac-
tors as a highly effective first line ofdefense
against potential pathogens" (39).
The range of physical action for NIR
includes circulating mast, natural killer
(NK), macrophage, B, and T cells and their
produced molecules such as TNF-a, IL-1
through IL-6, granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (40)
and histamine (1). Other actions include
collectins such as mannan binding protein
(MBP), surfactant protein-A, and surfac-
tant protein-D (39); and complement com-
ponents such as Cir, C1s, C4, and C2 (39)
which are serum proteins that respond to
antigen-antibody complexes (primarily) by
generating an enzyme cascade that effects
the membrane attack complex for cytolysis.
Acute-phase Response. "In the after-
math ofinjury, trauma or infection ofa tis-
sue, a complex series of reactions are
executed by the host in an effort to prevent
ongoing tissue damage, isolate and destroy
the infective organism and activate the
repair processes that are necessary to return
the organism to normal function" (41).
The range of physical action for APR
includes circulating cells such as macro-
phages, monocytes, platelets, and mast
cells; stromal and endothelial cells local to
damage; cytokines such as IL-i, TNF, IL-
6, and possibly IL-4 and IL-8; thrombox-
ane A2, and prostaglandins I2, E2, D2,
and F2a. Also included are leukotrienes
B4, C4, D4, and E4, bradykinin; ACTH;
glucocorticoids induding cortisol; J-endor-
phin; Zn; MT; and many liver-mediated
proteins such as glycoprotein, C-reactive
protein, complement C3, fibrinogen,
and antiproteases.
Stress Response. "Stressors are the
disturbing forces or threats to homeostasis,
and adaptive responses include physical
or mental reactions that attempt to
counteract the effects of the stressors or
disturbing forces in order to re-establish
homeostasis" (6).
The range of physical action for SR
includes brain regions: hypothalamus,
brain stem, limbic system, and cortex;
pituitary gland, adrenal gland, corti-
cotropin-releasing hormone (CRH),
ACTH, f-endorphins, glucocorticoids,
adrenergic system, and catecholamines. It
also includes immune cells (macrophages,
T, B, and NK cells); cytokines IL-1, IL-2,
IL-3, IL-6, TNF, prostaglandins induding
PGE2; adenosine monophosphate (42);
tissue Zn (43,44), and brain Zn (45).
Neurogenic Switching. "Neurogenic
switching is proposed to result when a sen-
sory impulse from a site of activation is
rerouted via the central nervous system to a
distant location to produce neurogenic
inflammation at the second location" (46).
The range of physical action for NS
includes immune system mast, T, B, and
other cells; CNS peripheral cells; cytokines
such as IL-1 and IL-2 communicating with
both CNS and immune cells; neuropep-
tides such as substance P, somatostatin, and
VIP communicating with both CNS and
immune cells. Various regions ofthe central
CNS may be involved in processing infor-
mation during switching. Immune memory
(cells and genetic coding) may also be
involved in encoding the switching (10).
Tolerance. "Adaptation and tolerance
are defined ultimately in biochemical and
biological adjustments that enable organ-
isms to survive...[T]olerance is character-
ized, not only by repair, but also by the
development of refractoriness or immunity
to the persistent insult so that repair at the
[same] level is no longer required in the
usual sense..." (20).
"Symptoms ofexposure to many chemi-
cals, whether inhaled or ingested, appear to
follow a biphasic pattern. Adaptation is
characterized by acclimatization (habitua-
tion, tolerance) with repeated exposures
that result in a masking ofsymptoms" (47).
"The stage of resistance represents the
sum of all nonspecific systemic reactions
elicited by prolonged exposure to stimuli
to which the organism has acquired adap-
tation as a result ofcontinuous exposure. It
is characterized by an increased resistance
to the particular agent to which the body is
exposed and a decreased resistance to other
types ofstress" (48).
"Oral tolerance is a term used to indi-
cate antigen-specific systemic hyporespon-
siveness after prior enteral (oral) exposure
to that antigen" (49).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199888
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
The range of physical action for toler-
ance includes multiple tolerance instances,
mechanisms, and symptoms involving
multiple organ systems (7,20,47-55); the
entire nervous, immune, and endocrine
systems are potentially involved.
Traumatic Dissociation. "Dissociation
is defined in DSM-III-R [Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual, 3rd Ed., Revised] as a
disturbance or alteration in the normally
integrative functions of identity, memory,
or consciousness....a more precise defini-
tion ofdissociation is required..." (56).
"Dissociation is one of the principal
mechanisms by which people cope with
overwhelming experiences. Dissociation
terminates states of extreme physical and
emotional arousal during the trauma, but
over time dissociative processes may be
activated by minor stresses and simple
reminders ofearlier trauma" (21).
"Dissociative states, used defensively at
the time of abuse, may become a general-
ized defense in any situation where strong
affect is aroused" (57).
"Dissociation may belong to the realm
of biological mechanisms that are triggered
by overwhelming trauma-related affects
and events...." (58).
Current research and reviews assert that
mild dissociation experiences are common
in the general population (56) and that
strong dissociation is a key and possibly
defining component of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) (21,59-62), borderline
personality disorder (BPD) (57,58,60), and
multiple personality disorder (MPD) cases
(63). All these clinical psychopathologies are
associated principally with childhood abuse
(21,57-60,63-66) and their differences
may represent stages and facets of the same
underlying process (61,62,67,68).
Since the etiologies of PTSD, BPD,
and MPD are only now being revealed and
because they appear to overlap signifi-
cantly (all three commonly involve child
sexual abuse), TD as introduced here is
modeled after dissociation as used by van
der Kolk and Fisler (21,61,69) and others
in which it refers to a combined biologi-
cal-psychological mechanism central to all
cases of PTSD, BPD, and MPD, and
which also occurs in less extreme forms in
nonpathologic populations.
TD, then, is an emergency defense
system invoked during overwhelming
inescapable psychological trauma, and
modulates both cerebral logical organiza-
tion and physiological affect regulation.
Especially after chronic trauma in child-
hood, TD produces lasting changes in
both, although the symptoms may not
appear simultaneously.
MODE OF ACTION. Recent articles in
attachment theory (59,70), a research and
theoretical framework in developmental
psychology, describe the building ofa con-
ceptual model ofrelationships in the infant
mind as early as the end of the first year of
life (70). Attachment researchers have
identified several types of children with
incomplete or deviant attachment behavior
(called avoidant, resistant, and disorganized
behavior). They have found these types of
children to be the result of insensitive,
inconsistent, and abusive parenting, respec-
tively (59,70). These children are postu-
lated to have developed incomplete or
damaged internal models ofthemselves and
their relationships to the outside world
(70), possibly permanently, because abused
children are known to more frequently
become abusing parents (70).
Working from a framework of adult
PTSD and BPD, van der Kolk and Fisler
(21) postulated disrupted attachment
(including that resulting from abuse)
results in a biochemically based loss ofcon-
ceptual control. Current perceptions that
appear superficially similar to past trauma
cause emotion-based fight or flight
responses to occur immediately, without
the mediation ofan abstract internal model
that could decide whether such responses
are valid. van der Kolk and Fisler further
maintain that "forty years of research on
nonhuman primates have firmly estab-
lished that...disruptions of attachment
early in the life cycle (as occurs in child
abuse) have long-term effects on the neuro-
chemical response to subsequent stress,
including the magnitude of the cate-
cholamine response and the duration and
extent of the cortisol response. There are
also long-term effects on a number ofother
biological systems, such as the serotonin
and endogenous opioid system" (21).
In humans as well, PTSD, BPD, and
MPD have been associated with lasting
biologic changes in either baseline levels or
during response to stress. For PTSD mea-
sured in war veterans, this includes norepi-
nephrine, cortisol, ACTH response to
CRH, serotonin (71), endogenous opioids,
lymphocyte glucocorticoid receptors
(21,69), and regional brain-flow patterns
(72). A serotonin function review has cited
its low levels in BPD and shown low levels
of serotonin to be related to hyperirritabil-
ity, hyperexcitability, and hypersensitivity,
pain sensitivity, and lack of an inhibitory
response in behavioral systems subserved
by the hippocampal/amygdala system,
including conceptual processing of reward,
punishment, and uncertainty (73).
MPD was only recently recognized as
an intentionally secret condition and not as
rare as had been thought (perhaps not rare
at all). MPD may be a superordinate diag-
nosis that may contain any of the symp-
toms ofPTSD, BPD, and other personality
disorders (63). In MPD separate personali-
ties may have different (allergic) immune
reactions (65) as well as differing responses
to the same substance (alcohol, foods, and
medications) (65), different body tempera-
ture, heart rate, and skin temperature (66),
different eye muscle malfunctions (visual
acuity problems) (66) and insulin levels
(74), different handednesses (65), and dif-
ferent brain wave patterns (66). Thus in
extreme cases ofTD (i.e., MPD), not only
is there an altered response to stress, there
is an altered psychologic and physiologic
response to almost everything. The num-
ber of varying personalities, which can
approach 200 (74), has been significantly
connected (p<0.0001) to the number of
types of childhood trauma reported in a
patient's history (65).
Thus overwhelming trauma, particu-
larly in inescapable (61,75) or double-bind
situations [such as abuse by father or other
primary caregiver (76)], appears to make a
conceptual shift or dissociation in how
both the psychologic and physiologic sys-
tems respond to stress. When the trauma
occurs during the formation of a child's
conceptual models, especially chronically,
the shift is likely to be much more intense.
RANGE OF PHYSICAL ACTION. TD
physical actions vary with the degree ofdis-
sociation; pathologically in PTSD and
BPD they include many, and perhaps all,
brain, endocrine, and immune systems that
are involved in the SR such as cortisol,
CRH, ACTH, norepinephrine, and lym-
phocytes; serotonin and possibly GABA
and other parts of the noradrenergic sys-
tem; and endogenous opioids. Although
less well understood, TD also affects what-
ever higher-level brain centers subserve
amnesia for self and place and for deper-
sonalization and derealization experiences
[such as not recognizing one's reflection in
a mirror or looking at the world through a
fog (56)]. In MPD the range of physical
action includes all the foregoing plus what-
ever brain, immune, and endocrine areas
and mediators are required to differentiate
insulin levels, heart rate, skin temperature,
allergic reactions, responses to foods and
medications, eye acuity, handedness, and
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 89
S.C. ROWAT
brain wave patterns. In other words, most
ifnot all body systems are included.
INCITERS. TD inciters are primarily
conceptual: inescapably traumatic (frighten-
ing) events; i.e., child physical and particu-
larly sexual abuse, war, rape, torture,
domestic violence (72), and natural disaster
experiences (69).
MCS Mechanisms Generated
from IDS Overlap Models
Multiple Chemical Sensitivity.
AWorking Definition
A population of patients has emerged that
reports elevated responses to low levels of
environmental chemicals and adverse reac-
tions to foods. One working group has
termed these patients people reporting
chemical sensitivity (77). They appear to
come from four population categories that
have been well-characterized elsewhere
(78). These categories are: industrial
workers, workers in tight buildings, people
in contaminated communities, and indi-
viduals with and without acute chemical
exposure histories.
Deciding who has MCS is problematic;
the recently begun search for MCS bio-
markers so far has been inconclusive
(79-82). However, in the literature and
based on extensive clinical experience,
working definitions have evolved; this
paper will use one similar to that proposed
by Miller (83) and Miller et al. (84), with
one notable difference: inclusion of the
stress context.
Miller (83) proposes that MCS can be
confirmed when, in a dean environmental
medical unit (EMU), the following condi-
tions are true: a) when a subject simultane-
ously avoids all chemical, food, and drug
incitants, remission of symptoms occurs
(unmasking); b) a specific constellation of
symptoms occurs with reintroduction of a
particular incitant; c) symptoms resolve
when the incitant is again avoided; and d)
with reexposure to the same incitant, the
same constellation of symptoms reoccurs,
provided the challenge is conducted within
an appropriate window oftime.
Working within the IDS overlap frame-
work provided in "Integrated Defense
System Overlaps as a Disease Model," a
problem with this definition is that a par-
ticular form of psychological stress may be
integral to the combined IDS response. For
example, if TD has modified the SR and
thereby modified the thresholds of other
IDSs that use the same messengers (as
modeled in the examples that follow), the
above definition could lead to the
improper attribution ofsymptoms to MCS
if a concurrent psychological triggering of
the SR is necessary for the low-level chemi-
cal response to occur. Because it is proba-
ble such a stress is not provided by the
EMU, no response is found and MCS is
therefore invalidated as a causative factor.
Yet the response occurs again when the
patient is in his or her normal (psychologi-
cally stressed) environment. Conversely,
the patient may find the EMU stressful to
the degree that it is not possible to unmask
the symptoms. Consider the following
report of a 21-year old patient with PTSD
(whose response to chemicals is not
reported): "A lot oftimes I wake up at two,
three o'clock in the morning and I'm hav-
ing an anxiety attack before my eyes even
get open. Sometimes it's that I'm dream-
ing, because that [clinic visit] is still going
around in my head, even though it was six
months ago. I'm really scared of this one
doctor, and a lot of times he's in [the
dream]...I hyperventilate, and I can't
breathe, and I have stomach spasms, mus-
de spasms, and sometimes I throw up after
it's over" (85).
Bell et al. (86) expressed similar concern
for MCS testing protocols because animal
work shows TDS sensitization in one envi-
ronment does not replicate in a novel envi-
ronment. To put it simply: context matters.
Thus it may be that in searching for an
MCS definition and mechanism the
attempt to isolate the patient from the con-
text is premature; patients' reports of what
is happening to them in their own words
may be our best source of data for formu-
lating hypotheses of what is occurring. At
present the only widely available forms of
these reports are a few extremely moving
self-reports that have appeared in the scien-
tific literature (87,88) or the popular press
and, importantly, collated data from clini-
cians (89-93), including attempts by clini-
cians to define the condition [collated by
Miller (90)].
This wealth of rich, awkward, and
unfinished data and other published
reports, along with my own experiences
with people reporting chemical sensitivity,
have been used to generate the IDS-overlap
MCS models to follow.
IDS Overla MCS Examples:
Induction and Summary
What appears to be required in the study of
MCS-with its variable biomarkers, multi-
organ symptoms, and diverse patient demo-
graphics-is a model that allows variable
biomarkers and symptoms among different
hosts, and even in the same host at different
times. For instance, a review of immuno-
logic data reported on MCS (94) notes
many abnormalities; some of these, how-
ever, are in opposite directions: T-cell
helper/suppressor ratios reduced in several
studies but raised in another; unusual
amounts of autoantibodies in some studies
but not in others; reductions in absolute T-
cell counts in some studies and increases in
others. Elsewhere a study of immune
marker alterations among several hundred
workers at a computer factory exposed to
various chemicals showed a split skew with
significant increases or decreases in T-cell
helper/suppressor ratios as well as autoim-
mune markers (95). Work with single-pho-
ton emission-computed tomography brain
scanning ofveterans with chemical sensitiv-
ities (96) shows differences during the trig-
gering state; this suggests a coded response
but there does not appear to be traceable
damage to any system. The task then may
not be to find a linear marker for MCS, but
to understand and extract from the data
more complex changes in mechanisms
underlying the biomarkers.
The overlap and chaining of thresholds
in the examples developed below are sug-
gested as first attempts at models that
include nonlinear interactions between
linked homeostatic systems. Mathematically
they probably would best be expressed by a
set of linked differential equations,
although the explicit mathematics are not
presented here. [Mathematics might best
be supplied by chaos theory, which has
been used to develop a model of the
immune system as a dynamic adaptation
system (27,55) to model the coevolution
ofhosts and parasites (97,98) and to study
pathology (99), psychology (100), physiol-
ogy (101), and a large number of other
biomedical disciplines (102-107)].
Examples ofthe following MCS models
produced through IDS interaction will be
considered in the balance of this paper.
Some are included because parts of their
mechanism have been directly suggested by
the MCS clinical literature; others are
included because they are known to be
widespread phenomena and their IDS
interactions appear capable of generating
MCS symptoms.
Six models are considered separately;
they are grouped as follows:
1. MCS attributable to damage ofIDSs
1A. Pesticide damage to the CNS
lB. Benzene disruption of IL-1
maturation
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199890
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
IC. Autoimmunity to IgG or vinyl
chloride disease
2. MCS attributable to inadequate or
inappropriate response from IDSs
2A. Chemical and stress overload
(using a combination offormalde-
hyde, air pollutants, anxiety, ben-
zene, alkylphenol novolac resin,
and anger)
2B. Mercury allergy in a genetic sub-
set (to increased levels of mercury
in dental applications, food, and
paint)
3. MCS attributable to evolving or learning
IDSs
3. MCS as evolution (a semantic
exploration)
IDS Overlap MCS Model 1A:
Pesticide Damage to the CNS
Introduction. Pesticides, including chlor-
pyrifos, are widely implicated in case histo-
ries and clinical reports of MCS (89,91,
108-112), both in terms of outbreaks of
MCS after group exposures and of patient
attributes of exposures that precipitated
their condition.
Certain widely used pesticides that have
disrupting effects on GABA neurotransmit-
ters (4,75,113) may be initiators ofkindling
(4). This interference may also extend to
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) (75) and
in general to organophosphate (OP) and
organochlorine compounds (113). Some
organochlorine insecticides such as chlor-
pyrifos reportedly cause both chronic neuro-
logic symptoms (114) and modulation of
the IRA (112). Certain OP insecticides
enhance the large-fiber distal axonopathy
caused by other OPs such as chlorpyrifos
(109,114). Recently reported studies of
GulfWar veterans confirm earlier reports of
a connection between a syndrome ofneuro-
logic damage and wartime exposure to
pesticides and insecticides (115-118).
Initial Damage. If we assume a
relatively severe exposure to an OP such as
chlorpyrifos with a coexposure to a synergis-
tic damage-promoting solvent or other OP,
there can be initial disruption of the GABA
neurotransmission as well as damage to long
nerve cells. It is also fair to assume that the
nerve damage initially will invoke the NIR
and, ifthe damage is sufficient, the APR.
Examining the IDS overlaps in Table 1,
we see that the disruption of GABA
may cause kindling and TDS to malfunc-
tion, as both use GABA. We also see that a
large number of other messengers have
been invoked by the NIR and the APR,
including ILs, immune cells, ACTH, and
P-endorphin. ACTH and P-endorphin,
however, are also used by TDS. Because we
are assuming that the GABA disruption also
changed TDS, the situation is unstable. In
one direction TDS may modify the APR
through ACTH and ,-endorphin; in the
other direction the APR may change TDS
further, possibly including changing its
threshold of reaction to incitants or the
magnitude ofits response. This bidirectional
interaction is shown in Figure 3.
Extensions. With reference to Table 1,
several major complications can be envi-
sioned that would increase the chances of
IDS interaction in this model; three will be
discussed briefly.
BODY BURDENS AND SYNERGIES OF
Toxic CHEMICALS, INCLUDING PESTICIDES.
Various chemical contaminants such as diox-
ins, PCBs, insecticides, and pesticides are
reported in human tissue at levels that arouse
concern (119-125). Because several chemi-
cals are known to be present simultaneously
in the normal body burden (119,125),
synergies may occur. Examples are carbon
tetrachloride with chlordecone (126-128)
and chlorpyrifos with other OP pesticides
(109,114). This could mean continuous
disruption of GABA and unstable action of
ACTH and P-endorphin, possibly leading
to unanticipated threshold changes in the
TDS ofvarious chemicals.
PREEXISTING TD. If a patient has a
history of trauma sufficient to have modi-
fied his or her SR, psychological cues may
incite changes in many messengers that also
affect TDS, including dopamine and norep-
inephrine, ACTH, ,B-endorphins, Zn, IL-1,
and other interleukins, hormones, and cells.
Such stress occurring concurrent with new
chemical exposure could be the mechanism
by which the response is spread (as explored
in model 2A). At least one study has
reported higher rates of self-reported child-
hood abuse among women reporting MCS
than among controls (129), and it may be
eptides, p_eadthiTt..P_. --7-, -,-!.. 4,
co?--
-
jJH, interferoo -
j
tl>,-
-
-
V.
1
1
Figure 3. Modifications through overlap of messengers among IDSs. In multiple chemical sensitivity model 1A
(pesticide damage to the CNS), TDS and APR are overlapping messengers ACTH, P-endorphin, various hormones,
metallothionein, zinc, and possibly others (Table 1). Such overlap provides opportunities for both intended and
unintended bidirectional influences, including modification of triggering thresholds and changing the functions of
messengers unique to each.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 91
S.C. ROWAT
more than chance that a significantly higher
proportion of females than males report
MCS, as a similar female:male ratio occurs
among those who are estimated to be sexu-
ally abused in childhood; about 4:1 in the
former (130,131) and 3:1 in the latter (57).
EARLY AND ONGOING ZINC DEFICIENCY.
Zinc deficiency has been widely investigated
in the last two decades and is now recog-
nized to be a public health problem (132);
a recent estimate is that 30% of the adult
U.S. population is at risk. Zinc is centrally
involved in multiple human systems (133),
induding GABA and other neurotransmitter
enabling (24,45,134-137), and in seques-
tering and defense against heavy metals and
chemicals (138). Gestational Zn deficiency
appears to damage hippocampal and other
functions (44,45,139,140). Chronic Zn
deficiency reduces the IRA by deactivation
of thymulin (133,141-144). Thus several
crossovers with TDS are possible. Limbic
structures and GABA may be malfunction-
ing because of early Zn deficiency; or ongo-
ing chronic Zn deficiency may, through lack
of MT and increased infection and other
malfunction ofthe immune response, mod-
ify TDS further, with crossovers at ILs,
immunoglobulins, TNF, other immune
cells, and ACTH and P-endorphins.
Combining Extensions to Produce
Variants ofMCS. Given a base of a large
number of people exposed to pesticides in
our society, the logical combinations of
these extensions with the initial exposure
may generate symptomology, demographics,
and incidence of MCS. That is, some
exposed persons may already have body bur-
dens of chemicals, some will have TD, and
some will have Zn deficiency. Because all
three conditions affect TDS, similar but not
identical syndrome sets will be generated.
Additionally some persons may have two of
the three preconditions and a small set will
have all three. These seven logical syndrome
sets will share some characteristics but each
will differ from the other six; each set will
have a unique blend of incidence, intensity,
and symptomology. A group of patients
now clinically defined by one researcher as
having MCS may constitute a particular
skew of these seven sets, those defined by
another a second skew, etc.
IDS Overlap MCS Model 1B: Benzene
Disruption ofI-i Maturation
Introduction. In a series of recent experi-
ments on mice and human in vitro cells,
benzene through its metabolites has been
shown to prevent bone marrow cells from
producing mature IL-1, and this is thought
to play a central role in benzene-produced
aplastic anemia (19,145-148). Combined
with the immense amount ofdata on a large
number of cancers and toxicities that ben-
zene is known to cause (149-157) as well as
its ubiquitousness in our environment, this
makes it clear that we need to know more
about its effect on IL-1 and possibly other
cytokines, both in the bone marrow and in
other body milieus. For instance various
researchers have implicated benzene in
human bronchial, colon, and liver damage,
leukemia, DNA damage, tumors including
brain, liver, stomach, and lung, cardiac
abnormalities, eye irritation, drowsiness,
unconsciousness, uncoordination, and heart
attack (and in mice, birth defects and
tumors). Benzene is present in gasoline
(from auto exhaust, vehicle interiors, and
gas stations), diesel exhaust, building materi-
als, plastics, polypropylene food containers,
cooked foods, printers, printed and copied
paper, copy machines, incinerators, and
tobacco, wood, and marijuana smoke.
IL-1 holds a central place in neuro-
immune-endocrine response. According to
reviews by Whitacre (2) and Plata-Salaman
(29), IL-1 is produced by many cell types,
some immunologic, some endocrine, and
some in the CNS. IL-1 may be the central
messenger in the SR (29), it has receptors in
both immune and CNS tissue (158),
including the brain (158), and it can cross
the blood-brain barrier (159). Its effects
include upregulation of IL-2, interferon,
and other lymphokines; it acts as a chemoat-
tractant for T and B cells, and it acts syner-
gistically with IL-4 and IL-6. IL-1 also
exerts effects on NK cells, regulates cell
growth including both immune and nerve
cells, promotes inflammation (prosta-
glandins), induces fever (160) and slow-
wave sleep, increases levels of epinephrine
and vasoactive intestinal peptide, induces
synthesis and release of various pituitary
hormones including ACTH, and enhances
the release of P-endorphin, as well as having
other effects. Recent work on the evolution-
ary origins of IL-1 and the other key
cytokines IL-2 and TNF-a has shown them
to be derived from invertebrate forms that
perform similar jobs (161), and in light of
recent evidence ofvarious immune (26,161)
and lectin (39,162-164) origins, it would
appear that IL-1 holds central place in the
first memory system, the nonspecific
immune system, which predates even the
existence ofa CNS, much less a brain.
Along with the relatively new data
about IL-1 suppression by benzene
metabolites (19,145-148), benzene
metabolites induce leukemia and other
DNA damage (165-167). If this damage
occurs at levels sufficient to invoke any of
the eight IDSs besides kindling, IL-1 is
likely to be involved as part of the IDS
response; IL-1 is the single most shared
messenger among the body's IDSs (Table 1).
One MCS study has shown IL-1 to be
produced in significantly reduced amounts
from peripheral blood mononudear cells in
cases relative to controls (81), although the
authors state that this may have occurred
because of laboratory methodology prob-
lems. Notwithstanding the slightness of
this evidence, the IL-1-benzene connec-
tion appears to be a reasonable candidate
for MCS investigation ifthe suppression of
IL-1 maturation in bone marrow by ben-
zene metabolites also holds in the large
number of other sites where identical IL-1
is produced. It also may be noteworthy
that the list of benzene-containing sub-
stances is close to being a list of the MCS
substances most highly reacted to. If we
suspect that which chemicals MCS suffer-
ers react to may be a meaningful guide to
what caused the condition, benzene is a
good place at which to start investigating.
InitialDamage. Ifbenzene metabolites
have also downregulated the IL-1 an IDS is
using for its messaging, the IDS response
to benzene may be changed. For instance if
we assume that benzene exposure induces
the APR, then because of the benzene
downregulation of IL-1, other messengers
in the APR could have distorted values;
these include ACTH, P-endorphin, prosta-
glandins, other interleukins, mast cells, and
other immune cells. TDS also uses ACTH
and [-endorphin; ifit is invoked, its thresh-
old ofresponse may be modified. Ifthe ben-
zene exposure has been sufficient to induce
the SR, then the distorted IL-1 values may
additionally affect TDS through limbic
brain structures and dopamine and norepi-
nephrine, and kindling through these and
through cortex and higher brain structures.
Extensions. CHILDHOOD WINDOW
ExPosuREs. Childhood exposure data indi-
cate that if exposure to benzene (or ben-
zene-derived chemicals that have similar
metabolites) occurred during developmen-
tal windows, special damage or immune
learning could occur. Gestational windows
correlate a wide variety of fetal malforma-
tions, toxicities, and subsequent develop-
mental problems with various pregnancy
exposures to PCBs (168), antibiotics
(169,170), anesthetics (171-173), and
environmental chemicals (174-177). Infant
developmental windows have been reported
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199892
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
to correlate hexachlorophene washing
with neonatal brain damage and death
(178,179). Such exposures of benzenoid
chemicals may induce a TDS to benzene or
its derivatives or an IRA to a hapten formed
from such a chemical or its metabolites.
HAPTEN SPREADING FROM CONIMNUOUS
EXPOSURE. Antigenic haptens are formed
from both aromatic and nonaromatic
chemicals (180-184). An interesting
series of experiments with acetaldehyde
(183,185-189) has shown that the immune
response successfully "...could be raised by
immunizing with acetaldehyde conjugated
to a carrier protein different from the one
that is used for testing" (185). In other
words the immune response could recognize
the antigenic chemical segment and spread
the reactivity to other carriers. In the case of
acetaldehyde, usually IgE, and in one case
IgG and IgM, is raised to acetaldehyde-pro-
tein adducts (183), and this has been used
both in diagnosing alcoholism (186,187)
and as an explanation for alcohol allergy
(183). Benzene is the building block of the
enormous number of new antibiotics, fuels,
plastics, printing materials, food additives,
pesticides, deaners, and cosmetics that have
been added to our environment in recent
decades. If this immune recognition could
happen with benzene metabolites or deriva-
tives, the crossover between the IRA and
another IDS, especially in light of the dys-
regulation of IL-1 by benzene, might
account for both threshold response change
and spreading found in MCS patients.
EARLY AND ONGOING ZINC DEFICIENCY.
IL-1 and Zn-thymulin are synergistic.
[Thymulin is central in T cell and other
immune regulation (34) and Zn is required
for thymulin function (142,190)]. IL-1
delivers Zn to thymulin via MT mRNA and
Zn-thymulin potentiates IL-1 activation of
nuclear protein kinase C in isolated spleno-
cytes (191). Also, Zn deficiency in gesta-
tional and childhood windows, especially in
conjunction with benzenoid environmental
chemicals (192), reportedly causes a variety
of malformations (44,193) including CNS
development. Lack of Zn during early
rat brain growth produces neurologic abnor-
malities (44,139,140). See additional
discussion in section on model 1A.
BODY BURDENS OF TOXIC CHEMICALS
INCLUDING PESTICIDES. Almost all the
chemicals commonly in the body burden
are benzenoid. See detailed description in
section on model IA.
PREEXISTING TD. In a human case-
control study, psychological stress reduces
the amount of IL-1 produced by peripheral
blood leukocytes, which was correlated with
the slowing of wound healing (194). See
detailed description in section on model IA.
Combining Extensions to Produce
Variants ofMCS. As discussed in the
section on model 1A, these different situa-
tions can be combined to produce over-
lapping syndromes that could be subsets of
MCS. Early window effects, hapten
spreading, body burdens of benzenoid
chemicals (and continuous exposure to
benzene itself), preexisting TD, and Zn
deficiency in early windows or later could
interact individually with an IL-1 dysregu-
lation model to increase or modify the
effect. Any combination of two, three,
four, or five of the extensions with the
original could produce a different subset of
symptoms and hence possibly appear as a
different subset ofthe main syndrome.
IDS Overlap MCS Model 1C:
(VWmyl Chloride Disease)
Autoimmunity to IgG
Introduction. A fascinating variant of
"Hapten Spreading from Continuous
Exposure" is that it appears that immune
system messengers themselves can become
objects of immune response. This has been
hypothesized as the central event in vinyl
chloride disease (95,195-197), which may
be a rheumatoidlike (198) autoimmunity to
IgG after chronic vinyl chloride exposure
damages the IgG molecule. Other chemicals
that induce autoimmune disturbances
include halothane (184) and acetaldehyde
(183), and biomarkers and symptoms in
such disturbances exhibit variable data in
multiple organs (197), indicating that sev-
eral effects on the IRA may be occurring. In
addition, food lectins such as BanLec 1
(found in bananas) can be inciters of IgG;
lectins also interfere with the complement
NIR (162,199,200), commonly act as super-
antigens (54,162), and are endocytosed in
relatively large quantities in the gut (200).
Initial Damage. In our model we
assume that chronic exposure to vinyl chlo-
ride has damaged both IgG and other tis-
sues and the IRA produces T-cell-mediated
autoimmune complexes raised against these
tissues (196). We do not know with cer-
tainty the memory mechanism of such
autoimmune disturbances; possibly it
involves DNA encoding in the variable
(diversity) joining recombination of T cells
(26,28,201,202). In addition T memory
cells exist for long periods, decades at least,
without any booster from antigens (5,203).
Extensions. SPREADING TO OTHER
IGG-INDUCING ANTIGENS. Certain foods
such as bananas, milk, and eggs produce
unusually high levels of IgG allergic
responses in pooled human blood (199).
Soy (204), beef (205), and corn (206)
also induce IgG, as do various chemicals
(181,182,206). Suppose a subject con-
sumes one of these substances and has an
IgG reaction to it; by increasing the IgG
level, the subject is simultaneously increas-
ing the total autoimmune reaction to IgG
itself. This may induce an additional IDS
such as NIR to become involved.
Because the NIR is also known to
induce the immunoglobulins, it becomes
possible that a feedback loop will be set
up: with more IgG comes more IRA and
more NIR; with more NIR comes more
IgG. This escalation could be sudden in
certain conditions (like a painful audio
feedback), and, by multiple crossover mes-
sengers, might induce the SR and TDS to
the initiating foods or chemicals. In this
way, a large number of IgG-provoking
substances eventually could become
inciters ofa TDS response.
SUDDEN SPREADING-MULTIPLE IDS
SENSITIZATION TO IGG. This possibility,
though apparently supported by no direct
experimental evidence, produces such an
interesting model that it must be at least
mentioned briefly. What happens if after
IgG becomes antigenic and IgG-inducing
substances are introduced, a feedback loop
causes TDS both to the inciting substance
and to IgG? A spreading/multiplier effect is
then set up. Any inciter of IgG automati-
cally becomes an inciter also of TDS, even
without a specific spreading event. The sub-
ject would suddenly become sensitized to all
the foods and chemicals that already incite
IgG, such as those mentioned in "Spreading
to Other IgG-inducing Antigens." This type
of quick spreading matches an important
and puzzling aspect ofthe MCS syndrome.
FOOD-CONTAMINATING CHEMICALS.
The presence of pesticide residues, addi-
tives, and packaging migrants in commer-
cial foods provides an opportunity for
chronic or acute conditioned association
between a chemical and an IgG-inciting
food. Additionally, if such a chemical
became complexed with the food before or
during metabolism, the association would
be different and possibly more antigenic. It
is perhaps noteworthy that such complex-
ing does not appear to have been studied;
the literature on food contaminants (sur-
prisingly sparse) deals largely with a few
identified migrants and contaminants
(207-216) rather than with their ability to
complex with foods. The intense European
Environmental Health Perspectives a Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 93
S.C. ROWAT
Economic Community initiative to develop
measurement and reporting techniques for
packaging migrants is based on specific lists
of chemicals (217,218); unfortunately
complexing with foods is not induded.
Combining Extensions to Produce
Variants ofMCS. Reports ofautoimmune
markers in MCS patients (like most MCS
data) are inconsistent. A recent report (89)
shows antismooth muscle antibodies in
about half the patients seen in a clinical
practice but no data about anti-IgG anti-
bodies or antibodies against any other IDS
messenger. Although many MCS patients
report food sensitivities, this model has
been presented chiefly as illustration. It is
plausible that any IDS messenger that
could act as an antigen could provide a
feedback mechanism for spreading of the
MCS response. An MCS so produced
could be viewed as a form of chemically
formed autoimmune disease.
IDS Overlap MCS Model 2A:
Chemical and Stress Overload
Introduction. In past decades the amounts
and types ofchemicals encountered indoors
and outdoors in food and air have risen
exponentially (78). Workplace environ-
ments contain chemicals at dangerous levels
based on outdated threshold limit values
that were never tested and are still in use
because of corporate political pressure
(219). Sealed office buildings built in the
1970s and 1980s use recycled air and have
spawned outbreaks of a new syndrome,
Sick Building Syndrome (220-223), which
may be a subset of MCS (221,224).
Neighborhoods have become car centered.
Cars have become necessary for work and
pleasure, and chemicals from car and diesel
exhaust, incinerators, and wood smoke turn
the air in populated areas into a toxic smog
(225-229). Pollution inside average urban
houses with synthetic rugs, cleaners, adhe-
sives, paints, and petroleum heating systems
has increased to the point where the levels
ofbenzene, xylene, tetrachloroethylene, and
many others (230) are consistently greater
indoors than outdoors, even in smog-pol-
luted areas, by factors of2 to 5 and often by
factors of 10 or more (79). Pesticide levels
indoors are commonly greater by factors of
100 compared to outdoor levels (78,79). In
food, residues from many common pesti-
cides and herbicides, as well as direct chem-
ical additives, are eaten in the average diet
(231). Many of these substances are
untested or inadequately tested (232),
whereas many others are already known to
be toxic (231,232). As illustration, Table 2
is an excerpt showing 8 from a list of 42
commonly encountered chemicals, where
they are found, and their known toxic
effects. The eight chemicals shown do not
appear significantly different from the
unshown entries in either number of
sources or overall toxicity.
People who are middle-aged today were
the first generation to have encountered
these chemicals on a daily basis since birth.
Because so few of these chemicals have had
long-term testing, in a sense this generation
is an experimental group. MCS is character-
ized by reactions to these chemicals, so it
may be that MCS is the experimental result.
Initial Damage and Extensions.
Model 2A will explore the possibility that
specific configurations ofincreased multiple
chemical exposure and stress can produce
MCS through IDS interactions even
though the IDSs are unchanged. In addi-
tion, Miller (90) and others (22,94) have
developed models of MCS that propose
sequential stages for MCS; common among
these are susceptibility, sensitization, trig-
gering, and spreading. For comparison's
sake this description will adopt these stages;
differences suggested by the IDS model will
be discussed in "How Long is an Event?"
Model 2A is shown graphically in Figure 4.
SUSCEPTIBILITY. As an example,
suppose that a chronic low-level exposure
(years long) to formaldehyde has created
haptens and an IRA reaction in the subject
(180-182). Assume that combined chronic
chemical stressors such as SO2, NO2, and
diesel exhaust particles are polluting the
subject's work area simultaneously and also
occurring in the subject's ambient urban
air. These substances have impinged on the
lung tissue (229) and a tolerance mecha-
nism supplying compensatory lung tissue
changes is occurring (20,48). Tolerance
symptoms may not be noticed by the
Table 2. Some commonly encountered toxic chemicalsa and their known toxic effects.
Chemical and where found Toxicity in humans, including chronic and acute effects Reference
1,3-Butadiene: rugs, rug underpaddings, rubber tires, leukemia, lymph cancer, blood-cell cancer; tumors of breast, bronchial (149,233-236)
rubber consumer products, nylon, gasoline, auto exhaust, tubes, stomach, large intestine, liver, heart, thyroid (in mice: testicular
groundwater tumors, leukemia)
Acetaldehyde: body metabolism of alcohol; wood stoves, DNA and chromosome damage; binds to liver and other cells, causing (188,237-240)
incinerators, smog, diesel exhaust, byproduct of Candida autoimmune responses; upper respiratory irritation, metabolic
albicansfungal infections disruption, lung damage
Acetone: adhesives Neurologic damage, lung damage; enhances carbon tetrachloride (241)
liver damage
Alkylphenol resin: carbonless copy paper (NCR forms) Immune responses including itching/burning skin, rash, flushing, (242,243)
wheezing, cough; nausea; hormone (prostaglandin) irregularities
Benzenes (benzene, benzo[alpyrene, naphthalene, others): Bronchial, colon, and liver damage; leukemia; DNA damage; tumors (149-157)
gasoline (auto exhaust and interiors, gas stations), diesel exhaust, including brain, liver, stomach, lung; cardiac abnormalities, eye
building materials, plastics, polypropylene food containers, irritation, drowsiness, unconsciousness, uncoordination, heart attack
cooked foods, printers, printed and copied paper, copy machines, (in mice: birth defects, tumors)
incinerators, tobacco smoke, wood smoke, marijuana smoke
BHT (butylated hydroxytoluene): migration from polyethylene Allergic reactions, possible cancer, possible kidney damage (animals: (244)
food packaging, additive in foods (cereals, fats, meats, behavioral changes in offspring)
potatoes, others)
Carbon disulfide: solvents, dry cleaning, painting, spray painting, Peripheral nerve damage, emotional instability, insomnia, lessening (245,246)
glue work, varnishes of libido
Carbon monoxide: wood smoke, tobacco smoke, auto Lung damage and irritation; carboxy-hemoglobin neutralizes blood (239)
and diesel exhaust oxygen transport
aThis list is excerpted from a larger list of 42 commonly encountered toxic chemicals (SC Rowat, unpublished data).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199894
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
a "Susceptibility" 1. Chronic formaldehyde induces the immune response
to antigen. Simultaneously, chronic SO2, NO2, and diesel
and other particulate matter from air at the workplace
and urban home impinge lung tissue and induce toler-
ance in the form of compensatory lung cell architecture.
/1-
chrfk airborne
N02, S4,l&
/pardculate
a"Sensitization"
during increased
formaldehyde
and
continuing airborne
N02, S02, &
particulates
2a. Acute anxiety occurs in combination with moderately
increased formaldehyde. The anxiety induces the SR.
2b. Crossover messengers interact between the SR and
the IRA such as ACTH, ,-endorphins, IL-1 and [L-2, and
immune cells.
2c. These messengers are also involved in TDS and TDS
is invoked and conditioned to recognize both formalde-
hyde and anxiety as inciters.
a "Trierine'
immediate
Benzene
3a. Later, subject encounters benzene during moderate
anxiety. TDS has increased over time and is triggered by
the anxiety.
3b. TDS reaction causes the already eroding lung toler-
ance to be breached and with continuing air pollution,
the NIR is invoked to deal with cellular damage.
3c. Concurrent irritation/damage from the benzene expo-
sure causes the APR to cascade from the NIR.
3d. Under the added influence of the TDS, the SR
cascades.
3e. Multiple messenger overlaps chain the threshold for
the SR to the TDS response so the SR will be invoked
directly by the TDS in future. TDS also becomes condi-
tioned to benzene as a trigger.
a "Spreading"
'0'x= nger__
Benzene
alkylphenol
novolac resin
./
4a. Later, during moderate anger, benzene is again
encountered along with alkylphenol novolac resin used
in no-carbon forms. Benzene invokes TDS.
4b. TDS cascades the SR.
4c. Hormonal overlaps between the SR and anger
increase anger's intensity.
4d. Messenger overlaps between increased anger, SR,
and TDS cause TDS to become sensitized to alkylphenol
novolac resin and anger as inciters.
4e. (Not shown.) In subsequent events this same
spreading mechanism continues to add new stimulus
chemicals and psychological stresses as TDS inciters.
Figure 4. IDS interaction model 2A, of MCS resulting from chemical and stress overload, adapted from the necessary stages of MCS suggested by Miller (90) and
others (22,941.
Environmental Health Perspectives a Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998
chroni
formaldehyde
95
S.C. ROWAT
subject as a pattern because tolerance
mechanisms are well known for moderat-
ing the magnitude of the reaction; in a
sense, that is their function.
SENSITIZATION. A strong psychological
anxiety (stress) occurs in combination with
a moderately increased amount of formal-
dehyde. The anxiety induces the SR IDS.
Because of the immune response already
occurring and even increased slightly
because of the increased level of formalde-
hyde, the crossover messengers between the
SR and the immune response (for example,
ACTH, fB-endorphins, IL-1 and -2, and
immune cells, all ofwhich are also involved
in TDS) condition TDS to both formalde-
hyde and anxiety as inciters. Such bidirec-
tional fertilization between psychological
and chemical triggers is reported for TDS
in animal experiments (3).
TRIGGERING. After some time the subject
encounters a new chemical, benzene, while
in a state of anxiety less severe than at the
onset of the original event, so the SR IDS
is not at first invoked. However TDS
increases over time, even without exposures
to the inciter; it is triggered by the anxiety.
The tolerance mechanism, meanwhile,
undisturbed during the sensitization stage,
has continued to erode toward the exhaus-
tion state (48). The added weight of the
neurochemical and endocrine changes that
characterize the TDS reaction causes the
lung tolerance to air pollution to be
breached and the NIR is invoked to deal
with cellular damage that had been toler-
ated to that point. Under the influence of
the concurrent benzene exposure, the APR
is also cascaded from the NIR, and under
the added influence of the TDS firing, the
SR cascades. (Figure 4 shows a graphic sep-
aration of these events.) At this level of
arousal TDS becomes conditioned to ben-
zene also as a trigger, and we speculate that
multiple overlaps in messengers between
the TDS and the SR (Table 1) make it
possible that the threshold for the SR
becomes chained to the TDS response; in
other words, the SR will be invoked
directly by the TDS in future exposures.
SPREADING. In a later event benzene
is again encountered along with a new
chemical, alkylphenol novolac resin, which
is used in no-carbon-required forms (242)
and a new psychological stress, moderate
anger. Now benzene causes TDS and
hence the SR to fire, and the anger
increases in intensity. The TDS becomes
conditioned to both the new chemical,
alkylphenol novolac resin, and to anger,
the new stress, as inciters.
In subsequent events this same spread-
ing mechanism could continue to add new
stimulus chemicals and psychological
stresses and new symptoms at diverse sites.
Notes on the Model. In Figure 4,
tolerance, which is no longer active, is not
shown in stage three; nor is the IRA; in
our example formaldehyde is no longer
being encountered. Additional possibilities
that could have been included are that the
IRA could develop an associated specific
reaction to benzene or its metabolites or
that the formaldehyde chronic exposure
could continue.
Interactionsfrom Other Models. In
particular, pesticide and other chemical
body burdens under model IA and interac-
tions between benzene and IL-1, model
1B, may be of interest in this model.
Childhood window exposures (model iB)
and TD (model IA) could also be added.
The multiple-feedback autoimmunity to
IgG model (model 1C) could also be used,
say, by substituting vinyl chloride for
formaldehyde as the chronic exposure
agent, but at this point the complications
become mind-numbing.
How Long is an Event?
Comparison ofIDS Models
with the Four-stage Model ofMCS
Although the second exposure event in
model 2A has been called triggering
(stage 3) to match with the models of
Miller (90) and others, several discrete
sequential interactions are occurring within
it, and this difference may be important.
The time frame for several IDS interactions
may be very short; a few minutes in high-
stress situations. In testing it may be neces-
sary to break down the IDS crossovers into
shorter events to measure biomarkers mean-
ingfully; otherwise the data will be chaotic.
Figure 5 shows a superimposition of the
IDS chaining during a single event, the
stage-3 triggering of model 2A. Not only is
the order ofthe chaining not easy to under-
stand when lumped together, but any mea-
surement of the crossed-over messengers
such as ACTH, 3-endorphin, IL-1, etc. will
appear random or otherwise incomprehen-
sible if the measurements are taken at
different times in the triggering sequence.
Another difference is that in the current
IDS model (model 2A) both sensitization
and spreading are also occurring during this
triggering sequence, since a new IDS is
being added to the mechanism (SR) and a
new inciter is being conditioned (benzene).
During the nominal spreading stage, trig-
gering ofTDS and stress are also occurring.
It appears that through the architecture of
the IDS interaction and chaining models,
which are composed ofshort discrete events
ofseveral types, various sequences and com-
binations of triggering, spreading, and
sensitizing can be obtained.
These differences between the IDS
model and the four-stage MCS model have
testing implications that are discussed in
"Relevance ofthe Models to Current MCS
Research Recommendations."
IDS Overlap MCS Model 2B:
AllergicMercury Reaction
in Genetic Subset
Introducti4m Human allergy to Hg has been
recognized for a long time and although the
specific genetic code is not worked out, this
allergy is strongly suspected to be of
genetic origin. It is estimated to affect
between 2 and 5% of the human popula-
tion (247,248). The North American con-
tact hypersensitivity to Hg is reportedly
5.4% (249). Predisposition to mercury
allergy has recently been investigated in
Figure 5. Possible source of MCS biomarker data error. This graphic shows combined IDS overlap events in the
level 3 triggering stage of chemical and stress overload MCS model 2A. If biochemical markers are taken indis-
criminately within this period chaotic data may result, since the same neuroendocrine-immune messengers may
be in use for different purposes at different times. (Figure 4 shows separated event sequence.)
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199896
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
genetically selected rodents. Interestingly,
special rodent strains develop significant
immune aberrations and autoimmune dis-
ease in Hg exposure, including exposure by
implanted dental amalgam Hg configured
as in human exposure (250,251).
In humans carrying dental amalgams,
the amounts of Hg released have been esti-
mated within the range that would cause
reactions in those genetically susceptible to
Hg (251). Therefore the millions of
humans who carry Hg amalgams are theo-
retically at risk for genetically induced reac-
tions. (Whether those not genetically
susceptible could also be directly toxically
affected by mercury is unknown; many
widely divergent opinions and research
reports have been published over the last
few decades (247,248,251-256). Recent
reports connect amalgams with oral cavity
ill-health (248,257), increase in antibiotic-
resistant bacteria in oral and intestinal cavi-
ties (258), multiple sclerosis (259,260),
psychological complaints such as depres-
sion, excessive anger, and anxiety (261),
and cardiovascular symptoms such as
fatigue and high blood pressure (262).
Mercury is also available in the diet,
particularly from fish. Levels of methyl
mercury (MeHg) in fish appear to be grow-
ing and are a concern (263,264). An epi-
demiologic investigation of a fish-eating
population is reported to show high suscep-
tibility to brain damage during prenatal
exposures to MeHg (263). Also Hg in
paint is a widely recognized health hazard
(265-267), as is skin-lightening cream
(268). A syndrome of infant Hg toxicity
called acrodynia is reported from applica-
tion ofcalomel teething powders (255) and
from paint exposures (267). A case-control
study shows increased urinary Hg in people
living in houses painted with Hg-latex paint
(p< 0.001) (267), and a case of acrodynia
occurred in a child living in such a house
(267). Before 1990 one-third of the inte-
rior latex paint used in the United States
had added Hg fungicide (267).
Like MeHg, Hg is toxic to the CNS
and established detrimental effects range
from behavioral irritability and insomnia at
low levels of exposure through tremors,
muscle spasms, and nerve conduction loss
at higher exposure levels (253). Many
other toxic effects are reported (255),
including cardiovascular (262), immune
(248,255), and autoimmune effects (269).
Data on a direct connection of Hg
exposure to MCS is lacking except for the
synchronicity of neurologic symptoms,
which are the most highly reported
symptom category in MCS clinical
literature and the symptoms most com-
monly produced by Hg. These reasons and
the demographics prompted this exploratory
model. Half the population of the western
world has Hg amalgam fillings, and 5%
may be allergic to Hg.
Initial Damage. We hypothesize a
human strain that has a genetically deter-
mined immune response to Hg and a sub-
ject who has sufficient dental Hg released in
the body to induce a systemic autoimmune
reaction through the IRA. Subsequent to
this the Hg level in the subject's body is
being increased by food sources, further
increasing the activity of the autoimmune
response. Then a moderate-to-high expo-
sure to toxic environmental Hg in paint,
drugs, pesticides, cosmetics, or other source
occurs during a stressful situation that
includes a chemical exposure. For example
Hg in fresh paint, in cosmetics or calomel,
or in amalgam implantation in a dentist's
office in conjunction with anesthetic injec-
tion or ambient chemicals might provide
this combination. This exposure causes SR
activation, and in combination with the
ongoing autoimmunity, a combined CNS-
mediated TDS to Hg and to the stress-asso-
ciated chemical may begin. Because there
is already an appreciable body burden of
Hg and also an immune response to this
Hg, there may be a messenger crossover-
ACTH, ,-endorphin, IL-1, or other
immune cells or messengers, for example-
between the TDS and the immune and
SRs. This may change the threshold of
response of any of these IDSs. This com-
bined sensitization of the immune response
and TDS to internal Hg may create an
unstable situation that allows subsequent
exposures to become conditioned inciters of
the TDS during various situations; e.g.,
those that elicit movement or increase
of the Hg body burden while stressing
psychologically or chemically.
Extensions. HEAVY METALS/ZINC
DISPLACEMENT. Cd, Pb, and Hg are all Zn
agonists, and rising levels ofCd and Pb can
add to the toxic effect of Hg in the body.
Metals are unique in the environment in
that they are not consumed by human
enterprise and so continue to increase in
the biosphere as we collect and process
them (270); one review concludes that we
have a growing problem of heavy metal
toxicity (270). Cd is increasing in human
tissue. It has a human half-life of 30 years
(271) and the average human body burden
since the turn of the century has increased
by a factor of 4.7 according to one study
(272), with the renal concentration
increasing by a factor of47 (272). Another
study found a renal increase factor of 3.8
(273). Cd is a potent developmental toxin
in animal studies; its effects include CNS
and behavioral dysftunctions and many oth-
ers (274). Some Cd effects have been
linked to its displacement of Zn from vari-
ous enzymes (270,274), and Cd from
maternal smoking is thought to decrease
the transfer of Zn across the human pla-
centa (275,276), which may implicate Cd
in multiple teratogenic effects strongly sus-
pected to result from Zn gestational defi-
ciency (44,193). Pb caused a reduction in
cognitive development through 7 years of
age in children living in a lead-smelting
community (277). Pb is also reported to
cause DNA-protein crosslinks and DNA
repair inhibition (270), and to accumulate
in the hippocampus of children, rats, and
monkeys. In monkeys the effects are
accompanied by Zn displacement and
learning deficits (278).
CHILDHOOD OR GESTATIONAL MERCURY
EXPOSURES. MeHg exposure during preg-
nancy causes neurologic abnormalities,
including psychomotor deficits, mental
retardation, and deafness in children (279).
Fetal effects occur at much lower exposure
levels than required for effects in adults,
although in both cases effects are almost
exclusively on the nervous system, especially
the CNS (268). Hg is not known to dam-
age the fetus as heavily as MeHg, but this
may be because oflack ofstudy (253).
Combining Extensions to Produce
Variants ofMCS. Body burdens ofchemi-
cals, preexisting TD, early and ongoing Zn
deficiency described under model 1A, and
childhood window exposures and hapten
spreading described under models 1B and
IC could also interact in this model. Again
various subsets of the MCS syndrome
might be produced depending on which of
these substrates is present.
Concluding Note on Inadequate or
Inappropriate IDS Models 2A and 2B.
In these two thought experiments, physio-
logically healthy MCS subjects appear
plausible through various interactions of
the nine IDSs. That is, it may be that in
some forms of MCS the subjects' neuro-
immune-endocrine systems are function-
ing well-within the limits of their present
design. These design limitations may now
be coming to our attention because of
interactions with increasing concentrations
of new types of toxic chemicals and metals
and possibly new levels of stress. In this
model those who have MCS are at the end
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 97
S.C. ROWAT
of a normal distribution; i.e., they have
been unlucky in how many chemicals and
how much stress and heavy metal they
were exposed to or in what synergistic
combinations. They may have marginally
different thresholds to TDS, kindling, or
other IDSs than the norm. A disturbing
correlate ofthese models is that an increas-
ing population in the industrial world may
be at risk for developing MCS.
Model 3: IDS Overlap MCS
as Evolution and Lea
As discussed earlier, the immune system
most likely predates the CNS. The immune
system has evolved specifically as a learning
mechanism. It has the function of mapping
its biochemical environment i.e., to recog-
nize and remember biochemical danger pat-
terns (10). Partly to achieve this purpose, it
is closely linked to the CNS (1,10,29-34,
42,158,280-284) and the endocrine system
(10,29-31,34,158,281). Grossman et al.
(10) propose that each cell is a complex
feedback-controlled unit and that different
cells learn to respond preferentially to differ-
ent combinations ofsignals in their immedi-
ate biochemical environment. These signals
may originate from the CNS or externally.
In addition, the recent T-cell receptor
recombination discoveries that make genetic
encoding ofspecific antigens more possible
(26,201,202) lead to the possibility that
changes in the thresholds ofvarious of the
IDSs will be encoded genetically either
within the present generation or in future
generations or both. At least four different
means ofvarying the DNA recombination
code for T-cell receptors have been identi-
fied (26), and some method of saving the
known toxic compounds into the germline
might be an evolutionary advantage. Recent
work by various researchers has pointed to
adaptive genetic learning as a major possi-
bility (201,202). In bacterial studies genetic
mechanisms are reported that accelerate
and direct DNA mutation during stressful
situations (201).
It appears that the neuroendocrine-
immune system is purposely unique in
each individual, and part of this comes
from experience. Jerne (7) suggests that
"Early imprints leave the deepest traces."
Ifwe consider the crossover messengers
(Table 1) used by most IDS-messengers
such as IL-1, ACTH, and f-endorphin,
MT, mast cells, etc.-limited resources the
body allocates between IDS in times of
attack, we may, in a semantic reorientation,
be able to model IDS threshold changes as
a learning effect rather than inadequacy or
damage. It would be reasonable also if the
body set these allocation ranges in advance;
that may be one function ofchildhood win-
dows and ofneuroimmune learning in gen-
eral. For instance TD can produce MPD
alternative personalities that have differing
immune responses (65) and many other
lifelong physiologic differences; the appro-
priate alternative personality appears in a
specific context then disappears when the
context changes. Various combinations of
IDSs therefore may be interacting meaning-
fully to adjust thresholds in readiness for
special situations.
Childhood developmental windows
could be understood then not only as times
when toxicants can accidentally produce
more damage but also as specific times
when the IDSs are sampling the external
environment to determine a range of
response appropriate for the lifetime of a
particular individual.
In a species sense MCS may conceivably
constitute a healthy response to an unhealthy
environment. Although MCS symptoms
frequently are painful, pain can have a use-
ful function. That is, since the chemicals
MCS individuals avoid are known to be
toxic in high concentrations and are also
increasingly recognized as toxic and car-
cinogenic in chronic exposures (239,285),
(Table 2), such a difference could be viewed
as an improvement in the species. People
who get MCS would be subject to lower
rates of chemical damage and cancer
because they would have an increased
impetus to avoid the toxicants.
In such a model we consider it possible
that it is through such IDS learning mech-
anisms that people with MCS have learned
to abandon almost all aspects of 20th-cen-
tury life that involve the smell, touch, and
taste of rubbers and synthetic foams, new
plastics, fresh paints, petrochemical clean-
ers, oil and gas fuels, and petroleum-based
pesticides, perfumes, food additives, and
drugs; also that their inability to be near
these chemicals is probably lifelong (89).
We may even imagine that persons with
MCS may find themselves living in an
electrically heated rugless house in a small
village far from a city, with a yard border-
ing a wild field. When they sit in the yard
on a sunny day breathing good air, listen-
ing to the birds chirping, watching their
organic garden growing, and looking at the
car parked in the driveway, which they can
only use once a week for a 20-min trip,
it may occur to them that their MCS
disease-as a learning experience-might
not be such a bad thing in some ways.
Testng hde IDS Overlap Models
Relevance ofIDS Models to Early MCS
Research. One research team investigating
MCS combined masking odors such as
peppermint, cinnamon, and anise with a
challenge chemical so that the patient could
not identify the odor of the chemical being
administered (286). The author of at least
one paper on MCS (287) has called for
similar odor-masking studies. However
odor, taste, sound, and sight-CNS per-
ceptions-can function as conditioned
stimuli (11,13). Accordingly, if MCS is a
complex conditioned phenomenon, remov-
ing these stimuli may result in studies that
do not find a reaction in at least some MCS
patients. For instance, according to the
models developed in this paper, odor may
be linked in the patient's memory with
acute unpleasant experiences, and by an
associated IDS linkage (such as TD) may
cause multiple reciprocal CNS-immune
messengers [IL-1 (159,288,289), IL-6 and
IL-8 (290), substance P (1,283), somato-
statin (32), and VIP (33), for example] to
cascade and perhaps lead to the SR
(8,30,280,281,288). If such odor response
is blinded, such studies could erroneously
conclude that MCS did not exist.
Relevance oftheIDSModels to Current
MCS Research Recommendations. If
biomarker data are pursued and the interac-
tive models developed in this paper are even
partially on the right track, complex non-
linear biomarker data will be required. But
how do we even know who has MCS? It
has been calculated that if only 10% of a
study population are responders, then to
achieve a response shift of one standard
deviation from norm, with p= 0.01 90% of
the time, the study population would need
to be 2102 people, but only 23 people if
100% are responders (291). Thus, defining
a small population of people with MCS in
the absence of reliable biomarkers is a
catch-22. Perhaps long-term self-control
crossover studies (291,292) that can mea-
sure data at various points in the trigger-
ing-spreading sequence would be more
useful, but the number of such studies that
could be economically carried out in a lim-
ited timeframe is small. Also there is no way
to know if we are measuring people with
MCS or people who are willing to spend
time in a physician's office.
Recent research groups working on
MCS testing (84,293) recommend using
only people who have had a verifiable sin-
gle-exposure event precipitating their
MCS. But how representative ofthe entire
population is this? Not only do we not
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 199898
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
know how many gradual onset cases are
being left out, the crossover with chronic
fatigue and fibromyalgia, among other con-
ditions, is reportedly high. These condi-
tions may even be indistinguishable in
most cases (89). If it turns out that an IDS
model accounting for all these effects
simultaneously is required-perhaps what
Miller has called "an emerging category of
disease" (294)-then limiting studies to
only a small number of adult single-event
precipitated MCS cases in a clinical setting
may seriously decrease our knowledge base
for building the pattern.
An additional serious problem with
clinical testing discussed in "Working
Definition" is that some ofthe IDS models
developed in this paper predict that people
with MCS will have psychological reac-
tions in a testing situation, which will dis-
tort results. Conversely they may require a
particular type of psychological stress to
produce their reaction, and such stress may
only occur when they are in their ordinary
life settings. Bell et al. (86), in their work-
ing-group report on MCS testing, referred
to the need to avoid novelty in testing situ-
ations (a variant of this same problem) and
concluded, "it will be essential to perform
multiple, not one exposure sessions sepa-
rated in time.... That is, it is necessary to
initiate and elicit sensitization within the
same experiment." This is an important
limitation and may be difficult to achieve.
Cohen et al. (293), in another working
group, state the problem clearly: "Do
events perceived as stressful in the recent or
past history of the individual play roles in
the onset and/or progression of MCS?
...Which factor is more important in the
traumatic initiation: the exposure to chem-
icals associated with the traumatic event,
and/or the stressful experience associated
with the event? Can a stressor precipitate
MCS in a chemically sensitized individual
who is not displaying overt symptoms of
MCS at the time ofstressor exposure?"
Yet their recommendations on the design
ofcontrolled exposure studies (293), accord-
ing to my interpretation, do not circumvent
this. In making recommendations on testing
three other working groups from the same
conference (77,84,295) made no reference
to this problem, yet it seems crucial.
Animal studies may help clarify the sit-
uation. The Bell et al. (86) working group
suggests a series of experiments on rodents
with each series taking measurements from
microelectrode bundles in the brain. The
series roughly measures: a) chemical odor
only, b) stress first, then chemical odor,
and c) chemical odor first, then stress. This
allows the use of stress, which the human
model does not. It does, however, leave out
variables explored in some of the IDS
models; for example, it has no simultane-
ous stresses and chemicals and no provision
for combinations of early developmental
windows, body burdens of chemicals and
metals, gestational and chronic Zn defi-
ciency, or a genetic allergy. These variables
could be added in future experiments,
but finding the right combination(s) might
be time consuming and possibly even
prohibitive in nonhuman subjects.
Also there is the problem outlined in
"How Long is an Event? Comparisons of
IDS Models with the Four-stage Model of
MCS" that several very short IDS-chaining
events may be being lumped together
under what is nominally called sensitiza-
tion, triggering, or spreading. Additionally,
these events may constitute combinations
of sensitization, triggering, and spreading
and even more importantly may use identi-
cal messengers that perform changing
functions within very short time spans.
Unless the measuring protocol is pro-
grammed for such shifts, chaotic biomarker
data could result.
Rigorous double-blind (84) and
balanced-placebo design (295) clinical test-
ing suggested by some work groups may be
critical in convincing other investigators,
doctors, and legislators of the legitimacy of
MCS as a debilitating condition, and should
probably be undertaken immediately. But
these tests may not identify the origins of
MCS. An analogy is that for a century it has
been possible to view the symptoms ofMPD
or BPD in dinical settings and the disorders
have long been accepted as valid. Yet only
recently has a convincing etiology been dis-
covered (57,58,60,65,66); this has been
through collating large numbers of patient
questionnaire self-reports. These early trau-
mas were not available in clinical settings to
either the people who experienced them or
the health care workers who had not.
Identifying MCS Mechanisms by
Large-scale Set-report Epidemiology. An
alternative investigation route that appears
logical is large-scale self-report epidemiol-
ogy of MCS. After decades of argumenta-
tive discourse among the medical profession
and the press, people with MCS are aware
and beginning to get organized, even ifthey
do not congregate in cities or at confer-
ences. They act most frequently through
newsletters and memberships in local
self-help organizations. There are many
national organizations and newsletters,
especially when the associated conditions of
fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue are consid-
ered. It is possible that by using e-mail and
the telephone, 10 organizations could
quickly be found that would each provide
addresses for 500 persons. Within a short
time, a mailing could be sent to 5000 peo-
ple, all ofwhom had self-defined long-term
MCS. This mailing could be done either at
the same time as or in advance of animal
and clinical studies called for by the
research groups working on MCS.
One suggestion might be for each
member of a panel of six to eight people
who have been studying this condition for
many years to produce 50 to 100 questions
based on his or her work. These questions
would then be collected, sorted, and culled
to a workable number-perhaps 150 ques-
tions. These questions would be mailed,
returned, and statistically analyzed for use-
ful patterns that might suggest directions
for future testing and research.
It appears appropriate to suggest that at
least one panel member prepare questions
based on the IDS interaction models. It also
seems reasonable to have at least one panel
member with overt MCS symptoms and
who has lived with MCS for an appreciable
period oftime. This might expand the func-
tional perspective ofthe panel; and help val-
idate the undertaking for those approached
to contribute addresses and contacts as well
as those asked to complete the question-
naire. It would also be important that at
least one panel member have previous expe-
rience with wide-area questionnaire prepara-
tion, distribution, and analysis. Finally,
including some carefully designed open-
ended and single- and multiple-choice types
of questions might allow more robust cross-
checking of the data. This has recently been
demonstrated in a long-term questionnaire
study searching for developmental correlates
in an adult population (296).
Conclusion
Available evidence is consistent with a
category of disease that develops through
the interaction of existing human IDSs.
Three models of such IDS disease genera-
tion are suggested: damaged IDSs, inap-
propriate or inadequate IDSs, and evolving
or learning IDSs.
Several nonexclusive mechanisms of
MCS based on these IDS models appear
plausible. If one or more of them are accu-
rate, demonstrating the existence of MCS
and verifying its mechanisms may involve a
simultaneous study of clinical, animal, and
large-scale self-report data.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 99
S.C. ROWAT
Appendix
Additional Descriptions
of IDSs: Mode of Action
and Inciters
Definitions and range of physical response
for each IDS are discussed in "Integrated
Defense System Overlaps as a Disease
Model." Table 1 lists the IDS models with
range ofphysical action and inciters.
Time-dependent Sensitization
Mode ofAction
In animals, when one or more noxious
chemicals or stresses are encountered above
a certain threshold level through any body
exposure route, responses related to survival
(297) occur in the CNS, endocrine, and
immune systems. Later when this same
stressor is encountered, this response has
increased (sensitization) or other stressors or
chemicals are now sensitized (spreading).
Intermittent stress encounters prolong or
increase sensitization; continuous ones may
induce tolerance (3,22). TDS sequelae in
humans have been suggested to include
paranoid schizophrenia, panic disorder,
PTSD, and MCS. Associated neurologic
changes appear to be irreversible. TDS has
been postulated to be `...dependent on
changes or alterations in gene expression`
(298). Behavioral and neurochemical
responses of genetically different rats
showed significant differences in the devel-
opment ofTDS (297); hence, human host
susceptibility to TDS may differ appreciably
with different inciters or mediators.
Incitrs
There are many chemical and nonchemical
stressors. Chemicals include: amitrip-
tyline, amphetamine, haloperidol, etha-
nol, IL-2, nicotine, and corticosterone.
Nonchemical stresses include immobiliza-
tion, shock, syringe insertion and with-
drawal, saline injection, and time in a
strange environment (3).
Immune Response to Antigen
Mode ofAction
Description ofthe antigen-specific immune
response to follow is highly simplified,
partly because of the "virtual explosion of
information that has taken place within the
field of immunology" (2) in recent years
and partly because the immune system is so
closely complexed with the central nervous
and endocrine systems.
In brief the specific immune response
has the important characteristics of long-
term memory through memory cells and
probably genetic coding; tolerance through
suppressor T cells that modulate other
immune functions; and associative spread-
ing of the response by recognition of multi-
ple epitopes on one antigen, and possibly by
other mechanisms such as CNS-mediated
conditioned learning.
T lymphocytes are activated by antigen
presented to them by macrophages or other
presenter cells, and in turn they grow, mul-
tiply clonally, and begin expressing molec-
ular messengers that in turn activate B
cells, other T cells, and other types of cells
to aid in attack and other responses to that
specific antigen (4. Many of these messen-
gers communicate directly with receptors
in the endocrine organs or on CNS cells
(32), so the response can involve all body
systems even if the antigen is local. The
immune responses can in turn be modified
by input from the CNS and endocrine
messengers. In addition an autoimmune
T-cell-mediated response is sometimes
mounted against the host's own tissue.
This can occur when the tissue is com-
plexed with a foreign antigen or for other
unknown reasons.
A major discovery ofrecent years is that
antigen-specific memory T cells, which will
precipitate a faster, stronger response on
second encounter with the antigen than
naive T cells (203) and B cells, can some-
times persist for a lifetime (203) without
any intervening booster encounters with
the original antigen (5,299).
Another important recent discovery is
that the antigen-recognizing T-cell recep-
tors undergo directed gene rearrangement
early in T-cell growth in the thymus
(26,28). Thus, it appears possible that
antigen recognition is being genetically
encoded (201,202), although such a feed-
back loop has not been characterized
in detail.
Incits
Inciters include bacteria, fungi, and viruses,
other foreign tissues, self-tissues in autoim-
mune reactions, chemicals such as phenol,
alcohol, formaldehyde, toluene diiso-
cyanate, PCBs, and polybrominated
biphenyls, metals such as Hg and nickel,
and messengers from the nervous and
endocrine systems including those induced
by psychologic or physical stresses.
Kindling
Mode ofAction
Kindling was the name given the effect
observed when brief applications of same-
strength electricity to the brains of animals
produced stronger and stronger reactions-
from no reaction through electroencephalo-
gram changes to full convulsions even after
stimulation had stopped (4). Partial kin-
dling produces behavioral changes sec-
ondary to brain chemistry changes, and in
humans chemical partial kindling has been
used to explain lasting panic disorder and
anxiety (22). Behavioral changes secondary
to kindling have been postulated to result
from the major part the limbic system
plays in controlling survival activities.
Incters
Various chemicals evoke a kindling
response in humans (22). These include
cocaine, amphetamine, P-endorphin, lido-
caine, physotigmine, and the pesticides lin-
dane and dieldrin. After initiation physical
stressors and morphine have been noted to
be inciters (22).
Nonspecific Immune
Response
Mode ofAction
The so-called innate (39,161) immune
system can be viewed as any first-line
immune reaction to an unanticipated
pathogen. The first contacts include mast
cells, NK cells, collectins such as MBP,
macrophages, T cells, and B cells. After con-
tact with pathogenic bacteria, fungi, viruses,
lectins, or superantigens (162) or after stim-
ulation by neuropeptides such as substance
P (1), various mediators are expressed to
produce cascading reactions, induding pro-
liferation of the original cells. For instance,
mast cells produce TNF-a, IL-i, IL-3, IL-4,
IL-6, GM-CSF (40), and histamine (1),
which have multiple effects on T, B, and
other immune cells and on receptors in
the nervous and endocrine systems, whereas
MBP induces complement-mediated
responses such as killing ofbacteria (39).
Incirs
NIRs are elicited by such factors as micro-
organisms (bacteria, fungi, viruses); lectins
from a wide range of plants, animals and
fungi, some of which are common in the
diet (peanut, wheat germ, potato, tomato,
various legumes, and others); exogenous
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998100
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
superantigens such as staphylococcal
enterotoxins (162); endogenous super-
antigens (162); chemicals such as phenol
resins (242) and dimethyl sulfoxide (300);
and neuropeptides such as somatostatin,
substance P, and VIP (32). Stress suppresses
nonspecific T-cell proliferation (14).
Acute-phase Response
Mode ofAction
Tissue damage or infection (as opposed to a
psychological stress; see `Stress Response")
causes principally macrophages, platelets,
and blood monocytes but also mast and
other cells to release cytokines such as IL-1
and TNF, which have both local and
distant effects (41,289).
Locally a second wave of cytokines is
released by stromal cells, and local endo-
thelial cells undergo changes that induce
leukocytes into the tissue. An arachidonic
acid cascade occurs, including prosta-
glandins and thromboxanes, and vascular
tone changes occur, swelling and redness,
for example. Histamine, serotonin, and
platelet-activating factor change tissue flow
of fluids. Pain occurs through molecules
such as bradykinin, which are released
during clotting (41).
Distantly the interleukins and TNF can
have multiple effects (29,158,288), includ-
ing changing the hypothalamic temperature
setting (fever) and inducing changes in liver
metabolism. Distinct sets of acute-phase
proteins are induced separately in the liver
by IL-1 as opposed to IL-6-type cytokines
(41); the former include glycoprotein,
C-reactive protein and complement C3,
the latter include fibrinogen and antipro-
teases (41,288). Liver changes also include
production of MT and the consequent
lowering ofplasma Zn levels (44,138,301).
These cytokines can also induce ACTH
from the adrenal-pituitary axis, generating
corticosteroids that feed back to suppress
the immune reactions (6,41); this can be
accompanied by direct production of anal-
gesic ,B-endorphins by B cells (31). At this
point the CNS is directly involved, as CRH
can be induced in the brain by interleukins
and psychological stress (281), and it
induces ACTH and hence corticosteroids.
This description merges with that ofthe SR
described below.
Although it may be that the APR
diminishes by an undirected erosion over a
24- to 48-hr period, it is also reported that
IL-4 and IL-10, produced by some T cells,
can accomplish downregulation of IL-1,
IL-6, and IL-8 (41).
Incters
Physical tissue injury and infection by
microorganisms are described as primary
inciting mechanisms (41). Based on
Zn/MT fetal damage studies, induction
may also occur through contact with toxic
environmental chemicals such as urethane,
ethanol, and others (44,192).
Stress Response
Mode ofAction
Coordinated responses take place when a
systemic threat is perceived. This percep-
tion may be triggered through release of
immune mediators such as IL-1, IL-2, IL-
3, IL-6, TNF, and prostaglandins (6,281)
resulting from a local injury, trauma, or
infection or it may be induced centrally
first, by psychological stress (281,302)
for example.
With central perception of stress,
several feedback loops are invoked within
the neuroendocrine-immune system; the
interactions between these, although com-
plex, presumably determine how the
response occurs, its intensity, and how long
it lasts (31,281).
The main functional changes are energy
redistribution toward improved attention
and alertness and suppression of less essen-
tial behavior such as feeding and sexual
interest (6). The brain, certain musdes, and
other organs ofimmediate need are supplied
with more oxygen and nutrients (6).
The immune response is also signifi-
cantly suppressed at various levels (6).
This has been well documented (29,32,
281,303) and includes cells (macrophage,
T, B, NK, etc.) and downregulation of
cytokines such as IL-1, IL-2, and others
(304-306). Less research reports differen-
tial effects, with some immune parameters
showing increased activity (303); this may
be time dependent (305).
The main effectors are corticosteroids
and catecholamines; the former have been
more extensively documented and are pre-
sumed to be centrally induced, although
this may prove not to be true with the
advent of newer evidence. CRH, induced
in the brain by stressors (including inter-
leukins) induces ACTH from the pituitary
and thus corticotropin from the adrenal
gland. CRH is associated with SR behav-
iors such as anorexia, decreased libido, and
motor activity changes. Fear responses and
decrease in willingness to explore have
been reported at higher dosages (6).
CRH also induces-and is induced
by-the central autonomic arousal system
(norepinephrine), resulting in simultane-
ous expression of catecholamines, which
contribute, with the glucocorticoids, to
both behavioral and immune effects.
Inciters
SRs may be elicited by immune-mediated
infection, physical trauma, the APR, psy-
chological trauma, drugs (297), environ-
mental chemicals, muscular exercise, cold
(48), solar radiation (48), and natural and
synthetic estrogens (48).
Neurogenic Switching
Mode ofAction
A recently named hypothesis by Meggs
(46,307,308) explains how antigen, stress,
chemical exposure, or damage at one body
site might lead to diverse symptoms at mul-
tiple distant sites. Anaphylactic reactions
and food-allergy symptoms are some
suggested end products.
On the one hand mediators such as
IL-1 and IL-2 participating in IgE and
other immune responses also affect the
release ofneuropeptides such as substance P
from nearby nerve cells. On the other hand,
substance P, a known participant in neuro-
genic inflammation caused by chemicals,
also can incite the IgE response and cause
other immune changes. Thus a feedback
loop can be initiated.
Although not using the term NS,
another review (32) has shown how this
could happen in the intestines, where neu-
ropeptides substance P, somatostatin, and
VIP are produced by nerve cells, received
by various immune cells, and produced by
various immune cells.
Because we know the CNS can be
conditioned to control immune responses
(10), for instance to have an audiovisual
signal control IgE response to egg albumin
in the intestines (13), and that immune
responses can quickly become systemic reac-
tions that include CNS modulation (such as
in anaphylactic shock after insect bite), this
feedback loop of cross-communication
between adjacent nerve and immune cells
has been suggested to be a likely candidate
for explaining such puzzling conditions as
migraine, asthma, arthritis, and MCS (46).
Inciters
Almost any exogenous or endogenous
agent recognized by the immune or periph-
eral nervous system or by higher CNS pro-
cessing centers may be involved. This
includes such factors as stress, chemicals,
foods, organisms, and self-proteins.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 101
S.C. ROWAT
Tolerance
Mode ofAction
Tolerance corresponds to stage 2 (resistance)
in Selye's well-known three-stage general
adaptation syndrome model for response to
chronic stressors (48). Stage 1 is alarm
reaction, which corresponds to a combina-
tion of the APS and SR described above
and stage 3 is exhaustion where the organ-
ism has lost its ability to defend by adapting
and unregulated damage is occurring.
Because an overall mechanism for the
induction of tolerance has yet to be postu-
lated, we remain at the descriptive stage.
However tolerance is so widely reported in
human and other life-form responses to
various insults that it may be useful to
define it as being any back-up system
developed by an organism that allows it to
more successfully bear a chronic injury.
Tolerance eventually gives out. In other
words all of the forms of tolerance
described below-with the possible excep-
tion of certain forms of nonpathogenic
food tolerance (49)-delay or minimize
damage but eventually succumb to a long-
term chronic stressor. During this process
of succumbing (exhaustion) (48) systemic
changes occur; e.g., rat lungs may lose tol-
erance to NO2. Stephens et al. (20)
describe this process as follows "...patho-
genesis continued to produce additional
alterations at various biological levels, first
stepwise and then simultaneously, and so
become identified at some point as a 'clini-
cal entity'...It appears that adaptation may
not be sustained in the face of persistent
stimulation from an injurious agent...."
Reported examples of tolerance include
changes in Escherichia coli colony-forming
when treated with Cd (309); in rat lung
tissue repair in response to NO2 (20) and
gasoline (310); in human psychophysio-
logic responses such as body balance and
reaction time to inhaled xylene (311),
ozone, and various solvents (53); and in
response syndromes to Zn oxide fumes,
nitroglycerin, and cotton and other grain
dusts (47). One review of examples (47)
imputed to tolerance and its interruption
tells of: brain- and CNS-mediated behav-
ioral effects; asthma; an infectionlike syn-
drome that includes fever, coughing,
nausea, and weakness; a syndrome with
drowsiness, severe headaches, and vomiting
that sometimes includes violent behavior; a
syndrome with airway irritation, coughing,
pulmonary function test reductions and
red blood cell fragility; emphysemalike
changes and fibrosis; olfactory fatigue;
and excess stimulation and tiredness in an
alternating pattern (indicating repeated
tolerance interruption).
A special type of tolerance has been
proposed for the immune system; various
cells such as T and B cells are widely
believed to function by suppression (7,55)
and anergy (54), which are forms of self-
controlled tolerance. Yet another form,
food tolerance or intolerance, also involves
the immune system, including the immuo-
globulins, but may be distinct since it has
some unusual features (49). Addiction,
including food addiction (312), has been
described as an unfortunate type of toler-
ance (47,52); in this case, the organism
procures and self-administers the insulting
agent to enjoy certain aspects of the toler-
ance mechanism (52) or to ensure that
tolerance continues (47,312).
Masking and masked addiction are
terms applied to the inability of a self-
conscious organism to know the inciting
agent (78). It occurs during tolerance when
the exposures are continuous and the
symptoms are diffuise. It can occur for foods
(312) and it has been proposed that masked
tolerance to household chemicals is a signifi-
cant unrecognized health problem (313).
At least one tolerance mechanism is
described as proceeding by adaptive changes
in DNA transcription (309). Possibly the
recent change of scientific paradigm (still
under debate) that allows for directed
genetic adaptation (28,202) as opposed to
merely random mutation will stimulate our
understanding of other DNA mechanisms
oftolerance ifthese exist.
Tolerance mechanisms have been
suggested as an underappreciated reason
why dose-response curves are frequently
nonlinear (51).
Inciters
Possibly any chronic stress can evoke
tolerance responses. Examples reviewed
(47,51,52) and reported to induce toler-
ance include diverse inhaled chemicals and
particle dusts including cotton and grain
dusts, ozone, xylene (311), NO2 (20),
nitroglycerin, systemic lead and cadmium,
welding fumes from Zn, copper, magne-
sium and aluminum, solvent fumes from
paint, varnish, adhesives, pesticides, and
cleaning solutions, caffeine, cigarette
smoke, narcotics, cocaine, marijuana, alco-
hol, formaldehyde, gasoline (310), gas
combustion products, and continuously
consumed allergenic foods (312) such as
corn, milk, eggs, wheat, beef, pork, and cit-
rus fruit, and immune-defined antigens
such as infectious microorganisms and
dietary lectins (54).
Traumatic Dissociation
TD is described in full in "Integrated
Defense System Overlaps as a Disease
Model" under "Traumatic Dissociation."
REFERENCES
1. Payan DG. Substance P: a modulator of neuroendocrine-
immune function. Hosp Pract (February 15):67-80 (1989).
2. Whitacre CC. Immunology: a state of the art lecture. Ann NY
Acad Sci 594:1-16 (1990).
3. Antelman SM. Time-dependent sensitization in animals: a pos-
sible model ofmultiple chemical sensitivity in humans. Toxicol
Ind Health 10(4-5):335-342 (1994).
4. Adamec R. Modelling anxiety disorders following chemical
exposures. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):391-420 (1994).
5. Lau LL, Jamieson BD, Somasundaram T, Ahmed R. Cytotoxic
T-cell memory without antigen. Nature 369(23 June):648-652
(1994).
6. Chrousos GP. Molecular and endocrine mechanisms of the
stress response, pp 854-857. In: Sternberg EM, Moderator,
The Stress Response and the Regulation of Inflammatory
Disease. Ann Intern Med 117(10):854-866 (1992).
7. Jerne NK. Towards a network theory of the immune system.
Ann Immunol 125(C):373-389 (1974).
8. Biondi M. The application of the human stress model to psy-
choneuroimmunology. Acta Neurol 13(4):328-334 (1991).
9. Ader R, Cohen N. Conditioned immunopharmacologic effects
on cell-mediated immunity. Int J Immunopharmacol
14(3):323-327 (1992).
10. Grossman Z, Herberman RB, Livnat S. Neural modulation of
immunity: conditioning phenomena and the adaptability of
lymphoid cells. Int J Neurosci 64(1-4):275-290 (1992).
11. Ader R, Kelly K, Moynihan JA, Grota LJ, Cohen N.
Conditioned enhancement of antibody production using anti-
gen as the unconditioned stimulus. Brain Behav Immun
7(4):334-343 (1993).
102 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
12. Olness K, Ader R. Conditioning as an adjunct in the pharma-
cotherapy of lupus erythematosus. J Dev Behav Pediatr
13(2):124-125 (1992).
13. MacQueen G, Marshall J, Perdue M, Siegel S, Bienenstock J.
Pavlovian conditioning of rat mucosal mast cells to secrete rat
mast cell protease 2. Science 243:83-84 (1989).
14. Workman EA, La Via MF. T-lymphocyte polyclonal prolifera-
tion: effects of stress and stress response style on medical stu-
dents taking national board examinations. Clin Immunol
Immunopathol 43(3):308-313 (1987).
15. Ader R, Cohen N. Psychoneuroimmunology: conditioning and
stress [Abstract]. Annu Rev Psychol 44:53-85 (1993).
16. La Via MF, Workman EA. Psychoneuroimmunology: where are
we, where are we going? Recenti Prog Med 82(12):637-641
(1991).
17. Kim JJ, Fanselow MS. Modality-specific retrograde amnesia of
fear. Science 256(5057):675-677 (1992).
18. Bolla-Wilson K, Wilson RJ, Bleecker ML. Conditioning of
physical symptoms after neurotoxic exposure. J Occup Med
30(9):684-686 (1988).
19. Renz JF, Kalf GF. Role for interleukin-1 (IL-1) in benzene-
induced hematotoxicity: inhibition of conversion of pre-IL-1
alpha to mature cytokine in murine macrophages by hydro-
quinone and prevention of benzene-induced hematotoxicity in
mice by IL-1 alpha. Blood 78(4):938-944 (1991).
20. Stephens RJ, Freeman G, Evans MJ. Early response of lungs to
low levels of nitrogen dioxide. Arch Environ Health
24(March):160-179 (1972).
21. van der Kolk BA, Fisler RE. Childhood abuse and neglect and
loss of self-regulation. Bull Menninger Clin 58(2):145-168
(1994).
22. Bell IR. White paper: neuropsychiatric aspects of sensitivity to
low-level chemicals: a neural sensitization model. Toxicol Ind
Health 10(4-5):277-312 (1994).
23. Vautrin J, Schaffner AE, Barker JL. Tonic GABA secretion of
cultured rat hippocampal neurons rapidly transformed by Zn2+
into quantal release. Neurosci Lett 158(2):125-129 (1993).
24. Xie XM, Smart TG. A physiological role for endogenous zinc
in rat hippocampal synaptic neurotransmission. Nature
349(6309):521-524 (1991).
25. Xie X, Smart TG. Giant GABAB-mediated synaptic potentials
induced by zinc in the rat hippocampus: paradoxical effects of
zinc on the GABAB receptor. Eur J Neurosci 5(5):430-436
(1993).
26. Thompson C. New insights into V(D)J recombination and its
role in the evolution of the immune system. Immunity
3(5):531-539 (1995).
27. Farmer JD, Kauffman SA, Packard NH, Perelson AS. Adaptive
dynamic networks as models for the immune system and auto-
catalytic sets. Ann NYAcad Sci 504:118-131 (1987).
28. Gill JI, Gulley ML. Immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene
rearrangement. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 8(4):751-770
(1994).
29. Plata-Salaman CR. Immunoregulators in the nervous system.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 15(2): 185-215 (1991).
30. Ballieux RE. Bidirectional communication between the brain
and the immune system. Eur J Clin Invest 1:6-9 (1992).
31. Kavelaars A, Ballieux RE, Heijnen CJ. The role of interleukin-
1 in the CRF- and AVP-induced secretion of ir-B-endorphin
by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Immunol
142:2338-2342 (1989).
32. Ottaway CA. Neuroimmunomodulation in the intestinal
mucosa. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 20(3):511-529 (1991).
33. Wenger GD, D'Orisio SM, Goetzl EJ. Vasoactive intestinal
peptide: messenger in a neuroimmune axis. Ann NY Acad Sci
594:104-119 (1990).
34. Millington G, Buckingham JC. Thymic peptides and
neuroendocrine-immune communication. J Endocrinol
133(2):163-168 (1992).
35. Adamec RE, Stark-Adamec C. Limbic hyperfunction, limbic
epilepsy, and interictal behavior: models and methods ofdetec-
tion. In: The Limbic System: Functional Organization and
Clinical Disorders (Doane BK, Livingston KE, eds). New
York:Raven, 1986;129-145.
36. Burnham WM, Niznik HB, Kish SJK. Biochemical changes in
the limbic system following kindling: assay studies. In: The
Limbic System: Functional Organization and Clinical
Disorders (Doane BK, Livingston KE, eds). New York:Raven,
1986; 123-127.
37. Girgis M. Biochemical patterns in limbic system circuitry: bio-
chemical-electrophysiological interactions displayed by
chemitrode techniques. In: The Limbic System: Functional
Organization and Clinical Disorders (Doane BK, Livingston
KE, eds). New York:Raven, 1986;55-65.
38. Mori N, Wada JA, Watanabe M, Kumashiro H. Increased
activity of superoxide dismutase in kindled brain and suppres-
sion of kindled seizure following intra-amygdaloid injection of
superoxide dismutase in rats. Brain Res 557(1-2):313-315
(1991).
39. Holmskov U, Malhotra R, Sim RB, Jensenius JC. Collectins:
collagenous C-type lectins of the innate immune defense sys-
tem. Immunol Today 15(2):67-74 (1994).
40. Ansel JC, Brown JR, Payan DG, Brown MA. Substance P
selectively activates TNF-alpha gene expression in murine mast
cells. J Immunol 150(10):4478-4485 (1993).
41. Baumann H, Gauldie J. The acute-phase response. Immunol
Today 15(2):74-80 (1994).
42. Glaser R, Kennedy S, Lafuse WP. Psychological stress-induced
modulation ofinterleukin 2 receptor gene expression and inter-
leukin 2 production in peripheral blood leukocytes. Arch Gen
Psych 47:707-712 (1990).
43. Arizono K, Tanahe A, Ariyoshi T, Moriyama M. Induction of
metallothionein by emotional stress. In: Metallothionein in
Biology and Medicine (Klaassen CD, Suzuki KT, eds). Boca
Raton, FL:CRC Press, 1991;271-282.
44. Keen CL, Taubeneck MW, Daston GP, Rogers JM, Gershwin
ME. Primary and secondary zinc deficiency as factors underly-
ing abnormal CNS development. Ann NY Acad Sci 678:37-47
(1993).
45. Itoh T, Saito T, Fujimura M, Watanabe S, Saito K. Restraint
stress-induced changes in endogenous zinc release from the rat
hippocampus. Brain Res 618(2):318-322 (1993).
46. Meggs WJ. Neurogenic switching: a hypothesis for a mecha-
nism for shifting the site ofinflammation in allergy and chemi-
cal sensitivity [Abstract]. Environ Health Perspect
103(1):54-56 (1995).
47. Ashford A, Miller CS. Key terms and concepts. In: Chemical
Exposures: Low Levels and High Stakes. New York:Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1991;27-58.
48. Selye H. The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases of
adaptation. J Allergy 17:231-247, 289-323, 358-398 (1946).
49. Strobel S. Dietary manipulation and induction of tolerance. J
Pediatr 121(5 Pt 2):S74-S79 (1992).
50. Randolph TG, Moss RW. The ups and downs of addicted life.
In: An Alternative Approach to Allergies. New York:Harper &
Row, 1980;36-48.
51. Davis JM, Svendsgaard DJ. U-shaped dose-response curves:
their occurrence and implications for risk assessment. J Toxicol
Environ Health 30(2):71-83 (1990).
52. Newlin DB. Drug sensitization, substance abuse, and chemical
sensitivity. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):463-480 (1994).
53. Miller CS. Possible models for multiple chemical sensitivity:
conceptual issues and role of the limbic system. Toxicol Ind
Health 8(4):181-202 (1992).
54. Bemer V, Rovira P, Truffa-Bachi P. T-cell activation, anergy
and immunomodulation by molecules ofviral, fungal and vege-
tal origin. Res Immunol 146(4-5):249-262 (1995).
55. Farmer JD, Packard NH, Perelson AS. The immune system,
adaptation, and machine learning. Physica 22D:187-204
(1986).
56. Ross CA, Joshi S, Currie R. Dissociative experiences in the gen-
eral population: a factor analysis. Hosp Community Psychiatry
42:297-301 (1991).
57. Ogata SN, Silk KR, Goodrich S. Childhood sexual and physical
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 103
S.C. ROWAT
abuse in adult patients with borderline personality disorder.
AmJ Psychiatry 147:1008-1013 (1990).
58. Saunders EA, Arnold F. A critique ofconceptual and treatment
approaches to borderline psychopathology in light of findings
about childhood abuse. Psychiatry 56(2):188-203 (1993).
59. Alexander PC. Application ofattachment theory to the study of
sexual abuse. J Consult Clin Psychol 60(2):185-195 (1992).
60. Saxe GN, van der Kolk BA, Berkowitz R, Chinman G, Hall K,
Lieberg G, Schwartz J. Dissociative disorders in psychiatric
inpatients [see comments] [Abstract]. Am J Psychiatry
150(7):1037-1042 (1993).
61. van der Kolk BA, Fisler R. Dissociation and the fragmentary
nature of traumatic memories: overview and exploratory study
[Abstract]. J Trauma Stress 8(4):505-525 (1995).
62. van der Kolk BA, Herron N, Hostetler A. The history of
trauma in psychiatry [Abstract]. Psychiatr Clin North Am
17(3):583-600 (1994).
63. Kluft RP. Clinical presentations of multiple personality disor-
der. Psychiatr Clin North Am 14(3):605-629 (1991).
64. Barthauer L. A piece of my mind: secret pain. Primary Care
20(2):xvii-xix (1993).
65. Putnam FW, GuroffJJ, Silberman EK. The clinical phenome-
nology of multiple personality disorder: a review of 100 recent
cases. J Clin Psychiatry 47:285-293 (1986).
66. Ross CA. Epidemiology of multiple personality disorder and
dissociation. Psychiatric Clin N Am 14(3):503-517 (1991).
67. Divac-Jovanovic M, Svrakic D, Lecic-Tosevski D. Personality
disorders: model for conceptual approach and classification.
Part I: general model. Am J Psychother 47(4):558-571 (1993).
68. Lonie I. Borderline disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder:
an equivalence? Aust NZ J Psychiatry 27(2):233-245 (1993).
69. van der Kolk BA, Fisler RE. The biologic basis ofposttraumatic
stress. Primary Care 20(2):417-432 (1993).
70. Zeanah CH, Zeanah PD. Intergenerational transmission of
maltreatment: insights from attachment theory and research.
Psychiatry 52(2):177-196 (1989).
71. van der Kolk BA, Dreyfuss D, Michaels M, Shera D, Berkowitz
R, Fisler R, Saxe G. Fluoxetine in posttraumatic stress disorder
[see comments] [Abstract]. J Clin Psychiatry 55(12):517-522
(1994).
72. Rauch SL, van der Kolk BA, Fisler RE, Alpert NM, Orr SP,
Savage C R, Fischman AJ, Jenike MA, Pitman. RK. A symp-
tom provocation study of posttraumatic stress disorder using
positron emission tomography and script-driven imagery. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 53(5):380-387 (1996).
73. Depue RA, Spoont MR. Conceptualizing a serotonin trait. A
behavioral dimension of constraint. Ann NY Acad Sci
487:47-62 (1986).
74. Blume ES. Multiple personality disorder. In: Secret Survivors:
Uncovering Incest and its Aftereffects in Women. New
York:Ballantine, 1990;8-88.
75. Corrigan FM, Coulter F. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
amitriptyline, and thioridazine [Letter]. Biol Psychiatry
23(3):320-321 (1988).
76. Herman J, Russel D, Trocki K. Long-term effects ofincestuous
abuse in childhood. Am J Psychiatry 143:1293-1296 (1986).
77. Bascom R, Meggs WJ, Frampton M, Hudnell K, Killburn K,
Kobal K, Medinsky M, Rea W. Neurogenic inflammation:
with additional discussion ofcentral and perceptual integration
of nonneurogenic inflammation. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 2):531-537 (1997).
78. Ashfor A, Miller CS. Chemical exposures and sensitive popu-
lations. In: Chemical Exposures: Low Levels and High Stakes.
New York:Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991;3-26.
79. Subcommittee on Immunotoxicology. Use of biologic markers
in controversial areas of environmental health. In: Biologic
Markers in Immunotoxicology. Washington:National Academy
Press, 1992;127-148.
80. Albright JF, Goldstein RA. Is there evidence of an immuno-
logic basis for multiple chemical sensitivity? Toxicol Ind Health
8(4):215-219 (1992).
81. Simon GE, Daniell W, Stockbridge H, Claypoole K,
Rosenstock L. Immunologic, psychological, and neuropsycho-
logical factors in multiple chemical sensitivity: a controlled
study. Ann Intern Med 119(2):97-103 (1993).
82. Broder I. Chairman's Introductory Remarks: Environmental
Sensitivities Workshop. Chron Dis Canada Suppl(Environmental
Sensitivities Workshop):6 (1991).
83. Miller CS. Toxicant-induced loss of tolerance-an emerging
theory of disease? Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
2):445-453 (1997).
84. Miller CS, Ashford N, Doty R, Lamielle M, Otto D, Rahill A,
Wallace L. Empirical approaches for the investigation of toxi-
cant-induced loss of tolerance. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 2):515-519 (1997).
85. Gottleib A. Post traumatic stress disorder and vulvar pain.
Vulvar Pain Newslett 8(Fall):1-15 (1995).
86. Bell IR, Rossi J, Gilbert ME, Kobal G, Morrow LA, Newlin
DB, Sorg BA, Wood RW. Testing the neural sensitization and
kindling hypothesis for illness from low levels environmental
chemicals. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 2):539-547
(1997).
87. Keplinger H. Patient statement: chemically sensitive. Toxicol
nd Health 10(4-5):313-317 (1994).
88. Wilson C. Patient statement: chemical sensitivity-one victim's
perspective. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):319-321 (1994).
89. Ziem G, McTamney J. Profile of patients with chemical injury
and sensitivity. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
2):417-436 (1997).
90. Miller CS. White paper: chemical sensitivity: history and phe-
nomenology. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):253-276 (1994).
91. Miller CS, Mitzel HC. Chemical sensitivity attributed to pesti-
cide exposure versus remodeling. Arch Environ Health
50(2):119-29 (1995).
92. Bell IR, Peterson JM, Schwartz GE. Medical histories and psy-
chological profiles of middle-aged women with and without
self-reported illness from environmental chemicals. J Clin
Psychiatry 56(4):151-160 (1995).
93. Bell IR, Schwartz GE, Peterson JM, Amend D. Self-reported
illness from chemical odors in young adults without clinical
syndromes or occupational exposures. Arch Environ Health
48(1):6-13 (1993).
94. Ashford A, Miller CS. Mechanisms of multiple chemical sensi-
tivities. In: Chemical Exposures: Low Levels and High Stakes.
New York:Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991;88.
95. Vojdani A, Ghoneum M, Brautbar N. Immune alteration asso-
ciated with exposure to toxic chemicals. Toxicol Ind Health
8(5):239-254 (1992).
96. Simon TR, Hickey DC, Fincher CE, Johnson AR, Ross GH,
Rea WJ. Single photon emission computed tomography of the
brain in patients with chemical sensitivities. Toxicol Ind Health
10(4-5):573-577 (1994).
97. Anderson RM, May RM. Coevolution of hosts and parasites.
Parasitology 85(Pt 2):411-26 (1982).
98. May RM. Parasitic infections as regulators of animal popula-
tions. Am Sci 71:36-45 (1983).
99. Cross SS, Cotton DW. Chaos and antichaos in pathology
[Abstract]. Hum Pathol 25(7):630-637 (1994).
100. Barton S. Chaos, self-organization, and psychology [Abstract].
Am Psychol 49(1):5-14 (1994).
101. Elbert T, Ray WJ, Kowalik ZJ, Skinner JE, Graf KE,
Birbaumer N. Chaos and physiology: deterministic chaos in
excitable cell assemblies [Abstract]. Physiol Rev 74(1):1-47
(1994).
102. Goldsmith JR, Kordysh E. Why dose-response relationships are
often non-linear and some consequences. J Exposure Anal
Environ Epidemiol 3(3):259-276 (1993).
103. Butz M. Practical applications from chaos theory to the psy-
chotherapeutic process, a basic consideration of dynamics.
Psychol Rep 73(2):543-554 (1993).
104. Reidbord SP, Redington DJ. Psychophysiological processes
during insight-oriented therapy: furt er investigations into
nonlinear psychodynamics. J Nerv Ment Dis 180:649-657
(1992).
104 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
105. Gleick J. Chaos: Making A New Science. New York:Penguin,
1987;352.
106. Bassingthwaighte JB. Chaos in cardiac signals [Abstract]. Adv
Exp Med Biol 346:207-218 (1993).
107. Preisler H, Raza A. An overview of some studies of chronic
myelogenous leukemia: biological-clinical observations and
viewing the disease as a chaotic system [Abstract]. Leuk
Lymphoma 11(Suppl 1):145-150 (1993).
108. Rosenthal NE, Cameron CL. Exaggerated sensitivity to an
organophosphate pesticide [Letter]. Am J Psychiatry
148(2):270 (1991).
109. Moretto A, Lotti M. Promotion of peripheral axonopathies by
certain esterase inhibitors. Toxicol Ind Health 9(6):1037-1046
(1993).
110. Lamielle M. Indoor air: Congress and flight attendant address
polluted cabin air. Delicate Balance 5(3-4):7-8 (1992).
111. Cone JE, Sult TA. Acquired intolerance to solvents following
pesticide/solvent exposure in a building: a new group ofwork-
ers at risk for multiple chemical sensitivities? Toxicol Ind
Health 8:29-39 (1992).
112. Thrasher JD, Madison R, Broughton A. Immunologic abnor-
malities in humans exposed to chlorpyrifos: preliminary obser-
vations. Arch Environ Health 48(2):89-93 (1993).
113. Corrigan FM, MacDonald S, Brown A, Armstrong K,
Armstrong EM. Neurasthenic fatigue, chemical sensitivity and
GABAa receptor toxins [Abstract]. Med Hypotheses
43(4):195-200 (1994).
114. Kaplan JG, Kessler J, Rosenberg N, Pack D, Schaumburg HH.
Sensory neuropathy associated with Dursban (chlorpyrifos)
exposure. Neurology 43(11):2193-2196 (1993).
115. Haley RW, Horn J, Roland PS, Bryan WW, Van Ness PC,
Bonte FJ, Devous MD Sr, Mathews D, Fleckenstein JL, Wians
FH Jr et al. Evaluation ofneurologic function in GulfWar vet-
erans: a blinded case-control study [Abstract]. JAMA
277(3):223-230 (1997).
116. Haley RW, Kurt TL. Self-reported exposure to neurotoxic
chemical combinations in the Gulf War: a cross-sectional epi-
demiologic study [Abstract]. JAMA 277(3):231-237 (1997).
117. Haley RW, Horn J, Kurt TL. Is there a Gulf War Syndrome?
Searching for syndromes by factor analysis of symptoms
[Abstract]. JAMA 277(3):215-222 (1997).
118. The Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group. Self-reported illness and
health status among Gulf War veterans [Abstract]. JAMA
277(3):238-245 (1997).
119. Kutz FW, Wood PH, Bottimore DP. Organochlorine pesti-
cides and polychlorinated biphenyls in human adipose tissue.
Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 120:1-82 (1991).
120. Unger M, Olsen J. Organochlorine compounds in the adipose
tissue ofdeceased peop[e with and without cancer. Environ Res
23:257-263 (1980).
121. Jensen GE, Clausen J. Organochlorine compounds in adipose
tissue of Greenlanders and Southern Danes. J Toxicol Environ
Health 5:617-629 (1979).
122. Wolff MS, Anderson HA, Rosenman KD, Selikoff IJ.
Equilibrium of polybrominated biphenyl (PBB) residues in
serum and fat of Michigan residents. Bull Environ Contam
Toxicol 21:775-781 (1979).
123. Muhlebach S, Wyss PA, Bickel MH. The use of 2,4,5,2',4',5'-
hexachlorobiphenyl (6-CB) as an unmetabolizable lipophilic
model compound. Pharmacol Toxicol 69(6):410-415 (1991).
124. Lisk DJ. Environmental implications ofincineration ofmunici-
pal solid waste and ash disposal. Sci Total Environ 74:39-66
(1988).
125. Kutz FW, Cook BT, Carter-Pokras OD, Brody D, Murphy
RS. Selected pesticide residues and metabolites in urine from a
survey of the U.S. general population. J Toxicol Environ
Health 37(2):277-291 (1992).
126. Calabrese EJ, Baldwin LA, Mehendale HM. G2 subpopulation
in rat liver induced into mitosis by low-level exposure to carbon
tetrachloride: an adaptive response. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
121(1):1-7 (1993).
127. Rao SB, Mehendale HM. Halomethane-chlordecone (CD)
interactive hepatotoxicity-current concepts on the mecha-
nism. Indian J Biochem Biophys 30(4):191-198 (1993).
128. Mehendale HM. Potentiation of halomethane hepatotoxicity
by chlordecone: a hypothesis for the mechanism. Med
Hypotheses 33(4):289-299 (1990).
129. Staudenmayer H, Selner ME, Selner JC. Adult sequelae of
childhood abuse presenting as environmental illness [Abstract].
Ann Allergy 71(6):538-546 (1993).
130. Fiedler N, Kipen HM. Chemical sensitivity: the scientific liter-
ature. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 2):409-415 (1997).
131. Gibson PR. Environmental illness/multiple chemical sensitivities:
invisible disabilities. Women Ther 14(3/4):171-185 (1993).
132. Sandstead HH. Is zinc deficiency a public health problem?
Nutrition 11(Suppl 1):87-92 (1995).
133. Walsh CT, Sandstead HH, Prasad AS, Newberne PM, Fraker
PJ. Zinc: health effects and research priorities for the 1990s.
Environ Health Perspect 102(Suppl 2):4-46 (1994).
134. Slevin JT, Kasarskis EJ. Effects ofzinc on markers ofglutamate
and aspartate neurotransmission in rat hippocampus. Brain Res
334:281-286 (1985).
135. Harrison NL, Radke HK, Talukder G, Ffrench-Mullen JM.
Zinc modulates transient outward current gating in hippocam-
pal neurons. Recept Channels 1(2):153-163 (1993).
136. Moynahan EJ. Zinc deficiency and disturbance of mood and
visual behaviour. Lancet (anuary 10):91 (1976).
137. Frederickson CJ, Danscher G. Zinc-containing neurons in hip-
pocampus and related CNS structures. Prog Brain Res
83:71-84 (1990).
138. Sato M, Bremner I. Oxygen free radicals and metallothionein.
Free Radic Biol Med 14(3):325-337 (1993).
139. Dreosti IE, Manuel SJ, Buckley RA, Fraser FJ, Record IR. The
effect of late prenatal and/or early postnatal zinc deficiency on
the development and some biochemical aspects of the cerebel-
lum and hippocampus in rats. Life Sci 28:2133-2141 (1981).
140. Crawford IL, Connor JD. Zinc in maturing rat brain: hip-
pocampal concentration and localization. J Neurochem
19:1451-1458 (1972).
141. Allen JI, Kay NE, McClain CJ. Severe zinc deficiency in
humans: association with a reversible T-lymphocyte dysfunc-
tion. Ann Intern Med 95:154-157 (1981).
142. Dardenne M, Bach J. Rationale for the mechanism of zinc
interaction in the immune system. In: Nutrient Modulation of
the Immune Response (Cunningham-Rundles S, ed). New
York:Marcel Dekker, 1993;501-509.
143. Dardenne M, Pleau JM, Savino W, Prasad AS, Bach JF.
Biochemical and biological aspects of the interaction between
thymulin and zinc. Prog Clin Biol Res 380:23-32 (1993).
144. Fraker PJ, DePasquale-Jardieu P, Zwickl CM, Luecke RW.
Regeneration of T-cell helper function in zinc-deficient adult
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 75(11):5660-5664 (1978).
145. Kalf GF, Renz JF, Niculescu R. p-Benzoquinone, a reactive
metabolite of benzene, prevents the processing of pre-inter-
leukins-1 alpha and -1 beta to active cytokines by inhibition of
the processing enzymes, calpain, and interleukin-1 beta con-
verting enzyme [Abstract]. Environ Health Perspect 104(Suppl
6):1251-1256 (1996).
146. Niculescu R, Bradford HN, Colman RW, Kalf GF. Inhibition
of the conversion of pre-interleukins-1 alpha and -1 beta to
mature cytokines by p-benzoquinone, a metabolite of benzene
[Abstract]. Chem Biol Interact 98(3):211-222 (1995).
147. Niculescu R, Kalf GF. A morphological analysis of the short-
term effects of benzene on the development of the hematologi-
cal cells in the bone marrow of mice and the effects of
interleukin-1 alpha on the process [Abstract]. Arch Toxicol
69(3):141-148 (1995).
148. Miller AC, Schattenberg DG, Malkinson AM, Ross D.
Decreased content of the IL-1 alpha processing enzyme calpain
in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages after treatment
with the benzene metabolite hydroquinone lAbstract]. Toxicol
Lett 74(2):177-184 (1994).
149. Mehlman MA. Dangerous and cancer-causing properties of
products and chemicals in the oil refining and petrochemical
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 105
S.C. ROWAT
industry. VIII: Health effects ofmotor fuels: carcinogenicity of
gasoline-scientific update. Environ Res 59(1):238-249
(1992).
150. Litovitz T. Myocardial sensitization following inhalation abuse
ofhydrocarbons. Occup Med 3(3):567-568 (1988).
151. Reid WD, Ilett KF, Glick JM, Krishna G. Metabolism and
binding of aromatic hydrocarbons in the lung: relationship to
experimental bronchiolar necrosis. Am Rev Respir Dis
107:539-551 (1973).
152. Autrup H, Jeffrey AM, Harris CC. Metabolism of
benzo[a]pyrene in cultured human bronchus, trachea, colon,
and esophagus. In: Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons:
Chemistry and Biological Effects, Fourth International
Symposium. Columbus, OH:Battelle Press, 1977;89-105.
153. WolffSP. Correlation between car ownership and leukaemia: is
non-occupational exposure to benzene from petrol and motor
vehicle exaust a causative factor in leukaemia and lymphoma?
Experientia 48(3):301-304 (1992).
154. Scheepers PT, Bos RP. Combustion of diesel fuel from a toxi-
cological perspective. II: Toxicity. Int Arch Occup Environ
Health 64(3):163-177 (1992).
155. Yardley-Jones A, Anderson D, Parke DV. The toxicity of ben-
zene and its metabolism and molecular pathology in human
risk assessment. Br J Ind Med 48(7):437-444 (1991).
156. MacFarland HN. Toxicology of petroleum hydrocarbons.
Occup Med 3(3):445-454 (1988).
157. Nesnow S, Evans C, Stead A, Creason J, Slaga TJ, Triplett LL.
Skin carcinogenesis studies of emission extracts. In:
Toxicological Effects of Emissions From Diesel Engines
(Lewtas J, ed). New York:Elsevier Biomedical, 1981;295-320.
158. Cunningham E Jr, De Souza EB. Interleukin 1 receptors in the
brain and endocrine tissues. Immunol Today 14(4): 171-176
(1993).
159. Banks WA, Kastin AJ, Durham DA. Bidirectional transport of
interleukin- 1 alpha across the blood brain-barrier. Brain Res
Bull 23:433-437 (1989).
160. Rothwell NJ. CNS regulation ofthermogenesis [Abstract]. Crit
Rev Neurobiol 8(1-2):1-10 (1994).
161. Cooper EL, Rinkevich B, Uhlenbruck G, Valembois P.
Invertebrate immunity: another viewpoint. Scand J Immunol
35:247-266 (1992).
162. Licastro F, Davis LJ, Morini MC. Lectins and superantigens:
membrane interactions of these compounds with T lympho-
cytes affect immune responses. Int J Biochem 25(6):845-852
(1993).
163. Vasta GR, Ahmed H, Fink NE, Elola MT, Marsh AG,
Snowden A, Odom EW. Animal lectins as self/non-self recog-
nition molecules. Biochemical and genetic approaches to
understanding their biological roles and evolution. Ann NY
Acad Sci 712:55-73 (1994).
164. McCoy JJ, Mann BJ, Petri WA Jr. Adherence and cytotoxicity
of Entamoeba histolytica or how lectins let parasites stick
around. Infect Immun 62(8):3045-3050 (1994).
165. Eastmond DA. Induction of micronuclei and aneuploidy by
the quinone-forming agents benzene and O-phenylphenol
[Abstract]. Toxicol Lett 67(1-3):105-18 (1993).
166. Robertson ML, Eastmond DA, Smith MT. Two benzene
metabolites, catechol and hydroquinone, produce a synergistic
induction of micronudei and toxicity in cultured human lym-
phocytes [Abstract]. Mutat Res 249(1):201-209 (1991).
167. Kolachana P, Subrahmanyam VV, Meyer KB, Zhang L, Smith
MT. Benzene and its phenolic metabolites produce oxidative
DNA damage in HL60 cells in vitro and in the bone marrow in
vivo [Abstract]. Cancer Res 53(5):1023-1026 (1993).
168. Jacobson JL, Jacobson SW, Humphrey HE. Effects of in utero
exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and related contami-
nants on cognitive functioning in young children. J Pediatr
116(1):38-45 (1990).
169. Schwarz RH. Considerations ofantibiotic therapy during preg-
nancy. Obstet Gynecol 58(Suppl 5):95S-99S (1981).
170. Whipkey RR, Paris PM, Stewart RD. Drug use in pregnancy.
Ann Emerg Med 13(5):346-354 (1984).
171. Levin ED, Uemura E, Bowman RE. Neurobehavioral toxicol-
ogy of halothane in rats. Neurotoxicol Teratol 13(4):461-470
(1991).
172. Vaughan RW, Sipes IG, Brown B Jr. Role ofbiotransformation
in the toxicity of inhalation anesthetics. Life Sci
23(25):2447-2462 (1978).
173. Berthoud MC, Reilly CS. Adverse effects ofgeneral anesthetics.
Drug Saf7(6):434-459 (1992).
174. Wess JA. Reproductive toxicity of ethylene glycol monomethyl
ether, ethylene glycol monoethyl ether and their acetates. Scand
J Work Environ Health 2:43-45 (1992).
175. Beckman DA, Brent RL. Mechanisms of teratogenesis. Annu
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 24:483-500 (1984).
176. Holmberg PC. Central-nervous-system defects in children born
to mothers exposed to organic solvents during pregnancy.
Lancet (uly 28):177-179 (1979).
177. Eriksson P. DDT and pyrethroids-ecotoxicological considera-
tions. Comp Biochem Physiol C 100(1-2):269-270 (1991).
178. Shuman RM, Leech RW, Alvord E Jr. Neurotoxicity of hexa-
chlorophene in humans. II: A clinicopathological study of 46
premature infants. Arch Neurol 32(5):320-325 (1975).
179. Shuman RM, Leech RW, Alvord E Jr. Neurotoxicity of hexa-
chlorophene in the human. I: A clinicopathologic study of248
children. Pediatrics 54(6):689-695 (1974).
180. Patterson R, Dykewicz MS, Evans RD, Grammer LC,
Greenberger PA, Harris KE, Lawrence ID, Pruzansky JJ,
Roberts M, Shaughnessy MA et al. IgG antibody against
formaldehyde human serum proteins: a comparison with other
IgG antibodies against inhalant proteins and reactive chemicals
[Abstract]. J Allergy Clin Immunol 84(3):359-366 (1989).
181. Patterson R, Pateras V, Grammer LC, Harris KE. Human anti-
bodies against formaldehyde-human serum albumin conjugates
or human serum albumin in individuals exposed to formalde-
hyde [Abstract]. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immun 79:53-59
(1986).
182. Broughton A, Thrasher JD, Gard Z. Immunological evaluation
offour arc welders exposed to fumes from ignited polyurethane
(isocyanate) foam: antibodies and immune profiles. Am J Ind
Med 13:463-472 (1988).
183. Israel Y, Macdonald A, Niemela 0, Zamel D, Shami E,
Zywulko M, Klajner F, Borgono C. Hypersensitivity to
acetaldehyde-protein adducts. Mol Pharmacol 42:711-717
(1992).
184. Kenna JG, Neuberger J, Williams R. Evidence for expression in
human liver of halothane-induced neoantigens recognised by
antibodies in sera from patients with ha othane hepatitis.
Hepatology 8:1635-1641 (1988).
185. Israel Y, Niemela 0, Hurwitz E, Arnon R. Monoclonal and
polyclonal antibodies against acetaldehyde-containing epitopes
in acetaldehyde-protein adducts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
83:7923-7927 (1986).
186. Niemela 0, Juvonen T, Parkkila S. Immunohistochemical
demonstration of acetaldehyde-modified epitopes in human
liver after alcohol consumption. J Clin Invest 87:1367-1374
(1991).
187. Niemela 0. Acetaldehyde adducts of proteins: diagnostic and
pathogenic implications in diseases caused by excessive alcohol
consumption. Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 213:45-54
(1993).
188. Niemela 0, Klajner F, Orrego H, Vidins E, Blendis L, Israel Y.
Antibodies against acetaldehyde-modified protein epitopes in
human alcoholics. Hepatology 7(6):1210-1214 (1987).
189. Niemela 0, Israel Y. Hemoglobin-acetaldehyde adducts in
human alcohol abusers. Lab Invest 67(2):246-252 (1992).
190. Prasad AS, Meftah S, Abdallah J, Kaplan J, Brewer GJ, Bach
JF, Dardenne M. Serum thymulin in human zinc deficiency. J
Clin Invest 82(4):1202-1210 (1988).
191. Coto JA, Hadden EM, Sauro M, Zorn N, Hadden JW.
Interleukin 1 regulates secretion of zinc-thymulin by human
thymic epithelial cells and its action on T-lymphocyte prolifer-
ation and nuclear protein kinase C. Proc Nati Acad Sci USA
89(16):7752-7756 (1992).
106 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
192. Taubeneck MW, Daston GP, Rogers JM, Keen CL. Altered
maternal zinc metabolism following exposure to diverse devel-
opmental toxicants. Reprod Toxicol 8(1):25-40 (1994).
193. Jameson S. Zinc status in pregnancy: the effect of zinc therapy
on perinatal mortality, prematurity, and placental ablation.
Ann NYAcad Sci 678:178-92 (1993).
194. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Marucha PT, Malarkey WM, Mercado AM,
Glaser R. Slowing of wound healing by psychological stress.
Lancet 346:1194-1196 (1995).
195. Sparrow GP. A connective tissue disorder similar to vinyl chlo-
ride disease in a patient exposed to perchlorethylene. Clin Exp
Dermatol 2:17-22 (1977).
196. Ward AM, Udnoon S, Watkins J, Walker AE, Darke CS.
Immunological mechanisms in the pathogenesis of vinyl chlo-
ride disease [Abstract]. Br Med J (6015):936-938 (1976).
197. Ward AM. Evidence of an immune complex disorder in vinyl
chloride workers. Proc R Soc Med 69(4):289-290 (1976).
198. Griffiths H, Lunec J. Effect of polymorph derived oxidants on
IgG in relation to rheumatoid ractor binding [Abstract]. Scand
J Rheumatol Suppl 75:148-156 (1988).
199. Koshte VL, Aalbers M, Calkhoven PG, Aalberse RC. The potent
IgG4-inducing antigen in banana is a mannose-binding lectin,
BanLec-I. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 97(1):17-24 (1992).
200. Pusztai A. Dietary lectins are metabolic signals for the gut and
modulate immune and hormone functions. Eur J Clin Nutr
47(10):691-699 (1993).
201. Thaler DS. The evolution of genetic intelligence [see com-
ments] [Comments]. Science 264(5156):224-225 (1994).
202. Cairns J, Overbaugh J, Miller S. The origin ofmutants. Nature
335:142 (1988).
203. Vitetta ES, Berton MT, Burger C, Kepron M, Lee WT, Yin X.
Memory B and T cells. Annu Rev Immunol 9:193-217 (1991).
204. Haeney MR, Goodwin BJ, Barratt ME, Mike N, Asquith P.
Soya protein antibodies in man: their occurrence and possible
relevance in coeliac disease. J Clin Pathol 35(3):319-322
(1982).
205. Cunningham-Rundles C. Failure of antigen exclusion. In:
Food Allergy and Intolerance (BrostoffJ, Challacombe SC,
eds). Balliere Tindall, 1987;223-236.
206. McGovern JJ Jr, Lazaroni JA, Hicks MF, Adler JC, Cleary P.
Food and chemical sensitivity: clinical and immunologic corre-
lates. Arch Otolaryngol 109(May):292-297 (1983).
207. Castle L, Kelly M, Gilbert J. Migration of mineral hydrocar-
bons into foods. 2: Polystyrene, ABS, and waxed paperboard
containers for dairy products. Food Addit Contam
10(2):167-174 (1993).
208. Page BD, Lacroix GM. The occurrence of phthalate ester and
di-2-ethylhexyl adipate plasticizers in Canadian packaging and
food sampled in 1985-1989: a survey. Food Addit Contam
12(1):129-151 (1995).
209. Conacher HB, Page BD, Ryan JJ. Industrial chemical contami-
nation offoods. Food Addit Contam 10(1):129-143 (1993).
210. Nerin C, Cacho J, Gancedo P. Plasticizers from printing inks
in a selection of food packagings and their migration to food.
Food Addit Contam 10(4):453-460 (1993).
211. Forsyth DS, Dabeka R, Sun WF, Dalglish K. Speciation of
organotins in poly(vinyl chloride) products. Food Addit
Contam 10(5):531-540 (1993).
212. Varner SL, Hollifield HC, Andrzejewski D. Determination of
benzene in polypropylene food-packaging materials and food-
contact paraffin waxes. J Assoc OffAnal Chem 74(2):367-374
(1991).
213. Grob K, Lanfranchi JE, Artho A. Determination offood conta-
mination by mineral oil from jute sacks using coupled LC-GC.
J Assoc Of Anal Chem 74:506-512 (1991).
214. Withey JR, Collins PG. Styrene monomer in foods a limited
Canadian survey. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 19(1):86-94
(1978).
215. Ishiwata H, Inoue T, Yoshihira K. Tetramethylsuccinonitrile in
polyvinyl chloride products for food and its release into food-
simulating solvents. Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 185(1):39-42
(1987).
216. Ahmed FE, Hattis D, Wolke RE, Steinman D. Risk assessment
and management of chemical contaminants in fishery products
consumed in the USA [Abstract]. J Appl Toxicol
13(6):395-410 (1993).
217. Barlow SM. The role of the Scientific Committee for Food in
evaluating plastics for packaging [Abstract]. Food Addit
Contam 11(2):249-259 (1994).
218. Gilbert J, Castle L, Jickells SM, Sharman M. Current research
on food contact materials undertaken by the UK Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [Abstract]. Food Addit
Contam 11(2):231-240 (1994).
219. Ziem GE, Castleman BE. Threshold limit values: historical
perspectives and current practice. J Occup Med
31(11):910-918 (1989).
220. Norback D, Torgen M. A longitudinal study relating carpeting
with sick building syndrome. Environ Int 15:129-135 (1989).
221. Welch LS, Sokas R. Development of multiple chemical sensi-
tivity after an outbreak of sick-building syndrome. Toxicol Ind
Health 8(4):47-50 (1992).
222. Molhave L. Indoor air pollution due to organic gases and
vapours of solvents in building materials. Environ Int
8:117-127 (1982).
223. Molhave L, Bach B, Pedersen OF. Dose-response relation of
volatile organic compounds in the sick building syndrome.
Clin Ecol 4(2):52-56 (1986).
224. Montgomery MR, Reasor MJ. A toxicologic approach for eval-
uating cases of sick building syndrome or multiple chemical
sensitivity [Abstract]. J Allergy Clin Immunol 94(2 Pt
2):371-375 (1994).
225. Ipsen J, Deane M, Igenito FE. Relationships of acute respira-
tory disease to atmospheric pollution and meteorological condi-
tions. Arch Environ Health 18:462-472 (1969).
226. Ito K, Thurston GD, Hayes C, Lippmann M. Associations of
London, England, daily mortality with particulate matter, sul-
fur dioxide, and acidic aerosol pollution. Arch Environ Health
48(4):213-220 (1993).
227. Oppelt ET. Air emissions from the incineration of hazardous
waste. Toxicol Ind Health 6(5):23-51 (1990).
228. Pearlman ME, Finklea JF, Creason JP, Shy CM, Young MM,
Horton JM. Nitrogen dioxide and lower respiratory illness.
Pediatrics 47(2):391-398 (1971).
229. Seaton A, MacNee W, Donaldson K, Godden D. Particulate air
pollution and acute health effects. Lancet 345:176-178 (1995).
230. Dumont R. Volatile organic compound survey and summariza-
tion of results. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan:Saskatchewan
Research Council, 1992.
231. Winter R. A Consumer's Dictionary of Food Additives. New
York:Crown, 1994.
232. Ashford A, Miller CS. Origins of multiple chemical sensitivity
and effects on health. In: Chemical Exposures: Low Levels and
High Stakes. New York:Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991;59-84.
233. Landrigan PJ. Critical assessment of epidemiologic studies on
the human carcinogenicity of 1,3-butadiene. Environ Health
Perspect 86:143-147 (1990).
234. Arce GT, Vincent DR, Cunningham MJ, Choy WN, Sarrif
AM. In vitro and in vivo genotoxicity of 1,3-butadiene and
metabolites. Environ Health Perspect 86:75-78 (1990).
235. Melnick RL, HuffJ, Bird MG, Acquavella JF. 1,3-Butadiene:
toxicity and carcinogenicity in laboratory animals and in
humans. Environ Health Perspect 86:3-5 (1990).
236. Morrissey RE, Schwetz P, Sikov MR, Hardin BD,
McClanahan BJ, Decker JR, Mast TJ. Overview of reproduc-
tive and developmental toxicity studies of 1,3-butandiene in
rodents. Environ Health Perspect 86:79-84 (1990).
237. Lieber CS. Biochemical and molecular basis of alcohol-induced
injury to liver and other tissues. N Engl J Med
319(25):1639-1650 (1988).
238. Lambert B, He S. DNA and chromosome damage induced by
acetaldehyde in human lymphocytes in vitro. Ann NY Acad Sci
534:369 (1988).
239. Levine SA, Reinhardt MS. Biochemical-pathology initiated by
free radicals, oxidant chemicals, and therapeutic drugs in the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 107
S.C. ROWAT
etiology ofchemical hypersensitivity disease. J Orthomol Psych
12(3):166-183 (1983).
240. Truss CO. Metabolic abnormalities in patients with chronic
candidiasis: the acetaldehyde hypothesis. J Orthomol Psych
13(2):66-93 (1984).
241. Raucy JL, Kraner JC, Lasker JM. Bioactivation of halogenated
hydrocarbons by cytochrome P4502E1. Crit Rev Toxicol
23(1):1-20 (1993).
242. LaMarte FP, Merchant JA, Casale TB. Acute systemic reactions
to carbonless copy paper associated with histamine release.
JAMA 260(2):242-243 (1988).
243. Marks JG Jr, Trautlein JJ, Zwillich CW, Demers LM. Contact
urticaria and airway obstruction from carbonless copy paper.
JAMA 252(8):1038-1040 (1984).
244. Schwope AD, Till DE, Ehntholt DJ, Sidman KR, Whelan RH,
Schwartz PS, Reid RC. Migration of BHT and Irganox 1010
from low-density polyethylene (LDPE) to foods and food-sim-
ulating liquids. Food Chem Toxicol 25(4):317-326 (1987).
245. Savolainen H. Some aspects of the mechanisms by which
industrial solvents pro uce neurotoxic effects. Chem Biol
Interact 18:1-10 (1977).
246. Grasso P. Neurotoxic and neurobehavioral effects oforganic sol-
vents on the nervous system. Occup Med 3(3):525-539 (1988).
247. Eley BM, Cox SW. The release, absorption and possible health
effects of mercury from dental amalgam: a review of recent
findings. Br DentJ 175(10):355-362 (1993).
248. Swartzendruber DE. The possible relationship between mer-
cury from dental amalgam and diseases. I: Effects within the
oral cavity. Med HypotEeses 41(1):31-34 (1993).
249. Hahn LJ, Kloiber R, Vimy MJ, Takahashi Y, Lorscheider FL.
Dental silver tooth fillings: a source of mercury exposure
revealed by whole-body image scan and tissue analysis [see
comments]. FASEB J 3(14):2641-2646 (1989).
250. Hultman P, Johansson U, Turley SJ, Lindh U, Enestrom S,
Pollard KM. Adverse immunological effects and autoimmunity
induced by dental amalgamas and alloy in mice. FASEB J
8:1183-1190 (1994).
251. Enestrom S, Hultman P. Does amalgam affect the immune
system? A controversial issue. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
106(3):180-203 (1995).
252. Lorscheider FL, Vimy MJ. Evaluation of the safety issue of
mercury release from dental fillings. FASEB J 7(15):1432-1433
(1993).
253. WHO. Inorganic Mercury. Environmental Health Criteria
118. Geneva:World Health Organization, 1991;107.
254. Reinhardt JW. Side-effects: mercury contribution to body bur-
den from dental amalgam. Adv Dent Res 6:110-113 (1992).
255. Weiner JA, Nylander M, Berglund F. Does mercury from
amalgam restorations constitute a health hazard? Sci Total
Environ 99:1-22 (1990).
256. Ratcliffe HE, Swanson GM. Human exposure to mercury: a
critical assessment of the evidence of adverse health effects. J
Toxicol Environ Health 49:221-270 (1996).
257. Siblerud RL. The relationship between mercury from dental
amalgam and oral cavity health [see comments]. Ann Dent
49(2):6-10 (1990).
258. Summers AO, Wireman J, Vimy MJ, Lorscheider FL, Marshall
B, Levy SB, Bennett S, Billard L. Mercury released from dental
silver fillings provokes an increase in mercury- and antibiotic-
resistant bacteria in oral and intestinal floras ofprimates [see com-
ments]. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 37(4):825-834 (1993).
259. Siblerud RL, Kienholz E. Evidence that mercury from silver
dental fillings may be an etiological factor in multiple sclerosis
[Abstract]. Sci Total Environ 142(3):191-205 (1994).
260. Siblerud RL. A comparison ofmental health of multiple sclero-
sis patients with silver/mercury dental fillings and those with
fillings removed [Abstract]. Psychol Rep 70(3 Pt 2):1139-1151
(1992).
261. Siblerud RL, Motl J, Kienholz E. Psychometric evidence that
mercury from silver dental fillings may be an etiological factor
in depression, excessive anger, and anxiety [Abstract]. Psychol
Rep 74(1):67-80 (1994).
262. Siblerud RL. The relationship between mercury from dental
amalgam and the cardiovascular system. Sci Total Environ
99(1-2):23-35 (1990).
263. Fitzgerald WF, Clarkson TW. Mercury and monomethylmer-
cury: present and future concerns. Environ Health Perspect
96:159-166 (1991).
264. Svensson BG, Schutz A, Nilsson A, Akesson I, Akesson B,
Skerfving S. Fish as a source of exposure to mercury and sele-
nium. Sci Total Environ 126(1-2):61-74 (1992).
265. Lorscheider FL, Vimy MJ. Mercury exposure from interior
latex paint [Letter; comment]. N Engl J Med 324(12):851-852
(1991).
266. Beusterien KM, Etzel RA, Agocs MM, Egeland GM, Socie
EM, Rouse MA, Mortensen BK. Indoor air mercury concentra-
tions following application ofinterior latex paint. Arch Environ
Contam Toxicol 21(1):62-64 (1991).
267. Agocs MM, Etzel RA, Parrish RG, Paschal DC, Campagna PR,
Cohen DS, Kilbourne EM, Hesse JL. Mercury exposure from
interior latex paint [see comments]. N Engl J Med
323(16):1096-1101 (1990).
268. WHO. Methylmercury. Environmental Health Criteria 101.
Geneva:World Health Organization, 1990;1-144.
269. Balazs T. Immunogenetically controlled autoimmune reactions
induced by mercury, gold and D-penicillamine in laboratory
animals: a review from the vantage point ofpremarketing safety
studies [Abstract]. Toxicol Ind Health 3(3):331-336 (1987).
270. Waalkes MP, Coogan TP, Barter RA. Toxicological principles
of metal carcinogenesis with special emphasis on cadmium.
Crit Rev Toxicol 22(3-4):175-201 (1992).
271. Jones MM, Cherian MG. The search for chelate antagonists for
chronic cadmium intoxication. Toxicology 62(1):1-25 (1990).
272. Drasch G. An increase of cadmium bofy burden for this cen-
tury-an investigation of human tissues. Sci Total Environ
26:111-119 (1983).
273. Elinder CG. Cadmium concentration in samples of human
kidney cortex from the 19th century. Ambio 6(5):270-272
(1977).
274. Ragan HA, Mast TJ. Cadmium inhalation and male reproduc-
tive toxicity. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 114:1-22 (1990).
275. Kuhnert BR, Kuhnert P, Debonne S, Williams TG. The rela-
tionship between cadmium, zinc and birth weight in pregnant
women who smoke. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157:1247-1251
(1987).
276. Kuhnert BR, Kuhnert PM, Groh-Wargo SL, Webster S,
Erhard P, Lazebnik N. Smoking alters the relationship between
maternal zinc intake and biochemical indices of fetal zinc sta-
tus. Am J Clin Nutr 55:981-984 (1992).
277. Baghurst PA, McMichael AJ, Wigg NR, Vimpani GV,
Robertson EF, Roberts RJ, Tong SL. Environmental exposure
to lead and children's intelligence at the age ofseven years. The
Port Pirie cohort study [see comments] [Abstract]. N EngI J
Med. 327(18):1279-1284 (1992).
278. Constantinidis J. The hypothesis of zinc deficiency in the
pathogenesis of neurofibrillary tangles. Med Hypotheses
35(4):319-323 (1991).
279. Marsh DO, Myers GJ, Clarkson TW, Amin-Zaki L, Tikriti S,
Majeed MA. Fetal methylmercury poisoning: clinical and toxi-
cological data on 29 cases. Ann Neurol 7(4):348-353 (1980).
280. Dafny N, Lee JR, Dougherty PM. Immune response products
alter CNS activity: interferon modulates central opioid func-
tions. J Neurosci Res 19:130-139 (1988).
281. Sternberg EM, Chrousos GP, Wilder RL, Gold PW. The stress
response and the regulation of inflammatory disease. Ann
Intern Med 117(10):854-866 (1992).
282. Stead RH. Innervation of mucosal immune cells in the gas-
trointestinal tract. Reg Immunol 4(2):91-99 (1992).
283. Payan DG, Goetzl EJ. Dual roles of substance P: modulator of
immune and neuroendocrine functions. Ann NY Acad Sci
512:465-475 (1987).
284. Jonakait GM, Schotland S, Hart RP. Interleukin-1 specifically
increases substance P in injured sympathetic ganglia. Ann NY
Acad Sci 594:222-230 (1990).
108 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998
IDS OVERLAPS AS DISEASE: WITH EXAMPLES FOR MCS
285. Ashford A, Miller CS. Chemical Exposures: Low Levels and
High Stakes. New York:Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991.
286. Staudenmayer H, Selner JC, Buhr MP. Double-blind provoca-
tion chamber challenges in 20 patients presenting with multiple
chemical sensitivity. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 18(1):44-53
(1993).
287. Tollefson L. Multiple chemical sensitivity: controlled scientific
studies as proof of causation. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol
18(1):32-43 (1993).
288. Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1. Rev Infect Dis 6(1):51-95
(1984).
289. Farrar WL, Kilian PL, Ruff MR, Hill JM, Pert CP.
Visualization and characterization of interleukin-1 receptors in
brain. J Immunol 139:459-463 (1987).
290. Kenney JS, Baker C, Welch MR, Altman LC. Synthesis of
interleukin-1 alpha, interleukin-6, and interleukin-8 by cul-
tured human nasal epithelial cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol
93(6):1060-1067 (1994).
291. Weiss B. Low-level chemical sensitivity: a perspective from
behavioral toxicology. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):605-617
(1994).
292. Weiss B. Experimental strategies for research on multiple
chemical sensitivity. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
2):487-494 (1997).
293 Cohen N, Kehrl H, Berglund B, O'Leary A, Ross G, Seltzer J,
Weisel C. Psychoneuroimmunology. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 2):527-529 (1997).
294. Miller CS. Chemical sensitivity: symptom, syndrome or mech-
anism for disease? Toxicology 111:69-86 (1996).
295. Siegel S, Kreutzer R. Pavlovian conditioning and multiple
chemical sensitivity. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
2):521-526 (1997).
296. Russek LG, Schwartz GE. Narrative descriptions of parental
love and caring predict health status in midlife: a 35-year fol-
low-up of the Harvard mastery of stress study. Altern Ther
2(6):55-62 (1996).
297. Sorg BA, Hooks MS, Kalivas PW. Neuroanatomy and neuro-
chemical mechanisms of time-dependent sensitization. Toxicol
Ind Health 10(4-5):369-386 (1994).
298. Sorg B, Doty R, Antelman S, Miller C. Questions and answers
#2. Toxicol Ind Health 10(4-5):387-389 (1994).
299. Hou S, Hyland L, Ryan KW, Portner A, Doherty PC. Virus-
specific CD8+ T-cell memory determined by clonal burst size.
Nature 369(23 June):652 (1994).
300. Brayton CF. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMS0): a review. Cornell
Vet 76(1):61-90 (1986).
301. Boosalis MG, Solem LD, McCall JT, Ahrenholz DH, McClain
CJ. Serum zinc response in thermal injury. J Am Coll Nutr
7(1):69-76 (1988).
302. Antelman SM. One brief exposure to a psychological stressor
induces long-lasting, time-dependent sensitization of both the
cateleptic and neurochemical responses to haloperidol. Life Sci
51:261-266 (1992).
303. Dantzer R, Kelley KW. Stress and immunity: an integrated
view of relationships between the brain and the immune sys-
tem. Life Sci 44:1995-2008 (1989).
304. Wilder R. Mechanisms ofneuroendocrine effects on inflamma-
tion and the immune response, pp 860-861. In: Sternberg EM,
Moderator, The Stress Response and the Regulation of
Inflammatory Disease. Ann Intern Med 117(10):854-866
(1992).
305. Cocke R, Moynihan JA, Cohen N, Grota LJ, Ader R. Exposure
to conspecific alarm chemosignals alters immune responses in
BALB/c mice. Brain Behav Immunol 7(1):36-46 (1993).
306. Ottaway CA, Husband AJ. Central nervous system influences
on lymphocyte migration. Brain Behav Immunol 6(2):97-116
(1992).
307. Meggs WJ. RADS and RUDS-the toxic induction of asthma
and rhinitis. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 32(5):487-501 (1994).
308. Meggs WJ. Neurogenic inflammation and sensitivity to envi-
ronmental chemicals. Environ Health Perspect
101(3):234-238 (1993).
309. Rossman TG, Roy NK, Lin WC. Is cadmium genotoxic? In:
Cadmium in the Human Environment: Toxicity and
Carcinogenicity (Nordberg GF, Herber RFM, Alessio L, eds).
IARC Sci Publ 118. Lyon:International Agency for Research
on Cancer, 1992;367-375.
310. Cooper P. A whiff of petrol. Food Cosmet Toxicol
18(4):433-434 (1980).
311. Riihimaki V, Savolainen K. Human exposure to m-xylene.
Kinetics and acute effects on the central nervous system. Ann
Occup Hyg 23:411-422 (1980).
312. Randolph TG, Moss RW. Hidden addictions. In: An
Alternative Approach to Allergies. New York:Harper & Row,
1980;19-35.
313. Randolph TG, Moss RW. The problems of chemical suscepti-
bility. In: An Alternative Approach to Allergies. New
York:Harper & Row, 1980;49-59.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 1 * February 1998 109
