-IJOI
12th Meeting of the Scientific Group
on Methodologies for the Safety
Evaluation of Chemicals: Susceptibility
to Environmental Hazards
J. Carl Barrett,1 Harri Vainio,2 David Peakall,3 and
Bernard D. Goldstein4
1National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina; 2Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki,
Finland; 3Monitoring and Research Assessment Center, Kings College,
London, England; 4Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences
Institute, Piscataway, New Jersey
The 12th meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of
Chemicals (SGOMSEC) considered the topic of methodologies for determining human and
ecosystem susceptibility to environmental hazards. The report prepared at the meeting describes
measurement of susceptibility through the use of biological markers of exposure, biological
markers of effect, and biomarkers directly indicative of susceptibility of humans or of
ecosystems. The utility and validity of these biological markers for the study of susceptibility are
evaluated, as are opportunities for developing newer approaches for the study of humans or of
ecosystems. For the first time a SGOMSEC workshop also formally considered the issue
of ethics in relation to methodology, an issue of particular concern for studies of susceptibility.
Environ Health Perspect 1 05(Suppl 4):699-737 (1997)
Key words: susceptibility, biomarkers, exposure assessment, ethics, ecosystems, human
health, genes, environment, biological monitoring, methods
Introduction number of interacting factors contribute to
Biological Basis ofHuman and an individual's risk for disease; these factors
Ecosystem Susceptibility to include environmental exposures, genetic
Enxvionmental Hazards factors, diet, socioeconomic status, age,
and gender. The intrinsic susceptibility of
Individuals vary greatly in their likelihood an individual is altered by inherited muta-
of developing specific diseases and in their tions in genes involved in predisposition to
response to environmental hazards. A large specific diseases, genes involved in the
This joint report was developed at the Workshop on Susceptibility to Environmental Hazards convened by the
Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals (SGOMSEC) held 17-22 March 1996
in Espoo, Finland. Manuscript received at EHP5 November 1996; accepted 18 November 1996.
Address correspondence to Dr. B.D. Goldstein, Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute,
681 Frelinghuysen Road, PO Box 1 179, Piscataway, New Jersey 08855-1179. Telephone: (908) 445-0205.
Fax: (908) 445-0131. E-mail: bgold@eohsi.rutgers.edu
Abbreviations used: AAS, atomic absorption spectrophotometry; AHH, aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase; -ALA,
-aminolevulinic acid; 1-HP, 1-hydroxypyrene; CA, chromosome aberration; CDGE, constant gradient gel elec-
trophoresis; CYP, cytochrome P450; DGGE, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; ELISA, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay; EDTA, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid; EROD, ethoxyresorufin 0-deethylase; FISH, flu-
orescent in situ hybridization; GPA, glycophorin A; GSTM1, glutathione Stransferase Ml; GSTT1, glutathione
Stransferase Ti; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; HPRT, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl-trans-
ferase; HUGO, Human Genome Project; ICSU, Intemational Council of Scientific Unions; MN, micronuclei; ILO,
International Labor Organization; IPCS, International Programme on Chemical Safety; MFO, mixed-function oxi-
dase; MXR, multixenobiotic resistance mechanism; OP, organophosphate; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor;
PCB, polychlorinated biphenyl; PCDF, polychlorinated dibenzofuran; PCDD, polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin;
PAH, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; QC, quak
ity control; OA, quality assurance; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism; RBP, retinal binding protein;
RT, reverse transcription; SGOMSEC, Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals;
SCOPE, Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment; SSCP, single-strand conformation polymor-
phism; SCEs, sister chromatid exchange; TCB, tetrachlorobiphenyl; TCDD, tetrachlorodibenzopdioxin; TEF, toxic
equivalent factor; WHO, World Health Organization; XRF, X-ray fluorescence; ZPP, zinc protoporphyrin.
metabolic activation or detoxification of
environmental toxins, and genes control-
ling the repair of DNA or cellular damage.
Epigenetic changes in expression of these
genes can also affect host susceptibility.
These alterations may be due to inherited
differences in genes that control the expres-
sion of other genes, to past environmental
exposures, to the physiological state of an
individual, to age-related differences, or to
developmentally controlled processes. The
interaction between genes and the environ-
ment, the cross talk between genes, and the
interplay of environmental factors, which
include diet and lifestyle, illustrate the com-
plexity in understanding the susceptibility
to environmental hazards.
Recent advances in the understanding
of molecular biology, the human genome,
toxicology, and disease mechanisms and
ecosystem functions have led to significant
advances in the study of susceptibility fac-
tors for environmental hazards. These
methods can be used to identify environ-
mental causes of human diseases and harm
to ecosystems; to identify susceptible sub-
populations; and to understand interindi-
vidual and interethnic differences in
response to environmental hazards, which,
we hope, will lead to disease prevention, an
important translation of molecular medi-
cine. The complex interplay between genes
and environment represents a tremendous
challenge to scientists but also an impor-
tant opportunity to reduce the burden of
disease and dysfunctions to humans and
the ecosystem.
The number of biomarkers available to
study responses of biological systems to
environmental factors is growing rapidly.
The term "biomarker" is a general term for
specific measurements ofan interaction ofa
biological system and an environmental
agent (1,2). Biomarkers of exposure mea-
sure an exogenous substance or its metabo-
lite and its interaction with a biological
molecule. Because a number of factors
determine whether a chemical exposure
reaches its biological target for a toxic
response, the most accurate measurement
of"dose" is the biologically effective dose at
the target tissue, which can be more reliably
measured by biomarkers of exposure than
estimated by measurements ofadministered
or ambient chemical exposure.
Biomarkers of effect are measurable
biochemical, physiological, behavior, or
other alterations within an organism (1).
Biomarkers ofeffect are primarily concerned
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 699
BARRETT ET AL.
it
TII
it it
Il J1T1
IllllJ
it
TI1 T I
I
l l il
Figure 1. The role of susceptibility in the continuum between biological markers of exposure and of effect.
with adverse effects, although the level of
evidence varies for the relationship between
a given measured effect and specific, patho-
logical responses, which occur often after a
long period and after chronic exposures.
There is an overlap between biomarkers of
exposure and biomarkers of effect, because
the same biomarker can be used for both
measurements. Some of the same biomark-
ers are also used to measure interindividual
differences in response and thus further
serve as biomarkers ofsusceptibility.
There is a continuum between biologi-
cal markers of exposure and those of effect
(Figure 1). Exploring the relationship
between biological markers on this contin-
uum can be a useful means for detecting
susceptibility. Biological markers ofsuscep-
tibility can be defined as indicators of the
mechanistic processes that cause variability
among the compartments in the continuum
between exposure and effect.
As a simplification, there are five differ-
ent mechanistic avenues through which fac-
tors affecting susceptibility can influence the
interaction between biological systems and
environmental exposures. These avenues are
body uptake, metabolism, target cell uptake,
subcellular or molecular interaction, and the
baseline status of the individual or ecosys-
tem. The mechanistic avenues are bounded
by compartments in which exposure or
effect can be quantitated. These compart-
ments are external exposure level, internal
exposure level, extracellular level of toxic
agent or metabolite, cellular level of toxic
agent or metabolite, target cell toxicity, and
adverse effect to the individual or ecosystem.
In each case one or more of the mecha-
nisms responsible for susceptibility produce
a variation in the relation between compart-
ments that is potentially detectable through
use ofbiomarkers.
In the simplest formulation, susceptibil-
ity can be defined as a variation in the
quantity of exposure/effect in a compart-
ment among individuals or populations
who have similar levels ofexposure/effect in
the preceding compartment. Of necessity,
this can only be accounted for by mecha-
nisms operative in the avenue between
these two compartments. Examples of
compartments and mechanistic avenues are
the following:
* For a given level of external exposure,
there is an interindividual variation in
the uptake into the body (e.g.,
increased Fe uptake in hemochromato-
sis; variations in uptake ofair pollutants
related to respiratory rate).
* For a given level of a toxic agent, there
is interindividual variation in the
uptake into the target cell (e.g., increase
in radioactive iodine uptake into the
thyroid in iodine-deficient individuals;
tumor resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents).
* For a given level of uptake into the
body, there is interindividual variation
in the level of a metabolically produced
active toxic agent (e.g., differing activities
ofmetabolic enzymes).
* For a given level of uptake into the tar-
get cell there is a variation in the extent
of effect (e.g., glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency or methemo-
globin reductase deficiency rendering
the red cell susceptible to oxidant stress;
differences in DNA repair).
* For a given level of effect in the target
cell, there is a variation in the impact
on the individual (organ functional
reserve capacity variations due to age;
disease factors).
* For a given level of effect in an organ-
ism, there is a variation in the impact
on communities and ecosystems (e.g.,
shifts in biomass, species diversity,
energy cycling due to heavy metals or
organochlorines).
Each mechanistic avenue can have mul-
tiple inputs in different directions, which
influence the extent to which a quantity in
one compartment affects the quantity in
the next compartment. For example, even
when the relation between the absorbed
dose ofa xenobiotic and the level ofa toxic
metabolite is the result of a single enzyme,
the activity of this enzyme in any individ-
ual may be a function of a genetic poly-
morphism as well as the presence of other
pollutants or of dietary factors that affect
enzyme activity. The potential order of the
compartments may differ depending upon
the mechanistic pathways; e.g., metabolism
may occur in a nontarget cell and precede
uptake of the toxic metabolite into the tar-
get cell (reversal of the second and third
sections in the above example). The rela-
tionship between compartments can be
modeled mathematically so as to explore
the extent of variability in the relationship
between two compartments among a speci-
fied population group, i.e., the distribution
of susceptibility due to this particular
mechanistic avenue.
In essence, the true distribution of
susceptibility in a population is the relation
between the first compartment and the last
one-between external exposure and
disease outcome, with the intervening
mechanistic avenues contributing to this
distribution. For a given individual it is
possible that a mechanism that increases
susceptibility to a disease outcome in one
avenue may be counterbalanced by a mech-
anism that decreases susceptibility in
another avenue. It is thus important to rec-
ognize that analysis ofonly one mechanistic
avenue in the pathway between exposure
and disease does not necessarily provide
definitive information on the susceptibility
ofany single individual in the population.
Biomarkers can be divided into those
that measure compartments, e.g., blood
levels, DNA adducts, or tissue damage; and
those that measure mechanisms, e.g.,
enzyme activity levels or gene polymor-
phisms. Each has its advantages and its
limitations. Measurement of the compart-
ment tells little about the reasons for the
level; measurement of the mechanism is
not always a definitive indicator of what
will be happening in the next compart-
ment. For individuals or populations at
risk, it is preferable to have measurements
both from mechanistic avenues and from
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997700
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
related compartments to more effectively
target prevention strategies.
Genetic Susceptibility
Individuals may vary in terms of their
responses to environmental hazards due to
differences in their genetic constitution.
The human genome encodes for 50,000 to
100,000 genes, some ofwhich are key regu-
lators of biological processes. Mutations
(heritable alterations in the primary coding
sequences of genes or their controlling
elements) in specific genes ("disease genes")
greatly predispose an individual to a dis-
ease. For example, mutations that inacti-
vate the retinoblastoma gene, a central
regulator of cell growth and division, can
result in a 105-fold increased probability of
a rare eye cancer in children (retinoblas-
toma). Due to recent advances in gene
mapping and isolation, a number of major
disease genes have been discovered, includ-
ing genes involved in cystic fibrosis;
Huntington's disease; Alzheimer's disease;
and breast, colon, lung, and many other
cancers. Mutations in disease genes lead to
a very high probability of disease develop-
ment, often approaching a 100% incidence
ofdisease in carriers ofthe mutations.
Mutations in disease genes are usually
rare; depending on the gene, 1 in 200 to 1
in a million people are affected. However,
multiple genes may regulate a specific dis-
ease, therefore, the percentage of disease
cases for which there is a genetic compo-
nent may be high. For example, in certain
cancers (e.g., colon, breast, and prostate) it
is estimated that up to 10% of the cancers
are due to a genetic predisposition. These
very strong susceptibility genes may not be
influenced by environmental factors, but
there is evidence for environmental influ-
ences in some diseases even with a strong
genetic predisposition.
Many of the genes in the genome of
humans and other species influence the
impact of environmental agents on the
organism. Genetic controls on the uptake,
activation, detoxification, or repair of envi-
ronmental insults are known. The exact
number of genes involved in the organ-
ism's response to environmental hazards is
unknown but could be very large. For
example, the estimates ofthe number ofthe
individual P450 genes in any mammalian
species range from 60 to 200 (3).
All genes commonly have variations in
their sequences that may or may not have
functional consequences. Changes in
DNA sequence that occur frequently (in
> 1% of the population) are called genetic
polymorphisms. Polymorphisms often
affect the function ofa gene but some may
change the level of expression of a gene or
change the activity of the gene product,
for example, an enzyme. Genetic polymor-
phisms that are functionally significant are
quite important when the gene controls
the response of an organism to environ-
mental hazards. For example, polymor-
phisms in the genes that metabolize
carcinogens can affect the response ofindi-
viduals to that carcinogen. Given that a
large number of genes are involved in
responses to environmental hazards and
that a large number ofpolymorphisms exist
in these genes, genetic differences are
important susceptibility factors in environ-
mental responses. Many ofthese commonly
occur in human populations.
Recent advances in the identification
and cloning of specific genes and methods
for the detection of mutations and poly-
morphisms in these genes have led to sig-
nificant advances in our understanding of
genetic susceptibility to environmental haz-
ards. There is an important difference
between individuals with genetic alter-
ations that lead to disease susceptibility and
individuals with genetic susceptibility to
environmental factors. Individuals who
inherit a mutation in a disease susceptibil-
ity gene have a high risk ofdeveloping that
disease regardless of environmental expo-
sures, although environmental factors may
increase the incidence or rate of disease
development. Individuals who have a
mutation or polymorphism in genes
involved in response to environmental haz-
ards will only have an increased risk of dis-
ease development when they are exposed to
specific environmental hazards. Therefore,
risk to these individuals is influenced
strongly by gene-environment interaction.
Also, because multiple genes are involved
in response to the same environmental haz-
ards, two individuals with the same genetic
susceptibility and environmental exposure
may have different risks because of the
interplay between genes involved in
response to xenobiotics. For example, two
individuals may both have a polymorphism
in a gene that increases the rate ofcarcino-
gen activation but different polymorphisms
in a gene that inactivates the same carcino-
gen. Because many environmental response
genes remain to be identified and charac-
terized and because many mixtures ofenvi-
ronmental exposures are present in the
environment, it is difficult to determine an
individual's risk. Great advances have been
made in the identification of susceptibility
factors for subpopulations exposed to
environmental hazards.
Susceptible Populations versus
Susceptible Inaividuals
Environmental and occupational medicine,
like medicine in general, is traditionally
concerned with individuals and their
health. It may also seek to identify individ-
uals who are liable to develop a specific dis-
ease (predictive medicine). This approach
implies the possibility of dividing the peo-
ple into two groups: those who are disease
prone, and the healthy remainder. This is,
ofcourse, a considerable oversimplification,
because susceptibility is rarely confined to a
distinct high-risk minority and because our
ability to predict the disease outcome for
these individuals is therefore weak.
Epidemiology, as a discipline of public
health, includes the study of the distribu-
tion of diseases and risk factors in popula-
tions. Epidemiologic research focuses on
populations in order to elucidate a broad
range of risk factors for disease. A distinc-
tion exists between the populations that
epidemiologists study and the individuals
comprising those populations. Within a
low risk population, there are individuals
who develop disease, and within high-risk
populations there are disease-free individu-
als. An individual's risk will be determined
by a complex interplay of multiple genes,
multiple exposures, diet, age, and chance.
The application ofbiomarkers ofexposure,
effect, and susceptibility to the assessment
of an individual's risk from environmental
hazards is not conceptually different from
the application of common clinical mea-
sures in medical practice. For example,
blood pressure, blood lipids, relative
weight, and smoking habits are applied to
the assessment of an individual's risk for
coronary heart disease in clinical medicine.
Combining biomarkers with epidemiologi-
cal study design has led to the development
of molecular epidemiology, an approach
that generates a great deal of interest and
expectation. The use of biomarkers in
human studies raises challenging ethical
questions that must be addressed in
advance of applying new technologies in
this area.
Susceptible Populations
and Ecsysems
Ecologists are concerned with understand-
ing differences in susceptibility among
individuals within communities of thou-
sands of species. One important method-
ological approach is the development of
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 701
BARRETT ET AL.
biomarkers of exposure and effect that are
applicable across a broad range of species
that range from invertebrates to birds and
mammals. However, ecologists also are
concerned with understanding and predict-
ing-through the use of biological indica-
tors-differences in susceptibility of
communities and ecosystems. Here, vul-
nerability refers to changes in the structure
and function of ecosystems. The challenge
for ecologists is to develop a broad range of
methodologies from molecular through
ecosystem measures that can be used to
assess susceptibility.
In many cases, cellular and molecular
biomarkers that can be used to assess the
susceptibility ofa range ofindicator species
will be most useful for communities and
ecosystems as well. Such biomarkers could
be used to assess both the health of the
ecosystem and the potential of the ecosys-
tem to support human populations and
provide ecological services.
Ethics
The study of susceptibility in human
populations and in ecosystems poses a
number of ethical challenges. Regarding
humans, both the manner in which infor-
mation is obtained and the uses to which
it could be put raise urgent concerns.
Regarding ecosystems, the ethical duty to
work towards protecting our shared environ-
ment and its life support systems requires
ongoing attention and the development of
clear guidelines.
Specifically relevant to susceptibility
studies in humans is the sensitivity of the
information and the likelihood of labeling
certain individuals or subgroups in ways
that could cause unanticipated harm.
Scientists and public health professionals
investigating susceptibility or implementing
related preventive screening programs must
be aware of the potential for harmful social
and psychological side effects arising from
susceptibility studies. For example, denial
ofemployment, denial ofinsurance, fear for
the premature onset of illness or death,
social marginalization, reconsideration of
family planning and of both medium and
longer term life goals, and the need for psy-
chological counseling are possible untoward
effects that may arise from the identification
ofsusceptibility in individuals.
Scientists also must remain sensitive to
cross-cultural differences in perception of
personal risks associated with susceptibility
studies and must strive for equity in their
research and in its potential consequences.
For example, there may be greater need to
focus resources on populations subjected to
more severe pollution than on those popula-
tions experiencing lower levels ofexposure.
Scientists must understand ethical
issues to be able to address the challenges
presented by susceptibility studies and to
learn how to resolve them. Preparation
would include defining the key ethical
issues, identifying the principles behind
them, and then attempting to resolve the
ethical dilemmas that emerge. This objec-
tive requires a certain amount of formal
training in ethics as well as ongoing dia-
logue involving a broad range ofstakehold-
ers who try to anticipate ethical dilemmas.
Stakeholders include, among others, other
professionals as well as patient advocates.
Markers of susceptibility are of a
particularly sensitive nature. Therefore,
serious attention must be paid to quality
assurance so that data integrity can be even
more highly assured than in most other
types of studies. In addition, existing
guidelines that protect confidentiality and
ensure the participants' "right to know"
must be revisited and made more specific
in light of the potential consequences of
susceptibility studies.
Where legal protections are not clearly
in place to ensure confidentiality of per-
sonal information gathered in the conduct
of research into susceptibility, and to pro-
tect the various stakeholders against retro-
active actions, the risks associated with
such studies must be made clear to any
research participants in advance of their
commitment to participate. Such risks
include birth with inherited negative traits,
and illness induced or associated with envi-
ronmental/occupational exposures only
subsequently recognized as having been
associated with susceptibility traits.
Finally, susceptible ecosystems exist,
the destruction of which can have both
direct and indirect negative consequences
for human health and well-being. For
example, the susceptibility of the earth's
atmosphere has consequences for global
warming associated with, among other
things, increasing skin cancer rates, coastal
flooding disasters, and crop failures.
Scientists engaged in such work must bring
to the attention of human populations
their stewardship duty and responsibility to
protect the ecosphere.
Condusions and Recommendations
The following condusions and recommen-
dations have been formulated in recogni-
tion of human and ecosystem vulnerability
to environmental hazards:
a) Determination of susceptibility to
chemicals in the workplace and general envi-
ronment is becoming increasingly feasible
through rapid advances in biological sci-
ences, particularly molecular biology. Parallel
advances have occurred in epidemiology,
ecology, toxicology, and related sciences
which have greatly facilitated understanding
and measurement ofsusceptibility.
b) Increased understanding of the
pathways leading to susceptibility of
individuals, of populations, and of ecosys-
tems to chemical and physical agents is of
value in protecting human health and
the environment.
c) Identification ofbiological markers of
exposure and ofeffect is a useful avenue for
determining susceptibility. Markers of sus-
ceptibility in essence operate in the pathway
between the various compartments ofexpo-
sure and effect, reflecting mechanisms
responsible for variations in response to the
levels in the previous compartment.
d) There is an important distinction
between studies of the susceptibility of
populations at risk and studies of the sus-
ceptibility of individuals. It is important
not to misinterpret from population
studies the risk to an individual.
e) The ethical, legal, and social dimen-
sions should be recognized in studies of
individuals, populations, communities, and
ecosystems at risk. Ethical dilemmas must
be considered in advance of research activi-
ties or of any use of susceptibility markers
in evaluating populations at risk. In some
cases public debate and legislation will be
required to clarify social norms and to pro-
vide legal protection for the participant.
Ethical issues should be incorporated in the
development ofmethodologies to study and
evaluate communities and ecosystems and
should be reflected in research proposals.
f) Studies of biomarkers of susceptibil-
ity should not be undertaken in circum-
stances in which confidentiality and
privacy safeguards cannot be assured.
g) Training programs for professionals
engaging in susceptibility studies of bio-
markers need to integrate formal ethics
education. Continuing education should
include an ongoing discourse through
ethics workshops, symposia, and discussion
in the journals ofthe respective professions.
h) Numerous other methodological
issues must be taken into account before
accepting a marker ofsusceptibility as being
potentially useful in protecting public
health and the environment. These issues
include technical feasibility, cost, quality
assurance and control, and cultural and
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997702
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
logistic issues related to sample availability,
collection, and storage.
i) The determination and use ofsuscep-
tibility markers pose both technical and
ethical issues in developing countries. These
need to be taken into account when design-
ing studies or applying the use of suscepti-
bility markers validated in industrialized
countries.
j) Additional research is needed to
focus biological advances on increasing
understanding of factors affecting the sus-
ceptibility of human and nonhuman com-
ponents of ecosystems, and to determine
how best to apply this understanding to
protect public health and the environment.
Good science should be tied to good ethics
and vice versa.
Biological Markers
of Exposure
Definition ofExposure Markers
In the narrowest sense, biomarkers ofexpo-
sure refer to measurement of the specific
chemical of interest or its specific metabo-
lite in a body compartment or fluid. In the
broadest sense, it can refer to any biomarker
used to estimate current or past exposure
for either medical, epidemiologic, or risk
assessment purposes (4). This can even
include the clinical detection ofevidence of
exposure, although this domain is usually
excluded from discussion ofbiomarkers.
Many of the biomarkers of effect are
used also to assess exposure, and some of
these will be discussed in this section. Not
all biomarkers can be used in all settings,
particularly in developing nations (5).
Objectives for Using Biomarkers
ofExposure
Exposure can be viewed as both a population
and an individual phenomenon. Exposure
markers can function in several ways.
a) They may lead to early detection of
exposure at a point where significant health
effects have not occurred. This must focus
attention on external means of reducing
exposure, i.e., on primary prevention.
b) They may provide validation of expo-
sure for use in epidemiologic studies.
c) They may facilitate comparison ofexpo-
sure levels in different compartments
(external, blood, cellular) to identify
susceptibility differences.
Criteria for Sereening, Using
Biomarkers. The application of any
biomarker approach must be conducted
within the context ofa viable screening and
prevention program. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has established a set
of criteria to be met before instituting a
screening program. These will be discussed
in relation to exposure markers.
CRITERION 1. The screening must
be conducted for a condition of public
health significance. Overall the exposure,
health status, or susceptibility of popula-
tions or subpopulations is clearly of public
health significance. Thus, criterion 1 is
usually met (but see the section on ethical
considerations).
CRITERION 2. The natural history of
the exposure marker must be well under-
stood, and there must be a distinguishable
subclinical phase. There is tremendous
variability in our knowledge regarding the
natural history ofvarious exposure markers
and their relation to subsequent effects.
CRITERION 3. There must be a scientifi-
cally defensible and socially and personally
acceptable intervention. The usual inter-
vention when an exposure is detected is to
remove the hazard and reduce the exposure;
CRITEIUON 4. The tests used must have
appropriate sensitivity and specificity.
Usually the sensitivity limitation is
imposed by the analytic method available.
Increasingly sophisticated instrumentation
has allowed the measurement of various
analytes at infinitesimally small levels,
although in most cases this sensitivity is not
required. However, it is essential to choose
the appropriate tissue or fluid and method-
ology to assure adequate test sensitivity.
Sensitivity also depends on the proper
timing ofanalysis with respect to exposure.
Measuring the agent of concern is usu-
ally highly specific. For example, a blood
lead determination reflects lead exposure.
However, it may not be specific to the
source of lead being investigated since
there are many sources of lead in our envi-
ronment. Specificity in part depends on
the question being asked. For example, one
might be interested in recent exposure or
historic exposure and would design a dif-
ferent testing approach for each. In some
cases, to address specific questions, chemi-
cal speciation ofthe agent or analyte is nec-
essary (e.g., chromium VI vs chromium
III, methyl vs inorganic mercury, organic
vs inorganic arsenic) and speciation, in
turn, may reduce sensitivity.
The metabolites one measures may be
specific or nonspecific. Thus phenol is
commonly used as a marker of benzene
exposure but is not specific (other com-
pounds are metabolized to phenol and
some consumer products, such as cough
medicines, contain phenol). Nonetheless it
may still be useful in quantifying exposure
in individuals known to have relatively
high levels of exposure to benzene. Other
metabolites are more highly specific (e.g.,
muconic acid for benzene), and others are
very specific (DDE for DDT). Some
metabolites are also active agents.
CRITERION 5. The condition or
exposure being sought must be sufficiently
common that the tests have acceptable pre-
dictive value. Exposure is a phenomenon
common to both a population and an indi-
vidual. On the individual level, the predic-
tive value of a screening test depends not
only on its sensitivity and specificity, but on
the underlying prevalence of the exposure.
One can estimate population exposure by
randomly sampling a subgroup of the pop-
ulation before extending screening for
exposure biomarkers to a larger population.
CRITERION 6. The testing must be
acceptable to the target population.
Biomarkers of exposure are most often
detected with noninvasive (breath sam-
pling, urine testing) or minimally inva-
sive (milk collection, blood testing)
approaches. At the other end of the spec-
trum are fat biopsies which are limited to
clinical diagnostic settings or to specialized
research protocols.
CRITERION 7. The testing program must
be cost effective (see below, on analysis and
quality assurance).
Use ofBiomarkers
Applications ofBiomarkers ofExposure.
Monitoring biomarkers of exposure is
usually part of a preventive activity. It can
contribute to identifying and reducing
exposure or to identifying at-risk or suscep-
tible populations that need to be protected
in special ways. In occupational health, the
major goal of detecting biomarkers is the
prevention of health impairment by the
recognition of excessive exposure and the
elimination of hazards (6). Ideally, expo-
sure is controlled and measured at the
source so that no excessive exposure occurs
(7), but often there is supplemental
reliance on biological monitoring as part of
a medical surveillance program, to assure
that the primary preventive strategies have
been effective.
A marker can be applied on an individ-
ual basis to estimate the amount of pollu-
tant absorbed or retained, usually through
the measurement ofthe agent or its specific
metabolites (8). A marker can reflect
individual differences in the rate ofabsorp-
tion and in toxicokinetics (metabolism,
distribution, and excretion).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 703
BARRETT ET AL.
The traditional definition of an expo-
sure biomarker involves measurement of a
xenobiotic or its metabolite in a body tis-
sue or fluid, whereas markers of effect
include any measurable alteration attribut-
able to a xenobiotic that can be recognized
as a health impairment. Between the two is
a continuum of subtle effects caused by
chemicals that can be measured but which
are not indicative of a disease. Some of
these are early stages in a significant patho-
genic process (e.g., DNA adducts of alky-
lating agents), others are early, often trivial,
stages in a pathogenic process (zinc proto-
porphyrin [ZPP] elevation in lead expo-
sure), and others may be the early signs of
damage that are reversible and not of clini-
cal significance (for example, depression of
cholinesterase activity or elevation of some
tubular proteins in persons exposed to
heavy metals). In the latter case, it is recog-
nized that kidney function may show no
clinically detectable decrement until about
90% of the nephrons are damaged; hence
substantial changes can occur with no
immediate overt clinical significance except
a reduction in reserve capacity.
Blood lead is a marker of exposure and
a surrogate marker of effect. Elevations of
ZPP or erythrocyte protoporphyrin and
urinary 6-aminolevulinic acid (6-ALA) or
the activity of 6-ALA dehydratase are all
effects caused by lead; the inhibition of
enzymes in the heme synthesis pathway
results in anemia, yet anemia is rarely the
end point of concern in lead poisoning,
especially in adults. Thus, they are useful as
exposure as well as effect markers.
A major criterion for distinguishing
markers ofexposure from markers ofeffect is
the purpose to which they are put. In many
cases enzymatic or cellular damage markers
are used for dose reconstruction or for the
classification of exposure status for epi-
demiologic studies. Van Schooten et al (9),
for example, treat DNA adducts in smok-
ers as a means ofestimating their polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) exposure.
For the purposes of this discussion we
recognize the following as biomarkers of
exposure: a) measurement of the xenobiotic
itself (i.e., lead in blood, DDT in milk);
b) measurement of specific metabolites;
c) measurement ofspecific subclinical effects
that are reversible. Many effect markers that
are used to estimate exposure or tissue dose
are described in more detail below.
Choice of Tissue or Fluid and
Analyte. Factors that influence the choice
of tissue or fluid and analyte include the
toxicodynamics of the agent (where it is
distributed, stored, excreted), speciation
(its chemical form), and chronology (acute
vs chronic exposures and temporal aspects
ofits kinetics in the body).
An exposure marker should be able to
distinguish long-term from short-term
exposures (10). Thus blood lead may
reflect recent exposure, while bone lead
reflects cumulative exposure.
An example of the importance of
appropriate quality control (QC) is
reflected in the experience with routine
blood lead determinations by clinical labo-
ratories. As recently as the early 1990s,
when laboratory proficiency testing pro-
grams were concerned with accuracy in the
presumed toxic range of 40 pg/dl, it was
found that most laboratories were unable
to provide reliable results below 15 pg/dI,
even though the Centers for Disease
Control had designated 10 pg/dl as a "level
of concern." Two years later, when profi-
ciency testing began to include unknowns
in the 10 pg/dl range, most laboratories
rapidly improved to the point where they
provided acceptable results. It is essential
that a quality assurance (QA) program be
designed for the range ofvalues that will be
encountered in a population.
DNA and Protein Adducts. Many
compounds form covalent adducts with
nucleic acids and other macromolecules
including hemoglobin and other proteins.
In the case ofDNA adducts, the changes in
the DNA molecule may relate directly to
mutational or repair events and the possi-
bility of subsequently developing cancer.
Elevated levels of DNA adducts are seen in
a number of populations with known ele-
vated cancer risks, including smokers and
coke-oven workers.
DNA adducts can be measured by the
32P-postlabeling technique or by immuno-
assays. For certain adducts, mass spectrom-
etry, fluorescence spectrometry, and liquid
chromatography/electrochemical detection
have been used. For quantitative analysis a
standard compound is necessary for the
calculation of recovery as discussed by
Hemminki (11). In the case of complex
mixtures, identification of individual
adducts may not be possible. In such cases
recoveries cannot be calculated and quan-
tification is not possible. Data on half-lives
of adducts in humans are very limited.
Biomonitoring of protein adducts applies
to either hemoglobin or albumin. Adducts
can be released hydrolytically from the pro-
tein and assayed by gas or liquid chro-
matography, or by mass spectrometry.
N-terminal valine of hemoglobin can be
specifically released in the Edman degrada-
tion process and assayed by mass spectrome-
try. Adducts are generally not thought to
alter the half-lives ofthe proteins.
DNA-protein cross-links are another
end point that has been used to estimate
exposure to mutagens such as hexavalent
chromium (12). A standardized DNA
extraction procedure is used that fails to
extract cross-linked DNA that can be
quantified as a percentage ofthe total DNA.
Assessing Population Exposures.
Examples ofexposure markers used to docu-
ment the effectiveness of regulatory inter-
ventions are the dramatic decline in blood
leads in countries that have eliminated lead
from gasoline (13), and the decline in the
levels ofpolychlorinated dioxins and diben-
zofurans in breast milk in Sweden (14),
attributable partly to the ban ofchlorinated
phenol herbicides.
Overall Ethical Considerations. The
estimation of exposure is performed to
benefit the individual subject or popula-
tion, usually by subsequently reducing
their exposure to hazards. It is unethical to
perform a testing program merely for its
own sake, without having the goal of
reducing harmful exposures that may be
detected. Therefore, in a workplace, a bio-
logical monitoring program using markers
of exposure should be performed as part
of a comprehensive medical surveillance
program linked to an industrial hygiene
program capable of discovering and
eliminating hazards.
Zielhuis (10) cautioned that the results
of a screening examination must be exam-
ined in the light of many individual fac-
tors. In turn the physician must impart
objective information to the participant.
"In the perception ofthe examined subject,
biological sampling for assessment of inter-
nal exposure, and henceforth ofhealth risk,
is not distinguished from assessment of
their health" (10). Individuals should be
informed of their health risks, along with
the degree of uncertainty, regardless of the
technologic and economic consequences.
Some question the ethics of biological
monitoring for exposure, arguing that
humans should not be the guinea pigs or
the detectors of their own exposure.
However, biological monitoring offers the
advantage of taking into account absorp-
tion by all routes (whereas air monitoring
would not detect potential exposure by
other routes). We caution that biological
monitoring can be an adjunct, but it can-
not substitute for environmental monitoring
and controls. [See below and Soskolne
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997704
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
Table 1. Examples of biological exposure markers.
Agent
Aniline
Benzene
Cadmium
Carbon disulfide
Chlorobenzene
Chromium VI
N,N-Dimethylformamide
Ethylbenzene
Fluorides
Furfural
n-Hexane
Lead
Methanol
Methemoglobin inducers
Methyl chloroform
Methyl ethyl ketone
Nitrobenzene
Organophosphates
Parathion
Pentachlorophenol (PCP)
Styrene
Toluene
Trichloroethylene (TCE)
Xylenes
Exposure marker
Total p-aminophenol in urine; methemoglobin in blood
Total phenol or muconic acid in urine; benzene in expired air
Cadmium in urine or blood
2-Thiothiazolidine-4-carboxylic acid in urine; CO in end-expired air
Total 4-chlorocatechol or p-chlorophenol in urine
Total Cr in urine
N-Methylformamide in urine
Mandelic acid in urine or ethylbenzene in end-expired air
Urinary fluoride
Total furoic acid in urine
2,5-Hexanedione in urine or n-hexane in expired air
Lead in blood or urine, ZPP
Methanol or formic acid in urine
Methemoglobin
Methyl chloroform in end-expired air or trichloroacetic acid in blood or urine
Urinary methyl ethyl ketone
Total p-nitrophenol in urine or methemoglobin in blood
Red cell or serum cholinesterase activity
Total p-nitrophenol in urine or RBC cholinesterase
Total PCP in urine or free PCP in plasma
Mandelic acid in urine, styrene in blood; phenylglyoxylic acid in urine
Hippuric acid in urine; toluene in blood or end-expired air
Trichloracetic acid in urine; TCA or trichlorocethanol in blood; TCE in end-expired air
Methylhippuric acids in urine
(15) elsewhere in this issue for a further
discussion ofethical issues.]
Examples ofBiological Monitoring
for Seleced Agents (Table 1)
Heavy Metals. Most heavy metals are of
toxicologic concern, although some are
essential trace elements in humans as well.
Since these elements are not metabolized,
they can be tracked in the body, and can
be measured in various body compart-
ments and fluids. A variety of standardized
analytic procedures are described in readily
available references (16). Most of these are
analyzed with atomic absorption spec-
trophotometry (AAS), usually using a
graphite furnace as the source. Flame pho-
tometry works with higher concentrations
of metals. Mercury is usually measured
with a cold vapor technique.
LEAD. A variety of tests of lead exposure
and early effects have been used, including:
6-ALA in urine, 6-ALA dehydratase activity
in red blood cells, free erythrocyte pro-
tophorporin or ZPP in blood (still widely
used), urinary coproporphyrin (very limited
use), and blood lead (the standard measure).
The measurement of blood lead is con-
sidered the best sampling approach for both
adults and children (17). Analysis for pop-
ulations with negligible lead exposure (no
occupational exposure in countries without
leaded gasoline) requires the sensitivity of
graphite furnace AAS; this is currently
the most widely used instrument for any
population, although anodic stripping
voltammetry is also used. In the absence of
this capability, excessive lead exposure can
be detected by measuring ZPP in a finger-
stick blood sample with a portable fluo-
rometer. Alternative methods still available
in some laboratories include measuring the
urinary excretion of6-ALA.
These measurements reflect relatively
recent and ongoing exposure. They do not
provide information regarding the body
burden or effects of long-term accumula-
tion. The challenge test, which uses a dose
of a chelating agent (usually EDTA) and
monitors urinary lead excretion in the fol-
lowing 24 hr, provides an estimate of the
amount of lead that can be mobilized and
is used to judge whether chelation will be
effective. The chelation test carries a level
of risk, including the mobilization of large
amounts of lead which can then reach the
brain and kidneys.
The past decade has seen the develop-
ment of in vivo X-ray fluorescence (XRF)
of bone as a way of measuring the relative
concentration of lead stored in the skele-
ton. Although increasingly available, the
technique is still under development, and
there is not adequate concordance among
laboratories (18). Two types of machines
are used, the K-wave and L-wave sources,
which differ in their penetration and
apparently in the precision of measure-
ments. Almost all machines in use today
employ K-wave XRF.
An example of using blood lead as a
marker of exposure and susceptibility is a
recent study in Mexico. Romieu et al. (19)
found a significant correlation among the
lead content of ceramics used to prepare
food, the soil lead on children's hands, and
the children's blood lead; yet all ofthe envi-
ronmental variables explained only 19% of
the variance in blood lead. Thus even
assuming that there are uncertainties in
measurement of the independent variables,
this leaves tremendous room for individual
variability in the uptake and distribution of
inorganic lead in these children. Thus blood
lead identifies variation in susceptibility as
well as exposure among these children.
Analysis of lead in urine is of relatively
little value for quantifying exposure, even
in those with organolead exposure.
Many studies have shown that there is a
low correlation between lead in blood and
lead in air, due in part to the sampling
duration; concurrent exposures through
water, diet or other jobs; alternative routes
of exposure (ingestion); variations in the
use of protective equipment; variations in
circumstances of exposure, including respi-
ratory rate, exercise, and other microniche
characteristics; and individual variation of
either a genetic or epigenetic nature (17).
MERCURY. The uptake, toxicokinetics,
and end points associated with organic mer-
curials (particularly methyl mercury) differ
greatly from those associated with inorganic
mercurials. Inorganic mercury is excreted
mainly in urine, organic mercury mainly in
feces. Both mercurials can be deposited in
hair. Accordingly, inorganic exposure is usu-
ally monitored with urinary mercury,
although blood mercury testing is also use-
ful and helps distinguish exposure within
the past week from that occurring in the
past month. Blood mercury is used to assess
organic mercury exposure. When dietary
exposure (especially fish consumption) is the
source ofmercury, it is usually not necessary
to speciate the mercury, since almost all of
the mercury is methyl mercury. There is a
strong correlation between either blood or
urine mercury and air mercury (20).
Hair mercury is useful for screening
populations. The digestion ofhair, however,
causes difficulties in some laboratories (21).
Urinary mercury testing is mainly used for
occupational exposure or for residential
exposure to metallic (elemental) mercury.
CADMIUM. Cadmium is usually
measured in blood or urine by graphite fur-
nace AAS. Lauwerys et al. (7) documented
the relationship between exposure and
blood levels of cadmium in humans. Many
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 705
BARRETT ET AL.
sources recommend the concomitant
measurement of P2-microglobulin, but that
marker of renal tubular damage is insensi-
tive and should not be relied on. By the
time it becomes elevated, significant kidney
damage has occurred. However, a variety
of new tubular markers such as retinal
binding protein (RBP) and N-acetyl-p-D-
glucosaminidase (NAG) are more sensitive
but not more specific (22).
The body burden ofcadmium has been
measured by neutron activation in vivo
(23), but this is a highly specialized tech-
nique ofonly research application.
Pesticides. Pesticides include any sub-
stance or mixture that destroys or controls
plant or animal pests or vectors of disease.
"Pesticide" is a broad term including, in
addition to pesticides, a variety of biocides
(fungicides, herbicides, acaricides, mollusci-
cides, rodenticides, etc.) Pesticides remain a
global occupational health problem (24).
Some pesticides, such as the organo-
phosphates, are short-lived both in the
environment and in the body, and it is
possible to detect only acute exposure (by
measuring a metabolite) or recent exposure
(past 3 months) by measuring cholines-
terase levels. Chlorinated hydrocarbon
pesticides are persistent both in the envi-
ronment and in the body and can be mea-
sured for many months or years after
exposure has terminated (25,26).
PESTICIDE EXPOSURE. Absorption
resulting from dermal exposure is the most
important route of uptake for pesticide-
exposed workers, while ingestion is the
most important nonoccupational route.
Within the body, the pesticide may be
eliminated or transferred to a target,
unchanged or after metabolism. Organo-
phosphates are typically broken down
rapidly, while many organochlorine pesti-
cides are stored in the fat. The actual pesti-
cide exposure (uptake) can be measured by
biological monitoring ofhuman tissues and
body fluids. Insecticides and their metabo-
lites can be measured after occupational
exposures (26-29).
WHERE TO MEASURE VARIOUS
PESTICIDES. Different sampling approaches
are required for different classes of pesti-
cide. Examples include the measurement of
dialkylphosphates in urine after exposure to
organophosphorus insecticides (27), of
p-nitrophenol after exposure to parathion
and methylparathion (28), and of 1-naph-
thol after exposure to carbaryl (29). Altered
liver enzyme activities have been reported
among pesticide workers exposed to
organophosphorus pesticides alone or in
combination with organochlorine or other
pesticides (30). Monitoring changes in
vitamin K levels is useful for identifying
exposure to anticoagulant rodenticides (31).
Adducts to hemoglobin have been
detected with several pesticides (32). The
advantages of such measurements include
the possibility of assessing dose closer to
the target, of assessing individual capacity
to form electrophiles, and of extrapolating
data on toxicity more easily across species.
When the mechanism of action of a pesti-
cide is understood, more specific markers
can be used (30).
ORGANOCHLORINES. Certain organo-
chlorine (OC) pesticides are highly persis-
tent. Although DDT is metabolized to DDE
and DDD, these metabolites persist in the
body fat for many years after exposure. They
can be detected at much lower levels in
serum. The reported levels in fat vary among
countries, the highest levels of DDT being
found in countries where the compound is
still used. Fat biopsies are not suitable for
routine screening ofpesticide exposure.
Some studies of the concentration of
pesticides in human milk are summarized
by Anwar (26). The contaminants found
most frequently in human milk have been
DDT, its main metabolite DDE, hexa-
chlorobenzene, hexachlorocyclohexane,
dieldrin, heptachlor epoxide, and the non-
pesticide polychlorinated biphenyls (33).
ORGANOPHOSPHATES. Whereas persis-
tent organochlorine pesticides tend to have
relatively low human toxicity, the organo-
phosphates (OP) are highly toxic to humans
and are responsible for many deaths
around the world. These compounds bind
various cholinesterase enzymes, thereby
interfering with transmission in the ner-
vous system. A widely used biochemical
biomarker is cholinesterase depression. It is
frequently used in occupational health as a
marker of OP exposure and is regularly
used clinically as a marker of OP effect.
With a specific antibody it is possible to
measure the concentration of a particular
esterase in plasma or serum. Diagnostic
kits to measure specific activities of blood
esterases are being developed for use in the
field (30). However, it is essential that the
workers with potential exposure have two
baseline cholinesterase determinations,
since cholinesterase activity varies greatly
between individuals and within the same
individual over time (21,34).
Further markers in pesticide application
workers are described byAnwar (26).
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons.
PAH are usually present in complex
mixtures of 3- to 6-ring compounds, of
which hundreds of congeners may be
present in various proportions. Analysis
is usually by gas or liquid chromatogra-
phy, where selected compounds, such as
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) are quantified.
Biological methods have been devel-
oped to measure 1-hydroxypyrene (1-HP),
a metabolite of pyrene, in urine. 1-
Hydroxypyrene is a prevalent species in
PAH mixtures. It is excreted in the urine
and is a good biomarker of exposure to
PAH (35). An advantage is that urine can
be stored for at least a year frozen at -20C
without preservative. After hydrolysis
and cleanup, the 1-HP is extracted and
analyzed on high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). The result is
expressed as pmols/mol ofcreatinine (35).
0vreb0 et al. (36) found levels up to
13.5 pmol/mol creatinine in coke oven
workers compared to 1.54 pmol/mol in the
surrounding community and up to only
0.2 pmol/mol in a control area.
Adducts of hemoglobin or albumin are
measured after hydrolytic cleavage of PAH
from the protein, followed by quantification
by mass spectrometry. DNA adducts are
measured by the 32P-posdabeling technique
and by immunoassay. Neither of these
techniques quantifies individual PAHs.
Jongeneelen (37) studied the S9 super-
natant fraction ofliver samples from 15 kid-
ney transplant donors for variation in PAH
metabolism in vitro. 1-Hydroxypyrene was
the major metabolite ofpyrene and 3-OH-
B[a]P was the major metabolite of B[a]P.
The Vmax for B[a]P and for purine were
highly correlated. They found individual
variation in the Vmax and the apparent
affinity for the substrates. The Vmax for
B[a]P ranged from 0.002 to 0.710, with a
geometric mean of0.012.
Volatile Organies. Ethylene oxide is
discussed here as an example of a volatile
organic compound. Ethylene oxide is used
as sterilant in hospitals. It is also the princi-
ple metabolite of ethene, a precursor to
polyethylene plastics and other synthetic
chemicals. Ethylene oxide can be measured
by gas chromatography in air or biological
specimens. Ethylene oxide reacts in the
body with hemoglobin; N-terminal valine
may be released by a modified Edman
degradation process and measured by
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
DNA adducts can be measured by a
number of techniques [above; Hemminki
(11)], including 32P-postlabeling mass
spectrometry and liquid chromatography/
electrochemical detection.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997706
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
Ionizing Radiation. Various cytoge-
netic techniques have been used extensively
to study populations exposed to ionizing
radiation, most notably the survivors ofthe
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Giemsa-banding techniques are labor
intensive and provide a resolution of about
1 million base pairs. They give information
on the frequency of chromosomal aberra-
tions: breaks, dislocations, deletions, and
translocations. The fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) technique (38) corre-
lates well with traditional chromosomal
aberration analysis and allows a more rapid
screening of individual samples for dose
reconstruction. This is also an effect
marker. Reciprocal translocations are
apparently permanent, hence are poten-
tially useful for dose reconstruction even
years after the exposure event. The use of
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
(HPRT) mutants and other molecular bio-
logic approaches to detect gene alteration,
including radiation specific lesions in DNA
(39) is dealt with below.
Sampling Considerations
Toxiokinetics The Importanee ofTiming.
Many endogenous chemicals and probably
also xenobiotics do not maintain a constant
level in the body but undergo diurnal varia-
tion, sometimes in a deterministic fashion.
Therefore it is important to standardize
techniques by sampling at one time of day.
However, it is also important to understand
the time course of excretion, which is not
always a uniphasic half-life (negative expo-
nential curve) but may be biphasic or
triphasic with an initial rapid elimination
followed by much slower elimination. If a
substance is mainly excreted within 24 to
48 hr, it is possible only to monitor for
acute exposure. Even for substances with a
half-life of 6 to 12 months, it may be
impossible to reconstruct the exposure that
may have occurred in years past.
Condusions and Recommendations
Biological monitoring of exposure can play
an important role in the detection of
exposed individuals or groups at an early
stage before significant or irreversible
adverse effects have occurred. Biological
markers of exposure also play a role in
quantifying or classifying exposure for epi-
demiologic studies. Biological monitoring is
also useful in identifying variations in sus-
ceptibility among members ofa population.
It is important that any biological moni-
toring for exposure markers be conducted
as part of a comprehensive framework
that includes steps for intervening and
reducing any hazards that are identified. A
screening program should meet the criteria
proposed by WHO. The information
from such programs should be shared with
the stakeholders.
Biological Markers of Effect
Definitions
The International Programme on Chemical
Safety has defined a biomarker of effect as
"A measurable biochemical, physiological,
behavioral or other alteration within an
organism that, depending upon the magni-
tude, can be recognized as associated with
an established or possible health impairment
or disease" (1).
This is a very broad definition. Such
biomarkers of effect can be elicited as a
result of interaction of the organism with a
host of different environmental factors
(including chemical, physical, and biologic
agents); this definition encompasses bio-
markers of effect at the level of the whole
organism, at the level of organ function, at
the level of tissue and individual cells, and
at the subcellular level. For example, the
results of neuropsychologic tests may be
considered biomarkers of behavioral effects
of the organism which may be induced by
solvent exposures. Spirometry results may
be considered biomarkers of physiological
effects on the respiratory system which
may be induced by fibrogenic dust expo-
sures. Sperm counts may be considered
biomarkers of effect on reproductive cells
which may be induced by exposure to syn-
thetic estrogenic compounds. There are
many other similar examples ofbiomarkers
at these levels in almost all systems of the
body, induding biomarkers of hematologi-
cal toxicity, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity,
immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity, pulmonary
toxicity, and reproductive and develop-
mental toxicity (1). These will not be con-
sidered further here, but rather this review
will focus on biomarkers of effect at the
subcellular level, particularly at the chro-
mosomal and molecular level, which are
particularly useful in assessing susceptibil-
ity. These include biomarkers at the
genomic level, such as cytogenetic alter-
ations and gene mutations, and biomarkers
ofgene expression, such as messenger RNA
and proteins. Some assays of protein func-
tion, such as enzymatic activity, could be
included in this category but could a,lso be
considered as biomarkers of exposure (e.g.,
cholinesterase activity in response to OP
exposure), and thus they will not be
included here. Biomarkers at the genomic
level or at the level of gene expression have
been most strongly associated with the risk
for cancer, although in selected instances
they may also be associated with other dis-
ease end points. Therefore, in general, we
will be concerned here with subcellular bio-
markers of effect that are believed to be
associated with cancer. We will examine the
methodologies employed with reference to
the objectives of their use, their potential
uses, and their advantages and limitations.
Because in many instances, these
biomarkers of effect are believed to repre-
sent events in a causal pathway to disease,
their occurrence may be viewed as indica-
tive of an acquired susceptibility for that
disease. This is in distinction to the bio-
markers of susceptibility per se, which in
many cases represent indicators of inher-
ited susceptibility to disease due to their
influence on steps in the causal pathway.
Biological markers of effect, as indicators
of acquired susceptibility for disease, have
the theoretical potential to exhibit predic-
tive value in identifying individuals who
could develop disease at some point in the
future or in determining the likely disease
progression in terms of severity and prog-
nosis once disease has occurred. In addi-
tion, biomarkers of effect, because they
occur quite far along the pathway between
exposure and disease outcome, essentially
provide an effective integration of the
influence of biomarkers of susceptibility
for all preceding steps in the causal path-
way and are thus a summary marker for
susceptibility to that point.
Cytogenetic Markers
In humans, cytogenetic alterations are
most often analyzed microscopically from
peripheral lymphocytes after they have
been stimulated to divide in culture by a
mitogen (40). Lymphocytes are used as a
surrogate for the actual target tissues of
genotoxic carcinogens. Some cytogenetic
end points (micronuclei, numerical aberra-
tions) can also be studied in interphase
cells from target tissues or proximate target
tissues, such as exfoliated cells from buccal,
nasal, urothelial, bronchial or esophageal
epithelium (41,42). Specimens can also be
obtained from hair bulbs. In special cases,
for instance, in connection with accidental
exposures, dividing cells from bone mar-
row may be available. Furthermore, cytoge-
netic biomarkers can be studied from
samples collected for prenatal diagnosis
(amniocytes or chorionic villus cells).
Effects on germ cells can be examined from
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 707
BARRETT ET AL.
semen specimens (43). Fresh samples are
required in most cases, but preservation by
freezing or fixation is possible for several of
the cytogenetic techniques. The analysis of
cytogenetic end points from such samples
is used to show exposure to genotoxic car-
cinogens and may have value in the identi-
fication of groups of people at increased
risk of cancer (44,45). Cells from different
individuals can be challenged with geno-
toxic agents in vitro, which in some cases
may enable the recognition of sensitive
individuals (46,47).
Chromosome Aberrations. Chromo-
some aberrations (CAs) are structural
alterations, breaks and rearrangements, in
chromosomes, usually observed in meta-
phase-blocked cells using conventional
microscopy (40). Chromosome-type
rearrangements, such as translocations and
dicentrics inspected in biological dosimetry
of radiation, can also be analyzed using
chromosome painting based on FISH with
chromosome-specific DNA probe libraries
(48). This approach has enabled the recog-
nition of new types of complex chromo-
some rearrangements that have not been
detectable with conventional cytogenetic
techniques. Recently, a simplified FISH
method to detect chromosome breakage
and alterations of chromosome number,
using tandem DNA probes specific for a
region in chromosome number 1, was
reported (49). FISH has also been applied
to study numerical chromosome aberra-
tions of specific chromosomes (50).
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
methods for the analysis of lymphocyte-
specific illegitimate chromosome recombi-
nation involving human immunoglobulin
or immune receptor loci and considered to
reflect genetic instability have also been
described (51,52). In two recent, indepen-
dent reports, increased rates of CA in
peripheral lymphocytes were shown to be
associated with later development ofcancer
(44,45). Thus, the analysis of CAs is
presently regarded as the cytogenetic
method of choice in studies of human
exposure to genotoxic carcinogens. In vivo
inducers ofCAs in humans include, among
others, ionizing radiation, alkylating cyto-
statics, tobacco smoking, benzene, and
styrene. Besides smoking, factors such as
age, gender, and diagnostic and therapeutic
X-rays are usually taken into account as
possible confounders. In vitro challenging
of lymphocytes from healthy individuals
with genotoxins has revealed individual
differences in CA response to some geno-
toxic agents (53,54). The reasons for such
differences are unknown, except for
1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane, where an associa-
tion probably exists with the deficiency of
glutathione S-transferase TI (GSTT1)
(46,47,55). Among butadiene-exposed
chemical workers, GSTTI null individuals
also had an elevated rate of chromosome
aberrations in peripheral lymphocytes in
vivo (56). On the other hand, the lack of
GSTM1 has been associated with elevated
CA frequencies in smokers and in bus
drivers (57).
Sister Chromatid Exchanges. Sister
chromatid exchanges (SCE) represent sym-
metrical exchanges of DNA segments
between the sister chromatids of a dupli-
cated metaphase chromosome (58). In
lymphocytes of humans, tobacco smoking,
alkylating cytostatics, and ethylene oxide
are well documented SCE inducers.
Factors to be controlled in the analysis of
SCEs include age, gender, and life style.
Individuals with enhanced in vitro SCE
response to some genotoxins have been
described and, in some cases, this has been
associated with certain metabolic genotypes
or phenotypes (46,47,50,59-66). For
example, individuals sensitive to in vitro
SCE induction by 1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane
were recently found to be deficient of
GSTT1 (46,47,62,64,66). Such people also
show elevated baseline frequencies of SCEs
in their peripheral lymphocytes (47,62,67).
SCEs were not, however, elevated in GS7TJ
null individuals exposed to butadiene (62).
Increased SCE rates have also been indi-
cated in relation to the GSTMJ null geno-
type and smoking (68) and deficiency of
the low Km aldehyde dehydrogenase and
alcohol consumption (69).
Micronuclei. Micronuclei (MN) are
small additional nuclei observable in inter-
phase cells. Micronucleus induction can be
triggered by either clastogens or agents that
influence the mitotic apparatus, such as
spindle poisons (70,71). Micronuclei can
also be scored in exfoliated cells of buccal,
nasal, or urothelial mucosa (41). The pres-
ence ofwhole chromosomes in MN can be
checked by identifying centromeric DNA
sequences (using FISH) or kinetochore
proteins in the MN (72,73). In vivo,
increased MN frequencies in lymphocytes
have been associated with exposure to ion-
izing radiation, aging, and gender (74). In
women, the influence of age on the fre-
quency of MN in lymphocytes has been
relate,d to an increased inclusion of the X-
chromosome in MN (75,76), while in
men the Y-chromosome appears to be
responsible for a part of this effect (77). In
buccal or nasal mucosa, MN induction has
clearly been shown for, e.g., various ethnic
chewing habits (3) and exposure to
formaldehyde (78). The MN analysis has
given negative results in several studies in
which another biomarker of genotoxic
exposure has been positive. As MN can
originate from chromosomal fragments
and whole chromosomes, the number of
cells presently examined may not be
enough to reveal the relatively small effects
usually expected in exposed humans. The
identification of the centromeric contents
of MN and automated analysis may
improve the specificity and sensitivity of
the MN assay oflymphocytes.
General Considerations. At the
population level, structural CA appears to
have predictive value for later development
of cancer. As similar associations have not
been detected for other cytogenetic end-
points, the analysis of CA appears to be, at
present, the cytogenetic method of choice
in studies of cytogenetic alterations in lym-
phocytes. However, the sensitivity of the
assay does not allow evaluation of cancer
risk based on individual values. Analysis of
an in vitro cytogenetic response of human
cells to genotoxins may, in some cases, be
used to identify susceptible individuals,
especially when genetic polymorphisms are
taken into account. In biological dosimetry
of radiation exposure, the analysis of chro-
mosome-type aberrations has been used as
the basis for individual dose estimates.
Chromosome painting by FISH is becom-
ing the new tool in the biological dosimetry
of radiation; the applicability of techniques
based on FISH and PCR for the identifica-
tion of specific chromosome alterations for
studies of chemical genotoxins should be
evaluated. The MN assay combined with
FISH analysis of centromeres in MN may
offer an easier technique to score CA, espe-
cially in target tissues or proximate target
tissue. Because each biomarker depicts a
different phenomenon, the use of various
exposure and effect biomarkers together is
recommended in risk assessment. It is also a
useful approach for detecting patterns of
human susceptibility. The combination of
cytogenetic parameters and information on
metabolic genotypes or phenotypes is
expected to increase the sensitivity of the
cytogenetic assays and allow better under-
standing of the biological significance of
genetic polymorphisms (43). As some poly-
morphisms have been shown to influence
basic or induced levels of cytogenetic
damage, information on the genotypes or
phenotypes of the individuals studied is
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997708
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
becoming important when these end
points are used as biomarkers. Automation
and analysis techniques utilizing FISH
offer faster and easier approaches to detect
cytogenetic alterations.
Markers ofGene Mutations
Somatic Gene Mutations in Surrogate
Tissues. The detection of mutations in the
HPRTgene has been used in experimental
mutagenicity studies of mammalian cells,
and it is also the most extensively employed
assay for human gene somatic mutations in
vivo. In humans, HPRT mutations are
examined in lymphocytes, and the standard
assay involves T-lymphocyte cloning for
phenotypic selection of 6-thioguanine-resis-
tant mutant cells. With the development of
PCR-based techniques, further molecular
characterization of the mutations present in
the T-cell clones has also become possible.
Such studies have shown, for instance, a
clear difference in mutation spectrum
between "spontaneous" mutations occurring
early in human development and mutations
acquired later in life (79). Studies ofhuman
lymphocytes in vitro are also considered use-
ful, as they provide information on HPRT
mutation spectra obtained after exposure to
specific carcinogens in controlled condi-
tions. Several studies have been carried out
on HPRT-mutant lymphocytes in human
populations exposed to various genotoxic
agents, as reviewed by Cole and Skopek
(80) and briefly described by Hemminki
(11). Only a few studies have thus far tried
to correlate HPRT mutations with other
measures ofexposure and susceptibility. In a
study ofoccupational exposure in a foundry,
the frequencies of HPRT-mutant T-lym-
phocytes correlated with the level of aro-
matic DNA adducts (81,82). In a recent
study on garage workers, a correlation was
found between aromatic DNA adducts and
mutation frequency at the individual level;
genotypes of two xenobiotic-metabolizing
genes (GSTMI and NAT2), alone or com-
bined, did not influence HPRTmutation
frequency (83).
The glycophorin A (GPA) assay is
another in vivo method for the detection of
somatic mutations to study the potential
effects ofexposure to chemical and physical
mutagens (84,85). The assay is based on
the autosomal GPA locus that encodes the
cell surface sialoglycoprotein expressed in
the erythrocytic lineage and responsible for
the M,N blood group. It uses immuno-
labeling and flow cytometry to enumerate,
in peripheral blood samples of M/N
heterozygotes, erythrocyte variants reflecting
mutations in the GPA locus. Most of the
variants are considered to derive from
mutations that occurred in bone marrow
stem cells and are therefore permanent,
depicting lifetime accumulation of muta-
tions. The GPA assay has been automated
and is thus easy, fast, and cheap to run.
The main limitations are that only one half
of the human population (M/N heterozy-
gotes) can be studied and an expensive flow
cytometer is required. As erythrocytes have
no nuclei, the variant cells cannot be clon-
ally expanded and the mutations cannot be
characterized at the molecular level.
Both the HPRT and GPA mutation
assays show a small number of people with
exceptionally high mutant frequencies in
healthy subjects (86). While at least part of
such high frequencies are due to clonal
expansion ofa few original mutations, some
of them might indicate individuals of
enhanced susceptibility. In a study of GPA
mutations in reinforced plastics workers,
the high frequency individuals were primar-
ily smokers or ex-smokers (87). Recently it
was shown that in smokers significantly ele-
vated NN variant frequency was associated
with GSTTI null genotype (88).
Gene Mutations in Target Tissue.
Knowledge on gene mutations from other
tissue than peripheral blood and lympho-
cytes is sparse. This relates to problems in
availability of samples and difficulties in
developing methods suitable for detecting
mutations occurring at a low frequency.
Growing cells under in vitro conditions cir-
cumvents the problem with lymphocytes.
Somatic mutations have been detected in
genes related to human disease and partic-
ularly in cancer-related genes (protoonco-
genes and tumor suppressor genes). In
most cases somatic mutations in disease-
related genes do not give rise to any func-
tional change in the cell, which would
allow its isolation or expansion in vitro. In
the case of cancer tissue, malignant growth
involves clonal expansion of cells, which
allows detection of mutations by the meth-
ods presently available. The methods
appear to work best and most reproducibly
on fresh frozen tissue, but in many
instances only preserved tissue is available.
Mutations in oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes are most common in
many types of human cancer. In the con-
text of external exposure to carcinogens,
the ras genes have been shown to be muta-
tionally activated in a number of environ-
mental cancers in humans (89), and. in a
carcinogen-specific manner in animal
studies (90). Since the p53 tumor suppressor
gene is among the most frequently altered
genes in human cancer, molecular analysis
of its mutational spectra has been used as a
clue to cancer etiology and mechanisms of
carcinogenesis (91,92). In the p53 gene,
DNA sequences corresponding to the
highly conserved domains of the protein
have been identified as a "hot spot" region
for mutations. A majority of mutations
identified in these genes in human cancers
are missense mutations, making them suit-
able targets for such analysis. The expo-
sure-related nature ofp53 mutations has
been proposed in many studies on various
forms of human cancers (91-94). Well-
known examples of this are nonmelanoma
skin cancer associated with exposure to
sunlight (UVB) as well as hepatocellular
carcinoma related to dietary exposure to
the mycotoxin aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) (92).
With the highly sensitive mutation detec-
tion assays it has been possible to investi-
gate whether the suggested causative
carcinogens (AFB1, UVB) induce similar
kinds of mutations in human cells in vitro.
In the case of AFB1, the results were in
agreement with the etiological role of
AFB1, although other types of mutations
were also seen (95). In nonmalignant
human liver tissue, the frequency of the
specific AGG to AGT mutation at codon
249 was found to parallel the level ofAFB1
exposure in the geographical areas where
the patients lived (96). For UVB exposure,
the experimental work on human skin
fibroblasts did not find the tandem double
CC to TT mutations seen frequently in
skin cancer (97). A relationship between
certain types of ras mutations or p53 muta-
tions and occupational exposure to agents
like solvents, vinyl chloride monomer, some
bladder carcinogens, and radon has been
suggested (98-100). In addition, smoking
has been associated with increased preva-
lence ofp53 mutations in some tumors, and
certain types of base substitutions have been
linked with exposure to tobacco smoke
(101,102). Recently, two studies have
reported a higher frequency ofp53 muta-
tions in lung cancer patients with the at risk
genotype of GSTMI gene (103-105).
Studies on prognostic significance of
p53 protein overexpression (determined
immunohistochemically) or mutation have
suggested that accumulation of the mutant
protein may predict poor survival in many
cancer types (92).
Methodological Considerations. An
array ofmethods has been used for detection
of point mutations in unknown positions
of the target gene. Most of them initially
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105. Supplement 4 * June 1997 709
BARRETT ET AL.
used radioactive labeling but alternative
techniques have been developed. One of
the first techniques available was the RNase
mismatch cleavage analysis method (106).
Methods relying on chemical modification
of mismatched nucleotides, by either car-
bodiimide or hydroxylamine and osmium
tetroxide (chemical cleavage of mismatch),
have been developed; they use mutation
detection mainly in genes of inherited dis-
eases (107). Two assays used widely in
mutation detection in association with
inherited diseases, genetic polymorphisms,
and also for somatic mutations in tumor
tissue are single-strand conformation poly-
morphism (SSCP) and denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE). SSCP assay is
based on conformational changes in DNA
due to sequence alterations (108,109).
SSCP has been successfully used for detec-
tion of DNA alterations of many cancer-
related genes in human cancer (ras, p53,
RB, for example). It is estimated to yield
over 90% efficiency in detecting single base
substitutions in sequences of 300 bp or less
in length (109,110). It is also well suited
for detection ofpolymorphic alleles ofvari-
ous genes (109). DGGE separates DNA
molecules based on their sequence-deter-
mined ability to melt (separate partially) in
longer fragments (low- and high-tempera-
ture melting domains) (111). DGGE sepa-
rates physically wild-type DNA from
mutant molecules, and under appropriate
conditions all single-base substitutions,
frameshifts, and deletions less than about
10 bp can be resolved from the wild-type
DNA (112). DGGE, or its application
called constant gradient gel electrophoresis
(CDGE) (113), has been used to study both
germline and somatic mutations in many
human genes. These include mutations in
cancer-related genes, human ras and p53
genes, as well as chemically induced muta-
tions of HPRTgene in human lymphocytes
in vitro (112). More recently, a capillary
electrophoresis technique has been applied
for CDGE (114).
For detection of known mutations in
certain sites of a gene, two much-applied
methods include allele-specific oligonu-
cleotide hybridization and genotypic muta-
tion analysis by restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP)/PCR method.
Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization
uses labeled probes which are hybridized
to PCR-amplified genomic DNA. It has
especially been used in studies on ras gene
mutations in various human cancers
(89,115). More recendy, many assays rely-
ing on recognition of a certain restriction
site which either is present in the wild-type
sequence or results from a mutation have
been developed. Of these, one of the most
sensitive and perhaps most promising for
molecular toxicology purposes is the
RFLP/PCR assay for detection of codon
12 mutations in the human H-ras gene and
codon 247 to 250 mutations in the human
p53 tumor suppressor gene (116,117). The
method is very sensitive and suitable for
detection ofvery low frequency mutations,
such as those in premalignant or in normal
cells after chemical treatment in vitro.
They are, however, limited to a single base
substitution at a certain codon.
DNA sequencing based on dideoxy-
mediated chain termination reaction (118)
can be performed also after in vitro amplifi-
cation of the DNA template by PCR.
Direct sequencing of PCR amplification
products is thus one method of choice for
mutation analysis; it is perhaps more labor
intensive when performed manually but has
been automated (119). Methods using
solid phase support in sequencing are being
used increasingly (120). Sequencing has of
course the advantage ofgiving precise infor-
mation on the sequence alterations unlike
some other methods (SSCP, DGGE). For
targeted use, an application called solid-
phase minisequencing has been developed
(121). However, direct sequencing ofgeno-
mic DNA ofpoor quality may be problem-
atic (fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue
samples) and other methods are better
suited in such instances.
Markers ofGene Expression
mRNA Expression. Markers of gene
expression include assays for detection of
mRNA or for detection of proteins. Many
of the assays for mRNA employ method-
ologies similar to those used for DNA
analysis noted above. In most cases, the
assays have been used for the examination
of diseased tissue (e.g., cancer tissue) in the
target organ. This poses problems of acces-
sibility. In addition, mRNA has very lim-
ited stability, and, therefore, tissue samples
must be obtained fresh and processed quite
rapidly so that the mRNA is preserved.
With the appropriate oligonucleotide
probes, the presence of mRNA in tissue
can be detected by in situ hybridization.
For example, differences in mRNA for
oncogenes may be detectable between
cancer tissue and adjacent normal tissue
(122). Other disease end points may also
be relevant. For example, in situ hybridiza-
tion can detect increases in mRNA for
growth factors, such as platelet-derived
growth factor and transforming growth
factor-,, in relation to the stimulation of
cell growth and the development offibrosis
resulting from asbestos (123). Alternately,
tissue can be analyzed for mRNA expres-
sion by isolation of message and amplifica-
tion by quantitative PCR followed by
Northern blot analysis (analogous to the
separation techniques of Southern blot
analysis for DNA by gel electrophoresis)
with appropriate oligonucleotide probes.
Quantitative PCR is considerably more
difficult to perform reliably compared to
qualitative PCR, adding further complexity
to this approach.
None of the approaches to mRNA
expression have been well developed for
routine application. Thus, among other
problems, there is generally little standard-
ization of assay techniques, little definition
of normal values or values of pathophysio-
logic significance, and little examination of
reproducibility, sensitivity, specificity and
predictive value of the tests in terms of the
occurrence of or prognosis for disease state
(i.e., indication of susceptibility for devel-
opment or severity of disease). Given these
limitations and the other difficulties noted
above, it is probably unrealistic to expect
that gene expression by mRNA analysis
will be very useful as a biomarker of effect.
At any rate, the true index of gene expres-
sion from the point ofview of effect in the
cell is at the protein level, not the mRNA
level, and it is not even clear that the two
always correlate. As noted below, detection
of protein expression has the potential to
avoid some of the problems inherent in
mRNA detection and is thus the more
attractive candidate for a biomarker ofgene
expression for many reasons.
Protein Expression. Methodologies for
examining gene expression by the detection
of the encoded proteins all depend on the
development of antibodies (either poly-
clonal or monoclonal) that are theoretically
specific for the identification of the protein
of interest. In many cases, however, the
specificity is only theoretical because there
is cross reactivity of the antibody with simi-
lar epitopes in other, unrelated proteins,
raising the possibility of false-positive tests.
Conversely, sensitivity of the antibody
detection (related to many factors, includ-
ing avidity and affinity for the epitope,
accessibility and stability of the epitope,
and the sensitivity ofthe secondary reaction
system used to identify the occurrence of
the antigen-antibody interaction) may be
insufficient to detect the antigen, leading to
false-negative tests. Monoclonal antibodies
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997710
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
that are produced from a single cell that is
clonally expanded and producing an anti-
body for only a single epitope are more eas-
ily standardized. Polyclonal antibodies can
be variable and are thus more difficult to
standardize but may have the virtue of
reacting with several different epitopes on
the protein of interest, increasing the likeli-
hood of detection. Modifications of anti-
body applications that can improve the
results include confirmation ofthe molecu-
lar weight of the identified protein as con-
sistent with what is expected and the use of
more than one antibody probe to demon-
strate that the protein identified reacts with
all expected positive antibodies; it does not
react with negative antibodies.
For protein identification of gene
expression, antibodies can be used in tissue
analysis or in assays of surrogate sites such
as extracellular fluids. As with mRNA
analysis, tissue analysis for protein expres-
sion usually relies on diseased tissue (e.g.,
cancer tissue) in the target organ, although
in some cases the same analysis can be
applied to exfoliated cells, for example,
from the urothelium or the bronchial
epithelium (124). Tissue analysis can be
either in situ or in aggregate. In situ analy-
sis relies on the application ofthe appropri-
ate antibody in immunohistochemistry
either to fresh-frozen tissue sections or to
fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections.
The latter approach raises issues of the sta-
bility of the antigen with fixation and with
storage over time, which can vary with the
different proteins. Immunohistochemistry
allows for the localization of proteins of
interest within cells (e.g., the question of
whether the protein is identified at the sub-
cellular site one would expect) as well as
within the histology of the specimen (e.g.,
if the protein is identified in cancer tissue,
in precursor lesions, in apparently normal
adjacent tissue). Aggregate analysis oftissue
can be accomplished with fresh tissue spec-
imens by lysis of the cells and analysis of
the appropriate cellular fraction of the
lysate (125,126). Analysis of cell lysate can
be performed with antibodies applied in
Western blotting (separation of the pro-
teins by gel electrophoresis followed by
antibody probing), which has the advan-
tage of allowing molecular weight determi-
nation as a confirmatory indicator but
which can be laborious, difficult, and hard
to standardize. Alternately, analysis of cell
lysate can be performed with antibodies
incorporated into an antigen-competition
or an immunosorbent assay, such as
radioimmunoasays or enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA), which are
generally easier, more rapid, and more eas-
ily standardized. Stepwise application of
assays can be employed, for example, in
which an ELISA may be used to screen
samples and Western blotting may be used
to confirm positive results.
Protein identification in extracellular
fluids can be similarly accomplished with
antibodies employed in Western blotting
or ELISA or related assays. This approach
is obviously more accessible and conve-
nient than relying on tissue, but it raises
issues such as whether extracellular fluid
protein levels accurately reflect cellular pro-
tein levels. Identification ofcertain proteins
in extracellular fluids, such as tumor-
associated antigens, has been well standard-
ized in convenient assays and widely
applied. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a
good example (127,128). Even in these
cases, however, many important issues
remain unresolved. Tumor-associated anti-
gens like PSA may be useful monitoring the
course of disease once identified and
treated, but the relationship to the patho-
physiology of the disease process remains
unclear and thus its utility in predicting
future occurrence of disease that will be
clinically significant in an individual is
unproven. Other proteins that represent
expression of genes in the presumed causal
pathway for disease, such as growth factors
and oncoproteins, can also be analyzed with
antibody-based techniques in extracellular
fluids, as described in depth by Brandt-Rauf
(129). Unfortunately, these tests are not as
well developed as the others mentioned. In
general, they are not standardized; normal
values and values of pathophysiologic sig-
nificance are not well defined; confounders
have not been identified; and sensitivity,
specificity, and predictive value as indica-
tors of susceptibility for disease occurrence
need to be more closely examined. Thus,
they are clearly not ready for routine use at
this time. As with all biomarkers of gene
expression, additional research will be nec-
essary to more clearly define their advan-
tages and limitations and to determine their
potential uses.
Condusions and Reconmendations
Considerationsfor Developing Countries.
Little work has been done to monitor the
level of exposures and their effects on
human populations in developing countries
(130). Although trials have been done for
cytogenetic monitoring of populations at
risk (42,131), more effort should be made
to improve the information concerning
human exposure possibilities and the
identification ofexposure-related diseases.
Simple cytogenetic techniques (such as
CAs, SCEs and MN) and simple gene
expression techniques (ELISA for protein
levels) can be applied for monitoring in
developing countries. More advanced mol-
ecular biomarkers (e.g., based on PCR and
gene sequencing) may be considered only if
the appropriate resources are available.
General Considerations. Most of
the biological markers of effect described
here are still experimental tools whose
utility remains to be established. For these
biomarkers, issues of assay validation,
QA/QC, and convenience and cost need to
be addressed. As noted above within the
context of susceptibility, one objective of
their use would be the identification of
individuals or groups who, by virtue of the
acquired susceptibility to the effect, are
likely to develop disease. Some examples,
such as the evidence that increased rates of
chromosomal aberrations are associated
with later development of cancer, suggest
that this may be possible, but in most cases
ofbiomarkers ofeffect, the predictive value
remains unproven.
Even if predictive value is ultimately
established, problems will remain. The util-
ity of establishing such susceptibility with-
out any way to alter it is of questionable
value. In some cases, the effects detected
may be irreversible, so effective secondary
prevention would be one important option.
In other cases, the effects detected may be
reversible (as with the reversion of SCE
rates following removal ofexposure to cyto-
static drugs), so that primary prevention
may be effective. At any rate, primary pre-
vention through the reduction or elimina-
tion of the exposure producing the effect is
always good policy, and secondary preven-
tive interventions or the use of biomarkers
to eliminate individuals from ongoing
exposure situations are not a substitute for
primary preventive efforts.
Other important social, legal, and ethical
implications also derive from these aspects of
biomarkers ofeffect. For example, the know-
ledge oftruly predictive biomarkers of effect
could obviously be misused to detrimentally
affect the employability and insurability of
the individual concerned, compounding the
suffering induced by the psychological bur-
den of the knowledge. Furthermore, such
knowledge having a potentially adverse psy-
chological effect raises the issue of whether
the detection ofa biomarker ofeffect is itself
an impairment and perhaps a disability,
even without other demonstrable clinical
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 71 1
BARRETT ET AL.
effects. Could such an impairment/disability
be compensable under tort or workers' com-
pensation laws? Would such an individual
be entitled to special considerations under
laws for protecting the disabled in employ-
ment and other societal circumstances? Prior
to the general use of biomarkers of effect,
such questions will have to be addressed.
Some general ethical aspects of these issues
are considered in more detail elsewhere in
this volume.
Other potential uses of biomarkers of
effect are in monitoring of disease progres-
sion and prognosis, and as adjuncts to
other biomarkers in providing refinements
of epidemiology and risk assessments. At
the very least, biomarkers of effect, as well
as other biomarkers, offer the opportunity
to provide scientific confirmation of pro-
posed exposure-disease pathways in vivo in
human populations. Biomarkers of effect
may be particularly useful for demonstrat-
ing the biologic influence of preceding
susceptibility factors (e.g., genetic poly-
morphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing
enzymes). It should be noted once again,
however, that at this time these biomarkers
of effect should only be employed in the
context of carefully designed studies with
all due attention to the rights and concerns
of the human subjects involved. Neverthe-
less, we believe that research on biomarkers
of effect is worth pursuing because of the
potential benefits for disease prevention.
Biological Markers
of Susceptibility
Definition ofSusceptibility Markers
A biomarker of susceptibility is defined as
an indicator or a measure of an inherent or
acquired ability ofan organism to respond to
the challenge of exposure to a specific xeno-
biotic substance (1). Biomarkers of suscepti-
bility are concerned with factors in kinetics
and dynamics of uptake and metabolism of
exogenous chemicals. Thus the concept
encompasses enzymes of activation and
detoxication, repair enzymes, and changes in
target molecules for toxic chemicals. Many
of the latter conditions include factors that
confer highly increased risks to predisposed
individuals (i.e., repair gene defects, "frag-
ile" DNA conditions, etc.). Susceptibility
factors occur along a continuum from
"near-obligatory" determinants of high risk
to contributory low risk factors (such as
metabolic polymorphisms). In this docu-
ment, we focus on those factors that involve
a major contribution of gene-environment
interaction to become manifest.
Monogenic traits are inherited in a
Mendelian fashion. A genetic polymor-
phism refers to a monogenic variation that
occurs with at least two phenotypes with
sufficient frequency (> 1%) to cause popu-
lation differences. Genetic variations occur
as either germline inheritance or somatic
cell mutations. Rare inherited metabolic
diseases such as Crigler-Najjar syndrome
occur as a germline mutation (132); a well-
known example of a somatic cell mutation
is hepatocellular carcinoma caused by
dietary exposure to AFBI (91).
Nongenetic factors such as age and sex
are obviously important but need further
refinement in terms of molecular mecha-
nisms and their interplay with environmen-
tal factors before being useful for any
intervention. Acquired factors (for example
physiological changes, disease-induced
changes, induction and inhibition of
enzymes by dietary factors, etc.) are also crit-
ical but difficult to study because of their
individual nature. Such changes may not be
permanent and thus may be impractical to
take into consideration in any long-term or
retrospective study.
Interindividual variability is observed for
practically all diseases and toxic responses.
It is certainly related in part to different
qualitative and quantitative environmental
exposures, but differences in susceptibility
between individuals in response to the same
level of exposure are also common. In most
chronic diseases, a long sequence of events
leads to a final response, which is seen as a
result ofan interplay ofmultiple genetic and
other host factors and environmental fac-
tors, each contributing to an overall risk of
having a manifest response.
Although biomarkers of susceptibility
identify those individuals in a population
who have a difference in susceptibility to
the effects of chemical exposure, only in
some circumstances can they predict an
individual's risk with any confidence. It is
important to not generalize inappropriately
from in vitro evidence of susceptibility, as
has occurred in inferring that individuals
with red blood cell glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency are particularly
sensitive to inhaled ozone (133).
Objectves ofUse
ofSusceptibility Markers
Interindividual variation occurs as a result
of different genetically inherited back-
ground modified by dietary and environ-
mental exposure and revealed by genotypic
and phenotypic variation. Susceptibility
markers are useful because they can partially
explain interindividual variation inherent
in the general population and thus provide
a biological rationale for investigation of
inherent vulnerability prior to exposure to
environmental hazards.
The objectives of the use of susceptibil-
ity markers are the following:
* To evaluate interindividual variation of
risk associated with environmental and
dietary exposure to hazardous chemi-
cals. These methods cannot easily iden-
tify all individuals at risk in a hazardous
environment due to lack of understand-
ing of the interaction of compensatory
genetic and cellular mechanisms and
complex environmental influences.
While individual susceptibility may only
occasionally be specifically linked to a
single defective gene (e.g., CYP2D6)
where the specificity of substrate struc-
ture has been better characterized, it
currently is our best approach to assess
populations at risk.
* To determine the role of genetic varia-
tions to explain interethnic differences
associated with susceptibility to chemi-
cal exposures and to predict population
vulnerability.
* To improve the detection of environ-
mental hazards by increasing the sensi-
tivity of epidemiological studies which
in turn will result in a) reduction of
risk through avoidance or limitation of
chemical exposure b) changes in dietary
and social habits to improve health or
reduce risk c) improved drug treatment
to maximize response and minimize
toxicity. Better knowledge of xenobi-
otic metabolism and pharmacokinetics
of elimination of toxins will speed
progress ofthis work.
Methodology in Studying
Susceptibility-related Genes
The approaches and methods described in
this section will focus on studies of poly-
morphisms in xenobiotic-metabolizing
enzymes. However, most of these methods,
in particular the molecular techniques, can
be used for studying polymorphisms of
other susceptibility-related genes, such as
DNA repair enzyme genes or disease genes.
In addition to the polymorphisms of
susceptibility-related genes, other genetic
alterations such as "mini- and microsatel-
lites" are also believed to be important in
human carcinogenesis and are involved in
individual susceptibility (134).
There are two important parts in studies
of genetic polymorphisms. The first is how
to identify a new polymorphism and its
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997712
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
possible functional significance. The second
is how to define the role of a known poly-
morphism in human susceptibility to envi-
ronmental toxicity in which the frequency
distribution of the polymorphic genotypes
or phenotypes should be determined. In
both cases the PCR technology has greatly
increased our ability to study genetic poly-
morphisms. In the PCR reaction specific
stretches of the DNA can be amplified
exponentially by thermostable DNA poly-
merases with a pair of specific primers.
Several methods are widely used in studies of
genetic polymorphisms and interindividual
variations in chemical metabolism.
Methods for Studying Phenotypic
Expression. USE OF PROBE DRUGS IN VIVO.
When an appropriate probe drug (with
specificity and safety) is available, meta-
bolic polymorphisms can be identified by
determining the metabolic ratio, i.e., the
ratio of the blood or urinary concentration
of the parent drug over its metabolite in
different individuals administered the
probe drug. Metabolic polymorphism is
usually indicated in a population if the fre-
quency distribution of the metabolic ratio
is shown to be bimodal or trimodal. For
example, a bimodal distribution ofdebriso-
quine 4-hydroxylation (catalyzed by
CYP2D6) is observed due to the existence
of "poor" and "extensive" metabolizers
(135,136). The role of gender-based
CYP1A2 variability in susceptibility to
bladder cancer has been explored using the
caffeine breath test (137).
USE OF PROBE DRUGS IN VITRO. The
probe drugs can be used for in vitro metab-
olism studies to look for possible polymor-
phisms ofthe metabolizing enzymes, which
are usually indicated iflarge interindividual
variations in the activities are observed.
Diagnostic probe drugs for individual CYP
enzymes have been developed such as
coumarin for CYP2A6 and caffeine for
CYP1A2 (138).
OTHER METHODS. Polymorphisms of
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes can be
determined at other phenotypic levels.
Enzyme protein levels can be measured by
immunological methods such as immuno-
blotting and immunohistochemical analy-
ses. mRNA levels are quantified by different
nucleic acid hybridization techniques
(Northern and slot blotting, RNase protec-
tion, and in situ hybridization). Quanti-
tative RT-PCR (reverse transcription ofthe
mRNA to cDNA followed by PCR ampli-
fication) has been developed for detection
of mRNA in a small amount of tissue
samples. Expression of CYPIAI mRNA in
human lymphocytes and its regulation
by tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
have been successfully determined by this
method (139).
Most genotoxic chemicals need to be
metabolically activated to exert their effects.
Therefore variations in the activities of the
xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes by poly-
morphic changes can influence the geno-
toxic effects. Biomarkers of effect, such as
cytogenetic damage caused by a genotoxic
compound, can be used as an indirect mea-
surement to evaluate the metabolic activity
of cells from donors with different poly-
morphic genotypes or phenotypes. The
commonly used cytogenetic parameters
include CAs, SCEs, and MN (46).
Methods for Studying Genetic
Polymorphisms. IDENTIFICATION OF
NOVEL GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS. Once a
metabolic polymorphism (or a polymor-
phism at other phenotypic expression lev-
els) is demonstrated, various molecular
biology techniques including cloning and
DNA sequencing can be used to look for
possible genetic changes of the enzyme. A
successful example is the discovery of
CYP2D6 genetic polymorphism (140).
After cDNA cloning and DNA sequencing,
it was demonstrated that a mutant 2D6
allele is responsible for the majority of"poor
metabolizers." Further work established that
a mutation at a splicing site caused the pro-
duction ofdefective 2D6 mRNA and a total
absence of2D6 protein (141).
The DNA sequence alterations can be
screened by SSCP analysis, which detects
the mutation-caused mobility shift of the
DNA fragments on gel electrophoresis
(109), or by DGGE, in which DNA mole-
cules are separated based on differences in
their melting temperatures due to the
sequence alterations (113). In some cases,
the variant alleles are detected by sequence
comparison with no knowledge of the
related phenotypic polymorphism. Most of
the polymorphisms will not have a func-
tional significance. Functional analysis is
then critically important in establishing the
phenotypic significance of these variant
alleles. Catalytic activity of enzymes can be
studied by expressing different variant pro-
teins with the cDNA expression systems if
the polymorphic changes are localized in
the coding region, such as in CYP2A6
polymorphism (142). If the polymorphic
loci are in the noncoding region, their
effects on the transcriptional regulation can
be studied by linking the mutated sequence
with a reporter gene, such as in CYP2E1
RsaI polymorphism (143).
GENOTYPING OF POPULATIONS. It is
rather simple to determine an individual's
genotype with respect to a specific locus by
current molecular biology techniques,
when the polymorphic sites of a xenobi-
otic-metabolizing enzyme gene are clearly
identified. If a polymorphic site changes
the recognition sequence of a restriction
enzyme, or the polymorphic alteration
involves a large deletion, the genetic poly-
morphism can be identified by RFLP
analysis in which DNA is subjected to
Southern blotting after digestion with
appropriate restriction enzymes and
hybridized with specific probes.
PCR technology has greatly increased
our ability to detect genetic polymor-
phisms. DNA amplification can be carried
out with specific PCR primers for any par-
ticular sequence of a polymorphic gene,
with small amounts of human tissue or cell
samples. The DNA source can be from
blood leukocytes, buccal epithelial cells,
hair roots, and exfoliated cells such as blad-
der epithelial cells in the urine. The PCR-
amplified DNA sequence containing the
polymorphic sites can be analyzed by RFLP
with restriction digestion and visualized on
a stained gel after electrophoresis. If the
genetic polymorphism results in a loss, or in
some cases a gain, of a restriction site, the
band pattern on the gel will be different
from the wild-type samples, such as in
CYP2E1 polymorphisms (143). If the PCR
primers are designed to be within the miss-
ing sequence of a deletion polymorphism,
no PCR product will be formed.
Obviously, the RFLP method cannot be
used to screen the genetic polymorphisms
in which the sequence alterations cause no
changes at suitable restriction sites. In this
case, genotyping can be carried out by cre-
ating a restriction site by mismatch primers
(144,145) or by allele-specific PCR (146).
If necessary, the results from PCR-RFLP
and allele-specific PCR can be confirmed
by PCR-direct sequencing (147).
Advantages and Limitations
ofGenetc Susceptbility Markers
Determinants of the Quality!
Appropriateness of the Approaches.
ASSESSMENT OF AN EXPOSURE. The reliable
characterization and assessment of the level
of exposure(s) in the population studied is
an important task. However, there are dif-
ficulties in measuring exposure because
assessment methodologies frequently
depend on personal recall (148,149).
In many studies published so far on meta-
bolic polymorphisms and susceptibility to
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 713
BARRETT ET AL
environmentally induced diseases, the
exposure data are either very scarce or not
available. This may contribute in part to
the divergent findings reported for potential
host factors in individual responses to toxi-
cants. Knowledge ofthe substrate specificity
of the polymorphic enzyme studied is
needed before any interpretations concern-
ing its potential effect on individual
response to a given exposure can be made.
SELECTION OF THE STUDY GROUP. The
cases and controls should have comparable
exposures in studies on individual responses
to environmental agents. Age and gender
matching should also be performed. Ifthese
potential confounding factors are not con-
trolled, the effect may be nullified (150).
Where matching is not possible, logistic
regression can be used to evaluate the indi-
vidual contributions by multiple factors and
to identify confounding factors (151).
SAMPLE COLLECTION. The sample
collection is one important aspect of the
appropriate assays. The proper treatment
and storage of the samples is a prerequisite
for obtaining good results. For instance,
blood samples for DNA analyses can be
stored in a refrigerator for several days and
subsequently may be transported on ice or
frozen for transportation or for further
storage. In contrast, the samples collected
for RNA analyses have to be frozen imme-
diately, preferably in liquid nitrogen, and
stored at -800C before use. Blood, which
has been the most used source of DNA
samples, should not be collected in heparin
tubes for DNA extraction. Interference
with the PCR assay occurs when compared
to the DNA extracted from blood collected
in EDTA tubes. Although the DNA-
bound heparin can be removed using
heparinases, they are far too expensive to
be used in studies involving large sample
sizes. The inhibition can be decreased by
extensive dilution ofthe samples (152).
In future studies, increased use of alter-
native sources of the DNA for genotyping
studies, such as cells from buccal mucosa
(153), is expected. These samples are easily
collected by scraping or mouth washing
and will thus overcome some of the prob-
lems associated with blood sampling. Aside
from the samples collected for "prospec-
tive" studies, the DNA can also be from
stored pathological tissue sections, which
provide great advantage for retrospective
studies but have additional problems due
to the small amount of DNA obtained and
due to possible DNA degradation.
NUMBER OF MARKERS STUDIED SIMULTA-
NEOUSLY. Given the number and variability
in expression ofthe xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes, assessment ofa single polymorphic
phenotype or genotype cannot be expected
to be sufficient for evaluating individual sus-
ceptibility to environmental agents. The
ultimate goal should thus be to concurrently
assess individual phenotypes or genotypes
for all the metabolic genes relevant for a
given exposure (154). This may raise an
urgent need for software to aid in the inter-
pretation of the overall risk contributed by
several different host factors.
Phenotyping versus Genotyping.
Phenotyping has been widely offered as a
more appropriate method compared to the
new DNA-based techniques in studies on
individual metabolic capacity. Deter-
mination of the actual phenotype of an
individual, although more time consum-
ing, is justified when no genotyping meth-
ods are available or when the correlation
between the genotype and phenotype is
very poor. However, in most cases the cor-
relation is fairly good. Moreover, pheno-
typing is easily affected by confounders
such as food or drug intake prior to testing,
which do not affect genotyping analyses.
Protein and mRNA levels, although
they give some indication of the expression
level of a given metabolic enzyme, do not
necessarily reflect the metabolic activity
(155). On the other hand, the power of
PCR to detect only a few copies of the tar-
get sequence makes it particularly vulnera-
ble to errors caused by contaminating
DNA. Both approaches will be discussed in
more detail below.
PHENOTYPING ASSAYS. Use ofprobe
drugs in vivo. The identification of poly-
morphic traits has repeatedly been by in
vivo probe and involves the collection of
blood or urine usually over a specific
period. The use of in vivo probes gives a
picture of the whole body capacity for a
specific enzyme to metabolize a given
substance. Probes are not yet available for
all known polymorphically expressed
enzymes. In many cases the probe is
metabolized by other enzymes as well,
which may complicate interpretation. It is
also important to have a probe that is both
specific and safe for use in humans.
Use ofprobe drugs in vitro. Because of
drug/chemical toxicity, the use of an
in vitro probe may be the only safe alterna-
tive to perform phenotyping. A simple
in vitro assay can be developed, ifthe poly-
morphic enzyme is expressed in blood
cells. The use of other tissues, such as liver
biopsies, may provide an opportunity to
measure the expression level of the enzyme
as well. Concerns for patient safety limit
the availability ofthese tissues for study.
GENOTYPING ASSAYS. DGGE and SSCP.
DGGE and SSCP methods are widely used
for detection of alterations in oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes, but they could
also be used to track down sequence varia-
tions in the genes coding for xenobiotic-
metabolizing enzymes. Recently they have
also been used as a genotyping methodol-
ogy (156), but at present the RFLP- and
PCR-based analyses may be more useful in
these studies.
RFLP assays. The early RFLP-based
genotyping studies by Southern blotting
were time consuming and labor intensive
and usually incorporated the less desirable
use ofradioactive probes. Southern blotting
has been mainly replaced by PCR-based
analyses, which have greatly facilitated
studies of individual susceptibility. This is
best exemplified by the rapid expansion of
the studies on GSTM1 polymorphism after
elucidation of PCR-based methods (157)
for detection of the gene deficiency (158).
Although several PCR-based methods are
available for detection of homozygous gene
deletions (157,159), amplifications (160)
or heterozygous deletions (158) of the
genes are still detectable only by the
Southern blotting analyses.
PCR-based methods. As mentioned
above, the PCR methods have mainly
replaced the genomic DNA methods in
genotyping studies. The RT-PCR is also
used to quantitate tissue-specific expression
of the metabolic genes (161). While rare
mRNA transcripts can be detected by the
RT-PCR approach, determination of rela-
tive or absolute copy number may be more
problematic (162). Consequently, there is
debate about whether RT-PCR is suitable
for these studies.
One advantage of PCR methods is the
requirement ofonly nanogram quantities of
the DNA or RNA template. The need for
starting material can be further diminished
by employing a multiplex PCR that gives
the genotype of several metabolic genes
from the same sample. However, optimiza-
tion of the multiplex PCRs may be time
consuming and the number of assays one
can add to one reaction is relatively limited.
The evident disadvantage in PCR
methods is their extreme sensitivity to con-
taminating DNA. Consequently, special
emphasis has to be put on controlling the
contamination (163). This can be achieved
by minimizing the possibilities for con-
tamination to occur, by UV radiating the
reaction mixture before adding template
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997714
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
DNA, and by using carefully selected posi-
tive and negative internal controls in all
amplifications. An additional limitation,
specific for RT-PCR, is that measurement
ofmRNA levels does not necessarily reflect
metabolic activity.
Sequencing. Sequencing is the only
method that provides the actual DNA
sequence of interest. Consequently, it is
still used mainly to identify novel allelic
variants and to confirm the applicability of
new genotyping methods. As the method-
ology improves, sequencing may be more
commonly used to determine genetic
markers (164).
Ethical considerations. Ethical review of
all studies regarding human risk is appropri-
ate. Specific issues arise with the use of
archival samples for which donor permission
may not have been obtained for the current
research investigation. Current practice is
variable regarding the need for consent. A
second issue is the type and quantity of
information derived from the project that
should be provided to the subject [see below
and Soskolne (15)].
Condusions and Recommendations
There are a large number of different
methods to measure susceptibility factors,
ranging from the activity of an enzyme to
the detection of mutant alleles of a gene
associated with a modified phenotypic
trait. In an era of molecular biology,
exceedingly sensitive and specific methods
to detect alleles and expression of genes of
interest have taken center stage; but one
has to keep in mind that it is actually the
phenotype that is of importance for the
final response to the hazardous insult.
One serious problem in phenotyping
studies is lack ofknowledge ofthe levels of
enzymes in the target cells and organs rele-
vant to the whole body metabolism and
the correlation of genotype with in vivo
phenotype. In humans, practical considera-
tions dictate to a large extent that one has
to resort to surrogate tissues.
Genotyping has some advantages, such
as unequivocal identification and lack of
interference with confounding factors; but
a modified sequence within a gene (poly-
morphism) must be demonstrated to
generate a different phenotype.
In vivo phenotyping has the advantage
in some cases of assigning a value with one
assay that might require determination of
multiple genotyping assays when several
alleles are present in the population. In vivo
methods to measure phenotype may lead to
misclassification of different genotypes,
which in the case of rare alleles can have a
large effect on the frequency.
To fully exploit the genetics of xeno-
biotic metabolizing enzymes as risk assess-
ment tools, much more information on the
structure/function relationships and regula-
tion of these enzymes correlated to the
in vivo phenotype must be elucidated.
On the basis of the current knowledge
of the field and of the above conclusions,
the following recommendations are made:
a) Phenotyping should be continued
along with genotyping, until we gain expe-
rience with large numbers to enable inter-
pretation ofmore complex relationships.
b) The combined impact of all relevant
genes for a given exposure (as far as they are
known) needs to be assessed through popu-
lation-based studies using multiple markers.
New insights into the physiologic function
of genes encoding xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes will be revealed by studies of
transgenic "knockout" or"insert" models.
c) Better kinetic characterization of
enzyme substrate and inhibitor specificity
must be determined through studies of
human tissues, as well as through detailed
metabolic studies ofwhole organisms. The
future availability of crystal structure of
drug metabolizing enzymes in combination
with computational chemistry will provide
better information on structure/function
predictions.
d) A greater understanding ofthe regu-
lation of enzyme expression by environ-
mental agents is needed.
e) The value ofintermediate markers of
exposure such as DNA adducts, should be
studied and related to other end points of
disease, e.g., cancer, by cohort studies of
individuals who have had unintentional
exposure.
f) Widely available software for inter-
pretation of the overall risk contributed by
several different host factors is needed.
g) Better methods of DNA sample col-
lection should be devised to facilitate stor-
age and transport and to reduce costs
because of the need to perform complex
DNA investigations at remote laboratories.
h) A future approach will be to use
information obtained from analysis ofpop-
ulations of interethnic groups, in an
attempt to modify risk by reducing expo-
sure to potentially hazardous environmen-
tal and dietary factors linked to disease.
The effects of these actions must be evalu-
ated to validate proposed interventions.
i) All of these areas need further
exploration before we will be able to assign
individual specific prevention strategies.
Factors That Determine the
Susceptibility of Organisms,
Species, Communities, and
Ecosystems
Introduction
There are both commonalities and differ-
ences between the sections on human and
nonhuman organisms in this report on sus-
ceptibility. Many of the techniques are the
same, but whereas for human health the
main consideration is the protection ofsus-
ceptible individuals, in environmental
terms we are more concerned with suscep-
tible species and communities. Even this
concern is double edged, as there are
species for which human efforts to control
have led to the formation of highly resis-
tant forms. Studies of the mechanisms
whereby this resistance has occurred have
given much valuable information on
the differences between susceptible and
resistant populations.
While this section of the joint report
follows the sequence of the human health
sections, namely, biomarkers of exposure,
effect, and susceptibility, emphasis is given
to the last category as in general the same
biomarkers of exposure and effect are used
in human and nonhuman biota. Examples
of how these biomarkers are used in the
environmental context will be given.
Here we use the term biomarker as a
biological change that is a measure ofexpo-
sure and sometimes of toxic effect caused
by environmental chemical(s) at the level
of the individual or below. Changes occur-
ring above the level of the individual are
referred to as biological indicators.
The discussion here on susceptibility
covers a broad canvas. There is first a dis-
cussion of biomarkers of susceptibility at
the cellular and molecular level, followed by
those at the individual level, both long and
short term. Then we move up the organiza-
tional scale discussing biological indicators
ofsensitivity at the population, community
structure, and ecosystem levels. We con-
dude with two case examples of individual
chemicals or chemical classes to illustrate
these points. Finally, we note that humans
are part of ecosystems, and the biomarkers
ofecosystem susceptibility can also indicate
and predict effects ofchemicals on humans.
The best biological indicators will both
warn humans of potential danger and alert
us to severe ecosystem damage (Figure 2).
Biomas ofExposure and Effect
We regard biomarkers of exposure and
effect as essentially a continuum (Figure 2).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 715
BARRETT ET AL.
t
T I T
I
Individual
t it
I T I T I T I
t
Figure 2. The role of susceptibility in individuals, biota, populations, and ecosystems.
Whether a biomarker can be used as an
indicator of effect as well as of exposure
often depends on the depth of our knowl-
edge of a particular case. Thus, we have
not made any effort at making this rather
artificial separation.
Biomarkers and higher level biological
indicators are important tools in ecotoxi-
cology. Their application to studies of
chemical effects on nonhuman biota are
well documented. However, as this does
not fall within the bounds of this discus-
sion, the readers' attention is drawn to a
number ofauthoritative texts (165-167).
Among the hierarchy of biomarkers and
biological indicators, representing pollu-
tant-induced changes in biota at all levels of
organization (from the molecular to ecosys-
tem), lie the means to identify, classify, and
ultimately quantify, the susceptibility of
individuals and populations to the detri-
mental effects of chemical exposure. At the
levels of molecule, organelle, and cell, there
are a number of changes we may use in our
studies of susceptibilities. In the case of
DNA adducts, for instance, we can measure
the quantity and rate of adduct formation
in one individual and compare it to others
in the same population. Interspecies varia-
tions could also be measured. Similarly,
there are a number of important cellular
regulation and defense proteins that may be
quantified for comparative purposes.
Detoxification proteins such as the
mixed-function oxidases (MFO) and the
cytochrome P450 enzymes may be mea-
sured, as well as the multidrug/multixeno-
biotic resistance proteins. The levels of
such molecules in individuals may give
some important clues to the susceptibility
ofan organism to toxic insult.
Efficient DNA repair has been shown to
be an important determinant of chemical
and radiation-mediated damage in cells.
We may therefore consider the cellular lev-
els of the various repair enzymes as indices
of overall susceptibility. Other important
molecules are the proteins involved in cell
regulation mechanisms. Proteins such as the
oncoproteins may be useful, along with the
functional analogues of proteins such as
p53, coded by the tumor-suppressing gene.
Other indicators of susceptibility at the
subcellular level include changes in
organelle structure and function, chromo-
somal aberrations, and the formation of
micronuclei to genotoxic agents, as well as
the functional integrity of lysosomes.
These cellular/molecular indicators of sus-
ceptibility may be considered in higher ani-
mals and plants to be only components of
the overall picture of organism response.
Thus they may be used in conjunction
with other higher level markers. However,
for a large number of single-celled organ-
isms (and simple organisms) they may play
a more important role.
Chemical-induced changes in many
types of cells, tissues and organs can also be
seen as markers of susceptibility. A high
level of cellular dysfunction results in dis-
tinct morphological and biochemical conse-
quences. An example is apoptosis or
programmed cell death. The function of a
cell may be so impaired, or damage to its
DNA so great, that a "suicide" sequence is
initiated, resulting in degeneration and
death. Such a process may be measured his-
tologically, and the levels of apoptosis mea-
sured in a target tissue or organ. Cellular
dysfunction may also be measured in a bio-
chemical manner, and tracing increases
and/or decreases in tissue specific molecules
such as hormones and enzymes may be a
key indicator ofindividual susceptibility.
Finally, physiological parameters are
potentially important markers, as they
relate directly to fitness and consequently
have higher level effects. Also included are
homeostatic processes such as thermo- and
osmoregulation, alteration to respiration,
and changes in cardiac function.
DNAAdducts
32P-posdabeling has been used for a number
of environmental studies. Some of the most
detailed are those carried out in Puget
Sound in the State ofWashington. Varanasi
et al. (168) used the 1-butanol adduct
enhancement method to measure the level
of DNA adducts in English sole (Parophyrs
vetulus) that were exposed to high concen-
trations of sediment-associated chemical
contaminants and exhibited elevated levels
of hepatic neoplasms. The level of DNA
adducts in contaminated sites averaged
from 17 to 26 nmol/mol nucleotides com-
pared to < 0.2 from a control site. The
finding that the levels of aromatic hydro-
carbons in the sediments of Puget Sound
were positively correlated with prevalence
of hepatic neoplasms and related lesions in
English sole were compared to those found
for the starry flounder (Platichthys stellatus)
(169). These workers found that the starry
flounder had a lower prevalence of hepatic
neoplasms and studies suggested that bio-
chemical differences in the metabolism of
carcinogenic PAHs can explain the lower
susceptibility of the flounder to chemical-
induced hepatocarcinogenesis.
The HPLC/fluorescence spectropho-
tometry approach has been used to show
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997
EcosystemsPopulations
t
_ll t~~~~~~~-EE , | S S l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
t
I
716
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
the presence of B[a]P adducts in a popula-
tion of beluga whale (Delphinapterus
leucas) in the St. Lawrence River, whereas
no such adducts were found in the brains
of whales from the Arctic population
(170). The finding of B[a]P adducts in the
brains of belugas in the St. Lawrence can
be correlated to the high incidence of
tumors (cause of death in 18% of the 61
whales post mortemed) in this population.
The formation of DNA adducts has
been considered a key step in the initiation
ofcarcinogenesis. However, the presence of
DNA adducts in aquatic invertebrates that
rarely or never develop neoplasms may
obviously be linked to genotoxic end
points other than tumorigenesis. Based on
good correlations between the induction of
DNA adducts and gene mutations, it was
hypothesized that, in natural species, a
variety of manifestations of the mutational
event may actually prove much more bio-
logically and ecologically important than
the induction ofneoplasia (171).
Strand breakage of DNA has also been
used to study the effects of environmental
pollutants. Although strand breakage can
lead to cell death, in many cases it is
repaired before serious damage occurs.
Strand breakage as measured by the alka-
line unwinding assay is one of a suite of
biomarkers used to study the effects ofpol-
lution on the liver DNA of bluegill sunfish
(Lepomis macrochirus) in rivers ofthe eastern
United States (172). The basic prerequisite
for the successful use of DNA adduct and
DNA strand breakage in environmental
risk assessment studies, however, is the
recognition of the fact that lower inverte-
brates may be incompetent in forming
DNA adducts from some highly prevalent
pollutants such as PAHs (173).
Some indicators of chemical exposure
and effects methods are shown in Table 2.
Biological Indicators ofSusceptibility
at the Individual Level
The phenomenon of resistance is a striking
example of differential susceptibility of
organisms to environmental chemicals.
There are a number ofmechanisms whereby
organisms can resist the action of toxic
chemicals. These include decreased uptake,
increased efflux, increased rate of metabo-
lism of the toxicant, sequestration of the
toxin, and increase or repair of target sites
within the cell. In some cases more than
one mechanism is involved and changes
made against one chemical can protect
against another; hence, the phenomenon
ofcross-resistance.
The factors that influence the onset of
resistance fall into three broad categories:
genetic, biological, and operational. In the
first category is the frequency and domi-
nance of the resistant gene. Dominance is
important; if the gene is normally recessive
because it has disadvantages, such as lower
reproductive capacity, the greater the
genetic disadvantage, the slower the resis-
tant strain takes over. The shorter the
generation turnover and the greater the
number of offspring per generation, the
more rapidly resistance can occur. For pes-
ticide resistance, the operational factors
include the actual pesticide used and the
mode and area of application. It is in the
area of disease resistance in insects that we
have the greatest control (174).
The degree of resistance can be large.
For example there are houseflies for which
the LD50 for DDT is 3000 times normal,
the main mechanism that defends the
organism being increased levels of a dehy-
drochlorinase (175). Resistance among
vertebrates is not so evident, although it
has been reported in several species of fish,
and the case ofwarfarin resistance in rats is
well known.
Resistance can cause considerable
changes in the community structure of
invertebrates. Man's attempts to control
the pests that affect cotton in northeastern
Mexico and the southern United States is a
good example of the problems that occur
with resistance and the alterations of com-
munity structure caused by differential sus-
ceptibility of organisms to environmental
chemicals (176). During the period 1945
to the mid-1950s there was almost com-
plete control of the main pests-the boll
weevil and the cotton fleahopper-by OC
pesticides and there was a spectacular
increase in cotton production. In the mid-
1950s it was necessary to switch to OP
compounds which increased the costs but
cotton was still profitable. Former minor
pests, the bollworm and tobacco budworm
Table 2. Some biomarkers, the pollutant, and their utility for study of environmental susceptibility.
Measure of
Biomarker toxic effect? Pollutant Organization level Reliability index
Inhibition of 6-ALAD Yes Lead Organ, intact animal Sufficiently reliable to replace chemical analysis; can be related
to mechanisms of action
Induction of metallothionein No Cadmium Organ No advantage over chemical analysis; not related to mechanism
of action
Eggshell thinning Yes DDT, DDE, Dicofol Intact animal, population Wide variation in sensitivity; related to reproductive success
Anticoagulant clotting proteins Yes Rodenticides Intact animal, population Has been related to mortality; can be assessed from blood protein
Porphyrin profiles No Several OCs Organ Levels of porphyrins found in samples are well below those causing
adverse effects
Depression of plasma retional Yes 3,4,3', 4'-TCB Tissue, intact animal Dermal and epithelia lesions to specific protein have been shown
and thyroxine
Inhibition of AchE Yes OPs, carbamates Organ, intact animal Easier and more reliable than chemical analysis
Induction of MFOs Yesa OCs, PAHs Organ, population Analysis of TCDD-EQa has been linked to reproductive success;
P450s related to specific pollutants
DNA and hemoglobin adducts No Largely PAHs Organ Good monitor of exposure, for PAHs, relation to effects
DNA integrity ? Metals, OCs, PAHs Organ DNA damage is serious to the individual but relationship to effects
on reproduction is unknown
Other serum enzymes No Metals, OCs, OPs Organ A considerable number of enzymes altered by pollutants, but
effects are not clear
Immune responses ? Metals, OCs, PAHs Organ Proper functioning of this is critical to health but there is
considerable reserve
Stress proteins No Metals, OCs Organ Difficult to separate effects from nonchemical stresses
8TCDD-EQ, TCDD equivalents.
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 717
BARRETT ETAL
were becoming major pests. By the mid- to
late-1960s all the pests were highly resis-
tant to all insecticides and cotton produc-
tion dropped markedly. The introduction
of integrated pest management was needed
to solve this problem.
Individual Susceptibility. Susceptibility
of individuals to chemical stress, or their
sensitivity to chemicals, is hard to define.
Pragmatically, susceptibility may be defined
as a lack of resistance, or tolerance, to
chemical stress. Such a definition enables
the recognition of molecular, biochemical,
or physiological mechanisms that constitute
a biological defense mechanism against
chemical pollution. These include mecha-
nisms dependent upon the activity or levels
of mixed-function oxidases, N-acetyltrans-
ferases, glutathione S-transferases, glu-
tathione, glucuronidation and sulfation,
heat-shock proteins, and metallothioneins.
The basic characteristic of these biologic
defense/detoxication mechanisms is their
inducibility. The induced state of these
enzymes, often expressed in thousands of
percent increase over natural state, serve as
useful biomarkers of exposure/effect. Their
activity and inducibility directly influence
the outcome of exposure to toxic chemicals
(induction of DNA adducts, induction of
single strand breaks in the DNA, induction
of chromosomal aberrations, modulation of
fitness and the frequency ofdiseases, lethal-
ity, extinction of species). In resistant
organisms both the natural level and more
importantly the inducibility ofone or more
of these mechanisms is higher than in sus-
ceptible individuals. Generally, better
response of detoxication/defense mecha-
nisms is inversely proportional to suscepti-
bility. Thus, biomarkers ofexposure may be
used as short-term indicators of biological
susceptibility of individuals to chemicals:
low response in these biomarkers will
denote a high level of susceptibility. For
example, lower inducibility of 7-ethoxy-
resorufin O-deethylase activity in carp will
denote their higher susceptibility to toxic
effects ofpollutants.
Using the same pragmatic definition of
susceptibility as a lack of resistance, one
can utilize a recently discovered multixeno-
biotic resistance mechanism (MXR) as a
long-term biomarker of susceptibility of
individuals to chemicals. The MXR repre-
sents a general biologic first-line defense
mechanism, it is taxonomically broadly dis-
tributed, and its expression is species
dependent. However, there are considerable
variations in its expression on an interindi-
vidual basis (177). The low expression of
activity of P-glycoprotein, a dominant fea-
ture in the MXR mechanism (178), in, for
example, the snail Monodonta turbinata
specimens living in a pristine marine envi-
ronment, indicates high susceptibility for
accumulation of xenobiotics and, conse-
quently, higher likelihood of effects (179).
In contrast, specimens of snails living at
polluted sites, expressing higher activity of
P-glycoprotein due to its induction, are less
susceptible to toxic effects of xenobiotics
due to a lower level of its accumulation.
Thus, the level of expression of MXR may
be a good long-term indicator of suscepti-
bility to chemicals. Similarly, species with
high levels of MXR (P-glycoprotein)
expression, such as mussels (Mytilus gallo-
provincialis, Mytilus edulis, Crasostera gigas)
(180), clam (Corbiculafluminea) (181),
marine snail (M. turbinata) (179), marine
worm (Urechis caupo) (182), or four
marine sponges (183), in contrast to a fresh
water mussel (Anodonta cygnea) and a fresh
water snail (Paludina vivipara) (179), are
not susceptible to chemical pollution.
Thus, the low, or nihil, expression ofMXR
in A. cygnea and P. vivipara are biomarkers
oftheir long-term susceptibility.
Excellent methods are available
for measurement of a functional state of
MXR (184), as well as for measurement
of concentration of inhibitors of MXR,
the chemosensitizers, in environmental
samples (185).
Several species or groups can be good
indicator species. Very good bioindicators
are the water insects, especially species
and groups of species of the order
Ephemerophera. Ecological niches and
needs of their larvae are well known. By
feeding on detritus they accumulate in
their bodies xenobiotics that can be reliably
identified (186).
Behavioral Mechanisms. Individuals
can clearly be exposed to chemicals in
situations in which they cannot escape or
move away from the exposure: then they
must rely on biochemical detoxifying
methods to avoid effects. Sessile organisms
that make up most species in the aquatic
world are unable to move away from expo-
sure. However, many organisms, parti-
cularly vertebrates, have a number of
behavioral and life-history strategies that
enable them to avoid exposure to chemi-
cals. These mechanisms make them less
vulnerable or less susceptible to the effects
ofthese chemicals.
The most obvious mechanism to avoid
chemicals is to move away from exposure;
and many animals do this by simply flying,
swimming, or walking away. This mecha-
nism functions in many species when they
are exposed to high doses ofchemicals such
as occurs during an oil spill. Birds, many
marine mammals, and fish will swim or fly
from advancing oil when it is possible to
do so (187). However, other fish and some
marine mammals will not do so until it is
too late to avoid exposure. Most exposures
to chemicals, however, occur at such
low doses that animals do not, or cannot
avoid them.
The impairment of locomotion or
abnormal behavior ofanimals is being used
to monitor pollutants. Fish have been used
commonly--monitoring the frequency of
coughing (188,189), loss of rheotaxis, or
disturbance of schooling. These methods
are linked with automatic water sampling
systems to serve pollutant analysis. Direct
measurement of respiration through blood
vessels in fish was devised to monitor cont-
aminants (190). Monitoring of mussels'
activity is also practical since mussels
respond to hazardous chemicals by closing
their bulbs. Abnormal web spinning by
caddisfly larvae or failure to make nests by
other aquatic insects are also useful meth-
ods to monitor pollutants. Feeding activity
can be another biomarker. A short-cut
test with Daphnia using toxicant-induced
inhibition offeeding is being studied.
For showing the changes caused by
long-term exposure, it is most important to
observe changes in the populations of indi-
vidual species. Changes in populations that
are useful include the changes in popula-
tion dynamics, fertility and fecundity,
physiological resistance to external factors,
behavior, levels of parasitism or pathogen
infestation, and changes in the structure of
communities ofsocial insects (186).
Life History Parameters. In addition
to behavior, some life history strategies
allow animals to avoid exposure, thus ren-
dering them less susceptible to exposure
and subsequent effects. Many species
migrate during part of the year, removing
them from low-level chronic exposure;
other species hibernate beneath the ground
where they also reduce exposure and thus
their vulnerability.
The two life history strategies that ren-
der animals most susceptible to the effects
of chemicals are a sessile life style and a
long life span. Species that are relatively
long lived, such as most vertebrates and
trees, are more susceptible to chronic expo-
sure to chemicals than those that have a
short life span. This factor functions with
chronic, low-level exposure rather than
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997718
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
acute, toxic levels ofchemicals. Species that
have a life history strategy that involves
short life spans have a reduced susceptibil-
ity to chemicals because the potential for
bioaccumulation is less and their reproduc-
tive potential is higher. Chemicals such as
dioxins, PCBs, DDTs, and mercury, which
bioaccumulate in internal tissues and are
thus available for remobilization into the
bloodstream, can have severe effects on
organisms that live a long time.
Of the invertebrate bioindicators,
insects are the most valuable because of
their quantities and diversity, and because
of our sufficient knowledge of their taxon-
omy, morphology, physiology, and onto-
geny. Their living areas may be rather
limited, their life cycles short, and their
reproductive potential enormous, with
great variations that can be regulating.
These properties are useful for bioindica-
tion. The diversity ofinsect communities is
distinct and cumulation of substances is
specific; it is not difficult to observe
changes in population dynamics and in
individual development because the life
cycles are short. The reproductive system
of insects is very sensitive to biologically
active substances (proliferation of follicular
cells, change in structure and function of
nutritive cells, etc.) This provides the
opportunity to use the reproductive system
of insects as a model for testing the effects
oftoxic substances in the environment.
Taxa Variation. In the environmental
field we have to look not only at suscepti-
ble populations of any one species but also
at interspecies variations that can cause a
differential effect. In this section we exam-
ine a number of biomarkers that vary
widely in their sensitivity from one group
ofanimals to another.
MIxED-FuNcTIoN OXIDASES. MFOs are
a major component of the defenses of
organisms against toxic chemicals in their
environment. Originally evolved to handle
naturally occurring toxic compounds, they
now play an important role in the detoxi-
fication of man-made chemicals. Nebert
et al. (191) consider that the ancestral
cytochrome gene is probably two thousand
million years old. The major divergence
occurred eight hundred to one thousand
million years ago when animals began
using plants as food and self-defense mech-
anisms against toxins in plants evolved.
Later, additional families of cytochromes
evolved in response to the necessity to
metabolize combustion products.
There is some variation between taxa:
in general terms, the relative activity of the
MFO enzyme epoxide hydrase follows
phylogenetic lines with mammals > birds
and amphibia > fish, with little overlap
between the groupings. Levels in inverte-
brates are much lower. Glucuronyl-
transferase activities were much higher in
mammals than fish with virtually no over-
lap. Aldrin epoxidase activity follows the
same trend, but in this case there is consid-
erable overlap. A linear log relationship was
found between relative activity and body
weight for mammals, with man being the
outlier having activity lower than would be
expected by body weight.
Fish-eating birds show a high correla-
tion coefficient for the regression ofactivity
against body weight, with the values for
relative activity being approximately an
order of magnitude lower than for mam-
mals of comparable weight. Other species
of birds tend to have values intermediate
between fish-eating birds and mammals,
but the correlation of activity with body
weight is considerably weaker. Low values
for fish-eating birds are considered to be
due to the fact that until xenobiotics conta-
minated aquatic food chains, the birds had
less need of these defense mechanisms.
Regrettably no data appear to be available
on fish-eating mammals.
The low level of activity in fish has
been considered to be due to the fact that
until historical times this group of organ-
isms has found the excretory route across
the gills effective for removing most xeno-
biotics. It is clear that this mechanism is
quite inadequate to deal with highly
liposoluble organochlorine molecules that
have been released into the environment by
humans in the last few decades.
The relationship between feeding
habits and MFO activity has also been
demonstrated in insects. A detailed review
of the data for aldrin epoxidase has been
made by Brattsten (192). He found that
aldrin epoxidase activity is lowest in
monophagous species, considerably higher
in oligophagous, and some 10-fold higher
in the most polyphagous species.
The comparison of Phase I and Phase
II hepatic transformation in quail and
trout to that of a number of mammalian
species commonly used in toxicity testing
has been made by Gregus et al. (193).
They found that the overall metabolism of
xenobiotics could vary several hundredfold
between species.
ToxicrrY OF DIOXINS. The toxicity of
dioxins to various mammalian species
varies greatly. The most sensitive species
known is the guinea pig; the LD50 for the
male is 0.6 pg/kg and the female 2.1 pg/kg,
the value for the male rat is 22 pg/kg, for
the female rat 45 pg/kg and for the rabbit
(mixed sex) 115 pg/kg, whereas the least
sensitive species is the hamster (1200
pg/kg) (194).
EGGSHELL THINNING. The phenomenon
of eggshell thinning, although confined to
only one order (Aves) does illustrate some
interesting points in susceptibility. Eggshell
thinning is caused by DDE and the sensi-
tivity varies greatly. A diet of only a few
parts per million will cause 20% thinning
(the degree of thinning that causes eggshell
breakage and thus reproductive failure) in
raptorial birds and some species offish-eat-
ing birds such as the pelican and cor-
morant. Other species such as gull, terns,
and ducks are only moderately sensitive
with diets of 40 to 50 ppm being needed
to cause biologically significant eggshell
thinning. Still other species, such as quail
and chicken are completely insensitive and
it is impossible to achieve more than a few
percent thinning even at the highest dosage
that can be used without mortality. One
important point from this variation is that
the common test species are insensitive and
thus even if the measurement of eggshell
thinning had been included in test proto-
cols for new pesticides this phenomenon
would not then have been recognized.
Another point is that the species exposed to
the greatest amount of DDE, due to bioac-
cumulation, are those that are the most
sensitive. DDE-induced eggshell thinning
caused the decline of many species of rap-
torial birds, such as the peregrine falcon
(Falco peregrinus) and european sparrow
hawk (Accipter nisus) over wide areas ofthe
northern hemisphere. These declines have
been reversed in areas where bans on DDT
have been imposed.
Biological Indicators ofSusceptibility
to Chemicals at the Population Level
Biological indicators for assessing sus-
ceptibility at the population level measure
parameters that are a consequence of low
activity of mechanisms of resistance
detected by molecular and physiological
biomarkers. For example, the induction of
DNA adducts and DNA strand breakages
found in individuals by molecular biomark-
ers predicted the increase in mutational
events in population. Consequently there is
a higher susceptibility of populations to
diseases, especially viral, bacterial, and para-
sitic, as the consequence of impairments in
the immunosystem. These populations also
are more highly susceptible to decreased
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 719
BARRETT ET AL.
fitness of population, to impairments in
reproduction, to sickness and increased
lethality. All these indicators of susceptibil-
ity of populations to chemical stress will
predict the expected consequences on the
level of population such as alterations in
adaption, survival and succession. On the
ecological level, the most severe effect-
extinction ofa species-can occur.
Several examples illustrate the use of
implications ofsusceptibility at the popula-
tion level. In salt marsh ecosystems of
North America, salt marsh grass (Spartina
alterniflora) is the primary producer; sus-
ceptibility of this species to specific chemi-
cals, which results in lowered reproductive
output, would have a greater effect on
community and ecosystem structure than
would susceptibility of other, less impor-
tant plant species (195). S. alterniflora is
susceptible to PAHs from oil pollution; the
sensitive vegetative propagules can be killed
and the species may take years to recover.
Similarly, differences in susceptibility to
chemicals among species of algae in salt
marsh communities would also have a crit-
ical effect on community and ecosystem
structure since algae productivity is critical
to the overall productivity of the animal
communities in the marsh.
Equally important to remember when
using cellular and molecular biomarkers as
measures of the susceptibility of communi-
ties and ecosystems to chemicals, is that
changes in molecular and cellular organiza-
tion must have effects at the population
level to be important for community and
ecosystem structure.
In many cases, chemical, physical, and
biological stressors occur together; and the
communities and ecosystems must contend
with them at once. Since communities and
ecosystems are assemblages of organisms,
and thereby are populations that make up
the system and are responsible for the stabil-
ity and repair of that system, the relative
susceptibility of that system depends on the
susceptibility of individuals and populations
within the system.
Biological Indicators ofSusceptibility
to Chemicals at the Community Ll
Within any community or ecosystem the
species are not necessarily of equal impor-
tance with respect to the maintenance of
stability. That is, some species have a key-
stone role (196). Keystone species include
species that provide key nutrients or energy
at the lower trophic levels, or species that
regulate competition and predation at the
higher trophic levels. Where molecular and
cellula'r biomarkers are used to indicate
potential susceptibility differences among
individuals or species, care must be given
to select indicator species that have a key or
pivotal role in community structure (197).
Chemical disruptions to species that are
essential for either the structure or the
function of the system will have a greater
effect on the susceptibility ofthe ecosystem
than those that are less critical.
Several measures of the structure and
function of communities and ecosystems
(Table 3) can be used to measure change
(167,197-201). The degree of change in
ecosystem structure and function that
occurs is a measure of susceptibility. That
is, if a community or ecosystem undergoes
few changes in either structure or function
in response to a chemical, biological, or
physical perturbation, then it is relatively
resistant or can be said to be less suscepti-
ble to the effects of a given chemical or
class ofchemicals.
The methods to evaluate community
and ecosystem change are often costly and
time consuming, but they can sometimes
be used with less technology and equip-
ment. That is, in places or situations where
extensive molecular and cellular laboratory
facilities are not available, the community
and ecosystem measures outlined in Table 3
Table 3. Methods to measure differences in suscepti-
bility at the community and ecosystem level.a
Usefulness
Ease of measurementa for chemical
Characteristic Aquatic Terrestrial assessmentb
Biodiversity 1 5 A
Relative density 1 2 A
Relative abundance 1 1 A
Dominance 5 5 C
Food web 8 8 A
characteristics
Genetic diversity 10 10 A
Primary productivity 1 1 A
Secondary 5 3-7 B
productivity
Decomposition 1 1 A
Energy flow 5 3 C
Mineral cycles 8 3 A
Nutrient cycles 8 5 B
Keystone species 5 5 A
Index of biotic 10 10 A
integrity
Guild structure 10 8 C
Biomass 10 10 A
Erosion 5 5 C
Revised from Burger and Peakall (195); and several
articles in this volume. Ease of measurement is
scored on a continuum of 1 to 10, 1 being the easiest
to measure, 10 the most difficult. bUsefulness for
assessment is scored on a continuum, A being most
useful, C the least useful or indicative.
can be effectively used to determine differ-
ences in susceptibility. On the other hand,
where such laboratory facilities exist, some
of these techniques can be used effectively
as surrogates to determine whether individ-
ual reproductive potential is compromised,
thereby affecting population levels, and by
extension, community structure. Table 3
also gives an indication of the difficulties of
each methodology, as well as its usefulness
for evaluation ofthe effects ofchemicals.
One of the most detailed studies at the
community structure level was made in
Canada to determine the effects caused by
acidification in an experimental lake situa-
tion (202). In this study the pH ofa poorly
buffered lake in northwestern Ontario was
reduced from pH 6.8 to pH 5.0 over 8
years. Fish populations started to collapse
due to lack of reproduction when the pH
reached 5.9, and there were marked changes
in the phytoplankton composition although
primary production was not decreased. At
pH 5.6 thick mats of filamentous algae
appeared, which persisted throughout the
study. When the stable value ofpH 5.0 was
reached the species composition of phyto-
plankton was completely different although
primary production remained high; no fish
reproduction was occurring; crayfish,
leeches, and mayflies were absent; but there
was a considerable increase in chlorophyll
and no changes in nutrient concentration
were observed.
Cas Studies
Lead. Lead is an example ofhow biomarkers
can be used at different levels of organiza-
tion. Concentrations oflead in tissues such
as blood, liver, and kidney are measures of
exposure. Analysis of levels of lead and
other heavy metals, however, is costly and
requires technical knowledge and sophisti-
cated equipment. However, 8-aminole-
vulinic acid dehydratase (6-ALAD) activity
can also be measured in blood as a bio-
marker ofexposure and effect (203). It is a
cheaper and easier method of analysis than
oflead itself.
Additionally, the effects of lead can be
measured with a number of neurobehav-
ioral assays, since one of the primary non-
lethal effects of lead is on cognitive,
psychomotor, and other neural processes in
both human (204) and nonhuman biota
(205,206). Lead can cause mortality
directly, or can cause lowered reproductive
success through depression of clutch and
egg size, mortality of embryos, depression
of growth, and disruption of reproductive
behavior in a variety of species, especially
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997720
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
on birds, the work on which has been key
(206). There are differences in susceptibil-
ity among birds: seabirds such as gulls and
terns are more susceptible than chickens,
ducks, and passerines (207-209).
Lead shows the classic trophic level
relationships with respect to vulnerability:
species that are higher on the food chain
have higher levels of exposure than those
that are lower on the food chain (206).
However, susceptibility will also vary with
such factors as developmental maturity at
hatching, at least in birds. That is, lead dis-
rupts parental recognition, making those
species dependent on recognition (i.e., pre-
cocial birds) more susceptible to the effects
of lead than species that do not depend on
this recognition (210). Humans are at a
relatively high trophic level and clearly
show effects of lead. These effects, espe-
cially the neurological and behavioral ones,
are particularly apparent during develop-
ment, and persist for many years in
humans (204).
Lead can also have disruptive effects at
the population and community levels. The
abnormalities caused by lead can reduce
survival and lower reproduction success,
resulting in lowered population levels for
impacted populations (206). The effects in
humans have the potential to severely alter
social structure and behavior of popula-
tions that are severely exposed (204). As
early as the 1950s, Bellrose demonstrated
that lead poisoning could depress popula-
tion levels by differentially affecting those
wounded by hunters, and the response was
dose related (211). Similarly, birds nesting
along roadways are heavily exposed to lead
from gasoline, while those in more remote
areas are not. Animals near smelters are
also heavily exposed through the aquatic
food chain. By differentially affecting dif-
ferent species, the species composition of
communities can be affected by lead, lead-
ing ultimately to changes in ecosystem
structure. Because organisms higher on the
food chain are more susceptible, this end of
the system would be more affected.
While the mechanisms whereby lead
affects hemoglobin formation (e.g., inhi-
bition of 8-ALAD) are well known, the
mechanisms disrupting neural systems,
development, and behavior are not well
established. These phenomena have been
quantified, without clarifying the mecha-
nisms. Phenomena include differences in
cell growth and neuronal projections.
PCBs andDioxins. The mechanism of
action of PCBs, polychlorinated dibenzo-
furans (PCDFs), and polychlorinated
dibenozo-p-dioxin (PCDDs) is considered
to proceed via initial binding to a high
affinity, low capacity cytosolic receptor
protein. The identification of the Ah recep-
tor (212) with stereospecific, high affinity
binding to 2,3,7,8-TCDD was a key find-
ing in bringing molecular biology into the
realm of toxicology. Examining the toxico-
logical and receptor binding data, Poland
and Knutson (213) concluded that it was
likely that these compounds exert their
toxicity through the cytosol receptor.
The ability of specific PCBs, PCDFs,
and PCDDs to induce the P4501 system is
greatly influenced by the degree of chlori-
nation and the chlorine substitution pat-
tern. The most toxic PCBs are those that
are unsubstituted in the ortho positions,
i.e., 3,3',4,4'- tetrachlorobiphenyl (TCB),
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl, and
3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl, which
allows the molecule to assume a co-planar
configuration. There is a close relationship
between aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase
(AHH) induction and body weight loss,
and AHH induction and thymic atrophy,
although the interactions ofenzyme induc-
tion, receptor binding, and toxicological
manifestations are very complex and our
knowledge is far from complete.
Problems that have to be faced before
one can use this approach for wildlife toxi-
cological investigations in the field are
extrapolations from species to species and
extrapolations from cell culture to the
intact animal. Brunstrom and co-workers
have carried out studies on avian embryos.
Marked differences were found in the sen-
sitivity of the chicken, pheasant, turkey,
duck, and gull (214-216). They found
that the pheasant was 50 times less sensi-
tive than the chicken, and other species
were even less sensitive. This emphasizes
the difficulties of interspecies comparison
since the chicken and pheasant both
belong to the order Phasianidae.
The application of this complex
biochemistry to field investigations has
been based on expressing the complex mix-
tures of PCBs, PCDFs, and PCDDs as
dioxin equivalents (TCDD-EQ). Based on
their affinity for the Ah receptor, the activ-
ity of the individual congeners are assigned
a value relative to the most active com-
pound (2,3,7,8-TCDD) which is given a
value of 1. These toxic equivalent factors
are multiplied by their concentration to
give TCDD-EQ for each compound.
Although even the co-planar PCBs are a
good deal less active than 2,3,7,8-TCDD,
their concentrations are much higher and
thus they contribute more than the dioxins
to the total TCDD-EQs. Now it is possi-
ble to do the process in reverse and use
the degree ofenzyme induction to estimate
the TCDD-EQs. This bioassay approach
is rapid and inexpensive compared to
the conventional chemical analysis by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Good correlations have been found
between TCDD- EQ of egg contents and
both the reproductive success and inci-
dence of deformities in fish-eating birds in
the Great Lakes of North America. In
terms of sensitivity, it is of note that the
cormorant is some 20 times more sensitive
than the Caspian tern (Hydroprogne caspia).
In the most contaminated areas of the
Great Lakes, the productivity success has
been linked to population declines.
Ethical Issues and Ecosystem
Susceptibiity
There are at least three areas where ethical
considerations impact methods evaluation
for ecological systems: scientist versus all
other stakeholder views, government
actions and ecosystem vulnerability, and,
the conflict between using biomarkers in
ecosystems for understanding the ecosys-
tem itself and using ecosystems as indica-
tors for human health [see section on ethics
below, and Soskolne (15)]. Increasingly,
the responsibilities of scientists toward
stakeholders (including scientists) are
obscure with respect to how well the
methodologies actually measure the phe-
nomena in question. It is unclear, there-
fore, how soon scientific "findings" should
be released or made available, how strin-
gent the criteria for acceptance of an effect
must be (given the accuracy of the meth-
ods), and how to resolve conflicts between
scientific viewpoints that develop as a result
ofmethodology differences.
Certain communities and ecosystems
are more susceptible to damage from expo-
sure to chemicals by virtue of their species
diversities, unique species assemblages, or
presence of endangered species. In these
cases, ecologists and ecotoxicologists have a
responsibility to make the susceptibility
known, and where possible, to affect deci-
sions to reduce the potential for exposure
to chemicals.
For example, the National Research
Council examined the susceptibilities of
offshore communities in the United States
to oil pollution. They determined that the
coast of Florida was very vulnerable
because ofthe presence ofsubtropical coral
reefs and manatees (both limited in the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 X June 1997 721
BARRETT ET AL.
continental United States). As a result,
the U.S. government decided not to allow
offshore oil exploration in Florida.
There is a conflict between the use of
biomarkers as indicators ofecosystem health
for itself, compared to using these biomark-
ers only as indicators of human exposure.
We would argue that both are important
uses of biomarkers, and biomarkers should
be developed that fit and evaluate the effects
of chemicals in both. We have an ethical
responsibility to preserve ecosystem integrity
on a worldwide basis.
Condusions and Recommendations
The following steps should be undertaken
to protect organisms, species, communities,
and ecosystems:
a) development of biomarkers at the
cellular and molecular level that cross-cut
taxonomic levels, including the vast diversity
ofinvertebrates
b) study of molecules and mechanisms
conserved across the animal kingdom;
these highly conserved mechanisms may
also have implications for higher animals
including humans
c) development ofbiomarkers that inte-
grate across all levels ofbiological organiza-
tion because some chemicals may have a
greater effect at lower trophic levels while
others will be more apparent at higher levels
d) development of biological indicators
that identify ecosystems susceptible to
chemicals
e) Development of biomarkers that are
rapid and inexpensive and thus capable of
being widely used.
Ethical, Social, and
Legal Issues Surrounding
Studies of Susceptibility
Intoducdon: Ethics as a Methodology
Growing Attention to Ethics. Since the
early 1980s, there has been a growing wave
of concern about the ethics of studies on
biomarkers of susceptibility (217-227).
Technological advances continue to chal-
lenge our sense of what may be deemed
"right" and "wrong" or "morally appropri-
ate." These concerns have escalated since
the beginning ofthe 1990s (228-248).
Education in the formal theories, princi-
ples, and rules of ethics generally has not
been an integral part of graduate training
among risk scientists. Even though scientists
have tended to focus on "the scientific
method" in their work, there are prominent
examples ofconcern with the ethical dimen-
sions of their speciality (249). Notions of
"peer review" are well developed and mech-
anisms for achieving "informed consent" are
firmly in place. However, the social conse-
quences, including both potential benefits
and harms, have been relatively neglected in
many areas ofscience (250,251).
Utility ofEthies. A brief overview of
ethical theories in relation to scientific
technologies is provided, with special
attention to their application in the field of
biomarkers of susceptibility. It will be
shown that the discipline of moral philoso-
phy, like the scientific specialty areas com-
prising the risk sciences, provides us with
methodologies for analyzing decisions (e.g.,
whether or not to implement a new tech-
nology) and a philosophical basis for our
actions. In practical terms, ethical analysis
provides us with the tools through which
decisions we make can be tested against
ethical theories (and their attendant princi-
ples and rules) as a basis for explaining or
justifying (moral) actions (252).
Ethical Theories and Principles.
Analogous to other disciplines, ethical
analysis has a theoretical basis. Stemming
from each theory are principles and associ-
ated rules, providing a framework for ethi-
cal analysis. Empirical data then are
testable against these theoretical frame-
works. Several theories from the discipline
of ethics warrant review in the context of
biomarkers ofsusceptibility.
Deontology, a duty-based theory that
specifies obligations to be upheld by mem-
bers of the profession, is perhaps the most
commonly evidenced ethical theory among
health professionals. The "scientific ethic,"
in fact, is deontological (duty based),
requiring of scientists, among other things,
to be objective, honest, and unbiased in the
use of appropriate methods related to their
subspecialty area of practice. Physicians,
too, are bound by duties that derive from
the principles ofautonomy (i.e., the right of
the individual to make independent
choices), beneficence (i.e., the obligation to
do good), nonmaleficence (i.e., the obliga-
tion to do no harm), and distributive justice
(i.e., social equity). The preeminent duty
among physicians is to not cause harm to
their patients. It is through this duty that
the physicians' role extends to that of
patient advocate. Autonomy, as more
recently interpreted, extends to include
involving the patient as a partner in deci-
sions about care. Distributive justice is
manifest in the principle of equal access to
care, regardless ofability to pay. These brief
glimpses of ethics relate to physician-
patient relationships (253).
Other relationships among health pro-
fessionals exist. For example, those engaged
in public health have the community's
interests to protect, and usually adhere
more to the utilitarian theory of ethics
requiring that the greatest good be done
for the greatest number of people. This
practice does not predude the indusion in
public health of other principles such as
autonomy, nonmaleficence, and equity.
However, the libertarian ethic has less
utility within public health because it
holds the individual more important than
the community.
The egalitarian ethic holds all commu-
nity members equally important and
upholds the principle of solidarity. It mea-
sures the well-being of the group by that of
the least well off. As an example of the use
ofegalitarianism, the U.S. Clean Air Act sets
regulatory standards to protect the most sus-
ceptible members of the population. The
principle ofjustice that flows from the egali-
tarian theory provides for equal access to the
process of susceptibility assessment; by the
same principle, the environmental risks
should be fairly distributed across social
classes, ethnic groups, and races. Equal out-
comes cannot be expected because of the
nonegalitarian characteristics of inherited
genetic traits. The egalitarian philosophy,
however, would strive to compensate for
those inequalities through biologically based
treatment or by social means.
It becomes evident that, depending on
the ethical theory that one draws upon, one
can rationalize apparently disparate conclu-
sions. This is where normative professional
practices need to be defined as an aid to
individual practitioners faced with dilem-
mas, ethical conflicts, or tensions among
various principles deriving from the respec-
tive theories. The recently formulated ethics
of postmodernism uphold the principle of
social specificity. This implies that local,
subjective, and sometimes fragmented nar-
ratives may be more appropriate in guiding
the actions of both scientists and the com-
munity than traditional overarching or
absolutist theories.
The relational ethic, for those more
familiar with moral philosophy, provides a
basis for making rational comparisons
among the various theories. While it is
often heard that "ethics are value neutral,"
in practice it is generally agreed that ethics
are, in fact, value laden. Hence, relational
ethics can be especially helpful for identify-
ing the theories and principles most appro-
priate to the issues in studies ofbiomarkers
ofsusceptibility.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997722
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
Distinguishing between "Research"
and "Practice. "A distinction needs to be
drawn between the professional engaged in
research and the professional engaged in
clinical or public health practice. The latter
is often governed by legal requirements
especially in the area of public health prac-
tice where, for example, tensions can arise
between the principle of autonomy (in
terms of the right to privacy) and the pub-
lic's right to know about, for example, a
potentially contagious condition that
requires isolation or quarantine.
Research is that area ofprofessional pur-
suit that develops new approaches to pre-
vention, treatment, and cure. Adequate
testing is required to assure that significantly
more good than harm will result before any
new product or technology is made available
for general practice or commercial applica-
tion. Where concern is focused on establish-
ing the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive
value ofa new test, this constitutes research.
Here, access by the individual to his/her
findings in the absence of any clear inter-
pretation would be inappropriate and vol-
unteers for such research ought to have
been so advised at the time that informed
consent was obtained. Any person, includ-
ing the one who participates in research,
who would wish to know the results of the
tests then would be required to await the
conclusion of the scientific investigation
and the availability of the test for general
use or practice.
Legal and Regulatory Perspectives.
While new technologies may have appeal as
"magic bullets" to people with concerns for
potential benefit, it is government's role to
protect the public from harmful effects.
Therefore, the involvement of government
in regulating the use of technologies is
appropriate in those instances where public
exploitation or harm could arise from access
to inadequately tested products, promoted
in the absence of adequate review. It is the
scientists' role to pronounce the time when
they deem products or technologies to have
been adequately tested and hence safe,
reliable, and accurate enough for public use.
There is, however, often a fine line that
separates "safe" from "unsafe." No product
or technology can be said to be absolutely
safe, so regardless ofwhere that cut point is
set, more or fewer untoward (and unin-
tended) effects will be seen. Society has to
be involved in the decisions that define
"acceptable levels ofunintended effects" as a
consequence ofany new technology. It then
becomes the burden of those in risk com-
munication to ensure public understanding
ofany risk associated with a new technology
used for identifying susceptibilities or for
building risk management policies around
susceptibility issues.
Ecosystem Perspective. Aside from the
ethical concerns of professionals engaged
directly in human-health-related disci-
plines, indirect concerns that are intricately
tied to the ecosystem also must be consid-
ered. Whether animal species are appropri-
ately used as sentinels (i.e., to serve as
indicator species) for exposure effects on
humans, the ecosphere should be seen as
life sustaining in itself. Hence, damage to
nonhuman species or the ecosphere should
be considered as potentially harmful to
human life. There is also the deontological
ethic that assigns to humans stewardship
responsibility for the natural world.
Therefore, broader concerns than anthro-
pocentric ethics need to be considered in
any ethical analysis.
Contwt ofMaco Nature:
Etbica, Soa, Lea
RelationaL The ethical, social, and legal
frameworks of biomarker research will dif-
fer depending on the professional and con-
tractual relationships of the participants.
Individual relationships, such as between
physician and patient, lawyer and client,
and researcher and participant, are gov-
erned predominantly by a deontological
ethic whereby the providing professional
has the primary obligation to look after
and protect the interest of the individual
over all other considerations, including
social benefits. This obligation is recog-
nized in law that protects the privacy and
confidentiality of the physician-patient
and lawyer-client (and, by implication, the
researcher-participant) relationship against
undue intrusion.
This protection may not be complete,
and will vary under different legal, social,
and cultural conditions. For example, the
patient-physician contract may be influ-
enced by the ethics ofthe payor ofservices.
This ethic places constraints on the pri-
macy of the deontologic relationship
because the utilitarian-based principles seek
the use offiscal resources for the maximum
good of the larger population. An addi-
tional threat to confidentiality rests in the
potential vulnerability of computer-based
records in which security may be breached
by technological intrusion potentially to the
detriment ofthe patient/client/participant.
The significance of these considerations
for studies on biomarkers of exposure,
effects, and susceptibility rests in the
inherent conflicts and tensions that occur
when the payor, courts, employer, or pub-
lic health laws impose requirements on
biomarker data that intrude on the princi-
ples of privacy and confidentiality in a way
that is beyond the power of the original
contractees to prevent, and with conse-
quences potentially detrimental to both
parties. In this way, data on genetic suscep-
tibility may be used to exclude workers
from certain job opportunities, or patients
may find themselves unsuspectedly con-
strained by public health laws. There is also
the consideration that the worker in pos-
session of information on genetic suscepti-
bility or biologic effect may be motivated,
in the absence ofa full understanding ofthe
limitations ofthe methods, to seek compen-
sation for injury; this could occur in the
absence of documented evidence of expo-
sure to a substance in the workplace because
of the lack of accompanying technology to
identify exposure.
The prevention and resolution of these
difficulties are complex and various
depending on the social, legal, and cultural
environment. The overriding ethical prin-
ciple is, however, that the participants in
these professional/contractual relationships
be made fully aware ofthese possibilities in
agreeing to participate in biomarker
studies, and that the legal frameworks
adjust to the potential negative outcomes if
they stand in the way of accomplishing a
desired social goal. The scientist, profes-
sional, ethicist, and lawyer should work in
concert to address these issues, recognizing
the adversarial nature of the process and
the desirability ofengaging the professional
organizations in identifying capable experts
to provide testimony.
Sodal Context. Another level of analy-
sis needed to broaden an understanding of
ethical concerns on a macro level is the
social context. The implication is that the
technologies used to identify susceptibility
are shaped by a variety of social processes.
On this level of analysis, questions sur-
rounding the intended and unintended
social consequences of dealing with suscep-
tible individuals and populations need to be
raised. For example, will the results ofiden-
tifying relevant biomarkers in an individual,
community, or population have a beneficial
or harmful effect upon current or future
employment; compensation status in terms
of both private insurance and public social
security systems; and, more generally, exist-
ing forms ofsocial inequality? In this sense,
ethical discussions must consider that these
consequences may be beneficial as well as
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 723
BARRETT ETAL.
harmful and this should be recognized
within the scientific community.
Another aspect within the social con-
text that needs consideration is the inter-
face between the public health needs of a
specific community and the duty ofprofes-
sionals to identify as well as to provide for
some of these needs. Simply, what ethical
demands emerge when professionals are
confronted with susceptibility in a particu-
lar community? This may expose a tension
between utilitarian and deontological theo-
ries. For example, on the one hand a public
health perspective, driven by utilitarian
ethics, upholds the principle of the greatest
good for the greatest number. On the other
hand, the deontological ethic, which gov-
erns health professionals, emphasizes their
duty to serve those susceptible in the com-
munity as well as to protect a community's
right to health.
An intervening ethical theory may be
the libertarian theory of rights, which
demands that any health decisions taken,
whether by professionals or the commu-
nity, will be absolutely respectful of indi-
vidual autonomy. Here the emphasis is
that to act ethically, decisionmakers need
to assume that their future actions enable
all persons to attain benefits (on their
own initiative).
It is worthwhile in an ethical context to
consider the impact of legislative and regu-
latory measures on communities. In light of
the issue of susceptibility, what biological
markers appear as important in determin-
ing whether a disease should be reportable
or notifiable or considered communicable?
How does susceptibility status affect regula-
tory measures or official disease classifica-
tions in the field of public health? Answers
to these questions should be informed by
clear ethical principles. But a tension
emerges if a community's rights for distrib-
utive justice (i.e., social justice or equity)
under the law overrides the social need for
trust in the public health professional.
Still another area of concern is the role
of the expert in the formation of public
health policy. Here, a key issue emerges: at
what stage in the production of knowledge
about susceptibility factors can experts
agree collectively that this knowledge will
contribute to more accurate methods ofpre-
vention? In this way, the ethical principle of
beneficence is upheld. Hence, meeting the
need for sensitivity, specificity, and predic-
tive value in this field has meant that an
effective contribution to prevention should
be able to be recognized. However, other
ethical principles besides beneficence need
to be considered for experts to be successful
in having an impact on the formulation of
appropriate prevention policies.
Most definitely, those involved in
studies on biomarkers of exposure, effect,
and susceptibility should be cognizant of
the fact that ethics guidelines may vary
across cultures. The sorts of ethical princi-
ples upheld by the scientific community of
a particular culture may differ significandy
from those upheld by their counterparts in
another culture. For example, the basic
tenets of both contemporary medical and
public health ethics are derived from major
conceptual developments in Western cul-
tures. Scientists and public health officials
from the "developed world" need to recog-
nize this fact when they attempt to compare
studies or assess the utility of biomarkers in
the "developing world."
Time-related Factors. A third factor in
the context of the application ofbiomarker
technology Ls the evolutionary nature of
social, ethical and legal concepts and
norms. The fairly recent institution of the
principles and practices of informed con-
sent is an example of evolution in the ethi-
cal conduct of science. What is considered
ethically acceptable or legally permissible at
the time an understanding is reached or a
contract negotiated may become ques-
tioned over the life of the outcome of that
contract, years or decades later, because of
the maturation of legal, social, or ethical
philosophy. Research studies on captive
populations or using potentially injurious
substances for worthy scientific goals are
no longer considered ethically justifiable or
legally permissible. Indeed, tort action is
proceeding retrospectively.
The status of legal protection of confi-
dentiality is in a state of flux, becoming
more secure in some societies and less
secure in others. Since it is not possible to
foretell at this time the full implications of
a biomarker ofexposure, effect, or suscepti-
bility, the potential for unforeseen out-
comes (detrimental or beneficial) is very
real. There is a need to provide legal pro-
tection to the participants in the future,
provided the contemporary criteria are ful-
filled. The alternative is to withhold or
delay the use ofbiomarker technology until
greater certainty is achieved.
Procss and Content
Self-Regulation. ACCOUNTABILITY.
Governments usually relegate control of
science to the subspecialty scientific profes-
sions. It therefore falls on the shoulders of
the scientific organizations to ensure that
guidelines exist against which members of
the subspeciality groups ofscientists can be
held accountable (250). Ethics guidelines,
standards of practice, and the development
ofgood laboratory practices are designed to
help maintain objectivity and scrupulous
honesty, so necessary for the advancement
of knowledge. Adherence to good practices
of record-keeping facilitates the auditing of
laboratories and thereby minimizes the
chances of misconduct in terms of data
handling (i.e., falsification, fabrication, and
plagiarism) (254).
CAPTIVE POPULATIONS. It is currently
recognized that captive populations should
not be included in research because the
prior voluntary consent needed for their
participation can have little meaning in
such circumstances. Furthermore, the sci-
entific validity of findings derived from
captive populations may be ofquestionable
generalizability in the context of the
imposed constraints under which such
participants may live (255,256).
PRIVACY. The privacy of findings from
research on biomarkers ofsusceptibility has
perhaps a higher level of personal concern
than other personal data. Because such
research can have profound ramifications,
not only for the research participant him/
herself, but also for his/her family (i.e., sib-
lings and offspring), special attention must
be given to respecting the participant's
right to privacy. In research settings gener-
ally, as well as in practice, some level of
uncertainty is associated with the findings
from susceptibility studies. The confidence
with which highly sensitive information
can be shared with the person to whom it
directly relates is not always optimal. The
question, therefore, of whether to share
this information (together with its uncer-
tain interpretation) must be raised.
Current deliberations around the principle
of autonomy suggest that the informed
consent process should include the option
of whether or not the research participant
would want to know his/her results in the
presence ofno clear interpretation.
Furthermore, whether results for which
no treatment can be offered should be pro-
vided to research participants is a topic that
extends to the underlying principles of
screening, where screening should not be
undertaken unless something can be offered
to remediate the condition. In genetic
marker susceptibility studies, genetic coun-
seling can be offered; inheritable conditions
are viewed as "treatable" through recom-
mendations of the option of abstention or,
more extremely, of sterilization, an option
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997724
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
that in the presence of uncertainty, could
result in substantial harm to the individual.
SECURITY. The degree to which informa-
tion is not only to be protected (secured) by
researchers, but also the degree to which it is
to be shared with research participants
should be effectively addressed in applica-
tions for ethics review to institutional review
boards, or human subjects/research ethics
committees. Studies of biomarkers of sus-
ceptibility require special attention to these
details because of the heightened sensitivity
associated with such findings. Indeed, owing
to the heightened sensitivity associated with
the information gleaned from studies into
biomarkers of susceptibility, special care by
scientific reviewers might include the ques-
tion of whether or not the hypothesis or
question being proposed by the study war-
rants being addressed. The latter point flows
from the social values that may or may not
permit such questions to be addressed from
the public purse. The question that then fol-
lows is how to handle the private funding
for research ofa highly sensitive nature.
When research is funded, researchers
need sufficient funds to ensure data secu-
rity and to conduct a study ofadequate sta-
tistical power. Pilot studies, while necessary
for the formulation of a major study pro-
posal, need to be undertaken with as much
attention to data security issues as if they
were full-scale studies.
Concern about the public demand for
tests that are not scientifically validated is
especially serious for biomarker studies.
Whereas syphilis testing remains a required
premarital test in many countries, in part
because a treatment is available, this is not
the situation for many markers ofsuscepti-
bility, especially genetic markers. Where
genetic markers are not clearly inter-
pretable, more harm than good could
result from access to such testing; certainly,
in the current state of development, few
cures or treatments are possible. Until such
time as society recognizes genetic aberra-
tions as a part of the normal range of bio-
logical diversity, the desire to eliminate
that which can be eliminated within the
constraints ofrespect for life will continue.
RIGHT TO KNOW AND NOT TO KNOW.
Do we have the right to know our personal
genetic characteristics? The peculiar and
highly sensitive nature of such knowledge
indicates that certain limits and precau-
tions may need to be considered in view of
the serious potential consequences of such
disclosures for the individual, for relatives,
and for children. Knowledge of an individ-
ual's genetic characteristics can, in some
cases and, with some limitations, provide
knowledge about the genetic characteristics
ofhis/her relatives.
We also can consider that we have the
right not to know our own genetic charac-
teristics, the right to a carefree life, and to
remain ignorant about our own lot.
Because genetic screening could lead to
fatalistic or pathological behavior, some
people might prefer to remain ignorant of
this information. Such an attitude would
deserve the same respect as the one that
demands the most exhaustive information
about one's state ofhealth. If, however, off-
spring are planned and, say, a 50% chance
of transmission of a serious genetic defect
exists, should the noncarrying spouse and,
for that matter, the carrier, be forced to
know or be provided with the information?
SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY. The importance
of ensuring absolute integrity in scientific
studies involving highly sensitive infor-
mation is apparent. Hence, methods of
laboratory procedures that minimize the
risk of data falsification and fabrication are
all the more important. Greater scrutiny
(oversight) ofthese studies is in order.
Conflicting interests must be protected
against. These could arise in biomarker
studies in which premature results are pub-
lished and the public demand for the
"new" test serves the interests ofthe manu-
facturers (and its shareholders or stock-
holders) at a time when the test results may
cause more concern through the inability
to interpret the results.
When population-based studies are
undertaken to determine the prevalence of
any susceptibility factor, unlinked studies
might be preferable by virtue of their total
anonymity. In drawing biological speci-
mens for these or other studies, however,
informed consent dictates adherence also
to the principle of veracity and fidelity in
honoring commitments to, for example,
privacy and to the withholding of, or the
communication of, results.
CONTINUING EDUCATION. Because pro-
fessions are expected to be self regulating,
the production of this document is one
mechanism by which the continuing educa-
tion of researchers engaged in studies of
biomarkers ofsusceptibility, as well as their
students, can be kept abreast ofadvances in
the field. Constructive criticism of any of
the ethics guides presented herein should be
encouraged, given that societal values and
technology differ and change over time.
The need to engage the public and stake-
holder interest groups in this discussion,
while difficult, cannot be overstressed.
Communication. Communicating and
campaigning with different categories of
scientific bodies, nonscientific bodies, and
other concerned organizations, are as
important as the discovery of genetic tests
themselves. Satisfying the concerns ofthose
bodies will facilitate the approval and
application of those methods, rendering
them more effective.
The current practice of genetic tech-
niques offered by researchers for protection,
selection, or surveillance ofsusceptible per-
sons to chemical environmental exposure
needs to be scientifically sound with honest
information and validated standards.
Then these techniques can be presented for
peer review.
Researchers also should inform and
explain such methods to important groups
such as health authorities, general or family
physicians, occupational health physicians,
trade unions, legislators, and administra-
tors. They should explain the benefits of
the work, as well as the risk assessment
findings and possible risk management
approaches to be considered. Other scien-
tific bodies and researchers can be informed
through scientific journals, periodicals, lec-
tures, conferences, and special symposia
and workshops.
Information to the general public using
mass media techniques can be handled
through the public press, radio, and tele-
vision applying simplified, understandable,
and uncomplicated language. Risk com-
munication with the general public should
be provided for in lay terms. People who
undergo such tests can be informed or not
informed depending on their wish to know
or not to know. Information to family mem-
bers, children, and siblings depends mainly
on local values and on legal requirements.
Stakeholder Involvement. As a key
stakeholder in the development of bio-
marker technology, the scientist is socially
accountable. The whole question of deter-
mining biomarkers of exposure, effects,
and susceptibility leads to assessments of
the health of individuals and populations
as well as considerations of the use of biol-
ogy in social relationships. For example,
ethics, as a guiding narrative for those
making scientific claims, is situated at the
interface between the scientific discourse
on susceptibility and the general, social
discourse on professional ethics. Within
ethics, ethical principles and basic human
rights become visible. While ethical princi-
ples include autonomy, beneficence, non-
maleficence and distributive justice, basic
human rights such as the right to health,
Environmental Health Perspectives m Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 725
BARRETT ETAL.
the right to work, and the right to privacy
emerge concurrently.
As these principles and rights become
established as collective values, it is the
duty of-all stakeholders involved to ensure
that they indeed are upheld. One way to
ensure this is to maintain open lines of
communication among the various groups
ofstakeholders. Here, the process ofimple-
menting the ethical principles of veracity
and fidelity become clear.
Science is not value neutral in that the
direction ofscientific pursuit is determined
by a synthesis ofthe value ofknowledge for
its own sake and the value of knowledge
for social benefit. All stakeholders should
be made aware of the nature and limita-
tions of the scientific method: that it func-
tions by observation, hypothesis, and
experiment and requires a tightly con-
trolled methodology for it to provide reli-
able results. By the same token, although
investigating a universe that is governed by
the absolute laws of nature, science can
never provide an absolute result but
phrases its conclusions on the best available
evidence at the time. These conclusions are
likely to change in the future as new
hypotheses and subsequent data about the
laws of nature are gathered. Science strives
to minimize-but can never eliminate-
uncertainty. For these reasons, the process
ofscience must be transparent to all partic-
ipants, including the research participants
themselves, witnesses, and communicators
of results. Furthermore, in the interests of
reliability, credibility, and durability, the
understandable demands for the premature
release of data, drugs, and technologies
must be resisted according to the ethical
principle ofnonmaleficence.
In advocating for a position favorable
to science, medicine, or public health, the
scientist should retain the identity and
adhere to the standards of science-objec-
tivity, impartiality, and stating limitations
and uncertainties-because the audience
always will lend the scientist the credibility
of science. To abandon these principles
may endanger the stature of science in
terms of the scientists' obligation to
improve the state ofhumankind. The need
for scientists to convey an attitude of
"healthy scepticism" should support the
role ofscience in the public interest.
Case Studies
The recognition of biomarkers in combina-
tion with the rapid development of new
methods in molecular genetics and analytical
biochemistry have facilitated the screening of
individuals for genetic variations of direct
relevance for susceptibility to environmen-
tal factors and diseases. These biomarkers
can be analyzed at different levels, indicat-
ing differences in metabolic conversion of
chemicals, differences in uptake and expo-
sure to DNA-binding chemicals, differ-
ences in genetic effects of chemicals, and
hereditary differences predisposing to dis-
eases. Several case studies are used to exem-
plify these applications. The concluding
section ofeach case study attempts to draw
out relevant ethical tensions or to highlight
particular ethical principles.
Metabolic Variation. Chemicals to
which people are exposed are primarily
detoxified in the liver by essentially two
systems-one that converts chemicals with
low water solubility to soluble metabolites
(cytochrome P450) and one that causes con-
jugation to glutathione (glutathione S-trans-
ferases) and to some other compounds.
Of relevance in the present context is
the fact that both enzyme systems embrace
genetic variants that affect the efficiency
with which potentially harmful chemicals
are metabolized or conjugated to innocent
or less toxic chemical components.
Individuals lacking or carrying variants of
some of the genes for metabolism and con-
jugation exhibit an increased susceptibility
to carcinogenic chemicals in the environ-
ment. This increased susceptibility has
been indicated by the observation of an
increase in the binding of the chemicals to
DNA, the increase of cytological effects
such as chromosome breakage, sister chro-
matid exchange, formation of micronudei,
and an increase ofpoint mutations (46).
The recognition of individuals who are
subjected to a potentially increased risk of
cancer from this exposure poses the ethical
dilemma common to much of the present
development of biomarker applications:
how to prevent susceptible individuals
(particularly those occupationally exposed)
from being exposed to these chemicals. In
this context, a tension appears between the
human right to work and the ethical prin-
ciple of nonmaleficence. To resolve this
tension, scientists should consider more
fully the principle of solidarity. In addi-
tion, scientists should work in conjunction
with public health officials who, at the
same time, tend to uphold the principle of
social justice.
Mutations Predisposing to Human
Diseases. In the last few years, the
characterization of genetic factors involved
in human disease has undergone a dramatic
development. A great number ofgenes now
have been localized and the DNA to a
great extent has been sequenced. The
human genome project, HUGO, which
implies the sequencing of the total human
genome can be expected to provide much
new material in this respect. A shortcut in
this procedure has been performed with
"expressed sequence tag" through which
mRNA is used instead of DNA to identify
human coding genes. DNA of the coding
genes is collected by enzymatic conversion
of mRNA to cDNA. With this technique,
the work can be focused on the 3 to 4% of
the human DNA giving rise to genes. To
date, about 50,000 of the 70,000 to
100,000 genes have been identified. This
material already has played a crucial role
for the characterization of the mismatched
repair genes particularly involved in human
colorectal cancer (below). This will put the
person concerned, the physician, and the
administrator into a dilemma on how to
handle such information and how to pro-
tect the person. If the ethical rules will be
applied and the test with its pros and cons
explained to the person beforehand, this
should provide reasonable resolution to
potential dilemmas.
Repeated DNA Sequences. Among
genetic variants in the human population
giving rise to diseases, repeated DNA
sequences have attracted a great deal of
attention in recent years. Repeated DNA
sequences of relevance in this context of
biomarkers concern amplification of cod-
ing genes as well as short repeated
sequences, minisatellite and microsatellite
DNA (134).
Amplification resulting in overexpres-
sion of coding genes is a regular phenome-
non under certain circumstances (257).
The gene for metallothionein protects
against heavy metals, and exposure to
heavy metals can cause an induction and
an amplification of this gene (258). The
subsequent increase of the protein there-
fore can be a biomarker for exposure to
heavy metals like cadmium and mercury.
Of pathological importance is the
occurrence of amplification particularly of
nuclear oncogenes such as c-myc. Such
amplification has been suggested as a bio-
marker of some prognosis value in breast
cancer patients (259).
An essential part of the noncoding
DNA is built up of short, repeated
sequences and some of that DNA exhibits
a pronounced instability, particularly
involving length alterations. The function
of this DNA has been and remains
obscure, but in recent years.several serious
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997726
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
human diseases have been associated with
short, repeated DNA sequences, minisatel-
lites (10-100 bp) and microsatellites
(2-4 bp).
One case of pathological connection
with minisatellites concerns a minisatellite
associated with the oncogene ras. Some
rare variants of this minisatellite are associ-
ated with multiple forms of human can-
cers. It is thus possible to identify carriers
of these rare minisatellite alleles that result
in a significandy increased risk for cancer.
Microsatellites are particularly impor-
tant as biomarkers and the cause of some
serious human neurological disorders. The
microsatellites are linked to the actual
genes involved in the disorders and an
extension of the repeated DNA sequences
above a certain number causes the disease.
An important aspect of this process is the
fact that the amplification tends to increase
from one generation to the next, making
the disease gradually more serious with
earlier onset-"genetic anticipation."
These microsatellite-linked diseases
involve, for instance, fragile X, which is
one of the most prevalent mental retarda-
tion conditions, and the well-known
Huntington's disease. Huntington's disease
causes a neurological disintegration with
onset usually in the age range of 40 to
60 years.
The genetic predisposition for these
diseases is passed on to 50% of the off-
spring and appropriate testing will predict
disease in the offspring. Only occasionally
has it happened that the number of
repeated DNA sequences has diminished
from one generation to the next. The fact
that Huntington's disease (as well as other
neurological diseases) is incurable poses
many ethical problems at the individual
and family level, such as testing the off-
spring and other family members; offering
prenatal diagnosis; or deciding whether or
not abortion should be performed.
Traditional debates in this area expose
major tensions between the ethical princi-
ples of autonomy, expressed by those
upholding the right to choose, and non-
maleficence, implicit in those opposing
abortion. While this tension has not yet
been adequately resolved, scientists as well
as public health professionals would benefit
from considering how developments in
biomarker technology may have the poten-
tial to modify this traditional tension. Ifall
stakeholders involved would agree collec-
tively about what is meant by "human life"
and when it starts, this awareness would
shift the traditional debate into a different
ethical arena. Here, deontology guides the
scientist to stimulate the public's awareness
ofautonomy.
Repair Mutations. It has been known
for over 25 years that a deficiency of DNA
repair can cause cancer. The classical case
is the recessive autosomal mutation
Xeroderma pigmentosum, which causes a
serious skin disease. Patients with the disease
lack the ability to repair the DNA lesions
caused by ultraviolet light irradiation and
they invariably develop skin cancer.
In recent years, several genes involved in
the repair of mispaired nucleotides, mis-
matched repair, have been characterized
and localized (260). Mutations in these
genes are particularly linked to an elevated
risk of colon cancer. The mutations occur
as heterozygotes and the tumors are
induced as the result ofthe loss ofthe wild-
type allele. It has been estimated that this
mutation is carried by 1 in 200 people, and
it thus constitutes one ofthe most prevalent
human disorder mutations. Screening for
this mutation is likely to be recommended,
at least in families that exhibit a high rate of
this specific colon cancer-type linked to
deficiency of mismatched repair. Such
screening will fulfill the purpose ofavoiding
malignant growth of tumors by regularly
checking the colon. In addition, it is evi-
dent that exposure to mutagenic and car-
cinogenic agents can be expected to increase
the risk of cancer to a greater extent in
mutant carriers, with possible implications
for occupational and lifestyle choices.
The fact that susceptibility studies of
colon cancer implicate family members
poses the tension already discussed in the
preceding section "Right to Know and Not
to Know." Nevertheless, varying attitudes
about genetic information-and the
genetic information itself-should be seen
as equally important by both the public
health professional and the scientist.
Reliability of Laboratories and
Methods. Many of the analyses of genetic
variants and genetic disorders at the molec-
ular level require sophisticated laboratory
techniques and professional knowledge to
properly interpret the data. It is of para-
mount importance that laboratories
involved in such analyses are subjected to
quality control to avoid mistakes. For
instance, it is critical that analyses of mini-
and microsatellite patterns in forensic med-
icine to identify criminals is performed
without any error-the consequences
could otherwise be disastrous. It also has
been pointed out that, although the chance
of two unrelated persons having a similar
genetic pattern is very remote, relationship
has to be excluded in the analysis (261).
On the other hand, correctly performed,
these techniques for characterizing individ-
uals genetically constitute invaluable tools
in forensic medicine, paternity determina-
tion, and epidemiological and population
analysis. The proliferation of these tech-
niques and tools, and their use with indi-
viduals and populations, demand that the
collective scientific value of quality assur-
ance be maintained. In ethical terms,
the principle of scientific honesty is most
relevant in laboratory settings.
Impact of Genetic Monitoring or
Screening on Society. We are doubtless
only in the beginning stages of the evolu-
tion of the genetic characterization of indi-
viduals, but already we can foresee many
practical and ethical problems for society.
Solutions must be developed with the ethi-
cal and moral implications defined explic-
itly. When social costs are involved, the
right ofautonomy over such personally sig-
nificant data should be balanced against
the interests of society according to, for
example, principles derived from utilitar-
ian, libertarian, or egalitarian theories
ofethics.
Among the pressing problems is the
question of who will have access to the
genetic information of individuals. The
initial governing principle here would seem
to be autonomy. The principle of auton-
omy requires respect for the individual's
right to privacy. However, a tension
emerges when the individual's own actions
can have a negative impact on the group.
The tension is between the individual's
right to privacy and the group's (or the
community's) right to know.
For example, the fact that people can
obtain information about mutations that
are likely to shorten their life expectancy
may become important in securing life
insurance. Attempts to prevent genetic
data from reaching insurance companies
are not likely to be successful in that insur-
ance companies can require the right of
access to medical records as a condition to
considering insurability.
If egalitarian theories are to be fol-
lowed, the cost ofthis insurance risk would
be shared without penalty across the pool
of insured people. If either utilitarian or
libertarian theories are adopted, susceptible
persons might be excluded from the pool
ofinsured, or they might be charged higher
premiums. It could be foreseen that persons
who know that they carry a life-shortening
genetic condition might purchase large
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 727
BARRETT ET AL.
amounts oflife insurance and that, in turn,
could cause an economic deterioration of
the insurance system. Prior consideration
of these possibilities might help society to
focus on the risks associated with the
adoption oftechnological advances.
Genetic Screening of Workers. The
recognition that certain genetic polymor-
phisms could be identified in humans (e.g.,
hemoglobin S, G-6-PD deficiency, xl-
antitrypsin deficiency) and could be related
to differential susceptibility, led Stokinger
(262) to advocate their application in
screening for so-called "hypersusceptible
workers." Omenn (223) cautioned against
the blanket application of such techniques
as inadequately predictive of risk, and sev-
eral critics have noted the importance of
controlling workplace exposures instead of
removing susceptible workers from the
workplace (263). Although unusually sus-
ceptible individuals would benefit from not
being exposed to the agents that are likely
to make them sick, this intent should not
be used as an excuse to avoid reducing
exposures in the workplace; nor can it be
invoked to avoid taking differential suscep-
tibility into account in risk assessment
(264). Moreover, none of the genetic
screening programs thus far proposed are
sufficiently predictive of risk. Hence, any
exclusion by virtue of membership in a
genotypic class would be discriminatory, at
least under United States law.
The elimination of women of child-
bearing age from certain occupations is
now deemed illegal in the United States
and represents an example of what is
essentially genetic screening; namely, the
elimination of persons with a particular
genotype (XX) without regard to their
actual susceptibility status.
Ecological Ethics. The emission of
harmful chemicals into the environment
also should be considered from an ecotoxi-
cological point of view. Particularly, the
contamination of the environment with
persistent chemicals like some chlorinated
hydrocarbons and heavy metals can have
serious effects on the ecosystem through
bioaccumulation along the food chain.
Organisms at the top of the food chain run
the risk of acute intoxication, reproductive
inability, and behavioral disturbances.
These effects on the ecosystem are relevant
for the preservation of biological diversity
in accordance with the convention of bio-
diversity accepted by the United Nations
conference on environment and develop-
ment in Rio de Janeiro, 1992. But besides
our moral obligation to take into account
effects on the ecosystem and biodiversity,
the monitoring of ecotoxicological effects
often can have relevance to human health.
The human species is also at the top of
the food chain and is often exposed in the
same way as other species at this trophic
level. The recent focus on chlorinated com-
pounds like PCBs, DDT, and tetrachloro-
dioxin, because of hormonal effects, may
serve as a further warning signal for human
beings. The deontologic duty of humans to
serve as stewards of the environment for
their own self interest and that of future
generations is highlighted in this context.
This duty enhances the right to life of
other species.
Ethical Components ofBiomarker
Project Proposals
Parties responsible for biomarker studies
need to ensure that the broad range of per-
sons involved in the planning, implemen-
tation, and outcome of projects (the
stakeholders) are provided the protection
of explicit ethical principles under which a
project will be conducted. Persons involved
include the study participants, the benefi-
ciaries (including both participants and
nonparticipants), the community (special
and general), those gathering the data
(researchers and surveyors), employers,
trade unions, regulators, sponsors, and
other potential recipients ofthe results.
The ethical issues to be addressed
include the following:
* autonomy of the participant in partici-
pating, including fully informed consent
* beneficence of the project for the
persons and institutions affected
* absence of maleficence toward the
participants and institutions affected
* assurance of justice (equity among
participants and nonparticipants)
* test validity as a function of the target
population, including consideration of
the degree of risk, exposure, and other
factors
* explicit provisions to ensure equal
access to participation across race, social
class, and gender as appropriate to the
attribute under study
* nonabridgement of deontologic (duty-
based) obligations ofthe participants
* scientific integrity and soundness
* confidentiality and security of data,
including anonymity and nonlinkage to
the individual
* referral for treatment and counseling for
a significant incidental medical finding
hassurance that a recognized public
health or legal risk will be reported
* formulated response to anticipated
questions about biomarker findings
* identification and allocation of legal
liability
* formats and pathways for communicat-
ing study results, including publication,
media and employer
* sponsorship, conflict of interest; clear
understanding ofdeliverables warranted
for funding received
* action to be taken in the event of an
untoward finding, including employ-
ment status
* future mutual obligations of partici-
pants in the event ofnew developments.
Condusions
A number of conclusions can be drawn,
particularly the following:
a) Because the issues contained herein
are from the scientist's perspective, the
attention ofother stakeholders is called for.
b) The positive aspects of biomarker
technologies must be emphasized without
failing to recognize the potential for their
misuse.
c) There is a need to continue research
to produce better evidence concerning sus-
ceptibility markers while simultaneously
protecting against any misuse of premature
or tentative evidence.
d) The active participation of the pub-
lic is to be sought in a partnership capacity
to ensure the advancement of knowledge
concerning biomarkers for identifying
susceptible people and populations.
e) It must be recognized that science is
imperfect. Uncertainty is inherent to the
scientific method and varies as a function
ofthe evolution ofscientific knowledge.
f) The imperfections of science require
humility on the part ofscientists. Science is
but one part of a number of inputs for
decision making.
g) For every decision that is made, the
tension between risk and benefit should be
considered.
h) Good science should be tied to good
ethics and vice versa.
i) An unintended consequence of
biomarker technology is that individuals
and populations could be discriminated
against.
j) Until the scientists involved with
developing a new susceptibility biomarker
technology have declared it adequately
reliable and accurate and after full peer
review, the public should be protected
from commercial interests that wish to pre-
maturely release the technology into the
market place.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997728
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
Recommendations
Participants in preparing this report make
the following recommendations:
a) Because a multidisciplinary group
assessed the ethical dimensions of each
respective subspecialty discipline, this
report ought to carry some authoritative
weight in the context ofprofessional ethics.
b) Professionals and their students need
to engage in an ongoing dialogue concern-
ing applied ethics.
c) Legislation needs to be developed to
protect all interests against liability that
could be judged in hindsight arising from
changes in ethical standards and scientific
knowledge over time (i.e., against retro-
spective tort action in soundly conducted
studies because of intervening changes in
social and ethical standards or advances in
scientific knowledge).
d) There is a need for guidelines
concerning biomarker susceptibility studies
for use by researchers and practitioners alike,
which also would be ofuse in the training of
students. Other agencies that have engaged
in related deliberations (such as those con-
cerning the Human Genome Project and
the U.S. Office ofTechnology Assessment),
should be sought out for collaboration since
they have developed guidelines in the area
and related areas.
e) Every research proposal in the
area of biomarker susceptibility should
address the ethical dimensions of the pro-
posed study. In addition, strategies for
communication, from peer review through
individuals and the public, should be doc-
umented. Studies in biomarker susceptibil-
ity should be audited for adherence to
proposed intentions.
f) Scientists must be vigilant in
developing ethics guidelines in that they
should ensure equity across all segments of
society. All guidelines should be sensitive
to cultural differences.
g) Because of the extremely sensitive
(i.e., intimately personal) nature of the
information gleaned from biomarker
susceptibility studies, extraordinary pre-
cautions relating to the privacy of the
information are to be exercised.
h) Specific guidelines on how industry
and insurance companies might deal with
individuals discovered to have a suscepti-
bility are beyond the scope of this text.
However, attention is drawn to this since
guidelines in these specific areas may be
aided by the discussion contained in
this section.
Appendix
Analysis and Quality
Assurance
Laboratory results are only useful if they are
accurate and precise, and are reported in a
responsible manner. Accuracy refers to the
ability of the analyst to determine the exact
quantity present in a sample. Precision refers
to the ability to provide a consistent result
(which may not necessarily be accurate, if
for example, there is a failure in calibration).
QA represents the sum total ofactivities that
are required to produce reliable results (good
precision and accuracy). In terms of labora-
tory analysis it includes setting data quality
objectives on the one hand and evaluating
quality control measures on the other.
Stating a data quality objective consistent
with the goals of the screening program or
study is a necessary first step. Lack of
resources or power sufficient to meet these
objectives is grounds for not doing the
study. Excessive power increases the cost.
Standard QC procedures have been
well documented. Most published method-
ologies include QC procedures which must
be individualized for each laboratory and
each analytic instrument and procedure.
Each laboratory must have a written
QA/QC statement and protocol. These
should be very detailed, including, for
example, assurance that the deionized
water is free ofanalytes in question, at least
within the limits of detection required.
Similarly, the purity of the solvents and
reagents and the source of all standards
should be specified.
Calibration procedures should use
blanks and fresh standards within the range
of anticipated concentrations. (One can
only assume that a method yields linear
results within the range of the calibration
curve). The method detection limit should
be specified for each analyte in each matrix
(blood, urine, hair, etc). Field and method
blanks should assure that there is no conta-
mination at any point in the collection and
analysis of samples. Spiked samples should
assure that the technique can recover the
analyte from the matrix. This allows one to
document the percent recovery ofthe spike
from the sample. Unless otherwise speci-
fied, it is customary to require that each
analytic run produce a recovery between 85
and 115% of the actual spike. For some
analytes it is difficult to achieve this level of
accuracy on certain instruments, while for
others tighter limits are routine. Ifrecovery
lies outside a certain range of values, then
the entire run is rejected, and the stored
samples are redigested and reanalyzed.
Alternatively, some procedures allow the
correction of the analytic results by the
recovery percent. Thus if the recovery is
only 80% of the spike, the results can be
multiplied by 1.25 to correct for the defi-
ciency. This approach is much less desir-
able and should be avoided, unless there is
no further material available for analysis or
unless the method repeatedly results in a
similar recovery.
Each laboratory should participate
regularly in a proficiency testing program
involving the blind analysis of unknown
samples provided by a reference laboratory.
The results ofsuch testing should be main-
tained with the QA/QC documents and
should be available for inspection.
Challenges for
Susceptibility Monitoring
in Developing Nations
In many cases through international coop-
eration, developing nations are able to
mount sophisticated screening programs
for environmental as well as infectious
agents. For example, the Mexican govern-
ment, with the support of several interna-
tional agencies such as United Nations
Environmental Program, has been able to
evaluate the exposure and possible effects
of chemicals on human health for both
acute and long-term exposures (Table Al).
However, such programs can only touch
the surface of the environmental pollution
problems present throughout the world.
Moreover, at the same time that indus-
trialization is increasing in areas with
minimal environmental regulation and
enforcement, the developed nations are
cutting back on funding for international
cooperative programs.
Guidelines for the
Implementation
of Biomarker Studies
In any program the number of guidelines
should be considered in implementing any
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 729
BARRETT ETAL.
Table Al. Assessment of exposure using various approaches: examples from Mexico.
Exposures Monitoring level Test
Acute
Chlorine gas tank leak, Mexico City Clinical Spirometry
Smelter emissions, El Paso, Texas Blood level Lead, cadmium, zinc
Metal exposure (10-year followup) conduction Neurological Peroneal nerve
Blood level Lead, cadmium, zinc
Cows raised on farmland with high natural Food chain As in milk
arsenic content exposure
Chronic
Studies of air pollution prevalence,a Mexico City Questionnaire symptom
Studies of air pollution, Mexico City Clinical Vital capacity in children
International 1 0-city study of lead exposure Blood lead level
in schoolteachers
Study of schoolteacher exposure, Mexico City Environmental media Air, food, water, soil,
cooking pottery
Organochlorine pesticide exposures in Breast milk DDT and other
representative sample of women, Mexico City organochlorines
Carbon monoxide levels in workers exposed Blood Carboxyhemoglobin
on streets, Mexico City
"Daily frequency of respiratory symptoms in elderly or chronically ill people.
screening program for biomarkers. These
guidelines should include the following:
Overali Quality Planning
a) The economic resources available for
the program must be identified.
b) The benefits of the program must be
justified to assure adequate funding.
c) The intervention must be specified and
funds identified in advance, ifpossible.
d) Where resources are not available for
the "best" methodology, the use of
alternative tests must be evaluated.
Quality Assurance
a) The screening protocol should include
a statement of the data objectives and
the required detection limits, the antici-
pated range of values, and the accept-
able limits for precision and accuracy.
b) High quality laboratories should be
identified.
c) All participating laboratories should
have a written QA/QC document
which should include documentation
of participation in some Laboratory
Proficiency program.
d) The protocol should allow for an inter-
nal QC program including blind repli-
cates and confirmation of some
percentage of the samples by an exter-
nal reference laboratory.
e) Data quality evaluation should be com-
pleted prior to data analysis.
Standards for Collection ofSamples
a) The population to be studied should be
clearly identified and the people to be
screened should be representative ofthe
population of interest (minimize con-
founders).
b) All personnel should be selected care-
fully and should be conscientious and
responsible.
c) All personnel (registrars, interviewers,
phlebotomists, etc.) should be carefully
trained and periodically evaluated.
d) Field sampling conditions should be
made as ideal as possible. Use extreme
precautions to avoid contaminating
samples ofblood, urine, etc. at the time
ofcollection.
e) Care must be taken in the transporta-
tion of samples from the field to the
central laboratory, particularly if sam-
ples require freezing or refrigeration.
f) All samples must be carefully and accu-
rately labeled and a chain-of-custody
form may be desirable for certain study
situations.
Laboratory Standards and Practices
a) High-quality laboratory facilities are
essential.
b) Where possible, a laboratory that is
already functioning and ofproven qual-
ity should be used.
c) Whether old or new, laboratories
should be designed to eliminate both
external and internal sources of conta-
mination. This requires high standards
ofdesign and maintenance.
d) Laboratory equipment should be appro-
priate for the analyses being performed.
e) The appropriate preservation of sam-
ples is important, so facilities should
have reliable refrigeration, preferably
with a backup source of emergency
electricity (gasoline generator).
f) All laboratory personnel should be
trained; usually this will require train-
ing at an analytic center in a major city
or outside the country. Training should
embody the general principles of labo-
ratory QA/QC and should also be rele-
vant to the equipment available for use
in the laboratory.
g) All results should be carefully checked
for internal consistency. Deviant results
should be repeated.
h) Laboratory supervision should be strict
and consistent to assure high quality data.
Results
a) There should be adequate computing
facilities and trained personnel for
analysis ofdata.
b) All individual results should be treated
as confidential and individuals should
be informed of their own results with
adequate information as medically
appropriate.
c) The suppression ofresults for economic or
political reasons is strongly discouraged.
REFERENCES
1. International Programme on Chemical Safety. Biomarkers and
Risk Assessment: Concepts and Principles. In: Environmental
Health Criteria 155. Geneva:World Health Organization,
1993.
2. NAS. Biological Markers in Reproductive Toxicology. Report of
the Oversight Committee. Washington:National Academy
Press, 1989;15-35.
3. Nebert DW, Nelson DR. P450 gene nomenclature based on
evolution. In: Cytochrome P450, Methods in Enzymology. Vol
206 (Waterman MR, Johnson EF, eds). Orlando, FL:Academic
Press, 1991;3-11.
4. WHO. IPCS Environmental Health Criteria 155. Biomarkers
and Risk Assessment: Concepts and Principles. Geneva:World
Health Organization, 1993.
730 Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
5. Jeyaratnam J. Occupational Health in Developing Countries.
Oxford:Oxford University Press, 1982.
6. Mendelsohn ML, Peeters JP, Normandy MJ. Biomarkers and
Occupational Health: Progress and Perspectives. Washington:
Joseph Henry Press, 1995.
7. Lauwerys R, Buchet JP, Roels H. The relationship between cad-
mium exposure or body burden and the concentration of cad-
mium in blood and urine in man. Inter Arch Occup Environ
Health 36:275-285 (1976).
8. Lauwerys RR. Objectives of biological monitoring in occupa-
tional health practice. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance
ofWorkers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vanio
H, eds). New York.Hemisphere Publishing Company, 1984;3-6.
9. van Schooten FJ, Hillebrand MJX, van Leewen FE, van
Zandwij N, Jansen HM, den Engelse L, Kriek E. Polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in white blood cells from
lung cancer patients: no correlation with adduct levels in lung.
Carcinogenesis 13:987-993 (1992).
10. Zielhuis RL. Theoretical and practical consideration in biologi-
cal monitoring. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance of
Workers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vanio
H, eds). New York:Hemisphere Publishing, 1984;7-18.
11. Hemminki K. DNA adducts and mutations in occupational and
environmental biomonitoring. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 4):823-827 (1997).
12. Costa M, Zhitkovich A, Toniele P. DNA-protein cross-links in
welders: molecular implications. Cancer Res 53:460-465
(1991).
13. Annest JL, Mahaffey KR. Blood lead levels for persons ages 6
months-74 years, in the United States, 1976-1980. DHHS
84-1683. Washington:U.S. Department ofHealth and Human
Services.
14. Noren K. Studies of organochlorine contaminants in human
milk. PhD Dissertation. Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 1987.
15. Soskolne CL. Ethical, social, and legal issues surrounding
studies of susceptible populations and individuals. Environ
Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):837-841 (1997).
16. Baselt R. Biological Monitoring Methods for Industrial
Chemicals. Davis,CA.Biomedical Publications, 1988.
17. Hernberg. Lead. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance of
Workers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vainio
H, eds). New York:Hemisphere Publishing, 1984.
18. Kosnett MJ. Factors influencing bone-lead concentration in a
suburban community assessed by non-invasive K X-ray fluores-
cence. JAMA 271:197-203 (1994).
19. Romieu I, Carreon T, Lopez L, Palazuelos E, Rios C, Manuel Y,
Hernandez-Avila M. Environmental urban lead exposure and
blood lead levels in children of Mexico City. Environ Health
Perspect 103(11):1036-1040 (1995).
20. Lindstedt G, Gottberg I, Holmgren B, Jonsson T, Karlsson G.
Individual mercury exposure ofchloralkalai workers and its rela-
tion to blood and urine mercury levels. Scand J Work Environ
Health 5:59-69 (1979).
21. Giovanoli-Jakubczak T, Greenwood MR, Smith JC, Clarkson
TW. Determination of total and inorganic mercury in hair by
flameless atomic absorption, and ofmethylmercury by gas chro-
matography. Clin Chem 20:222-229 (1974).
22. Bernard A, Lauwerys R. Cadmium, NAG activity, and 2-
microglobulin in the urine of cadmium pigment workers. Br J
Ind Med 46:679-680 (1989).
23. Vartsky D, Ellis KJ, Chen NS, Cohn SH. A facility for in vivo
measurement of kidney and liver cadmium by neutron capture
prompt y-ray analysis. Phys Med Biol 20:88-95 (1975).
24. Jeyaratnam J. Acute pesticide poisoning: a major global health
problem. World Health Stat Q43:139-144 (1990).
25. WHO. Safe Use of Pesticides. 20th Report of the Expert
Committee. WHO Technical Report Ser 513. Geneva:World
Health Organization, 1973.
26. Anwar WA. Biomarkers of human exposure to pesticides.
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):801-806 (1997).
27. Coye MJ, Lowe JA, Maddy KJ. Biological monitoring of agri-
cultural workers exposed to pesticides. II: Monitoring of intact
pesticides and their metabolites. J Occup Med 28:628-636
(1986).
28. Wolfe HR, Durham WF, Armstrong JF. Urinary excretion of
insecticide metabolites. Excretion ofpara-nitrophenol and DDA
as indicators of exposure to parathion. Arch Environ Health
27:711-716 (1970).
29. Comer SW, Staiff DC, Armstrong JF, Wolfe HR. Exposure of
workers to carbaryl. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 13:385-391
(1975).
30. IARC. Occupational Exposures in Insecticide Application, and
Some Pesticides In: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofthe
Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans. Vol 53.
Lyon:International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1991.
31. Walker CH. Biochemical responses as indicators oftoxic effects of
chemicals in ecosystems. Toxicol Lett 64-65:P527-533 (1992).
32. Shugart LR, Adams SM, Jiminez BD, Talmage SS, McCarthy
JF. Biological markers to study exposure in animals and
bioavailability of environmental contaminants. In: Biological
Monitoring or Pesticide Exposure. Measurement, Estimation
and Risk Reduction. ACS Symposium Ser 382 (Wang RGM,
ed). Washington:American Chemical Society, 1989;85-97.
33. WHO/UNEP. Public Health Impact of Pesticides Used in
Agriculture. Geneva:World Health Organization, 1990.
34. Ciesielski S, Loomis DP, Mims SR, Auer A. Pesticide exposures,
cholinesterase depression, and symptoms among North
Carolina migrant farmworkers. Am J Public Health
84(3):446-51 (1994).
35. Elovaara E, Heikkila P, Pyy L, Mutanen P, Riihiamki V.
Significance of dermal and respiratory uptake in creosote work-
ers: exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and urinary
excretion of 1-hydroxypyrene. Occup Environ Med
52:192-203 (1995).
36. 0vreb0 S, Fjeldstad PE, Grzybowska E, Kure EH, Chorazy M,
Haugen A. Biological monitoring ofpolycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbon exposure in a highly polluted area of Poland. Environ
Health Perspect 103:838-843 (1995).
37. Jongeneelen F. Biological monitoring of occupational exposure
to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Nijmegen, Netherlands:
Scientific Publishers, 1987.
38. Lucas J, Tenjun T, Straume T, Pinkel D, Moore D, Litt M,
Gray J. Rapid determination of human chromosome transloca-
tion frequency using a pair ofchromosome-specific DNA prob-
lems. IntJ Radiat Biol 56:35-44 (1989).
39. Kelsey KT, Wiencke JK, Liber HL. Biomarkers to detect radia-
tion exposures. In: Biomarkers and Occupational Health:
Progress and Perspectives (Mendelsohn ML, Peeters JP,
Normandy M, eds). Washington:Joseph Henry Press,
1995;215-225.
40. Evans HJ Human peripheral blood lymphocytes for the analysis
of chromosome aberrations in mutagen tests. In: Handbook of
Mutagenicity Test Procedures, 2nd ed (Kilbey BJ, Legator M,
Nichols W, Ramel C, eds). Amsterdam:Elsevier, 1984;405-427.
41. Rosin MP. The use of the micronucleus test on exfoliated cells
to identify anti-clastogenic action in humans: a biological
marker for the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents. Mutat Res
267:265-276 (1992).
42. Anwar WA, Rosin MP. Reduction in chromosomal damage in
schistosomiasis patients after treatment with praziquantel.
Mutat Res 298:179-185 (1993).
43. Lahdetie J. Occupation- and exposure-related studies on human
sperm. J Occup Med 37:922-930 (1995).
44. Hagmar L, Br0gger A, Hansteen I-L, Heim S, Hogstedt B,
Knudsen L, Lambert B, Linnainmaa K, Nordenson I,
Reuterwall C et al. Cancer risk in humans predicted by
increased levels of chromosomal aberrations in lymphocytes:
Nordic Study Group on the Health Risks of Chromosome
Damage. Cancer Res 54:2919-2922 (1994).
45. Bonassi S, Abbondandolo A, Camurri L, Dal Pri L, De Ferrari M,
Degrassi F, Forni A, Lamberti L, Lando C, Padovani P et al. Are
chromosome aberrations in circulating lymphocytes predictive of
future cancer onset in humans? Preliminary results of an Italian
Cohort Study. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 79:133-135 (1995).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 731
BARRETT ET AL.
46. Norppa H. Cytogenetic markers of susceptibility: influence of
genetic polymorphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes.
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):829-835 (1997).
47. Wiencke JK, Pemble S, Ketterer B, Kelsey KT. Gene deletion of
glutathione S-transferase: correlation with induced genetic dam-
age and potential role in endogenous mutagenesis. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:253-259 (1995).
48. Lucas JN, Tenjin T, Straume T, Pinkel D, Moore D, Litt M,
Gray, JW. Rapid human chromosome aberration analysis using
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Int J Radiat Biol 56:35-44
(1989).
49. Rupa DS, Hasegawa L, Eastmond DA. Detection ofchromoso-
ma1 breakage in the 1cen-1qi2 region of interphase human lym-
phocytes using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization with
tandem DNA probes. Cancer Res 55:640-645 (1995).
50. Smith MT, Rothman N, Zhang L, Wang Y, Hayes RB, Yin SN.
Molecular cytogenetics ofhumans exposed to benzene. Fundam
Appl Toxicol 30 (No 1, part 1; Su 1:178 (1996).
51. Lipkowitz S, Garry VF, Kirsch IR. Interlocus V-J recombina-
tion measures genomic instability in agriculture workers at risk
for lymphoid malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
89:5301-5305 (1992).
52. Bell DA, Liu Y, Cortopassi GA. Occurrence of bcl-2 oncogene
translocation with increased frequency in the peripheral b ood
ofheavy smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 87:223-224 (1995).
53. Wiencke JK, Wrensch MR, Miike R, Petrakis NL. Individual
susceptibility to induced chromosome damage and its implica-
tions for detecting genotoxic exposures in human populations.
Cancer Res 51:5266-5269 (1991b).
54. Cervenka J, Hirsch BA. Cytogenetic differentiation of Fanconi
anemia, "idiopathic" aplastic anemia, and Fanconi anemia het-
erozygotes. Am J Med Genet 15:211-223 (1983).
55. Wiencke JK, Christiani DC, Kelsey KT. Bimodal distribution
of sensitivity to SCE induction by diepoxybutane in human
lymphocytes. I: Correlation with chromosomal aberrations.
Mutat Res 248:17-26 (1991a).
56. Sorsa M, Osterman-Golkar S, Peltonen K, Saarikoski S, Sram
R. Assessment of exposure to butadiene in the process industry.
Toxicology 113:77-83 (1996).
57. Norppa H, Hirvonen A, Jarventaus H, Uuskula M, Tasa G,
Ojajarvi A, Sorsa M. Role of GSTTJ and GSTMI genotypes in
determining individual sensitivity to sister chromatid exchange
induction by diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes.
Carcinogenesis 16:1261-1264 (1995).
58. Tucker JD, Auletta A., Cimino MC, Dearfield KL, Jacobson-
Kram D, Tice RT, Carrano AV. Sister-chromatid exchange: sec-
ond report of the Gene-Tox program. Mutat Res 297:101-180
(1993).
59. Oikawa A, Sakai S, Horaguchi K, Tohda H. Sensitivities of
peripheral lymphocytes from healthy humans to induction of
sister chromatid exchanges by chemicals. Cancer Res
43:439-442 (1983).
60. Kelsey KT, Christiani DC, Wiencke JK. Bimodal distribution
of sensitivity to SCE induction by diepoxybutane in human
lymphocytes. II. Relationship to baseline SCE frequency. Mutat
Res 248:27-33 (1991).
61. Hallier E, Langhof T, Dannappel D, Leutbecher M, Schroder
K, Goergens HW, Muller A, Bolt HM. Polymorphism of glu-
tathione conjugation of methyl bromide, ethylene oxide and
dichloromethane in human blood: influence on the induction of
sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) in lymphocytes. Arch Toxicol
67:173-178 (1993).
62. Kelsey KT, Wiencke JK, Ward J, Bechtold W, Fajen J. Sister
chromatid exchanges, glutathione S-transferase deletion and
cytogenetic sensitivity to diepoxybutane in lymphocytes from
butadiene monomer production workers. Mutat Res
335:267-273 (1995).
63. Uuskiila M, Jarventaus H, Hirvonen A, Sorsa M, Norppa H.
Influence of GSTM1 genotype on sister chromatid exchange
induction by styrene-7,8-oxide and 1,2-epoxy-3-butene in cul-
tured human lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 16:947-950
(1995).
64. Landi S, Ponzanelli I, Hirvonen A, Norppa H, Barale R.
Repeated analysis of sister chromatid exchange induction by
diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes: effect of glu-
tathione S-transferase TI and MI genotype. Mutat Res
351:79-85 (1996).
65. Norppa H, Pelin K, Jarventaus H, Ollikainen T, Knudsen L,
OkkeIs H, Scarpato R, Migliore L, Hirvonen A. Polymorphisms
of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes: influence on cytogenetic
parameters in vitro and in vivo. In: The 4th Nordic Toxicology
Meeting, 27-31 March 1996, Storlien, Sweden. Abstract.
66. Pelin K, Hirvonen A, Norppa, H. Influence of erythrocyte glu-
tathione S-transferase TI on sister chromatid exchanges induced
by diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes. Mutagenesis
11:213-215 (1996).
67. Cheng T-J, Christiani DC, Xu X, Wain JC, Wiencke JK, Kelsey
KT. Glutathione S-transferase genotype, diet, and smoking as
determinants ofsister chromatid exchange frequency in lympho-
cytes. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:535-542 (1995).
68. van Poppel G, de Vogel N, van Balderen J, Kok FJ. Increased
cytogenetic damage in smokers deficient in glutathione S-trans-
ferase isozyme. Carcinogenesis 13:303-305 (1992).
69. Morimoto K, Takeshita T, Imayyoshi S, Mure K, Inoue C. Low
Km aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) polymorphism and chro-
mosome alterations in alcohol drinkers. In: 2nd International
Conference on Environmental Mutagens in Human
Populations, 20-25 August 1995, Prague. Abstract.
70. Heddle JA, Cimino MC, Hayashi M, Romagna F, Shelby MD,
Tucker JD, Vanparys Ph, MacGregor JT. Micronuclei as an
index of cytogenetic damage: past, present, and future. Environ
Mol Mutagen 18:277-291 (1991).
71. Fenech M, Morley AA. Measurement of micronuclei in lym-
phocytes. Mutat Res 147:29-36 (1985).
72. Thomson EJ, Perry PE. The identification of micronucleated
chromosomes: a possible assay for aneuploidy. Mutagenesis
7:407-410 (1988).
73. Norppa H, Renzi L, Lindholm C. Detection ofwhole chromo-
somes in micronuclei of cytokinesis-blocked human lympho-
cytes by antikinetochore staining and in situ hybridization.
Mutagenesis 8:519-525 (1993).
74. Norppa H, Luomahaara S, Heikanen H, Roth S, Sorsa M,
Renzi L, Lindholm C. Micronucleus assay in lymphocytes as a
tool to biomonitor human exposure to aneuploidogens and clas-
togens. Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl 3):139-143 (1993).
75. Richard F, Muleris M, Dutrillaux B. The frequency ofmicronu-
clei with X chromosomes increases with age in human females.
Mutat Res 316:1-7 (1994).
76. Catalin J, Autio K, Wessman M, Lindholm C, Knuutila S,
Sorsa M, Norppa H. Age-associated micronuclei containing
centromeres and the X chromosome in lymphocytes ofwomen.
Cytogenet Cell Genet 68:11-16 (1995).
77. Nath J, Tucker JD, Hando JC. Y chromosome aneuploidy,
micronuclei, kinetochores and aging men. Chromosoma
103:725-731 (1995).
78. Ballarin G, Sarto F, Giacomelli C, Bartolucci GB, Clonofero E.
Micronucleated cells in nasal mucosa of formaldehyde-exposed
workers. Mutat Res 280:1-7 (1992).
79. McGinniss MJ, Nicklas JA, Albertini RA. Molecular analyses of
in vivo hprt mutations in human T-lymphocytes. IV: Studies in
newborns. Environ Mol Mutagen 14:229-237 (1989).
80. Cole J, Skopek RT. Somatic mutation frequency, mutation rates
and mutational spectra in the human population. Mutat Res
304:33-105 (1994).
81. Perera FP, Dickey C, Santella R, O'Neill JPO, Albertini RJ,
Ottman R, Tsai WY, Mooney LA, Savela K, Hemminki K.
Carcinogen-DNA adducts and gene mutation in foundry work-
ers with low-level exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
Carcinogenesis 15:2905-2910 (1994).
82. Perera FP, Tang DL, O'Neill JP, Bigbee WL, Albertini RJ,
Santella R, Ottman R, Tsai, WY, Dickey C, Mooney LA.
HPRTand glycophorin A mutations in foundry workers: rela-
tionship to PAH exposure and to PAH-DNA adducts.
Carcinogenesis 14:969-973 (1993).
732 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 - June 1997
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
$3. Hou S-M, Lambert B, Hemminki K. Relationship between
HPRTmutant frequency, aromatic DNA adducts and geno-
types for GSTMI and NAT2 in bus maintenance workers.
Carcinogenesis 16:1913-1917 (1995).
84. Langlois RJ, Bigbee WL, Kyoizumi SK, Nakamura N, Bean
MA, Akiyama M, Jensen RW. Evidence for increased somatic
cell mutations at the glycophorin A locus in atomic bomb sur-
vivors. Science 236:445-448 (1987).
85. Langlois RG, Nisbet BA, Bigbee WL, Ridinger DN, Jensen RH.
An improved flow cytometric assay for somatic mutations at the
glycophorin A locus in humans. Cytometry 11:513-521 (1990).
86. Grant SG, Bigbee WL. In vivo somatic mutation and segrega-
tion at the human glycophorin A (GPA) locus: phenotypic vari-
ation encompassing both gene-specific an chromosomal
mechanisms. Mutat Res 288:163-172 (1993).
87. Bigbee WL, Grant SG, Langlois RC, Jensen RH, Anttila A,
Pfaffli P, Pekari K, Norppa H. Glycophorin A (GPA) somatic
cell mutation frequencies in Finnish reinforced plastics workers
exposed to styrene. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
5:801-810 (1996).
88. Langlois AM, Lockhart AM, Watson MA, Thopson CL, Bell
DA. Evidence that GSTTf affects the induction o cophorin A
variant cells in smokers. Environ Mol Mutagen 27(Suppl 27):39
(1996).
89. Bos JL, Verlaan-de Vries M, Jansen AM, Veeneman GH, van
Boom JH, van der Eb AJ. Three different mutations in codon
61 of the human N-ras gene detected by synthetic oligonu-
cleotide hybridization. Nucleic Acids Res 12:9155-9163
(1984).
90. Balmain A, Brown K. Oncogene activation in chemical carcino-
genesis. Adv Cancer Res 51:147-182 (1988).
91. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53
Mutations in human cancers. Science 253:49-53 (1991).
92. Harris CC, Hollstein M. Clinical implications of the p53
tumor-suppressor gene. N EnglJ Med 329:1318-1327 (1993).
93. Puisieux A, Lim S, Groopman J, Ozturk M. Selective targeting
of the p53 gene mutational hotspots in human cancers by etio-
logically defined carcinogens. Cancer Res 51:6185-6189
(1991).
94. Biggs PJ, Warren W, Venitt S, Stratton MR. Does a genotoxic
carcinogen contribute to human breast cancer? The value of
mutational spectra in unraveling the aetiology of cancer.
Mutagenesis 8:275-283 (1993).
95. Aguilar F, Hussain SP, Cerutti P. Aflatoxin B1 induces the
transversion of G -> T in codon 249 of the p53 tumor suppres-
sor gene in human hepatocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
90:8586-8590 (1993).
96. Aguilar F, Harris CC, Sun T, Hollstein M, Cerutti P.
Geographical variation ofp53 mutational profile in nonmalig-
nant human liver. Science 264:1317-1319 (1994).
97. Almstad P, Hussain SP, Cerutti P. Ultraviolet B light-induced
mutagenesis ofp53 hotspot codon 248 and 249 in human skin
fibroblasts. Mol Carcinog 10:181-188 (1994).
98. Esteve A, Srlie T, Martel-Planche G, Hollstein M, Kusters I,
Lewalter J, Vineis P, Stephan-Odenthal, Montesano R.
Screening for p53 gene mutations in archived tumors ofworkers
occupationally exposed to carcinogens: examples from analysis
ofbladder tumors. J Occup Environ Med 37:59-68 (1995).
99. Husgafvel-Pursiainen K, Ridanpaa M, Anttila S, Vainio H. p53
and ras gene mutations in lung cancer: implications for smoking
and occupational exposures. J Occup Environ Med 37:69- 76
(1995).
100. Bartsch H, Hollstein M, Mustonen R, Schmidt J, SpiethoffA,
Wesch H, Wiethege T, Muller K-M. Screening for putative
radon-specific p53 mutation hotspot in German uranium min-
ers. Lancet 346:8967 (1995).
101. Takeshima Y, Seyama T, Bennett WP, Akiyama M, Tokuoka S,
Inai K, Mabuchi K, Land CE, Harris CC. p53 mutations in
lung cancers from non-smoking atomic-bomb survivors. Lancet
342:1520-1521 (1993).
102. Brennan JA, Boyle JO, Koch WM, Goodman SN, Hruban RH,
Eby YJ, Couch MJ, Forastiere AA, Sidransky D. Association
between cigarette smoking and mutation of the p53 gene in
squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med
332:712-717 (1995).
103. Ryberg D, Hewr A, Phillips DH, Haugen A. Different suscepti-
bility to smoking-induced DNA damage among male and
female lung cancer patients. Cancer Res 54:5801-5803 (1994).
104. Rydberg D, Kure E, Lystad S, Skaug V, Stangeland L, Mercy I,
B0rresen A-L, Haugen A. p53 Mutations in lung tumors: rela-
tionship to putative susceptibility markers for cancer. Cancer
Res 54:1551-1555 (1994).
105. Kawajiri K, Eguch H, Nakachi K, Sekiya T, Yamamoto M.
Association ofCYPlAI germ line polymorphisms with mutations
ofthep53 gene in lung cancer. Cancer Res 56:72-76 (1996).
106. Myers RM, Larin Z, Maniatis T. Detection of single base sub-
stitutions by ribonudease cleavage at mismatches in RNA:DNA
duplexes. Science 230:1242-1246 (1985).
107. Smooker PM, Cotton RGH. The use of chemical reagents in
the detection ofDNA mutations. Mutat Res 288:65-77 (1993).
108. Orita M, Iwahana H, Kanazawa H, Hayashi K, Sekiya T.
Detection of polymorphisms of human DNA by gel elec-
trophoresis as single strand conformation polymorphisms. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 86:2766-2770 (1989).
109. Sekiya T. Detection of mutant sequences by single-strand con-
formation polymorphism analysis. Mutat Res 288:79-83
(1993).
110. Fan E, Levin DB, Glickman BW, Logan DM. Limitations in
the use ofSSCP analysis. Mutat Res 288:85-92 (1993).
111. Fischer SG, Lerman LS. DNA fragments differing by single
base-pair substitutions are separated in denaturing gradient gels:
correspondence with melting theory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
80:1579-1583 (1983).
112. Cariello NF, Skopek TR. Mutational analysis using denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis and PCR. Mutat Res 288:103-112
(1993).
113. Hovig E, Smith-Srensen B, Br0gger A, B0rresen A-L. Constant
denaturant gel electrophoresis, a modification ofdenaturing gra-
dient gel e[ectrophoresis, in mutation detection. Mutat Res
262:63-71 (1991).
114. Khrapko K, Hanekamp JS, Thilly WG, Belenkii A, Foret F,
Karger BL. Constant denaturing capillary electrophoresis
(CDCE): a high resolution approach to mutational analysis.
Nucleic Acid Res 22:364-369 (1994).
115. Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res
49:4682-4689 (1989).
116. Pourzand C, Cerutti P. Genotypic mutation analysis by
RFLP/PCR. Mutat Res 288:113-121 (1993).
117. Cerutti P, Hussain P, Pourzand C, Aguilar F. Mutagenesis of
the H-ras protooncogene and the p53 tumor suppressor gene.
Cancer Res 54:1934s-1938s (1994).
118. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR DNA sequencing with chain-
terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:5463-5467
(1977).
119. Pease AC, Solas D, Sullivan EJ, Cronin MT, Holmes CP, Fodor
SPA. Light-generated oligonucleotide arrays for rapid DNA
sequence analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:5022-5026
(1994).
120. Hultman T, Stahl S, Hornes E, Uhlen M. Direct solid phase
sequencing of genomic and plasmid using magnetic beads as
solid support. Nucleic Acids Res 17:4937-4946 (1989).
121. Syvanen A-C, Soderlund H, Laaksonen E, Bengtstrom M,
Turunen M, Palotie A. N-ras gene mutations in acute myeloid
leukemia: accurate detection by solid-phase minisequencing. Int
J Cancer 50:713-718 (1992).
122. Funa K, Steinholtz L, Nou E, Bergh J. Increased expression of
N-myc in human small cell lung cancer biopsies predicts lack of
response to chemotherapy and poor prognosis. Am J Clin
Pathol 88:216-220 (1987).
123. Limper AH, Broekelmann TJ, Colby TV, Malizia G,
McDonald JA. Analysis of local mRNA expression for extracel-
lular matrix proteins and growth factors using in situ hybridiza-
tion in fibroproliferative lung disorders. Chest 99:555-565
(1991).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 733
BARRETT ET AL.
124. Koutselini H, Kappatou G, Yiagnisis M, Field JK, Spandidos
DA. Immunocytochemical study of ras oncoprotein in cytologic
specimens ofprimary lung tumours. Anticancer Res 10:597-604
(1990).
125. Gallick GE, Kurzrock R, Kloetzer WS, Arlinghaus RB,
Gutterman JU. Expression of p21 ras in fresh primary and
metastatic human colorectal tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
82:1795-1799 (1985).
126. Kurzrock R, Gallick GE, Gutterman JU. Differential expression
ofp21 rasgene products among histological subtypes offresh pri-
mary human lung tumors. Cancer Res 46:1530-1534 (1986).
127. Ruckle HC, Klee GG, Desterling JE. Prostate-specific antigen:
critical issues for the practicing physician. Mayo Clin Proc
69:59-68 (1994).
128. Ruckle HC, Klee GG, Oesterling JE. Prostate-specific antigen:
concepts for staging prostate cancer and monitoring response to
the copy. Mayo Clin Proc 69:69-79 (1994).
129. Brandt-Rauf PW. Biomarkers of gene expression-growth fac-
tors and oncoproteins. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
4):807-816 (1997).
130. Ashby J, Anwar W, Au WW, Massoud A, Gentile JM. Genetic
toxicology in developing countries: comments and recommen-
dations. Environ Health Perspect (Suppl 3):335-338 (1993).
131. Anwar WA. Cytogenetic monitoring of human populations at
risk in Egypt: role ofcytogenetic data in cancer risk assessment.
Environ Health Perspect 96:91-95 (1991).
132. Burchell B, Coughtrie MWH. Genetic and environmental fac-
tors associated with variation ofhuman xenobiotic glucuronida-
tion and sulfation. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl
4):739-747 (1997).
133. Goldstein BD, Amoruso MA, Witz G. Erythrocyte glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency does not pose an increased
risk or black Americans exposed to oxidant gases in the work-
place or general environment. Toxicol Ind Health 1:75-80
(1985).
134. Ramel C. Mini- and microsatellites. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 4):781-789 (1997).
135. Alvan G, Bechtel P, Iselius L, Gundert-Remy U. Hydroxylation
polymorphisms of debrisoquine and mephenytoin in European
populations. Eur J Pharmacol 39:533-537 (1990).
136. Daly AK, Cholerton S, Gregory W, Idle JR. Metabolic poly-
morphisms. Pharmacol Ther 57:129-160 (1993).
137. Horn EP, Tucker MA, Lambert G, Silverman D, Zametkin D,
Sinha R, Hartege T, Landi MT, Caporaso NE. A study of gen-
der-based cytochrome P4501A2 variability: a possible mecha-
nism for the male excess of bladder cancer. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 4(5):529-33 (1995).
138. Pelkonen 0, Raunio H. Metabolic activation of toxins. Tissue-
specific expression and metabolism in target organs. Environ
Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):767-774 (1997).
139. Vanden Heuvel JP, Clark GC, Thompson CL, McCoy Z,
Miller CR, Lucier GW, Bell DA. CYPlAl mRNA levels as a
human exposure biomarker: use of quantitative polymerase
chain reaction to measure CYPlAI expression in human
peripheral blood lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 14:2003-2006
(1993).
140. Gonzalez FJ, Skoda R, Kimura S, Umeno M, Zanger UM,
Nebert DW, Gelboin HV, Hardwick JP, Meyer UA.
Characterization ofthe common genetic defect in humans defi-
cient in debrisoquine metabo[ism. Nature 331:442-446
(1988).
141. Kagimoto M, Heim M, Kagimoto K, Zeugin T, Meyer UA.
Multiple mutations of the human cytochrome P450IID6 gene
(CYP2D6) in poor metabolizers of debrisoquine. J Biol Chem
265:17209-17214 (1990).
142. Yamano S, Tatsuno J, Gonzales FJ. The CYP2A6gene product
catalyzes coumarin 7-hydroxylation in human liver microsomes
Biochemistry 29:1322-1329 (1990).
143. Hayashi SI, Watanabe J, Kawajiri K Genetic polymorphisms in
the 5'-flanking region change transcriptional regulation of the
human cytochrome P450IIE1 gene. J Biochem 110:559-565
(1991).
144. Ambrosone CB, Freudenheim JL, Graham S, Marshall JR, Vena
JR, Brasure JR, Laughlin R, Nemoto T, Michalek AM,
Harrington A et al. Cytochrome P450 lAl and glutathione S-
transferase (Ml) genetic polymorphisms and postmenopausal
breast cancer risk. Cancer Res 55:3483-3485 (1995).
145. Oyama T, Mitsudomi T, Kawamoto T, Ogami A, Osaki T,
Kodama Y, Yasumoto K. Detection of CYPIAJ gene polymor-
phism using designed RFLP and distributions ofCYPlAl geno-
types in Japanese. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 67:253-256
(1995).
146. Hayashi SI, Watanabe J, Nakachi K, Kawajiri K. Genetic link-
age of lung cancer-associated MspI polymorphisms with amino
acid replacement in the heme binding region of the human
cytochrome P4501A1 gene. J Biochem 110:407-411 (1991b).
147. Zimmerman LJ, Fuscoe JC. Direct DNA sequencing of PCR
products. Environ Mol Mutagen 18:274-276 (1991).
148. Birdsong WH, Lash AA, Thayer S, Kumekawa E, Becker CE.
The validity of study group assignments based on occupational
histories obtained from questionnaires. J Occup Med
34:940-945 (1992).
149. Hemminki K, Lindbohm M-L, Kyyronen P. Validity aspects of
exposure and outcome data in reproductive studies. J Occup
Environ Med 37:903-907 (1995).
150. London SJ, Daly AK, Thomas CD, Caporaso NE, Idle JR.
Methodological issues in interpretation ofstudies ofthe CYP2D6
genotype in relation to lung cancer risk. Pharmacogenetics
4:107-108 (1994).
151. Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S. Applied Logistic Regression. New
York:John Wiley & Sons, 1984.
152. Tasa G, Uuskula M, Hirvonen A, Mikkelsaar A-V. Optimization
of PCR to yield successful amplification from heparin-contami-
nated DNA. Methods Mol Cell Biol 5:122-124 (1995).
153. Liu Y-H, Bai J, Zhu Y, Liang X, Siemieniak D, Venta P,
Lubman DM. Rapid screening of genetic polymorphisms using
buccal cell DNA with detection by matrix-assisted laser desorp-
tion ionization mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 9:735-743 (1995).
154. Hirvonen A. Combinations of susceptible genotypes and indi-
vidual responses to toxicants. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 4):755-758 (1997).
155. Landi MT, Bertazzi PA, Shields PG, Clark G, Lucier GW,
Garte SJ, Cosma G, Caporaso NE. Association between
CYPlAJ genotype, mRNA expression and enzymatic activity in
humans. Pharmacogenetics 4:242-246 (1994).
156. Broly F, Marez D, Sabbagh N, Legrand M, Millecamps S, Lo
Guidice J-M, Boone P, Meyer UA. An efficient strategy for
detection of known and new mutations of the CYP2D6gene
using single strand conformation polymorphism analysis.
Pharmacogenetics 5:373-384 (1995).
157. Bell D, Taylor JA, Paulson D, Robertson CN, Mohler JL,
Lucier GW. Genetic risk and carcinogen exposure: a common
inherited defect of the carcinogen metabolism gene glutathione
S-transferase Ml (GSTMI) that increases susceptibility to blad-
der cancer. J Natd Cancer Inst 85:1159-1164 (1993).
158. Seidegard J, Vorachek WR, Pero RW, Pearson WR. Hereditary
differences in the expression of the human glutathione trans-
ferase active on trans-stilbene oxide are due to a gene deletion.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:7293-7297 (1988).
159. Steen VM, Andreassen OA, Daly AK, Tefre T, Borresen A-L,
Idle JR, Guldbrandsen A-K. Detection of poor metabolizer-
associated CYP2D6(D) gene deletion allele by long-PCR tech-
nology. Pharmacogenetics 5:215-223 (1995).
160. Johansson I, Lundqvist E, Bertilsson L, Dahl M-L, Sjoqvist F,
Ingelman-Sundberg M. Inherited amplification of an active
gene in the cytochrome P450 CYP2D locus as a cause ofultrara-
pid metabolism of debrisoquine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
90:11825-11829 (1993).
161. Vanden Heuvel JP, Clark GC, Kohn MC, Tritscher AM,
Greenlee WF, Lucier GW, Bell DA. Dioxin-responsive genes:
examination of dose-response relationships using quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymersase chain reaction. Cancer Res
54(1):62-8 (1994).
734 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
162. Rayemaekers L. A commentary on the practical applications of
competitive PCR. Genome Res 5:91-94 (1995).
163. Kwok S, Higuchi R. Avoid false positives with PCR. Nature
339:237-238 (1989).
164. Syvanen A-C, Sajantila A, Lukka A. Identification ofindividuals
by analysis of biallelic DNA markers, using PCR and solid-
phase minisequencing. Am J Hum Genet 52:4659 (1993).
165. McCarthy JF, Shugart LR. Biological markers of environmental
contamination. In: Biomarkers ofEnvironmental Contamination
(McCarthy JF, Shugart LR, eds). Boca Raton, FL:Lewis
Publishers, 1990;-14.
166. Huggett RJ, Kimerle RA, Mehrle PM Jr, Bergman HL, eds.
Biomarkers. Biochemical, Physiological, and Histological
Markers of Anthropogenic Stress. Boca Raton, FL:Lewis
Publishers, 1992.
167. Peakall, DB. Animal Biomarkers as Pollution Indicators.
London:Chapman & Hall, 1992.
168. Varanasi U, Reichert WL, Stein JE. 32P-Postlabeling analysis of
DNA adducts in liver ofwild English sole (Parophys vetulus) and
winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus). Cancer Res
49:1171-1177 (1989).
169. Stein JE, Reichert WL, Nishimoto M, Varanasi U. Overview of
studies on liver carcinogenesis in English sole from Puget
Sound; evidence for a xenobiotic chemical etiology. II.
Biochemical studies. Sci Total Environ 94:51-69 (1990).
170. Shugart LR. Detection and quantitation of benzo(a)pyrene-
DNA adducts in brain and liver tissues of beluga whales
(Delphinapterus leucas) from the St. Lawrence and Mackenzie
estuaries. In: Proceedings of the International Forum for the
Future ofthe Beluga. 1990;219-223.
171. Kurelec B. The genotoxic disease syndrome. Marine Environ
Res 35:341-348 (1993).
172. Shugart LR, McCarthy JF, Jimenez BD, Daniels J. Analysis of
adduct formation in the bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus)
between benzo[a]pyrene and DNA ofthe liver and hemoglobin
ofthe erythrocyte. Aquatic Toxicol 9:319-325 (1987).
173. Kurelec B, Gupta RC. Biomonitoring of aquatic systems. In:
Postlabelling Methods for Detection ofDNA Adducts (Phillips,
DH, Castegnaro, M, Bartsch H, eds). Lyon:International
Agency on Research on Cancer, 1993; 365-372.
174. Petersen LB-M, Petersen RC. Anomalies in hydropsychid cap-
ture nets from polluted streams. Freshwater Biol 13:185-191
(1983).
175. Peterle TJ. Wildlife Toxicology. New York:Van Nostrand
Reinhold, 1991.
176. Adkisson PL, Niles GA, Walker JK, Bird LS Scott HB.
Controlling cotton's insect pests: a new system. Science
216:19-22 (1982).
177. Kurelec, B. The multixenobiotic resistance mechanism in
aquatic organisms. Crit Rev Toxicol 22:23-43 (1992).
178. Kurelec B. A new type of hazardous chemical: the chemosensi-
tizers of multixenobiotic resistance. Environ Health Perspect
105(Suppl 4):855-860 (1997).
179. Kurelec B, Lucic D, Pivcevic B, Krca S. Induction and reversion
of multixenobiotic resistance in the marine snail Monodonta
turbinata. Marine Biol 123:305-312 (1995).
180. Minier C, Akcha F, Galgani F. P-glycoprotein expression in
Crassostrea gigas and Mytilus edulis in polluted seawater. Comp
Biochem Physiol B Comp Biochem 106B:1029-1036 (1993).
181. Waldmann P, Pivcevic B, Mueller WEG, Zahn RK, Kurelec B.
Increased genotoxicity of aminoanthracene by modulators of
multixenobiotic resistance mechanism: studies with the fresh
water clam Corbiculafluminea. Mutat Res 342:113-123
(1995).
182. Holland-Toomey B, Epel D. Multixenobiotic resistance in
Urechis embryos: protection from environmental toxins. Biol
Bull 185:355-386 (1993).
183. Kurelec B, Krca S, Pivcevic B, Ugarkovic D, Bachmann M,
Imsiecke G, Muller WEG. Expression of P-glycoprotein gene
in marine sponges. Identification and characterization of the
125-kDa drug-binding glycoprotein. Carcinogenesis 13:69-76
(1992).
184. Hollo Z, Homolya L, Davis CW, Sarkadi B. Calcein accumula-
tion as a fluorometric functional assay of the multidrug trans-
porter. Biochim Biophys Acta 1191:384-388 (1994).
185. Sarkadi B, Mueller M, Homolya L, Hollo Z, Seprodi J,
Germann U, Gottesman MM, Price EM, Boucher RC.
Interaction of bioactive hydrophobic peptides with the human
multidrug transporter. FASEB J 8:766-770 (1994).
186. Landa V, Soldan T. The possibilities of mayfly faunistics to
indicate environmental changes of large areas. In: Overview and
Strategies of Ephemeroptera and Plecoptera (Alba-Tercedor J,
Sanches-Ortega A, eds). Gainesville, FL:Sandhill Cram Press,
1991;559-566.
187. Burger J, ed. Before and After an Oil Spill: The Arthur Kill.
New Brunswick, NJ:Rutgers University Press, 1994.
188. Cairns J, Gruber D. A comparison ofmethods and instrumenta-
tion of biological early warning systems. Water Resources Bull
16:261-266 (1980).
189. Kramer KJM, Botterweg J. Aquatic biological early warning sys-
tems: an overview. In: Bioindicators and Environmental
Management (Jeffrey DW, Madden B, eds). New York:
Academic Press, 1991;95-126.
190. Hughes GM. Changes in blood of fish following exposure to
heavy metals and acid. In: Biological Monitoring of
Environmental Pollution (Yasuno M, Whitton BA, eds).
Hokkaido:Tokai University Press, 1988;1 1-17.
191. DW Nebert, Nelson DR, Feyereisen R. Evolution of the
cytochrome P450 genes. Xenobiotica 19:1149-1160 (1989).
192. Brattsten LB. Ecological significance of mixed-function oxida-
tions. Drug Metab Rev 10:35-58 (1979).
193. Gregus Z, Watkins JB, Thompson TN, Harvey MJ, Rozman
K, Klaassen CD. Hepatic phase I and phase II biotransforma-
tions in quail and trout: comparison to other species commonly
used in toxicity testing. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 67:430-441
(1983).
194. NRC. Ecological Knowledge and Environmental Problem
Solving. Washington:National Academy Press, 1986.
195. Burger J. Effects of oil on vegetation. In: Before and After an
Oil Spill: The Arthur Kill (Burger J, ed). New Brunswick,
NJ:Rutgers University Press, 1994;130-141.
196. Paine RT. Food web complexity and species diversity. Am
Natur 100:65-75 (1966).
197. Anderson SL. Linking genotoxic responses and reproductive suc-
cess in ecotoxicology. Environ Health Perspect 102:9-12 (1994).
198. Pimm SL.The complexity and stability of ecosystems. Nature
307:321-326 (1984).
199. Suter GW II. Ecological endpoints. In: Ecological Assessment of
Hazardous Waste Sites (Warren-Hicks W, Parkhurst BR, Baker
SS Jr, eds). Rpt 600/3-89/013. Washington:U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 1989;13-20.
200. Suter GW II. Endpoints for regional ecological risk assessment.
Environ Manage 14:9-20 (1990).
201. Burger J, Peakall D. Methods to assess the effects of chemicals
on aquatic and terrestrial wildlife, particularly birds and mam-
mals. In: Methods to Assess the Effects of Chemicals on
Ecosystems (Linthurst RA, Bourdeau P, Tardiff RG, eds).
Chichester:Wiley & Sons, 1995;291-306.
202. Schindler DW, Mills KH, Malley DF, Findlay DL, Shearer JA,
Davies IJ, Turner MA, Linsey GA, Cruikshank DR. Long-term
ecosystem stress: the effects ofyears ofexperimental acidification
on a small lake. Science 228:1395-1401(1985).
203. Eastin C, Hoffman DJ, O'Leary CT. Lead accumulation and
depression of delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD) in
young birds fed automotive waste oil. Arch Environ Contam
Toxicol: 12031-35 (1983).
204. Needleman HL, Schell A, Bellinger D, Leviton A, Alfred EN.
The long-term effects of exposure to lead in cildhood: an 11
year follow-up report.NEngl JMed 322083-88(1990).
205. ATSDR. Toxicological Profe for Lead. Atlanta, GA:Agency for
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 1990.
206. Burger J. A risk assessment for lead in birds. J Toxicol Environ
Health 45:369-396 (1995).
207. Grue CE, O'Shea JJ, Hoffman DJ. Lead concentrations and
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 735
BARRETT ET AL.
reproduction in highway-nesting barn swallows. Condor
860383-389 (1984).
208. Burger J. Behavioral effects of early postnatal lead exposure in
herring gull (Larus argentatus) chicks. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 35:7-13 (1990).
209. Burger J, Gochfeld M. Behavioral impairment of lead-injected
young herring gulls in nature. Fundam Appl Toxicol 23:
553-561 (1995).
210. Burger J, Gochfeld M. Lead and behavioral development in
young herring gulls: effects of timing of exposure on individual
recognition. Fundam AppI Toxicol 21:187-195 (1993).
211. Bellrose, FC. Lead poisoning as a mortality factor in waterfowl
populations. Trans North Am Wildlife Conf 27:235-288
(1959).
212. Poland A, Glover E, Kende AS, DeCamp M, Giandomenico
CM. 3,4,3',4'-Tetrachloro azoxybenzene and azobenzene:
potent inducers of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase. Science
194:627-630 (1976).
213. Poland A, Knutson JC. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons: examination of
the mechanism of toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
22:517-554 (1982).
214. Brunstrom B, Reutergardh L. Differences in sensitivity of some
avian species to the embryotoxicity of a PCB, 3,3',4,4'-tetra-
chlorobiphenyl injected into the eggs. Environ Pollut
42A:37-45 (1986).
215. Brunstrom B, Lund J. Differences between chick and turkey
embryos in sensitivity to 3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl and in
concentration/affinity of the hepatic receptor for 2,3,7,8-tetra-
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Comp Biochem Physiol C Comp
Pharmacol Toxicol 91:507-512 (1988).
216. Brunstrom B. Sensitivity of embryos from duck, goose, herring
gull, and various chicken breeds to 3,3',4,4'-tetrachloro-
giphenyl. Poult Sci 67:52-57(1988).
217. Ashford NA. Policy considerations for human monitoring in
the workplace. J Occup Med 28(2):563-568 (1986).
218. Ashford NA. Medical screening in the workplace: legal and eth-
ical considerations. Semin Occup Med 1(1):67-79 (1986).
219. Atherley G, Johnston N, Tannassee M. Biological surveillance:
rights conflict with rights. J Occup Med 28:958-965 (1986).
220. Lappe M, Gustafson J, Robin R. Ethical and social aspects of
screening for genetic disease. N Engl J Med 206:1129-1132
(1972).
221. Lappe M. Ethical issues in testing for differential sensitivity to
occupational hazards. J Occup Med 25:797-808 (1983).
222. Lappe M. Ethical concerns in occupational screening programs.
J Occup Med 28:572-577 (1986).
223. Omenn GS. Predictive identification of hypersusceptible indi-
viduals. J Occup Med 24:369-374 (1982).
224. Perera FP. Molecular cancer epidemiology: a new tool in cancer
prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 78:887-898 (1987).
225. Perera FP, Santella R. Carcinogenesis. In: Molecular
Epidemiology: Principles and Practices (Schulte P, Perera FP,
eds). New York:Academic Press 1993; 277-300.
226. Schulte PA, Ringen K. Notification ofworkers at high risk: an
emerging public health problem. Am J Public Health
74:485-490 (1984).
227. Schulte PA, Ringen K, Altekruse EB, Gullen WH, Davidson
K, Anderson SS, Patton MG. Notification of a cohort ofwork-
ers at risk ofbladder cancer. J Occup Med 27:19-28 (1985).
228. Annas G. The bioethics of biomonitoring people for exposure
to carcinogens. In: Molecular Dosimetry and Human Cancer:
Analytical, Epidemiological, and Social Considerations
(Groopman JD, Skipper PL, eds). Caldwell, NJ:Telford Press,
1991; 385-399.
229. Ashford NA, Spadafor CJ, Hattis DB, Caldart CC, eds.
Monitoring the Worker for Exposure and Disease. Scientific,
Legal, and Ethical Considerations in the use of Biomarkers.
The Johns Hopkins Series in Environmental Toxicology.
Baltimore:Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990.
230. Council of Europe. Draft Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard
to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Bioethics
Convention, and Explanatory Report. Strasbourg:Directorate
ofLegal Affairs, 1994.
231. Ettore E. The new genetic discourse in Finland: Exploring
experts view within surveillance medicine. Helsinki:Helsinki
Association ofFinnish Muncipalities, 1996.
232. Grandjean P, Sorsa M. Ethical aspects of genetic predisposition
to environmentally-related disease. Sci Total Environ
184:37-45 (1996).
233. Hulka BS, Wilcosky TC, Griffith JD, eds. Biological Markers in
Epidemiology. New York:Oxford University Press, 1990.
234. Hulka BS. Overview of biological markers. In: Biological
Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS Wilcosky TC Griffith JD,
eds). New York:Oxford University Press, 1990;3-15.
235. Hulka BS. Methodologic issues in molecular epidemiology. In:
Biological Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS, Wilcosky TC,
Griffith JD, eds). New York:Oxford University Press, 1990;
214-226.
236. Hulka BS. Epidemiological studies using biological markers:
issues for epidemiologists. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1:13-19 (1991).
237. McMichael AJ. Invited Commentary-"Molecular epidemiol-
ogy:" new pathway or new travelling companion? Am J
Epidemiol 140:1-11 (1994).
238. Merletti F, Soskolne CL, Vineis P. Introduction to the epidemi-
ological method as applied to occupational health and safety. In:
ILO Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety, 4th ed.
Geneva:International Labour Office, in press.
239. Pearce N, de Sanjose S, Boffetta P, Kogevinas M, Saracci R,
Savitz D. Limitations of biomarkers of exposure in cancer epi-
demiology. Epidemiology 6:190-194 (1995).
240. Privacy Commissioner of Canada. Genetic Testing and Privacy.
Ottawa:Canadian National Research Council, 1992.
241. Rothman N, Stewart WF, Caporaso NE, Hayes RB.
Misclassification of enetic susceptibility biomarkers: implica-
tions for case-controT studies and cross-population comparisons.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2:299-303 (1993).
242. Schulte PA. A conceptual and historical framework for molecu-
lar epidemiology. In: Molecular Epidemiology: Principles and
Practices (Schulte P, Perera FP, eds). New York:Academic Press,
1993; 3-44.
243. U.S. Congress. Genetic Monitoring and Screening in the
Workplace. OTA-BA-455, Washington:U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1990.
244. Van Damme K, Casteleyn L, Heseltine E, Huici A, Sorsa M,
van Larebeke N, Vineis P. Individual susceptibility and preven-
tion of occupational diseases: scientific and ethical issues. J
Occup Environ Med 37(1):91-99 (1995).
245. Vineis P. Uses ofbiochemical and biological markers in occupa-
tional epidemiology. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique
40:S63-S69(1992).
246. Vineis P. Use of biomarkers in epidemiology. The example of
metabolic susceptibility to cancer. Toxicol Lett 77:163-168
(1995).
247. Vineis P. Use of biochemical markers in environmental epi-
demiology. In: Environmental Epidemiology: Exposure and
Disease (Bertollini R, Lebowitz MD, Saracci R, Savitz DA, eds).
Boca Raton, FL:CRC Lewis Publishers, 1996;210-206.
248. Wilcosky TC, Griffith JD. Applications of biological markers.
In: Biological Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS Wilcosky
TC Griffith JD, eds). New York:Oxford University Press,
1990;16-27.
249. Greenberg MR, Martell J. Ethical dilemmas and solutions for
risk assessment scientists. J Exp Anal Environ Epidemiol
2:381-389 (1992).
250. Soskolne CL. Epidemiology: questions ofscience, ethics, moral-
ity and law. AmJ Epidemiol 129:1-18 (1989).
251. Summers C, SoskoLne CL, Gotlieb C, Fawcett E, McClusky P.
Do scientific and scholarly codes of ethics take social issues into
account? Accountability Res 4:57-68 (1995).
252. Reece RD, Siegal HA. Studying people: a primer in the ethics of
social research. Mercer, 1986.
736 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT
253. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics.
4th ed. New York:Oxford University Press, 1994;336-337.
254. Shamoo AE, Annau Z. Data audit-historical perspective. In:
Principles of Research Data Audit (Shamoo AE, ed). New
York:Gordon & Breach, 1989;1-11.
255. CIOMS. International Guidelines for Ethical Review of
Epidemiological Studies. Geneva:Council for International
Organizations ofMedical Sciences, 1991.
256. CIOMS. International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical
Research Involving Human Subjects. Geneva:Council for
International Organizations ofMedical Sciences, 1993.
257. Schimke RI. Gene amplification, drug resistance and cancer.
Cancer Res 44:1235 (1984).
258. Beach LR, Palmiter RD. Amplification of the metallothionein
gene 1 in cadmium-resistant mouse cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 78:2110-2114 (1981).
259. Marx J. Oncogenes evoke new cancer therapies. Science
249:1376-1378 (1990).
260. Peltomaki P. DNA mismatch repair gene mutations in human
cancer. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):755-780
(1997).
261. Lewontin RC, Hartl DL. Population genetics in forensic DNA
typing. Science 254:1745-1750 (1991).
262. Stokinger HE. Letter: Carcinogen standard. A letter to the
Assistant Secretary, Occupational Safety and Health-and a
response. J Occup Med 16(2):119-120 (1974).
263. Vainio H, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K. Elimination of environ-
mental factors or elimination of individuals: biomarkers and
prevention. J Occup Environ Med 37(1):12-13 (1995).
264. Gochfield M. Factors influencing susceptibility to metals.
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):817-822 (1997).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 737
