9,,,9~ih
Focus
Rings of Controversy around Benzene
Few industrial chemicals have received as
much attention from occupational health
scientists as benzene: evidence of its harm-
ful effects date back nearly 100 years.
Today benzene is recognized as a human
carcinogen, based on studies showing that
exposure to high levels of the chemical
causes leukemia in workers. But scientists
now recognize that low levels of benzene
also may pose a health threat, and atten-
tion is being directed at understanding the
risks of low-level exposures in both the
workplace and the environment.
Benzene is a widely used material: only
15 chemicals are produced in the United
States in greater volume. Benzene is an
important raw material for the chemical
industry and an occasional industrial sol-
vent, as well as a component of crude oil
and gasoline. Thus, it is virtually impossi-
ble for someone in the United States to
avoid low-level environmental exposure to
benzene. For example, benzene enters the
air through vehicle emissions, so anyone
who drives or is caught in traffic is
exposed. The chemical can seep into a
house from an attached garage, when ben-
zene in gasoline evaporates from the car's
hot engine and tank. Drivers filling gas
tanks usually get a hefty whiff and end up
with the odor of gasoline on their hands.
Indoors, some consumer products and fur-
nishings emit small amounts of benzene,
and refineries and coke oven plants emit
benzene into outdoor air. Benzene is just
one of the many hazardous constituents of
cigarette smoke. People may also be
exposed to benzene while showering when
the heat volatilizes benzene present in the
water.
The combined levels of all indoor and
outdoor exposures are very low, says Lance
Wallace of the EPA, "averaging only 5
parts per billion in the United States."
Wallace was project officer for EPA's Total
Exposure Assessment Methodology
(TEAM) studies, which measured 24-hour
personal exposures to selected chemicals,
including benzene. The environmental lev-
els of benzene measured by EPA are far
lower than the currently permitted work-
place standard of 1 part per million (ppm).
It is the disparity between the typically
low environmental levels and the compara-
tively high workplace exposures that chal-
lenges regulators and scientists assessing
risks and that concerns the oil and auto
industries worried about potentially stricter
regulations for the workplace and for
motor vehicle fuel and emissions. The key
questions center on whether low levels of
benzene cause leukemia or other adverse
health effects, the mechanism by which
benzene causes cancer, and whether the
mechanism at high doses is relevant at low
doses.
Answering these questions is hampered,
say many scientists, by the inability to
identify an animal model in which benzene
produces leukemia. Nonetheless, research-
ers are making advances by focusing their
efforts on more accurately quantifying
exposure, dose, and effects, for example, by
evaluating exposure in microenvironments
using molecular biology and epidemiologic
approaches, target tissue dosimetry, toxico-
kinetic modeling, and identifying biologi-
cal markers. Ultimately, their research aims
at illuminating the issue of high- to low-
dose extrapolation and the controversial
issue of how strictly benzene needs to be
regulated.
"We recognize that benzene can cause
leukemia at high levels of exposure, say 25,
50, or 100 parts per million in the work-
place," says Robert Drew of the American
Petroleum Institute. "But we disagree that
there is a risk of cancer at the lower levels
present in the environment." In contrast,
nine scientists and health professionals
have signed a letter arguing that the cur-
rent workplace standard for benzene (1
ppm) should be reduced dramatically
because "any higher than 0.1 ppm presents
a needless and preventable cancer danger."
One signer of the letter, which was sent to
the American Conference ofGovernmental
Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), is Eula
Bingham, former head ofthe Occupational
Safety and Health Administration during
the Carter administration. "We had con-
cerns about benzene when we set the 1
ppm standard in 1978," she says, "and
since then the evidence has magnified."
"Now," she adds, "we see that benzene is a
carcinogen for multiple organs, and we
have human experience supporting the
conclusion that this is a very dangerous
chemical."
A regulatory battle is expected on two
fronts: the first, as EPA prepares to regulate
motor vehicle fuel and vehicle emissions
under the Clean Air Act and the second, as
the ACGIH debates a proposal to lower its
recommendation for occupational expo-
sures from 1 ppm to 0.1 ppm. The values
adopted by ACGIH have regulatory
implications because some states (e.g.,
Cigarette smoke:
Benzene is one of the
many hazardous con-
stituents of cigarette
smoke.
Industrial uses:
Benzene is used as a raw
material for the chemical
industry and as an indus-
trial solvent.
Industrial emissions:
Benzene is emitted into
outdoor air by refineries
and coke oven plants.
Gasoline fumes:
Benzene may be inhaled
from gasoline evaporating
from a car's hot engine and
as drivers fill vehicle gas
tanks.
Vehicle emissions:
Benzene is a constituent
of vehicle emissions so
anyone driving or caught
in traffic may be exposed.
Water contaminant:
Benzene present in water
may be volatilized during a
S hot shower and inhaled.
Environmental Health Perspectives
'a
L
I)@
laT
276
WY 1
California) adopt them as workplace stan-
dards.
Adverse Health Effects
Leukemia linked to benzene exposure in
the workplace has been documented in
numerous case reports and epidemiologic
studies. For example, in Italy in the 1960s,
printing shop workers and shoemakers
exposed to benzene were found to have a
risk of leukemia 20 times higher than
expected. A 1977 study of U.S. rubber
workers at Goodyear facilities by Peter
Infante and associates at the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health found a statistically significant
increase in deaths from acute myelogenous
leukemia among workers exposed to ben-
zene in the range of 10-100 ppm. Finally a
recent study of the Swedish Cancer
Registry, published in the July/August
1993 issue of the Archives ofEnvironmental
Health, found an excess of acute myeloge-
nous leukemia among petrol station atten-
dants.
Strict OSHA standards make it unlike-
ly that large numbers of U.S. workers con-
tinue to be exposed to high levels of ben-
zene. Thus, epidemiologists interested in
studying the health effects of benzene are
turning to other countries that have not
yet implemented such strict exposure stan-
dards. Since the early-1980s, Yin Song-
nian and colleagues at the Chinese
Academy of Preventive Medicine have
been conducting a massive epidemiologic
study ofworkers exposed to benzene in 12
Chinese cities. In 1989, they reported a
statistically significant excess of leukemia
and lung cancer, along with possible
increases of liver and stomach cancer, and
lymphoma. The Yin report states that
"leukemia occurred in some workers with
as little as 6-10 ppm ofexposure."
The National Cancer
Institute is now co-sponsor-
ing the research in China
and expanding its scope.
Richard Hayes and Martha
Linet are co-principal inves-
tigators on the project.
Hayes says the cohort con-
tains shoemakers, spray
painters, and workers from
many other manufacturing
industries, with a recent
average exposure of 8 ppm. Eula Bingham-
Hayes reports that paint in very dangerous
China still contains benzene
as a solvent in the range of7-8%.
More work needs to be done to deter-
mine which blood-related cancers other
than leukemia and which solid tumors are
definitely related to benzene exposure. In
the judgment of Bernard Goldstein, direc-
tor of the Environmental and Occupa-
-B(
ch
tional Health Sciences Institute
at Rutgers, and former assistant
EPA administrator for research
and development, "It is more
likely than not that most hema-
tological neoplasms under the
heading of lymphoma or acute
lymphoblastic leukemia can be
caused by benzene." Goldstein
says he has no scientific proof,
but "I think more likely than
not, chronic leukemias and mul-
tiple myeloma also can be caused
by benzene." Goldstein says the
evidence on solid tumors is
Bernard Goldstein-More
likely than not, leukemia can
be caused by benzene.
much weaker. He recommends a meta-
analysis (group analysis of studies that may
enhance the ability to relate exposure to
response) of the epidemiologic database to
look at solid tumors.
Although cancer has driven the risk
assessment and regulation of benzene,
some human evidence links benzene expo-
sure to various blood abnormalities and
neurological, immunological, and repro-
ductive effects in exposed workers-all of
which need greater scrutiny.
Regulation ofBenzene
The International Agency for Research on
Cancer has designated benzene as a group
1 carcinogen ("with sufficient evidence of
carcinogenicity in humans"). These desig-
nations often affect standards-setting poli-
cies both in the United States and abroad.
In the United States, EPA's regulatory
clock is ticking for benzene and other haz-
ardous pollutants in motor vehicle fuels
and exhaust. By May 1995, EPA must pro-
pose new regulations for these pollutants,
under provisions of the 1990 Clean Air
Act Amendments. Questions about low-
dose effects of benzene will have to be
addressed in the regulations.
EPA has already completed
a study on motor vehicle-relat-
c0 ed air toxics, which was also
CD required under the Clean Air
_ Act Amendments. The report
says the current average level of
benzene in gasoline in the
United States is 1.5% and that
the fraction of benzene in the
exhaust generally runs 3-5%,
depending on control technol-
ogy. EPA may choose to
enzene is a require a reduction in the ben-
emical. zene content of gasoline, as the
agency has already done for
reformulated gasoline (which has a limit of
1.0% benzene). Benzene also can be pro-
duced from engine combustion of other
aromatic hydrocarbons present in gasoline.
Thus, simply reducing the levels of ben-
zene in fuel will help solve the benzene
emission problem. Other regulatory
approaches such as alterna-
tive fuels and energy sour-
s ces and vapor recovery may
@ also be necessary.
C Such approaches have
I been used to reduce smog
since the 1970s in Cali-
fornia, where 4000 gas sta-
tions in large cities have
had to use vapor recovery
systems. Starting in 1987,
an additional 1000 gas sta-
tions had to install vapor
recovery systems to reduce
benzene air emissions in
response to the California Air Resource
Board rules designating benzene as a toxic
air contaminant "because of its ability to
cause cancer.
Attempts to regulate workplace expo-
sure to benzene have resulted in bitter legal
battles-all the way up to the U.S.
Supreme Court. In 1978 OSHA issued a
regulation reducing the permissible ben-
zene exposure from 10 ppm to 1 ppm over
an 8-hour day to protect workers from
cancer. OSHA subsequently was sued by
both labor unions and by industry (includ-
ing various chemical, oil, and rubber com-
panies and their trade associations). The
Supreme Court later vacated the OSHA
standard, stating that OSHA had not
shown it would achieve a "substantial
reduction in significant risk" by reducing
levels from 10 ppm to 1 ppm. The court
ordered OSHA to reconsider the standard.
In 1987 a new benzene standard, again at
1 ppm, was issued and is now in effect.
Employers are required to start monitoring
when exposures reach 0.5 ppm.
Peter Infante, an epidemiologist with
OSHA, argues that the current permissible
exposure limit for benzene carries with it a
significant risk ofleukemia. "Based on can-
cer data, the benzene level should be
stricter than 1 ppm," he contends. "The
agency was not able to go lower than 1
ppm because of economic feasibility."
Infante believes that a standard based on
health risk alone should be no higher than
0.1 ppm, the level proposed by the
ACGIH in July 1990. Carl Mackerer of
the Mobil Oil Corporation, strongly dis-
agrees. He believes that regulating benzene
at levels below 1 ppm is unreasonable: "It
would cost billions of dollars, be extremely
difficult for industry to meet, and be of
questionable positive health impact."
Exposure
Year after year, workplace exposure levels
to benzene continue to drop. Exposures
early in the century sometimes were as
high as 1000 ppm. Several sources say that
most major U.S. employers today are try-
ing to keep benzene exposures under 0.5
Volume 102, Number 3, March 1994 277
v
ppm, the OSHA "action level," which trig-
gers special monitoring requirements. In
developing countries, on the other hand,
typical benzene exposures are much higher.
A joint U.S.-China study, for example,
found levels of occupational benzene expo-
sure for workers in 12 Chinese cities aver-
aged 8 ppm in 1987. Workers in the study
were primarily involved in spray painting,
shoe manufacturing, synthetic rubber pro-
duction, and adhesive production.
In contrast, EPA says
outdoor air levels in the
United States are usually well
under 5 parts per billion
(ppb), often ranging from 1I
to 2 ppb. The largest contrib-
utors are mobile sources,
which EPA says account for
approximately 85% of the
total ambient air emissions,
with the majority coming
from exhaust and the rest
from evaporative emissions Lance Wallac
(from hot engines) and refu- sources of expeling emissions (from filling regulated.
gas tanks). The remaining
15% of benzene emissions come from sta-
tionary sources, such as refinery and coke
oven operations.
Wallace concludes from the TEAM
studies that mobile sources contribute
more benzene to 24-hour personal expo-
sures than do industrial emissions. The
more time people spend in cars, the more
benzene exposure they receive. Some of his
other results are significant. First, Wallace
found that indoor air usually has higher
levels of benzene than outdoor air. "On
average," Wallace says, "the outdoor air
contributes 2 ppb to your benzene expo-
sure and the indoor air contributes 3 ppb."
Wallace attributes much of the higher
indoor levels to benzene entering from
autos in attached garages and to emissions
from consumer products that contain ben-
zene such as paint or adhesives.
Second, Wallace calculated that main-
stream cigarette smoke provides a larger
dose of benzene to the smoker than all
other sources combined. For example, per-
sonal exposures during the course of a 24-
hour day averaged approximately 5 ppb for
a nonsmoker. A smoker received an addi-
tional 30 ppb. "Ambient air levels are so
low," says Wallace, "that if the person is a
smoker, most of his benzene exposure will
be from cigarettes." The studies also
showed a 50% increase in benzene expo-
sures for spouses and children in the homes
ofsmokers.
In a 1990 article in Risk Analysis,
Wallace concluded that EPA's "current
environmental regulations and control
strategies are misdirected" in that "impor-
tant sources of exposure are not regulated
ce-
posL
in any way, whereas unimportant sources
are heavily regulated." Environmentalist
Ed Rothschild of Citizen Action, in
Washington, DC, criticizes these conclu-
sions, arguing that when Congress passed
the Clean Air Act Amendments, it asked
for regulation of mobile air toxics, not
smoking. "No one disagrees that people
who smoke get lots of benzene exposure,"
says Rothschild. "But that can't be used as
a rationale for EPA to stop reduction of
benzene emissions." Toxicol-
ogist Myron Mehlman of the
' Environmental and Occupa-
_ tional Health Sciences Insti-
tute at Rutgers University,
argues that smoking and "self-
serve" filling of gas tanks are
avoidable behaviors, but that
exposure to benzene emissions
from vehicles must be regulat-
ed because it is involuntary.
"No one in our society can
avoid it," says Myron. Wallace
peare not finds the highest peak expo-
sures to benzene when driving
and refueling cars. "It takes
about 70 seconds to fill a tank," Wallace
says. "During that time the exposure goes
from 2 ppb to 1000 ppb." Wallace adds,
"You can still see a difference in the breath
of people 24 hours after they fill their tank
with gasoline."
Jerry Blancato, a research biologist with
EPA's Exposure Monitoring Program in
Las Vegas, Nevada, says he would like to
see more research to characterize possibly
unrecognized sources of benzene exposure
inside homes, including a better look at
heating and cooking fuels such as natural
gas and oil. And although Wallace's
research claims negligible benzene intake
from food and water, NIEHS researchers
Eric Johnson and George Lucier have
called for a closer examination of benzene
exposure from routes other than air.
Johnson and Lucier detected the benzene
metabolite muconic acid, found in ben-
zene workers, in the general public, sug-
gesting the possibility that some people
may be exposed to more than 1 ppm of
benzene, some of it from unknown
sources.
The Health Effects Institute of
Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is jointly
funded by the motor vehicle industry and
EPA, held a series of workshops on
"Research Priorities for Mobile Air Toxics"
in 1992-1993. The HEI report on these
workshops contains a lengthy series of
research recommendations on benzene.
The report suggests that better assessments
of the contribution of benzene from
attached garages need to be conducted,
along with studies of how home construc-
tion could be modified "to reduce the
transfer of benzene vapors into the living
areas." The HEI report also cites the need
for mathematical models to assess human
indoor exposure.
Exposure Analysis in Risk
Assessment
Exposure assessment in epidemiologic
studies is an important parameter in the
development of risk assessments. The link
between exposure levels of toxic chemicals
and observed adverse effects is used to
determine the risk expected from contin-
ued exposure and to set regulations. EPA
conducted a risk assessment of benzene in
the 1980s and calculated a cancer risk of
2.6 per 100 for someone breathing 1 ppm
of benzene in the air over a 70-year life-
time. To calculate that risk, EPA used sev-
eral epidemiologic studies containing ben-
zene exposure data, including the cohort
study ofrubber workers by Rinsky and col-
leagues at NIOSH. The exposure assess-
ment methods in the Rinsky study have
become a focus of attention in discussions
of benzene's risk assessment in the scientif-
ic literature and in the HEI report.
A recent paper in EHP (volume 100)
by toxicologist Robert Snyder and col-
leagues at Rutgers describes the
Rinsky/NIOSH study of Goodyear work-
ers as "one ofthe most thorough retrospec-
tive exposure assessments ever done on a
cohort of workers." But the Snyder paper
also argues that "it appears that NIOSH
significantly underestimated the extent of
exposure during World War II."
Rinsky says the industrial hygiene mea-
surements at the plants studied were
unusually comprehensive for such retro-
spective studies. Nonetheless, levels ofben-
zene were not measured during all years.
Rinsky's approach to estimating exposures
was to use all available monitoring data; if
none were available for a certain period of
time, he chose as the estimated level a
point midway between the recorded mea-
surements on either side of that time peri-
od. If anything, Rinsky theorizes, his expo-
sures may be overestimated in part because
industrial hygienists generally performed
sampling in "trouble spots."
This issue is critical to the risk assess-
ment of benzene, particularly to industries
that are affected by standards based on
these assessments. If the exposures that
caused leukemia were higher than Rinsky
estimated, for example, then the resulting
risk calculations would be lower and stan-
dards would not need to be as strict.
The American Petroleum Institute
(API) has supported a number of efforts,
including those of Dennis J. Paustenbach,
vice president of Chem-Risk, Inc., a con-
suiting firm in Alameda, California, to
reevaluate the Rinsky exposure assump-
Environmental Health Perspectives278
* ollrealkylII|9
tions. Paustenbach concluded that almost
all workers were exposed to higher levels of
benzene than Rinsky had estimated. In his
evaluation, for example, Paustenbach con-
cluded that many workers during the war
worked longer than 40-hour weeks and
thereby received higher exposures. Using
Paustenbach's exposure estimates, Mary
Burr-Paxton and colleagues at API came
up with a somewhat lower estimate of
occupational risk than Rinsky.
When referring to the Rinsky study,
the HEI report notes the controversy over
the exposure estimates. "What is contro-
versial," says Rinsky, "is the way the
American Petroleum Institute went after
my study after the ACGIH recommended
lowering the workplace standard to 0.1
ppm in 1990." Rinsky defends his work as
solid, adding that it was based on the sam-
pling data "as it existed, without any
attempt to read things into it." He says, "I
used a classic epidemiologic approach,
whereas the approach used by Paustenbach
and colleagues was to do everything they
could to maximize the levels ofbenzene."
Robert Drew of API defends
Paustenbach's work and the API's partici-
pation in it, arguing that "it
was a reasonable effort to
show that exposures were
actually higher than Rinsky
had estimated." Drew says
that there is now a reasonable
body of evidence suggesting
that exposures were higher
than EPA had assumed,
"hence benzene is not as
potent as EPA thinks it is."
Several researchers using
linear dose extrapolations
from the Rinsky data have
ended up with estimates of
environmental leukemia risk
comparable to EPA's. In con-
trast, according to the HEI
report, a recent assessment by
Louis Cox of Cox Associates
in Denver, Colorado, and
Paolo Ricci of Ricci and
Molton in Berkeley, Cali-
fornia, using a nonlinear approach to the
dose-response relationship and informa-
tion from physiologically based pharmaco-
kinetic models, ended up with a risk esti-
mate much lower than the previous assess-
ments. Since 1992, the journal Risk
Analysis has carried an ongoing series of
articles and letters between these authors
and others concerned about benzene's can-
cer risk assessment.
Animal Bioassays
Benzene is an example of a chemical that
caused cancer in humans before it was
found to be an experimental carcinogen.
Volume 102, Number 3, March 1994 279
I e
The chemical causes blood abnormalities
and aplastic anemia in most animal species
exposed. It is also a potent carcinogen at
many different sites in rats and mice,
although no animal species has been iden-
tified that consistently develops leukemia
after exposure to benzene.
The first successful animal work on
benzene's carcinogenicity was conducted in
1982 by Caesare Maltoni and his col-
leagues in Bologna, Italy. In mice and rats,
Maltoni was able to produce tumors in the
Zymbal gland (a small external gland
behind the ear of a mouse or rat), oral and
nasal cavities, skin, forestomach, and
mammary glands, as well as angiosarcomas
of the liver, hemolymphoreticular neo-
plasms, lung cancer, and possibly
hepatomas.
The largest animal study ever conduct-
ed on benzene was done by the National
Toxicology Program and the NIEHS. The
bioassay of rats and mice found benzene-
induced cancers in the oral cavity, skin,
Zymbal gland, lung, Harderian gland,
preputial gland, hematopoietic system
(lymphoma), skin, mammary gland, and
probably forestomach. Based on the bioas-
say, toxicologist James Huff of NIEHS
says, "I predicted in the late 1980s that we
would start to see humans with different
types of cancer from benzene in addition
to leukemia; already we are beginning to
see other cancers in the Yin study from
China." He adds, "If someone dies from
leukemia, they are not likely to have an
autopsy, so you will never know if they
had other tumors."
Many scientists strongly recommend
research "to develop an animal model for
benzene-induced leukemia in humans."
The HEI report concludes that "in the
absence of proper models, it is impossible
to study the mechanism of benzene-
induced leukemia." The report also rec-
ommends further work on benzene metab-
olism in monkeys and chimpanzees to see
if those species could serve as models for
leukemia.
Several investigators believe that it is
possible to place too much emphasis on
the need for the perfect animal model.
"We don't need an expensive monkey
model, we already have the best model in
the world," says Mehlman. "It's the
human." Michele Medinsky, a toxicologist
at the Chemical Industry Institute of
Toxicology, argues that it may be expen-
sive to test monkeys or keep searching for
an animal model in which to produce
leukemia, but "it is also expensive to set a
very low exposure standard." Medinsky
adds that her work on pharmacokinetic
modeling of benzene is hampered by the
lack of a good animal model, which results
in uncertainty about which toxic metabo-
Michele Medinsky-Searching for animal models
is expensive-so is setting very low exposure
standards.
lites are important in leukemia.
Mackerer, of Mobil Oil's environmen-
tal sciences laboratory, which conducts
research on benzene metabolism and bio-
markers, urges evaluating the Zymbal
gland's utility in helping to understand
benzene's mechanism, suggesting that the
gland might serve as a potential model.
The Zymbal gland is a consistent site of
tumor in the rodent studies. In fact, Huff
points out it is the only organ in which
cancer has been produced in both sexes of
both species. Mackerer suggests looking at
whether chromosomal changes occurring
in the Zymbal gland tumor cells are "anal-
ogous to the changes we see in bone mar-
row leukemia."
Snyder is not convinced. "I still don't
think Zymbal gland tumors, even in cul-
ture, are a model for benzene-induced
leukemia," he says. "We'd like the tumor
to be the kind ofcancer we see in people."
Metabolism and Physiologically
Based Pharmocokinetic Models
Benzene undergoes many changes when it
is inhaled. For example, many different
metabolites are formed by the liver via sev-
eral metabolic pathways involving several
different enzyme systems. "Benzene can go
from the lungs to the liver where enzymes
metabolize it," says Medinsky. For exam-
ple, one enzyme metabolizes benzene to
phenol, and the same enzyme metabolizes
benzene to hydroquinone. Then the
metabolites are sent out of the liver to the
bone marrow, where some research sug-
gests they are metabolized to a different
reactive metabolite which may be actively
responsible for the toxicity.
Medinsky has developed one of the
physiologically based pharmocokinetic
models for benzene, which is like a com-
puterized mathematical road map to pre-
dict how much benzene gets to the bone
marrow (the "target dose") after differing
exposures. Medinsky says her model con-
siders how much benzene is inhaled and
the rate of respiration, along with the
chemical's solubility in the blood and bone
marrow and the rate at which blood circu-
lates through the body to transfer the
material from the lung to the liver to the
bone marrow.
Target tissue dosimetry is an important
issue, says Medinsky. "What you want to
be able to predict is, given exposure to 300
ppm of benzene, what is the time course
for the benzene metabolites to be in the
bone marrow? And given exposure to 1
ppm, what does that time course look
like?" She argues that because so many dif-
ferent metabolites are formed, what hap-
pens at a high dose to people may not be
the same as what happens at a low dose-a
crucial issue with respect to benzene-relat-
ed cancers at environmental levels.
Toxicologist Rogene Henderson says
there are some surprises about high doses
versus low doses when studying the meta-
bolic and detoxification pathways of ben-
zene. An important issue, she says, is how
much of the internal benzene dose
becomes the biologically effective dose. In
her work at Lovelace Inhalation
Toxicology Laboratory in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, in collaboration with Lucier
of NIEHS and Linda Birnbaum of EPA,
Henderson found that proportionately
more of the (putative) toxic metabolites are
formed at lower doses of benzene than at
higher doses. "What this means for risk
assessment," she says, "is if you extrapolate
from high-dose animal studies to predict
low-dose effect, you may underestimate
the risk."
More research is still needed to identify
with certainty which of the many metabo-
lites of benzene may be toxic, or whether
there is only one toxic metabolite. The
HEI report recommends studies to charac-
terize the mixture of metabolites delivered
from the liver to the bone marrow, with
particular attention on the relationship
between metabolite concentration and cell
damage.
Marrow Aplasia and Leukemia
Case reports show that workers with pro-
longed exposure to high levels of benzene
have developed pancytopenia, a blood dis-
order characterized by decreased red and
white blood cells and platelets, the worst
form ofaplastic anemia.
Several researchers, including Snyder,
contend that aplastic anemia or some other
form of myelodysplasia (blood marrow
abnormalities) may be a necessary step in
the development of leukemia after benzene
Environmental Health Perspectives280
II
EIlilro
exposure. According to Snyder, the pro-
gression is from bone marrow damage to
aplastic anemia to myelodysplasia and then
leukemia. "To go through this process,"
says Snyder, "the person must be exposed
to substantial levels of benzene, definitely
above 0.1 ppm, maybe above 1 ppm,
maybe even above 10 ppm." The HEI
report suggests this issue deserves further
investigation to determine "whether or not
these mechanisms apply at low environ-
mental levels." Goldstein, on the other
hand, believes it's unreasonable to suggest
that aplastic anemia is a necessary step in
developing leukemia, but he agrees that we
need to know more about whether
myelodysplasia is an independent event or
is related to leukemia.
The HEI report suggests that more
research is needed into whether "slight
decreases in circulating cells, resulting
from mild bone marrow damage, can be
indicative of a risk of eventual leukemia."
Medinsky says this is an area of research
calling for an animal model to test the
linkage.
Biomarkers ofExposure and Effect
Several types of biomarkers, including
muconic acid in urine, are being evaluated
as possible biological markers of benzene
exposure for both occupationally exposed
workers and the general population.
Historically, simple blood counts have been
used as markers of adverse effects to ben-
zene. More sophisticated cytogenetic tests
are now being evaluated, although with few
exceptions, studies attempting to show
mutagenic activity of benzene in vitro have
been negative. Benzene and its metabolites
have been shown to cause damage or breaks
in the genetic material, as well as chromoso-
mal aberrations. For example, Mackerer
reports that in Mobil Oil's laboratory,
researchers have found micronuclei in
Zymbal gland tumor tissue from animals
exposed to low doses ofbenzene.
NIEHS has been conducting studies of
adult leukemia patients and analyzing
bone marrow for evidence ofchromosomal
abnormalities. According to investigator
Dale Sandler, leukemia patients with ras
oncogene mutations were more likely to
report exposure to benzene or unspecified
organic solvents. Sandler and colleagues
are also conducting a case-control study of
600 leukemia patients, in which an associ-
ation between loss of chromosome 7 and
solvent exposure appears to be confirmed.
Again, the solvent exposures were self-
reported, but many solvent products were
verified to contain benzene when NIEHS
investigators obtained classified data and
information from the manufacturers.
Studies of DNA adducts have not yield-
ed consistent results in animal or human
studies. Questions about whether benzene
exposure causes DNA damage are being
considered in two molecular epidemiology
studies of workers in Shanghai, China,
being conducted by Nathaniel Rothman,
an epidemiologist with the Occupational
Studies section of the National Cancer
Institute, and Martyn Smith, a toxicologist
at the University of California at Berkeley.
Rothman and Smith are conducting a
case-control study ofthe workers diagnosed
for compensation purposes as having been
"benzene poisoned" (defined as having evi-
dence of benzene exposure and specific
blood abnormalities). This study is consid-
ering the issue of genetic susceptibility to
benzene poisoning. According to Rothman,
"We are looking at the impact of variation
in enzyme activity among different workers
on the risk of having an episode of benzene
poisoning."
The cross-sectional study looks at
workers currently exposed to an average of
30 ppm of benzene. Smith says the goal of
this study is to determine the level and
Andrea Hricko has previously written for EHP
about arsenic.
persistence of benzene-induced micronu-
clei and chromosome damage and to
detect and identify DNA adducts to help
characterize the risk. Rothman adds that
the study has prompted some Chinese fac-
tories with heavily exposed workers to con-
sider ways to reduce the levels of benzene,
such as substituting less toxic solvents and
providing better ventilation.
The HEI report recommends expand-
ing the tools ofmolecular biology to devel-
op sensitive and specific markers of expo-
sure to identify susceptible populations if
they exist and to permit better characteri-
zation of benzene's cancer effects. These
biomarker studies in China may ultimately
provide the first reliable data on the
dose-response relationship of benzene
exposure and chromosomal effects.
Research Recommendations
The most thorough recent review of
research issues involving risk assessment
for benzene is found in the HEI report.
Some top-priority issues on benzene in the
report's final conclusions include exposure
in microenvironments, whether benzene
causes solid tumors, development ofa suit-
able animal model and dose-response
models, and refinement of molecular biol-
ogy tools. The report also names as priori-
ties research to develop a better under-
standing of benzene's mechanisms and
research on the link between chromosomal
changes and leukemia. Lucier, who chaired
the HEI benzene working group, stresses
the need for multidisciplinary teams of
researchers, including epidemiologists,
mathematicians, molecular biologists, and
toxicologists. "We need solid scientific
data at each ofthese levels," he said, "to fill
knowledge gaps that create uncertainty in
current risk assessments for benzene."
Andrea Hricko
9TE TIM HA COwbME...
.12. ...to send for the latest copy of the free Consumer Information .12.
* Catalog. It lists more than 200 free or low-cost government { *
9 4 publications on topics like money, food, jobs, children, cars, 9 3
health, and federal benefits. Send your name and address to:
Consumer Information Center
Department TH
Pueblo, Colorado 81009
A public service of the U.S. General Services Administration
Volume 102, Number 3, March 1994 281
