Environmental Health and Hispanic Children
Raphael Metzger, Jane L. Delgado, and Robert Herrell
National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human Services Organizations, Washington, DC
There are numerous indicators that Hispanics face a disproportionate risk of exposure to environmental hazards. Ambient air pollution, worker
exposure to chemicals, indoor air pollution, and drinking water quality are among the top four threats to human health and are all areas in which
indicators point to elevated risk for Hispanic populations. These data, juxtaposed with data on the health status of Hispanics, tell us that the
environmental health status of Hispanics and their children is poor. At the same time, significant inadequacies in the collection of data on Hispanics
make it difficult to make improving Hispanic environmental health status a priority. These inadequacies include the failure to use Hispanic identifiers in
data collection and failure to collect sample sizes large enough to allow for breakouts of data by Hispanic subgroup. In addressing environmental
justice issues, the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) should prioritize
improving the quantifiability of environmental exposures and risk based on race or ethnicity. However, improving data should not be the prerequisite
to significant, affirmative steps by DHHS and U.S. EPA to address environmental and environmental health problems facing Hispanic communities.
In particular, a health-based approach to environmental justice should be the priority. - Environ Health Perspect 103(Suppl 6):25-32 (1995)
Key words: Hispanic, health, environment, children, data collection, environmental justice, minority, ambient air, water quality, indoor air,
pesticides
Introduction
The Children's Environmental Health
Network (CEHN) Symposium, Preventing
Child Exposures to Environmental
Hazards was a public health milestone
because it recognized that for purposes of
environmental health the issues of children
are different. This is the starting point for
CEHN's development of a research and
policy agenda to address hazardous envi-
ronmental exposures to children. The
National Coalition of Hispanic Health and
Human Services Organization's
(COSSMHO) objective in helping to pro-
vide an environmental justice context for
this landmark symposium is to ensure that
the research and policy agenda that results
is meaningful for all children, including
Hispanic children.
This paper was presented at the Symposium on
Preventing Child Exposures to Environmental
Hazards: Research and Policy Issues held 18-19
March 1994 in Washington, DC. Manuscript received:
December 5, 1994; accepted: May 15, 1995.
The National Coalition of Hispanic Health and
Human Services Organizations (COSSMHO) is a pri-
vate, nonprofit, membership organization dedicated
to improving the health and well-being of the nation's
Hispanic population. Founded in 1973, COSSMHO is
the only national Hispanic organization focused on
health. COSSMHO pursues its mission through policy
and research activities and programming in partner-
ship with community-based member organizations.
COSSMHO does not accept funds from alcohol or
tobacco companies or their subsidiaries or parent
companies.
Address correspondence to Raphael Metzger,
National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human
Services Organizations (COSSMHO), 1501 Sixteenth
Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036. Telephone
(202) 797-4338. Fax (202) 265-8027.
A persistent theme underlying most
discussions of environmental health is the
issue of causation. The difficulty of estab-
lishing causation is rooted in the fact that
...the amount ofexposure sustained
by study subjects and the conditions
under which that exposure occurs
generally are beyond the direct con-
trol of the investigator. Human
populations are exposed to multiple
pollutants whose individual, let
alone joint, effects are not known.
Under these conditions, inaccurate
measurement of exposure and the
effects of extraneous factors on dis-
ease occurrence often present major
threats to study validity. (1)
Further, such research may set inappropri-
ate toxicity levels for Hispanics and Asians,
given recent data that show significantly
different pharmacokinetic responses to
drugs in drug trials compared to responses
in non-Hispanic whites (2). These can be
taken as an indication of variable responses
to substances in the environment based on
ethnicity. Thus, although causality is an
important issue, complete research in this
area must account for variation in response
based on ethnicity and other biologic factors.
The extreme difficulty of not only
establishing causation but also accounting
for variable responses based on ethnicity
underscores the futility and impracticality
ofapproaches to environmental health that
are predicated on proof of harm. While
research into causation is critical, preserva-
tion and improvement of public health
necessarily require a protective approach to
environmental regulation-one that seeks
to prevent exposure to potentially harmful
substances even without certainty of cause.
Further, data are available from which
sound indications of risk can be deter-
mined for various populations. These indi-
cators should be the basis for federal, state,
and private efforts to achieve more equi-
table environmental protection for all peo-
ple living in the United States, including
Hispanics who constitute a major segment
ofthe population.
Demographics: Hispanic
Children
Hispanics constitute a significant portion
of the American population-about 22.4
million persons in the United States (3),
and an additional 3.5 million persons in
Puerto Rico (3). Hispanics are also a
youthful population, with a median age of
only 26.1 years compared to 27.7 for
blacks and 33.6 for whites (4). High birth
and fertility rates characterize Hispanics in
the United States; they had a birth rate of
26.2 per 1000 persons in 1989, compared
to an overall birth rate of 16.3 per 1000 for
the United States in general (5).
Additionally, the "estimated fertility rate
for U.S. Hispanic women aged 15 to 44
years was 104.9, 60% above the rate of
65.7 for non-Hispanic women" (5). These
high rates, together with the relative youth
of the Hispanic population, have led to
projections that by 2010 Hispanics will
number 31 million persons (6). Addi-
tionally, the 1990 Census of Population
and Housing reveals that 29.5% of the
Hispanic population was 14 years of age
and under, compared to 20.8% of the
Environmental Health Perspectives 25
METZGER ETAL.
non-Hispanic population (3). Indeed, in
the same year, "63% of Hispanic families
had children under 18 living with the fam-
ily, compared to 47% for non-Hispanic
families" (3). The characteristics of high
birth and fertility rates together with
youthfulness result in a substantial propor-
tion of the Hispanic population being
composed of children. Unfortunately, rela-
tively little is specifically known about the
environmental health status of Hispanic
children because ofa lack ofdata.
Key Overall Findings
Inadequate Data Collection Systems
Overall, since the direction ofpolicy efforts
and programs to address serious problems
are at least in part driven by data, the lack
of data that would be useful in assessing
with specificity the environmental health
status of Hispanic children remains an
important issue for Hispanic communities.
The Clinton Administration's 11 February
1994 Executive Order on environmental
justice may prove useful in helping to
address the issue of data collection on
Hispanics. While the provisions of the
executive order are peppered throughout
the text with the caveat "whenever practi-
cable and appropriate," a notable exception
is the provision that requires federal agen-
cies to "provide minority populations and
low-income populations the opportunity
to comment on the development and
design of research strategies undertaken
pursuant to this order" (7). At present it is
still unclear which studies will be desig-
nated as undertaken pursuant to the execu-
tive order, and therefore fall under this
definition. Nevertheless, this is a poten-
tially important precedent, particularly so
for Hispanic communities. To date,
Hispanics continue to be regularly excluded
from important federal research and data
collection activities through methodologies
that fail to require ethnic identifiers, do not
oversample, do not collect samples ofa size
sufficient to allow break out by Hispanic
subgroup, or rely on interviews conducted
by field researchers without the appropriate
linguistic competence.
These data collection issues are well
documented. The most recent General
Accounting Office study on Hispanic
access to health care reports that while
there are "sources of data that do provide
some useful information on the health sta-
tus of the Hispanic population...no exist-
ing database currently provides accurate,
complete, and available data on the entire
Hispanic population, including subgroups,
residing in the United States" (8). Delgado
and Estrada state the problem more
specifically, noting that the U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) has 21 national health data col-
lection systems which:
...largely form the basis of our
quantitative knowledge of public
health in the United States.... Of
the 21 systems, 6 do not collect
Hispanic population data, including
the Medicare statistical system.
Furthermore, of these data systems,
only the National Vital Statistics
System collects data for all Hispanic
subpopulation groups. Seventeen of
the 21 data systems do not collect
samples ofa size adequate for analy-
sis for any of the four major
Hispanic subpopulation groups. (9)
While the Office of Management and
Budget has provided the appropriate stan-
dards for federal data collection efforts
encompassing race and ethnicity in its
Directive No. 15 (10), the exclusion of
Hispanics from critical national data sys-
tems has persisted. Until changes occur in
federal data collection and reporting, the
information needed to determine the envi-
ronmental health status of Hispanic chil-
dren with specificity will continue to elude
policy makers, and Hispanic children will
continue to be the victims of inequitable
federal responses to health and environ-
mental health problems. An excellent case
study of the importance of sound data to
establishing risk is provided by the recent
attention focused on the siting of haz-
ardous waste treatment, storage, and
disposal facilities (TSDFs).
Unfair Siting and
Unequal Enforcement
Various studies have sought to document
that TSDFs are disproportionately located
in black and Hispanic communities.
Research conducted by Public Data Access,
Inc. for the United Church of Christ
Commission on Racial Justice (UCCCRJ),
which used ZIP code areas as the primary
geographic unit, found that race and eth-
nicity are the strongest predictors of com-
mercial hazardous waste activity (11).
While this study would benefit from analy-
sis that breaks out the specific figures for
Hispanics and blacks and has been criti-
cized for using a too large primary geo-
graphic area for its computations, it is the
first widely recognized attempt to docu-
ment that a disproportionate number of
TSDFs are located in Hispanic and black
communities. Further, substantial anecdo-
tal evidence from COSSMHO member
agencies and others in the southwestern
United States supports the notion that
TSDFs and other sources of risk such as
chemical plants, refineries, and other
industrial operations pose threats to the
health and well-being of Hispanics living
near them.
The issues of the disproportionate sit-
ing of TSDFs and other operations in
Hispanic and black communities are of
particular concern because of potential
effects on health to those living in the areas
surrounding such facilities. For example,
various studies have documented serious
negative health effects among workers at
hazardous waste incinerators (12), which
suggests the possibility of similar effects on
persons living in the surrounding area.
Further, there is compelling evidence that
regulatory agencies such as the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S.
EPA), whether intentionally or uninten-
tionally, enforce environmental law differ-
ently in Hispanic and black communities.
The strongest analysis of this to date was
offered by The National Law Journal, a
Washington-based weekly periodical.
Among its findings were that penalties
issued pursuant to U.S. hazardous waste
laws at sites "having the greatest white pop-
ulation were about 500% higher than
penalties at sites with the greatest minority
population" (13). The study also found
numerous other disparities that suggest
unequal protection for Hispanics and
blacks under the various environmental
statutes. Environmental justice advocates
have found this evidence to be less than
compelling among those who argue that,
with regard to the siting process, econom-
ics is the principle determinant of likeli-
hood to live near a TSDF. The argument
over economics and market forces does not
answer the issue of differential enforce-
ment, however. Rather than becoming
entangled in formalistic arguments regard-
ing the role of economics in propensity to
live near a TSDF, it is important to
remember that the principle reason siting is
of concern is because of potentially delete-
rious effects on health. To this end, the
broader categories of concern articulated
by this article provide a health-based
approach to environmental justice that
relies on scientifically established areas of
top concern for public health.
Environmental Health Perspectives26
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTHAND HISPANIC CHILDREN
Top High-Risk Hunan Exposures:
Threats to Hispanic Health
In 1987 and again in 1990, the U.S. EPA
convened its Science Advisory Board (SAB)
to determine the top environmental threats
to human health. The 1987 U. S. EPA SAB
considered four major types ofrisk-cancer
risks, noncancer health risks, ecological
effects, and welfare effects-in an evalua-
tion of 31 environmental problems based
on both quantitative data and expert judg-
ment (14). The results of the evaluation
included an U.S. EPA ranking of environ-
mental hazards on the basis of cancer risk,
as follows: a) radon/worker exposure to
chemicals; b) pesticide residue on food;
c) indoor air pollutants other than radon/
consumer exposure to chemicals; d) haz-
ardous/toxic air pollutants; e) depletion of
stratospheric ozone; f) hazardous waste
sites-inactive; g) drinking water; and
h) application of pesticides (14). More
recently, in 1990 the U.S. EPA SAB's
Relative Risk Reduction Strategies Com-
mittee released a report which, while not
ranking risk from highest to lowest, identi-
fied more generally the highest-risk envi-
ronmental exposures for humans. This
listing substantially overlapped with the
ranking of risk developed by the U.S. EPA
in 1987. The top four high-risk human
exposures are:
* ambient air pollutions
* worker exposure to chemicals in indus-
try and agriculture
* pollution indoors
* pollutants in drinking water (15).
These two separate determinations by
the U.S. EPA of the top threats to human
health are important because they provide
expert criteria by which to set environ-
mental policy-making priorities to protect
the public health, including the environ-
mental justice issues that are part of these
critical public health questions. Further
examination of each of the high-risk expo-
sure areas reveals that, in terms of risk,
Hispanics either fare the worst or face
significant threats to health for every area
identified by the U.S. EPA as a top threat
to human health.
U S. EPA High-risk Human E&posure:
Air Pollutions. Acute effects of air pollu-
tion on the respiratory system include "trig-
gering or aggravating of asthmatic attacks,
exacerbation of symptoms of chronic
obstructive disease, increased upper or lower
respiratory infections, transient changes in
pulmonary function, increased respiratory
symptom reporting, increased respiratory
hospital admissions or doctor visits, and
increased daily mortality" (16). Chronic
effects of air pollution on the respiratory
system include "promotion of the develop-
ment of asthma, increase in non-specific
airway responsiveness, reduced level oflung
function, increased rate of lung function
decline, decreased rate of lung growth,
development of chronic obstructive pul-
monary diseases, increased reporting ofper-
sistent respiratory symptoms, lung cancer,
and increased mortality" (16).
The chronic and acute health effects of
exposure to air pollution are in large part
responsible for introduction of air pollu-
tion control laws in the United States. The
Clean Air Act (CAA) (18), which "estab-
lishes comprehensive sets of measures to
control outdoor air pollution throughout
the nation" (17), is the modern mecha-
nism for national regulation of air quality
by the U.S. EPA. To control the amount
of pollution in the air, the U.S. EPA sets
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS)-uniform, national air quality
standards that restrict ambient levels ofcer-
tain pollutants to protect the public health
(17). According to ยง108(a)(2) of the CAA
(18), these NAAQS must "accurately
reflect the latest scientific knowledge use-
ful in indicating the kind and extent of all
identifiable effects on public health or wel-
fare which may be expected from the pres-
ence of such pollutant in the ambient air."
NAAQS exist for particulate matter
(which includes emissions from sources
such as incinerators), lead, ozone, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen oxide, and sulfur
dioxide (17).
Unfortunately, Hispanics appear to face
elevated risk for developing acute and
chronic responses to exposure to air pollu-
tion because a disproportionate number of
Hispanics live in areas failing to meet one
or more NAAQS. Recent research reveals
that 80% of Hispanics live in an area fail-
ing to meet one U.S. EPA air quality stan-
dard compared to 65% of blacks and 57%
of whites (19). Additionally, in areas fail-
ing to meet two NAAQS, three NAAQS,
and four or more NAAQS, Hispanics are
consistently significantly worse off as mea-
sured by percentage of the population liv-
ing in these nonattainment areas. Sixty
percent of Hispanics, 50% of blacks, and
33% of whites live in areas failing to meet
two or more NAAQS; 31% of Hispanics,
20% of blacks, and 12% of whites live in
areas failing to meet three or more NAAQS;
and finally, 15% of Hispanics, 10% of
blacks, and 5% ofwhites live in areas failing
to meet four or more NAAQS (19).
There are some specific data on health
outcomes related to air pollution that are
consistent with the acute and chronic
health effects from exposure to air pollu-
tion. The American Lung Association
reports that "63% ofpreadolescent children
reside in counties classified as nonattain-
ment for one or more NAAQS" (20).
Further, "61% of pediatric asthma cases
(less than 18 years of age) are among chil-
dren living in nonattainment areas for one
or more NAAQS" (20). With the excep-
tion of regional data on asthma among
Puerto Rican children, who are more than
three times as likely as non-Hispanic white
children to suffer from active asthma (21),
specific quantitative knowledge on the envi-
ronmental health status of Hispanic chil-
dren is virtually nonexistent. This is largely
due to the failure to collect Hispanic
specific data in national data systems, also
noted above. Nevertheless, on a pollutant
by pollutant basis, reviewing data that indi-
cate disproportionate risk for Hispanics
provides an indication of the type ofhealth
effects Hispanics must therefore be at some
degree ofelevated risk ofexperiencing.
Particulate Matter. Hispanics are
more than twice as likely as either blacks or
whites to live in areas with elevated levels
of particulate matter. Thirty-four percent
of Hispanics, 16.5% of blacks, and 14.7%
of whites live in a U. S. EPA nonattain-
ment area for particulate matter (19).
Research into the effect ofexposure to par-
ticulate matter on lung function reveals
that both forced vital capacity and forced
expiratory volume are consistently lower in
urban children than in suburban children
(22), strongly suggesting that urban ambi-
ent air pollution exposure (particulate mat-
ter, NO2 SO2, etc.) are responsible for the
retardation in growth of lung function in
children. Research conducted by Joel
Schwartz of the Harvard School of Public
Health reports an association between ele-
vated levels of PM and death rates for vari-
ous conditions which have respiratory
factors as contributing to the underlying
causes ofdeath (23).
Lead. Hispanics are more than twice as
likely as either blacks or whites to live in
areas with high levels of lead. About
18.5% of Hispanics, 9.2% of blacks, and
6% of whites live in a U.S. EPA nonat-
tainment area for lead (19). The effects of
lead on child development are well docu-
mented and well known. Indeed, "chronic
low-level exposure to lead has been linked
to damage to the central and peripheral
nervous system, low birth weight, learning
Volume 103, Supplement 6, September 1995 27
METZGER ETAL.
disabilities, chronic anemia, shorter stature,
impaired hearing, and impaired formation
and function of blood cells in young chil-
dren, infants, and fetuses" (24).
Ozone. Hispanics are most likely to live
in a U.S. EPA nonattainment area for
ozone. Seventy-one percent of Hispanics,
62% of blacks, and 52% of whites live in
areas with high levels of ozone (19).
"There are some provocative indications
that there may be substantial adverse
effects [to ozone exposure]. The indica-
tions include: greater rate of loss of lung
function in nonsmoking men and
women..., reduced baseline lung function
when annual average 03 concentration is
greater than 40 ppb, based on a national
population sample, and an unexpectedly
high incidence of centriacinar region dis-
ease in the lungs of adolescents and young
adults examined postmortem in Los
Angeles County" (25). Additionally,
"acute reduction of pulmonary function
performance following ozone exposure has
been documented in epidemiologic studies
in which small groups were followed over a
short period" (26).
Carbon Monoxide. Eighty-eight per-
cent of Hispanics and 85% of non-
Hispanic blacks live in nonattainment
areas for carbon monoxide, compared to
50% ofnon-Hispanic whites (19).
Carbon monoxide binds with hemo-
globin in the blood to form carboxy-
hemoglobin (COHb), reducing
oxygen transport to the tissues. The
most common symptoms of carbon
monoxide poisoning are headache,
dizziness, drowsiness, nausea, and
vomiting. But it can also lead to
confusion, neurologic damage, car-
diac arrhythmias, coma, and death.
Retinal hemorrhages are standard
signs ofCO poisoning. (19)
U.S. EPA High-risk Human Exposure:
Worker Exposure to Chemicals in
Industry andAgriculture
Environmental exposure of humans
to agrichemicals is common and
results in both acute and chronic
health effects, including acute and
chronic neurotoxicity (insecticides,
fungicides, fumigants), lung damage
(paraquat), chemical burns (anhy-
drous ammonia), and infant
methemoglobinemia (nitrate in
groundwater). A variety of cancers
also have been linked to exposure to
various pesticides, particularly
hematopoietic cancers. Immunologic
abnormalities and adverse reproduc-
tive and developmental effects due
to pesticides have also been reported
(27).
The willingness to continue current
pesticide use practice is astonishing given
the risk to farm workers and their chil-
dren. Research reveals evidence of a possi-
ble association between pesticide exposure
and aplastic anemia (28), while another
study on couples seeking artificial insemi-
nation with donor sperm because of poor
sperm quality found a significant associa-
tion between male factor infertility and
employment in agricultural occupations
(29). Still other research suggests elevated
risks of Ewing's bone sarcoma for children
"whose fathers were engaged in agricul-
tural occupations" (30). Additionally,
"[a]n increased risk for anencephaly has
been related to parental occupation of
farmer and farm worker; neural tube
defects, and a combined category of
neural tube defects, facial clefts, and renal
agenesis have been related to exposure to
agricultural chemicals during preconcep-
tion" (30). There is also evidence to sug-
gest an association between spontaneous
abortion and stillbirth and exposure to
pesticides (30).
The threat to health indicated by the
studies cited above is borne out by 1992
data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
which indicate that farmworkers account
for 11% of all occupational fatalities-the
second highest percentage of work-related
deaths in the United States after trans-
portation occupations (31). Other data
indicate that prolonged exposure to pesti-
cides causes an estimated 313,000 illnesses
and 1000 deaths annually among agricul-
tural workers (32). These findings are of
particular concern to Hispanic health
advocates because Hispanics account for
such an overwhelming percentage of both
seasonal agricultural workers and migrant
workers, and because "[a]griculture
accounts for 80% of the 1 billion pounds
of pesticides used annually in the U.S."
(33). Fully 71% of all seasonal agricultural
workers are Hispanic, compared to whites
at 23% and blacks at 3% (34). The pro-
portion of Hispanics who are migrant agri-
cultural workers is even higher at 95%
(35). Agricultural workers are thus particu-
larly at risk of exposure to pesticides. More
specifically, workers who mix, load, and
apply pesticides, and workers who are in
contact with crops or commodities sprayed
with pesticides have the greatest potential
exposures (33). In addition, many migrant
farm workers live near the crops they ser-
vice, and may be regularly exposed to a
great variety of pesticides due to pesticide
drift and off-gassing (36).
Although regular exposure is foresee-
able, of the approximately 600 "active pes-
ticide ingredients" in use "adequate
toxologic data are available" for only about
100 of them (27). Thus even though,
"....the effects of acute exposure (usually a
relatively large single exposure) are well
documented, the effects of chronic, low-
level exposure...to pesticides is unclear"
(24). Research "is needed to better charac-
terize and quantitate the adverse effects of
agrichemicals on human health" (27), yet
there is more than enough evidence to jus-
tify proactive efforts to prevent harmful
exposures to pesticides among farmworkers
in terms of which pesticides are registered
for use and the aggressive promotion of
alternative pest-control technologies.
U.S. EPA High-risk Human Exposure:
Pollution Indoors
At first glance pollution indoors appears to
be an inconsequential threat to health
compared to other exposures, but it can be
just as deadly. Among the most serious
indoor air quality issues are environmental
tobacco smoke and radon. The dangers to
health posed by the indoor air pollutants
environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) and
radon are distinct from many other envi-
ronmental threats to health in that they are
most directly caused by preventable con-
sumer behavior, as in the case of ETS, or
randomly occurring natural phenomenon,
as in the case ofradon.
Environmental Tobacco Smoke. It is
well established that cigarette smoking is a
major cause ofdeath and disease. According
to the DHHS,
...[t]obacco use is responsible for
more than one ofevery six deaths in
the United States and is the most
important single preventable cause
of death and disease in our society.
Cigarette smoking accounts for
about 434,000 deaths yearly includ-
ing 21% of all coronary heart dis-
ease deaths, 87% of all lung cancer
deaths, and 82% of all deaths from
chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease. (36)
The threat to health from tobacco use
is not limited to the user of the tobacco
product. Others who are near a smoker can
be exposed to passive smoke, ETS (37).
ETS is "composed of exhaled mainstream
smoke (MS) from the smoker, sidestream
Environmental Health Perspectives28
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTHAND HISPANIC CHILDREN
smoke (SS) emitted from the smoldering
tobacco between puffs, contaminants emit-
ted into the air during the puff, and conta-
minants that diffuse through the cigarette
paper and mouth between puffs" (37).
While ETS is dilute compared to MS, it is
similar in composition (37). Compounds
present in ETS include: 1,3-butadiene,
acetic acid, acetone, ammonia, benzene,
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
formaldehyde, formic acid, hydrogen
cyanide, toluene, and various types of par-
ticulate matter, including di- and poly-
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (37). ETS
contains "many of the same carcinogenic
and toxic agents" (37) present in MS, and
as such ETS poses a significant threat to
the health of nonsmokers occupying the
same environment.
Consistent with this threat to health
the U.S. EPA in 1992 designated ETS as a
known human lung carcinogen, or "Group
A" carcinogen under U. S. EPA's carcino-
gen classification system (37). The Group
A designation is used "when there is
sufficient evidence from epidemiologic
studies to support a causal association
between exposure to the agents and cancer
(37). The application of stringent criteria
led to conservative estimates by U.S. EPA
that ETS causes approximately 53,000
deaths annually among nonsmokers in the
United States, including 3000 lung cancer
deaths (38).
The U.S. EPA's designation of ETS as
a Group A carcinogen is amplified by the
noncancer health effects of exposure to
ETS. A positive link has been established
between ETS and respiratory illness in
children (37), with numerous epidemio-
logical studies demonstrating a causal asso-
ciation between ETS and
* bronchial hyperresponsiveness
* "additional episodes and increased
severity of asthma in children who
already have the disease"
* reduced lung function as measured by
various airflow parameters such as forced
expiratory volume
* cough, phlegm, and wheezing (37).
Other studies on the noncancer health
effects of ETS on children show evidence
ofan association between ETS and
* acute lower respiratory tract illnesses
such as bronchitis and pneumonia
(occurring up to twice as often during
the first 2 years oflife in the children of
smokers)
* acute upper respiratory tract illnesses,
acute middle ear infections, and acute
middle ear effusion ("the most common
reason for hospitalization ofyoung chil-
dren for an operation")
* sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
(37).
Hispanic children are regularly exposed
to ETS. According to the National Center
for Health Statistics, 44.3% of Hispanic
preschool children have been exposed to
tobacco smoke compared to 50.8% of
non-Hispanic white children (21). Of this
substantial number, Hispanic children are
more likely to be exposed to tobacco
smoke postnatally rather than prenatally.
Of all Hispanic children exposed to
tobacco smoke, 23.5% have been exposed
postnatally compared to 20.9% of non-
Hispanics (21). This distinction is impor-
tant because it indicates a significant
deterioration in the quality of Hispanic
children's environment once they are born,
and points to a need for postnatal health
education and intervention in Hispanic
households with children.
Radon
Radon gas is derived from the radio-
active decay ofradium, a ubiquitous
element found in rock and soil. The
decay series begins with uranium-
238 and goes through four interme-
diates to form radium-226....
Radium-226 then decays to form
radon-222 gas. Radon's half-life,
3.8 days, provides sufficient time for
it to diffuse through soil and into
homes, where further disintegration
produces more chemically and radi-
ologically active radon progeny
('radon daughters'). These radon
progeny, which include four iso-
topes with half-lives of less than 30
minutes, are the major source of
human exposure to alpha radiation.
This alpha radiation is responsible
for cellular transformation in the
respiratory tract, which results in
radon-induced lung cancer. (39)
While the probability that radon will be
a problem is essentially random, public
awareness is largely the result of purposive
public health education campaigns.
Difficulties in raising public awareness
about the seriousness of the threat to
health posed by radon are centered largely
on the fact that radon is colorless, odorless,
and tasteless and causes no immediate
symptoms. Further, where federal efforts at
public education have succeeded for non-
Hispanic whites, this is far less true for
Hispanics. DHHS's National Center for
Health Statistics reports that 61.2% of
Hispanics have never heard of radon
compared to 21.5% ofwhites (40). Public
education materials and programs target-
ing Hispanic communities are critical to
reducing this knowledge gap.
US. EPA High-rskHuman Exposure:
Pollutants in Drinking Water. The
importance of safe drinking water cannot
be overemphasized, particularly for chil-
dren. In a recent poll of public health
officials, 82% responded that safe drinking
water was the most important or a very
important factor in increasing life
expectancy and quality of life (41).
Hispanic children nevertheless face
significant threats to their well-being from
tainted water.
Lead. In urban areas, drinking water
treatment and delivery systems (pipes) can
be a source ofcontamination ofwater with
lead, disinfectants and their by-products,
and fluoride (42). Lead in particular may
be problematic for urban Hispanic com-
munities as lower income Hispanics are
more likely to rent older homes or apart-
ments, which may contain antiquated lead
plumbing. This is particularly a source of
concern regarding the health of Hispanic
infants, as "U.S. EPA found that more
than 85% of the blood lead in bottle-fed
infants may derive from drinking baby for-
mula made with lead-contaminated water"
(43). Further, this concern is corroborated
by findings regarding lead-based paint and
higher prevalence of elevated blood-lead
levels among inner-city children living in
deteriorating pre-1970s housing (44).
Chronic low-level exposure to lead has
been linked to damage to the central and
peripheral nervous system, low-birth
weight, learning disabilities, chronic ane-
mia, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and
impaired formation and function of blood
cells in young children, infants, and
fetuses (24).
United States-Mexico Border.
Contamination of the air and water has
also been a persistent problem along the
United States-Mexico border, leading
many public health professionals and oth-
ers who live and work in the region to
believe that contaminated air and water are
responsible for a cluster of neural tube
defects (NTDs) discovered in 1989 by the
Brownsville, Texas, Community Health
Center. While the results of a Texas
Department of Health study on the cause
of NTDs in Cameron County pointed to
folic acid supplements for the diets of
expectant mothers as a critical prevention
measure, the report was inconclusive as to
whether or not environmental factors are
Volume 103, Supplement 6, September 1995 29
METZGER ETAL.
responsible for the high incidence ofNTDs
(45). Thus, "it is important to realize that
although there are no overwhelming data to
support a role for environmental agents in
the etiology of NTDs, there are data that
suggest that extrinsic agents need to be
evaluated further" (LE Sever, unpublished
data). Unfortunately, "[e]nvironmental
data collection, particularly on a county-
wide level, are not designed to address spe-
cialized public health issues such as the
elevated rates of NTDs in Cameron
County" (45). In addition, data on surface
water quality of the Rio Grande are lim-
ited, although it is known that mercury
concentrations exceeded state standards
and guidelines (45), and polychlorinated
biphenyls were detected above recom-
mended guidelines in a fish tissue sample
collected from the Rio Grande River in
Cameron County (45).
Another serious problem for Hispanic
children in the United States-Mexico bor-
der area is persistent biological contamina-
tion of water supplies for residents of
United States colonies. Most colonies origi-
nated in the early 1950s when developers
began creating subdivisions outside city
boundaries. These subdivisions were not
incorporated or part of the cities near
which they were located (46), and those
who moved into them, mostly Mexican-
Americans, have lived there since the sub-
divisions were created (46). Additionally,
most colonies exist in Texas, although some
can be found in New Mexico and Arizona
with a substantial number of people (46).
In six Texas counties there are about 842
separate colonies with over 200,000 persons
living in them. Of this only three, or less
than 1%, have public sewage disposal sys-
tems (46). Without sewage treatment
facilities, water supplies often become con-
taminated with bacteria and viruses (22),
which in turn indicate the possible pres-
ence of organisms that cause typhoid,
cholera, infectious hepatitis, and dysentery
(47). Indeed, the EPAJournalhas reported
that outbreaksas ofdysentery and hepatitis
A are commonplace in the colonies, even
though in the rest of the United States
these severe waterborne afflictions are
considered Third World diseases" (47).
Migrant Labor Camps. Many of the
same Hispanics who face threats to their
health such as those described above must
also contend with biological and chemical
contamination ofwater supplies at migrant
labor camps. Again, specific quantitative
measures of this problem are generally
unavailable. There are, however, examples
that can be considered reflective ofthe situ-
ation in other sites. For example, a 1992
Pullman Health Systems study found that
43% of water supplies at state-licensed
migrant worker camps in nine Michigan
counties contained nitrates. In some wells,
the levels were so high that federally man-
dated warnings had to be posted.... (48).
Similarly, "[m]igrant labor camps in
California covered by the Clean Water Act
have been cited by the U.S. EPA for failure
to sufficiently sample water provided to
laborers for contaminants. Some were
exceeding limits for coliform bacteria and
some for high levels of nitrates in the
water" (49). Based on verifiable anecdotal
accounts and other evidence it is antici-
pated that serious drinking water quality
problems are a persistent aspect of migrant
labor life.
Recommendations
Overall, the U.S. EPA needs to make itself
accountable to the communities it ulti-
mately serves by improving its responsive-
ness to community concerns and its
accessibility to those concerned about envi-
ronmental health. For example, for
Hispanics, one part of making U.S. EPA
accountable must mean increasing the
diversity of its staff. Hispanics are severely
underrepresented at the U.S. EPA, account-
ing for only 4% ofthe total U.S. EPA work
force. This underrepresentation exacerbates
the inaccessibility of the agency and its
information to interested individuals, com-
munity-based organizations (CBOs), and
national organizations who represent CBOs
and Hispanic communities. Effectively
addressing the underrepresentation of
Hispanics at the U.S. EPA will involve
improved agency responsiveness to Hispanic
concerns through immediate, more aggres-
sive efforts to recruit Hispanics for profes-
sional positions at U.S. EPA. In addition, it
will also require the implementation of
long-term strategies to increase the accessi-
bility of the U.S. EPA to Hispanics and to
increase the pool of qualified Hispanics
from which the U.S. EPA and other federal
entities may draw. To this end, U.S. EPA,
foundations, and corporations should fund
community-based programming that tar-
gets Hispanic youth and seeks to cultivate
interest in the environment and environ-
mental protection.
The following, more specific, recom-
mendations are similar, made with an eye
toward making the federal government
accountable to the communities it
ultimately serves.
Data Collection
As the U.S. EPA begins to collect exposure
and other population data, it should require
methodologies that include ethnic
identifiers, conduct oversampling, collect
samples of a size sufficient to allow break-
out by Hispanic subgroup, and require lin-
guistic competence for interviewers. At
minimum both the U.S. EPA and DHHS
should adhere to OMB Directive No. 15,
which sets forth the minimum standards on
data collection activity at federal agencies.
The U.S. EPA should improve the coor-
dinating ofits information for public use by
identifying and describing all current and
proposed data and information collection
activities to be funded or to be conducted
by the agency. In addition, the U. S. EPA
should aggressively pursue policies that pro-
mote data sharing and integration.
The U.S. EPA, DHHS, and the
Department of Labor should specifically
identify which studies each entity will be
conducting pursuant to President Clinton's
Executive Order on Environmental Justice
of 11 February 1994.
Unfair Si.ing and
Unequal Enforcement
U.S. EPA should fully and completely
assess the extent to which particular racial
and ethnic groups are more likely to live in
proximity to TSDFs, chemical plants,
refineries, and other such facilities. This
should be done without determining risk
or causation.
The U.S. EPA should develop a mecha-
nism for review of local siting processes to
ensure full opportunity for participation by
local residents and equal protection under
U.S. environmental law.
The U.S. EPA should conduct an inter-
nal audit of its enforcement activities to
determine the extent to which non-
Hispanic white communities benefit from
more punitive enforcement as compared to
Hispanic and black communities.
Top High-risk Human Exposures:
Threats to Hispanic Health
AmbientAir Pollutions. Existing NAAQS
should be reviewed and modified as needed
in light of new research indicating more
serious health effects from exposure to
ozone and other criteria pollutants.
Existing NAAQS may be too lax.
The U.S. EPA should require adher-
ence to state implementation plans under
the Clean Air Act with renewed vigor.
Noncompliance with NAAQS results in
unacceptable health costs for affected
Environmental Health Perspectives30
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTHAND HISPANIC CHILDREN
communities and places a particularly
onerous burden on children and their
development.
Programs targeting Hispanic commu-
nity-based organizations and individuals
for training on how to use the Toxic
Release Inventory (TRI) should be a prior-
ity to empower Hispanic communities in
the monitoring and influence local indus-
try. While the TRI has been a particularly
effective tool for non-Hispanic white com-
munities, it remains largely inaccessible to
Hispanic communities.
Worker Exposure to Chemicals in
Agriculture
Improving safety of agricultural workers
must involve a significant increase in the
threshold, which must be met before a
pesticide can be registered for use under
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Administrator
Carol Browner recently proposed the addi-
tion of 313 new chemicals to the Toxic
Release Inventory, over 170 of which are
currently used and registered as pesticides.
That these substances are considered haz-
ardous enough to add to the TRI but at
the same time continue to be used for pest
control is indicative of a pesticide registra-
tion process that does not give appropriate
weight to the health impact on agricultural
workers and their children.
The federal government must also
improve access to health care for agricul-
tural workers through health reform, and
improve monitoring ofgrowers for compli-
ance with farmworker safety standards.
Indoor Air Poliutants
A tobacco tax should be imposed to reduce
smoking behavior while at the same time
raising revenue for critical national efforts
such as health reform and environmental
justice.
Increased public education is necessary,
targeted to the specific groups that need to
be reached with messages on prevention or
mitigation, recognizing that simple transla-
tion of materials intended for mainstream,
non-Hispanic white audiences or other
communities is not effective.
We also need to encourage develop-
ment of creative programming targeted to
Hispanics, which focuses not only on rais-
ing awareness and eliciting testing, but
also seeks to provide low-cost options for
mitigation.
DrinkingWater Quality
The U.S. EPA, OSHA, and relevant state
entities must vigorously pursue enforcement
ofexisting regulations relevant to the work-
ing conditions of migrant farmworkers,
including availability of clean drinking
water. Where gaps exist, new regulations
should be initiated through the public
review and comment procedure.
The U.S. EPA and DHHS should con-
tinue lead abatement programs targeting
urban areas, but should improve them by
including linguistic and cultural compe-
tence as critical elements of program
implementation.
The U.S. Trade Representative and the
U.S. EPA should undertake a public edu-
cation campaign targeted to the residents
ofthe United States-Mexico border area to
inform them about the public participation
provisions of the environmental side
accord to the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA). Public participation
should be facilitated in all NAFTA related
environmental activities.
U.S. EPA, HUD, DHHS, and other
relevant governmental entities should make
bringing modern water treatment and
delivery systems to the colonies a priority
and they should act on that priority with
appropriate funding.
REFERENCES
1. Cohen AJ, Gordis L. Introduction to the Health Effects
Institute Environmental Epidemiology Planning Project
Documents. Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl 4):15-17
(1993).
2. Levy RH. Ethnic and racial differences in response to medi-
cines: preserving individualized therapy. In: Managed
Pharmaceutical Programs. National Pharmaceutical Council,
1993.
3. U.S. Bureau of the Census. Hispanic Americans today. Current
Population Reports, Series P-20, Population Characteristics,
Vol 183. Washington:U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1993;
23-183
4. COSSMHO. The State of Hispanic Health. Washington:
National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human Services
Organizations, 1992.
5. National Center for Health Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics
Report, Advance Report of Final Natality Statistics 39.
Washington:U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1989.
6. U.S. Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United
States: 1990. Washington:U.S. Bureau ofthe Census, 1990.
7. Sec 3-301 (c) Environmental Justice Executive Order, 3195-
01-P 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice
in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations. Fed
Reg 59(32) (1994).
8. GAO. Hispanic access to health care: significant gaps exist.
Washington:General Accounting Office, 1991.
9. Delgado JL, Estrada L. Improving data collection strategies.
Pub Health Rep 108:540-541 (1993).
10. Directive No 15. Race and Ethnic Standards for Federal
Statistics and Administrative Reporting. 43 Fed Reg 19260.
Washington:Office of Management and Budget, 1978.
11. UCCCRJ. United Church ofChrist, Toxic Wastes and Race in
the United States. New York:United Church of Christ
Commission for Racial Justice, 1987.
12. U. S. Congress, House Subcommittee on Environment,
Energy, and Natural Resources. D Ferris Testimony on the
Alliance for the Washington Office on Environmental Justice.
Washington:Alliance for the Washington Office on
Environmental Justice, 1994.
13. Lavelle M, Coyle M. Unequal protection. The National Law
Journal 51 (1992).
14. U.S. EPA. Unfinished Business: A Comparative Assessment of
Environmental Problems. Overview Report. Washington:U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 1987.
15. U.S. EPA. Reducing Risk: Setting Priorities and Strategies for
Environmental Protection. Washington:U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 1990.
16. Dockery DW. Epidemiologic study design for investigating res-
piratory health effects of complex air pollution mixtures.
Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl 4):187-191 (1993).
17. Percival R, Miller A, Schroeder C, Leape J. Environmental
Regulation: Law, Science, and Policy. New York:Little, Brown
and Company, 1992.
18. Clean Air Act, 42 USC 7401 (1970) (Amended 1977, 1990).
19. Wernette DR, Nieves LA. Breathing polluted air: minorities are
disproportionately exposed. EPA J 18(1):16-17 (1992).
20. ALA. Breath in Danger II. Estimation of Populations At-risk of
Adverse Health Consequences in Areas Not in Attainment with
National Ambient Air Quality Standards of the Clean Air Act.
Washington:American Lung Association, 1993.
21. Growing Up Hispanic Leadership Report. Washington:
Volume 103, Supplement 6, September 1995 31
METZGER ETAL.
National Coalition of Hispanic Health and Human Services
Organizations, 1994.
22. Hricko A. Environmental problems behind the Great Wall.
Environ Health Perspect 102:127-244 (1994).
23. Schwartz J. What are people dying of on high air pollution
days? Environ Res 64(1):26-35 (1994).
24. Minnesota Department of Health. Environmental issues in pri-
mary care. St. Paul:Minnesota Department of Health, 1991.
25. Lippmann M. Use of human lung tissue for studies of struc-
tural changes associated with chronic ozone exposure: opportu-
nities and critical issues. Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl
4):209-212 (1993).
26. Devlin RB. Identification of subpopulations that are sensitive
to ozone exposure: use of end points currently available and
potential use of laboratory-based end points under develop-
ment. Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl 4):225-230 (1993).
27. Weisenburger DD. Human health effects of agrichemical use.
Hum Pathol 24:571-576 (1993).
28. Flemming LE, Timmeny W. Aplastic anemia and pesticides: an
etiologic association? J Occup Med 35(11):1106-1116 (1993).
29. Strohmer H, Boldizar A, Plockinger B, Felder-Busztin M,
Feichtinger W. Agricultural work and male infertility. Am J
Ind Med 24(5):587-592 (1993).
30. Holly EA, Aston DA, Ahn DK, Kristiansen JJ. Ewing's bone
sarcoma, paternal occupational exposure, and other factors. Am
J Epidemiol 135(2):122-129 (1992).
31. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Census of fatal occupational
injuries. Washington:U.S. Department ofLabor, 1992.
32. Perfecto I, Velisquez B. Farm workers: among the least pro-
tected. EPAJ 18(1):13-14 (1992).
33. Moses M. Pesticides in Occupational and Environmental
Reproductive Hazards: A Guide for Clinicians.
Baltimore:Williams and Wilkins, 1993.
34. U.S. Department of Labor. Findings from the NAWS Survey
1990: A Demographic Profile of Perishable Crop Farm
Workers. Research Rpt 1, 1991.
35. U.S. Department of Labor. Migrant farmworkers: pursuing
security in an unstable labor market. Research Rpt 5, 1994.
36. DHHS. Health United States. Washington:U.S. Department
ofHealth and Human Services, 1992; 260.
37. U.S. EPA. Respiratory health effects of passive smoking: lung
cancer and other disorders. EPA 600/6-90/006F.
Washington:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
December 1992.
38. AMA. Tobacco Use: An American Crises, Final Conference
Report and Recommendations from America's Health
Community. Chicago:American Medical Association, 1993.
39. ATSDR. Case studies in environmental medicine: radon toxic-
ity. Atlanta:Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry,
1992.
40. DHHS. National health interview survey. Washington:U.S.
Department ofHealth and Human Services, 1990.
41. The Chlorine Institute, Inc. The Wirthlin report. Opinions of
public health officials on safe water: executive summary.
Washington:The Chlorine Institute Safe Drinking Water
Advisory Committee, 1992.
42. U.S. EPA. Setting national goals for environmental protection
(goals in development-for public review and discussion).
Washington:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1994;23.
43. NRDC. Think before you drink: the failure of the nation's
drinking water system to protect public health. Fed Reg
56:26467-26468 (1991).
44. ATSDR. Case Studies in Environmental Medicine-Lead
Toxicity. Atlanta:Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, 1990.
45. TDH. An investigation of a cluster of neural tube defects in
Cameron County, Texas. Austin, TX:Texas Department of
Health, 1992.
46. GAO. Rural development: problems and progress of Colonia
subdivisions near Mexico border. Rpt GAO/RCED-91-37.
Washington:General Accounting Office, 1990;2.
47. Lewis J. The U.S. colonies: a target for aid. EPA J 18(1):61-62
(1992).
48. Diversity: a united vision for tomorrow, education efforts links
water quality to health of migrants. Int J WK Kellogg
Foundation 23: (1992).
49. Steps at EPA in the regions: enforcing the law in California.
EPAJ 18(1):67 (1992).
32 Environmental Health Perspectives
