Effects of Low Concentrations of Benzene
on Mouse Hematopoietic Cells in Vivo:
A Preliminary Report
Georgia M. Farris, Simon N. Robinson, Kevin W. Gaido, Brian
A. Wong, Victoria A. Wong, Linda Leonard, and Rekha Shah
Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina
Evaluation of benzene-induced hematotoxicity following exposure to low concentrations is
important for understanding mechanisms of toxicity and determining the dose response at
benzene levels close to the current occupational exposure limit (1 ppm). Male B6C3F1 mice were
exposed to 0, 1, 10, 100, or 200 ppm benzene by inhalation for 6 hr/day, 5 days/week for 1, 2, 4,
or 8 weeks. At each sampling time, we evaluated primitive and committed progenitor cells,
differentiating and maturing lineage-specific cells, and stromal cells in the bone marrow; T and B
lymphocytes of the spleen and thymus; micronucleated reticulocytes and erythrocytes; and
standard blood parameters. At 100 and 200 ppm benzene, there were rapid and significant
reductions in number of reticulocytes in the blood, B lymphocytes in the bone marrow and spleen,
and an increased frequency of micronucleated reticulocytes in the bone marrow. At 10 ppm, the
only parameter affected was a transient reduction in the number of splenic B lymphocytes. There
were no significant effects induced by 1 ppm benzene in this study. The present study suggests
numbers of B lymphocytes and maturing erythrocytes, and frequency of micronucleated
reticulocytes are sensitive indicators of benzene-induced hematotoxicity and will be useful in
further investigation of the hematotoxicity induced by 10 to 100 ppm benzene. Environ Health
Perspect 1 04(Suppl 6):1275-1276 (1996)
Key words: benzene, hematotoxicity, micronuclei, mouse, inhalation
Introduction
Benzene-induced hematotoxicity is poorly
understood. Several hypotheses regarding
potential mechanisms of benzene hemato-
toxicity have been based on results of in vivo
experiments that investigated only one or
two parameters of hematopoiesis. Most
proposed mechanisms of benzene-induced
effects such as cytotoxicity, apoptosis,
mutagenesis, and cell replication can be
demonstrated in vitro at relatively high con-
centrations of benzene metabolites (1,2).
Benzene effects in vitro do not necessarily
correlate with benzene-induced hemato-
toxicity following in vivo exposures to low
concentrations, since in vitro assays ofhema-
topoiesis lack the complex hematopoietic
cell interrelationships, fine-tuned regulation,
and compensation mechanisms that are
essential in normal hematopoiesis.
The association of severe bone marrow
damage, as manifested by aplastic anemia,
with the progression to acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) that has occurred in some
humans exposed to high concentrations of
benzene (3,4) is also poorly understood. If
a regenerative increase in replication of
stem cells and progenitor cells plays a pri-
mary role in benzene-induced leukemia,
then the risk of developing AML might be
predicted from the association of benzene-
induced cytotoxicity with regeneration and
simultaneous mutagenesis.
This paper was presented at Benzene '95: An International Conference on the Toxicity, Carcinogenesis, and
Epidemiology of Benzene held 17-20 June 1995 in Piscataway, New Jersey. Manuscript received 16 January
1996; manuscript accepted 14 June 1996.
The authors thank D. Janszen for his assistance on statistical analysis; M. Morris, D. Williams, and 0. Lyght
for technical assistance; M. Marshall for technical support in the generation of benzene inhalation atmospheres;
and P. Ross, K. Bragg, C. Bobbitt, and other animal care staff for their efforts.
Address correspondence to Dr. G.M. Farris, Los Alamos National Laboratory, MS888, Los Alamos, NM
87545. Telephone: (505) 667-9205. E-mail: gmfarris@mailzone.com
Abbreviation used: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ANOVA, analysis of variance; BrdU, bromodeoxyuridine;
CFU-E, colony-forming units-erythrocytic; CFU-GM colony-forming units-granulocytic and macrophage;
CFU-HPP, colony-forming units-high proliferative potential cells.
The present study has three purposes: it
investigates benzene-induced hematotoxicity
induced by low-concentration exposure to
benzene in vivo; it presents a model of the
cell populations adversely affected by
benzene and the progression of this dam-
age; and it investigates the ability of the
hematopoietic tissues of the mice to com-
pensate or adapt with continued exposure.
The frequency of micronucleated reticu-
locytes and erythrocytes during benzene
exposure was measured as an indicator
of mutagenesis.
The most important aspects ofbenzene-
induced hematotoxicity are the possible
toxic effects caused by low concentrations
of benzene (1 and 10 ppm). Concurrent
assessment of toxicity elicited by high
concentrations of benzene (100 and 200
ppm) established a reference for compari-
son. This communication provides prelim-
inary information about the effects of
benzene inhalation by mice at low concen-
trations on hematopoiesis, lymphopoiesis,
and mutagenicity.
Methods
Male B6C3F1 12-week-old mice inhaled
0, 1, 10, 100, or 200 ppm benzene for 6
hr/day, 5 days/week for 1, 2, 4, or 8 weeks.
Animals were removed from the inhalation
chambers at each sampling time following
the last scheduled exposure and were imme-
diately evaluated for hematotoxicity and
mutagenicity. Several stages of hemato-
poietic cell replication, differentiation, and
maturation starting at a very primitive
progenitor-cell compartment in the bone
marrow through to the mature cells in the
blood were examined. Bone marrow from
individual mice was evaluated for number
and replication of high proliferative-poten-
tial cells (CFU-HPP) using a previously
described culture assay (5). The number of
granulocyte and macrophage (CFU-GM),
as well as erythroid cells (CFU-E) were
evaluated using agar culture (6) and a com-
plete methylcellulose medium (StemCell
Technologies, Vancouver, BC), respec-
tively. The number and replication of ery-
thropoietic cells, granulopoietic cells, and
B lymphocytes in the bone marrow were
evaluated using monoclonal antibodies to
surface antigens and BrdU incorporation.
Stromal cells in the bone marrow were evalu-
ated by counting adherent cells after 24 hr
in culture. Conventional hematology para-
meters were recorded including reticulocyte
counts. The frequency of mnicronucleated
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996 1 275
FARRIS ET AL.
reticulocytes and erythrocytes in the bone
marrow and blood were analyzed by flow
cytometry and manual counts (7).
For each sampling time, the data from
each benzene exposure group were compared
to the controls using Dunnett's one-way
analysis ofvariance (ANOVA).
Results
Inhalation of 1 ppm benzene extending
over an 8-week period did not cause statis-
tically significant changes in any of the
parameters assessed compared to controls.
At 10 ppm, benzene also caused a
transient decrease in the number of splenic
B lymphocytes at 2 weeks with a return to
control numbers at 4 weeks.
Exposure of mice to 100 and 200 ppm
benzene for 5 days caused a reduction in
the number of differentiating and matur-
ing cells ofthe three major lineages (B lym-
phocytes, granulocytes, erythrocytes) in the
bone marrow, splenic lymphocytes, blood
reticulocytes and erythrocytes, and blood
leukocytes. The number of maturing B
lymphocytes decreased progressively in the
bone marrow of mice exposed to 200 ppm
benzene over the 8 weeks of exposure
(Figure 1). An increase in the number of
B lymphocytic cells in the mice exposed to
a 160 -* ppm
o 140 - 10 ppm
*100ppm
ae 120- A 200 ppm
100 -
80
= 60 -
40-
20-E
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Benzene exposure, weeks
Figure 1. Effects of benzene on the absolute number of
B lymphocytic cells in the bone marrow (pro-B lympho-
cytes through mature B lymphocytes), presented as a
percentage of the control values (mice exposed to air)
for each time point. Asterisk indicates a statistically
significant reduction compared to controls, p < 0.05.
10 ppm for 5 days, as compared to controls,
was due to the number of total bone mar-
row cells. The total number of bone mar-
row cells was within the range of control
male B6C3F1 mice and this increase, com-
pared to controls, was not reproducible in
subsequent studies. Within 2 weeks the
number of high proliferative-potential
progenitor cells and committed progenitor
cells (CFU-GM and CFU-E) decreased.
The percentage of B-lymphocytic cells and
CFU-HPP cells in S phase increased. The
blood reticulocytes decreased rapidly in
mice exposed to 200 ppm benzene and
over the following 7 weeks of exposure the
numbers increased (Figure 2). Exposure to
100 and 200 ppm benzene also caused an
increased frequency of micronucleated
reticulocytes in the bone marrow and
micronucleated erythrocytes in the blood
after 5 days ofexposure.
Discussion
Inhalation of 1 ppm benzene by male
B6C3F1 mice over an 8-week period did
not induce significant hematotoxicity in
this study. No statistically significant
change in the frequency of micronucleated
reticulocytes or erythrocytes was induced
by 1 or 10 ppm benzene. The concentra-
tion response of micronucleated reticulo-
cytes and erythrocytes with 1 to 200 ppm
benzene in mice from this study has been
described (7). A quadratic concentration-
response model fit to frequency of bone
marrow micronucleated reticulocyte data
of mice exposed to a maximum of 200
ppm benzene had a high correlation and
could not be rejected based on lack offit. A
linear concentration-response model was
rejected based on a lack offit ofthe data.
The hematotoxic effects of 100 ppm
benzene were not as severe as exposure to
200 ppm benzene, and there was a return
toward control values at week 8 as com-
pared to 2 and 4 weeks, indicating com-
pensation by the bone marrow with
continued exposure. Figure 1 demonstrates
a mild improvement in the number of
120
, 100 -
o 80-
60-
7° 40 - * l ppm
2 20 - 10 ppm
co A 200 ppm
m 0
l-1 1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Benzene exposure, weeks
Figure 2. Effects of benzene on the number of reticulo-
cytes per p1 of blood, presented as a percentage of the
control values (mice exposed to air) for each time
point. Asterisk indicates a statistically significant
reduction compared to controls, p< 0.05.
B lymphocytes in the bone marrow at 8
weeks of exposure to 100 ppm (38% of
control) as compared to 2 weeks (26% of
control). An increased replication of primi-
tive progenitor cells (CFU-HPP) and B
lymphocytes were two measured responses
in this study that indicated an attempt by
the bone marrow to increase progenitor-
cell replication to compensate for the very
early loss ofmaturing cells.
The present study suggests that decreased
number of B lymphocytes and maturing
erythrocytes, and increased frequency of
micronucleated reticulocytes are sensitive
indicators of benzene-induced hematotoxi-
city. The decreased number of blood retic-
ulocytes was a useful parameter to measure
in an acute exposure (1-5 days), whereas
the decreased number of femoral or splenic
B lymphocytes and increased frequency of
femoral micronucleated reticulocytes were
measurable effects for a longer period (up
to 8 weeks). Two weeks of exposure was
the optimal timepoint to assess benzene
damage for most of the parameters evalu-
ated in this study, because bone marrow
compensation by increasing progenitor-
cell replication and replenishing cell loss
appears to be occurring during continued
exposure to benzene.
REFERENCES
1. Snyder R, Witz G, Goldstein BD. The toxicity of benzene.
Environ Health Perspect 100:293-306 (1993).
2. Snyder R, Kalf GF. A perspective on benzene leukemogenesis.
Crit Rev Toxicol 24:177-209 (1994).
3. Aksoy M. Malignancies due to occupational exposure to ben-
zene. Am J Ind Med 7:395-402 (1985).
4. Rinsky RA, Smith AB, Hornung R, Filloon TG, Young RJ,
Okun AH, Landrigan PJ. Benzene and leukemia: an epi-
demiologic risk assessment. N Engl J Med 316:1044-1050
(1987).
5. Robinson S, Lenfant M, Wdzieczak-Bakala J, Melville J, Riches
A. The mechanism of action of the tetrapeptide Acetyl-N-Ser-
Asp-Lys-Pro (AcSDKP) in the control of haematopoietic stem
cell proliferation. Cell Prolif25:623-632 (1992).
6. Farris GM, Benjamin SA. Inhibition of myelopoiesis by condi-
tioned medium from cultured canine thymic cells exposed to
estrogen. Am J Vet Res 54:1366-1373 (1993).
7. Farris GM, Wong VA, Wong BA, Shah R. Benzene-induced
micronuclei in erythrocytes: an inhalation concentration-response
study in B6C3F1 mice. Mutagenesis 11:455-462 (1996).
1276 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 6 * December 1996
