Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 9, pp. 1-32, 1974
Mycotoxins: Toxicity, Carcinogenicity, and the
Influence of Various Nutritional Conditions*
by Paul M. Newbernet
Toxicologic diseases of man and animals, associated with molds growing on foods, have been
recognized for centuries. Only in recent years, however, have these mycotoxicoo reweived the
attention of many laboratories and skilled scientists around the world in a broad inter-
disciplinary effort.
This review covers the literature on mycotoxicoses but centers on those about which most is
known, particularly the diseases associated with metabolites elaborated by some strains of
Aspergilli, Penicillia, Fu.aria, Stachybotrys, and Claviceps.
The ubiquitous nature of the aflatoxins, toxic metabolites produced by AspergUIiu flavu4,
make them important to public health, especially since it is now known that certain areas of
endemic liver disease coincide with consumption of aflatoxins and, often, malnutrition.
The older disease of ergotism, the scourge of Europe for centuries, is considered in detail.
Alimentary toxic aleukia, which has caused enormous suffering in Russian human and animal
populations, is better understood as a result of relatively recent experimental investigations.
Stachybotryotoxicosis, a disease previously considered to be of significance only to man has
now been identified in domestic animals
Finally, Japanese studies have clearly revealed the hepatotoxicity of certain metabolites of
Penicillium molds.
Factors that influence susceptibility to mycotoxins and the hazards they present to man are
also reviewed.
Introduction
Metabolites of certain molds growing on
foodstuff have caused toxic diseases in man and
animals throughout recorded history; but an un-
derstanding of the relationship between the
molds, the food, and the diseases has begun to
develop only recently.
Since the turn of the century, it has been
known that certain fungi produce toxic
*Preparation of this state-of-the-art review was spon-
sored by the Toxicology Information Program of the
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
t Department of Nutrition and Food ScienRce,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.,
02193. Consultant during the preparation of this manuscript
to the Environmental Information System Office, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, operated by Union Carbide Corpora-
tion Nuclear Division for the U.S. Atomic Energy Commis-
sion, Oak Ridge, Tenn., 37830.
metabolites eliciting biologic responses in both
man and animals. As early as the 19th century,
a disease associated with the consumption of
yellow, discolored rice was recognized in Japan
and was established as a toxicologic entity.
Similarly, alimentary toxic aleukia (ATA),
associated with overwintered wheat, affected
both man and animals in Russia and was known
for many decades. Centuries prior to these
observations, ergot poisoning through ingestion
of flour and bread contaminated with a fungus
created widespread epidemics of ergotism in
Europe-known to the ancients as St. Anthony's
fire. Thus, ergot poisoning was recognized
retrospectively as the first of many mycotoxi-
coses.
Despite the early recognition of ergot poison-
ing and the toxicoses associated with yellow rice
and overwintered grain, the mycotoxicoses
December 1974 I
remained generally neglected diseases until
about 1960. A serious outbreak of a toxic turkey
disease in England precipitated scientific in-
vestigations which delineated the nature of the
disease presently known as aflatoxicosis. This
incident led to the realization that mycotoxins,
and especially aflatoxins, presented a serious
threat to public health as well as to animal
economy; large numbers of investigators and
vast resources were drawn into investigation of
the problem; and resultantly, during the past
decade an enormous amount of literature in the
field has accumulated. This large volume of
literature is somewhat misleading by subtly
suggesting a long-standing knowledge; actually
the field of mycotoxin research is barely out of
its infancy.
Surveys of foods and feeds around the world
have revealed that the problem of mycotoxicosis
is not limited to any one geographic area but is a
real or potential problem in all areas where
molds grow (1). In fact, virtually all staple food
products consumed throughout the world are
subject to contamination by mold toxins. Obser-
vations that some of the mycotoxins are car-
cinogenic in certain animal species and further-
more that they are associated with a high in-
cidence of liver cancer in some human pop-
ulations have added considerable impetus to
research efforts.
The huge amount of literature on mycotoxi-
coses cannot be covered in a relatively short
review; therefore, this treatise centers on the
salient features of the diseases associated with a
few of the most commonly encountered
molds-Aspergilli, Penicillia, Fusaria,
Stachobotrys, and Claviceps. Exclusion of other
molds and even of some of the toxins produced
by those listed above does not imply that they
are not important, but rather that limitation of
both time and space prevent their inclusion. In
addition to pointing out the major toxic frac-
tions that are known to be produced by the
molds, other relevant information concerning
the mold metabolites will be presented. Further-
more, factors that may influence biologic
response to the toxins will be discussed, par-,
ticularly emphasizing nutrition. With the excep-
tion of aflatoxin research, investigation of
nutritional influences consists to a large extent
only of clinical observations.
Ergot
During the Middle Ages, large-scale
epidemics of a toxic disease occurred in middle
and western Europe (2). Although the causative
agent was not known, it was recognized that the
disease was associated with rye used for making
bread. Two characteristic forms were described:
gangrenous and convulsive ergotism. There are
some hints in the older literature that ergot may
have been used as a medicinal; its actual use as a
drug was described for the first time in 1582 (3).
Ergot is composed of several true alkaloids,
some of which have been thoroughly in-
vestigated. The best-known genus of fungi
capable of forming ergot alkaloids is Claviceps
purpurea, one of the first species known to
produce mycotoxins; it is most often found as
a parasitic fungus on rye and several wild
grasses, causing the disease ergotism (4).
In about 1875, the first crystalline alkaloid
preparation was isolated,from ergot by a French
pharmacist, and in 1918, Stoll described the first
homogeneous, chemically pure alkaloid which
exhibited the typical biologic properties of ergot
and which was designated as ergotamine (3).
The highly variable composition of the ergot
alkaloid mixture and the complex chemical
structure of the bases impeded the further
evaluation and elucidation of ergot alkaloids (5).
The ergot alkaloids are 3,4-substituted indole
derivatives, for example, ergoline (I), lysergic
acid derivatives (II), and clavine alkaloids (III).
Many ergot alkaloids can be derived from
lysergic acid, but the main alkaloids of C. pur-
purea are peptides. On hydrolysis, these pep-
tides (IV) decompose into lysergic or isolysergic
acid, ammonia, a keto acid, and two amino
acids. Proline is the amino acid common to all
peptide alkaloids; the various alkaloids differ
from each other mainly in the type of the second
amino acid obtained upon hydrolytic cleavage.
There are many additional chemical compounds
derived from alkaloids which cannot be covered
in this review; for further information, the
reader is referred to Groger (3).
During recent years, the biosynthesis of ergot
alkaloids has been under intensive investiga-
tion. The ergoline ring system in ergot fungi as
well as in other plants is constructed from tryp-
tophan and mevalonic acid. The N-methyl group
Environmental Health Perspectives2
R CH2R
R N-CH3
HN
Lysergic acid derivatives
R = Tripeptide or smaller units
I
Clavine alkaloids
R = H = OH
.m
R = NH2: Ergine
R - NH* HICH3 Lysergic acidR=
H * methylcarbinolamide
R=
H,CH3 . Ergometrine
NHC H2 (ergobasine)
H= HCH(CH3)2 Lysergic acid-
R =
NHC
OCl L-valinemethylesterCOOCH3
is derived from methionine by a transmethyla-
tion reaction. L-Tryptophan is the immediate
precursor of the ergoline nucleus. During the in-
corporation of tryptophan into ergoline at the
alpha carbon atom of the side chain, an inver-
sion of configuration occurs; an isoprene unit
also may participate in the formation of the
alkaloid-ergoline. The complicated chemistry
of the alkaloids has been described in great
detail by Gr6ger (3, 5).
The particular interest in chemical assays for
ergot alkaloids and their derivatives arises from
their therapeutic and toxic properties. Many
methods have been described for the qualitative
and quantitative assessment of the compounds.
Lysergic acid derivatives are unstable, usually
decomposing upon exposure to light or oxidizing
agents; the decomposition to isolysergic acid
derivatives destroys the pharmacological effect,
complicating assays of the active principles in
crude drugs. Characteristic color reactions occur
when the ergot alkaloids are exposed to sulfuric
acid or p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde in sul-
furic acid. Through the addition of ferric
chloride, this color reaction-known as the van
Urk reaction-has been improved and standard-
ized for the quantitative measurements of
ergot alkaloids (6). Derivatives of lysergic acid,
isolysergic acid, and some other compounds
produce an intense blue color in these tests.
Ergolines are also quantitatively assessed by
titration, spectrophotofluorometric methods,
and by ultraviolet absorbance (7). Spectral data
about infrared radiation and neutron magnetic
resonance (NMR) are known for many of the
alkaloids. Thin-layer chromatography as well as
paper chromatographic methods have been used
for further separation of the various alkaloids
(8, 9).
The ergot alkaloids have been used as
therapeutic agents for many years (8). Accor-
ding to the sites of action-periphery,
neurohumoral system, central nervous
system-the six principal effects of all natural
ergot alkaloids can be categorized as follows.
Vasoconstriction and contraction of the uterus
are perhaps the most important peripheral
effects; the classic use of ergot alkaloids in
obstetrics arises from this influence. Principal
neurohumoral effects appear as antagonisms to
serotonin and adrenaline. Effects of ergot on the
central nervous system are many and varied, in-
cluding a depression of the vasomotor center
and a stimulation of sympathetic structures in
December 1974
10> ,5
12 _11 C 4
1 1
HN 2
Ergoline
I
H COR
9 -CH3
I
H
HN
JI
3
the midbrain, particularly in the hypothalamus.
Slight modifications in the chemical structure
of an alkaloid can produce pronounced changes
in biological activity. Thus, certain compounds
are used therapeutically in peripheral and
cerebral vascular disorders, while others are
used in essential hypertension.
The interest and the amount of research
associated with lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) is reflected by more than 2000 scientific
and popular publications during the last several
years (2, 10). As the prototype of hallucinogens,
LSD has been an object of recent fascination
(10).
The ergot alkaloids reportedly influence
pregnancy (11), perhaps by affecting
progesterone metabolism; because of its poten-
tial application to contraception, this area is
currently under intensive investigation.
Fusaria and Alimentary Toxic Aleukia
Probably since the 19th century, outbreaks of
an enigmatic toxic disease occurred in Eastern
Siberia and the Amur region. As a result, the
Soviet government established the Institute of
Epidemiology and Microbiology of the U.S.S.R.
within the Ministry of Health, including a spe-
cial laboratory for investigating all aspects of
the disease (12, 13). Starting during the spring
of 1932, when the same disease reappeared
suddenly in endemic form throughout several
districts of Western Siberia, the laboratory con-
ducted comprehensive studies of the disease, its
etiologic agent(s), and its control.
The signs and symptoms of the disease, called
alimentary toxic aleukia (ATA), have been
described repeatedly in the Russian literature.
The signs include fever and hemorrhagic rash as
well as bleeding from gums, nose, and throat;
signs and symptoms also comprise necrotic
angina, extreme leukopenia, agranulocytosis,
and an exhaustion of the bone marrow with
general sepsis. Mortality has always been high.
Mostly occurring in agricultural areas, the dis-
ease severely affected whole families and even
entire villages.
Although the disease initially received many
names, including septic angina, alimentary
mycotoxicosis, alimentary hemorrhagic aleukia,
aplastic anemia, hemorrhagic aleukia, and
agranulocytosis, a committee of the Soviet
Health Ministry concluded that the most ap-
propriate term was alimentary toxic aleukia
(ATA).
At first the disease was considered to be infec-
tious, but neither bacteriological studies nor
epidemiologic investigations confirmed the
hypothesis. Alternatively, the disease was con-
sidered a vitamin deficiency or a poisoning
through bacterially contaminated food; neither
of these hypotheses was substantiated. The
various false concepts delayed recognition of the
true nature of ATA. Eventually it was realized
that the disease stemmed from an ingestion of
overwintered grains infested by toxic fungi.
These grains formed the staple diet of the peas-
ant population in agricultural areas of Russia.
ATA occurred with special severity during
World War II, reaching a peak in 1944, when the
population of the Orenburg district alone suf-
fered an alarming number of casualties (12).
The morbidity among the population in this dis-
trict exceeded 10% and a high mortality oc-
curred in 9 of the 50 counties. Occurrence of the
disease was related to the particular situation
prevailing in some parts of the Soviet Union at
that time; because of famine, the population
was driven to collect grains that had been left in
the field under the thick snow cover of winter.
Under ordinary circumstances the wheat would
have been gathered earlier; but the shortage of
nvanpower occasioned by the war prevented
harvesting at the proper time.
The role of toxic fungi as an etiologic agent in
ATA was examined extensively in the Institute
of Epidemiology and Microbiology in Moscow.
From more than 1000 samples of overwintered
grains, the institute isolated over 3500 fungal
cultures belonging to 42 genera and 200 species.
Among the isolates, 61 showing Fusarium poae
and 57 showingFusarium sporotrichioides were
toxic to animals. Numerous investigations in
different laboratories supported these results;
between 1943 and 1949, trial plot experiments
determined the most favorable conditions for
toxin production in overwintered wheat.
The extensive work conducted in the Soviet
Union established that the disease is caused by
toxic metabolites stemming from those species
of Fusaria which grow on grains that are har-
vested after the snow has melted in the spring
(Table 1); evidence suggests that the toxin is
produced during the spring thaws. The follow-
Environmental Health Perspectives4
Table 1. Toxicity of Fusarium fungi isolated from overwintered cereals, summer-harvested cereals, and their soils.a
Number of isolates
Overwintered cereals: Summer-harvested cereals:
grains and vegetative parts -Soil grains and vegetative parts
Fungus Toxic Mildly Non- Total Toxic Mildly Non- Total Toxic Mildly Non- TotaltOXiC toxic toxic tOxic tOxic tOxic
Fusa7ium arthro- - 1 7 8 - - 2 2 - - 5 5
sporioides Sherb.
F. avenaceum (Fr.) 3 3 26 32 - - 10 10 - - 3 3
Sacc.
F. culmorum (W. G. 2 1 13 16 - - - - - - - -
Sm.) Sacc.
F. equiseti (Cda.) 7 3 41 51 - 1 9 10 - - 27 27
Sacc.
F. graminearum - 1 2 3 - - - - - - - -
Schw.
F. javanicum - - 8 8 - - - - - - 5 5
Koord.
F. kihni(Fuck.) - 1 9 10 - - - - - -
Sacc.
F. late7itum 2 2 24 28 - 1 3 4 - - - -
Nees
F. moniliforme 1 3 22 26 - 1 10 11
Sheld.
F. nivale (Fr.) - 2 11 13 - - - - - - - -
Ces.
F. oxysporum Schl. 1 2 16 19 - 1 13 14 - - 2 2
F. poae (Pk.) Wr. 44 17 2 63 2 3 - 5 - - - -
F. redolensWr.Wr. 1 - 5 6 - - 2 2
F. sambucinum 1 1 14 16 - - - - - - - -
Fuck.
F. semitectum Berk. 2 2 23 27 - - - - - - - -
et Rav.
F. solani (Mart.) - 3 16 19 - - 5 5 - - - -
app. et Wr.
F. sporotrichioides 42 15 4 61 2 2 - 4 - - 2 2
Sherb.
F. tricinctum (Cda.) 2 1 19 22 - - 5 5 - - - -
Sacc.
a
FromJoffe (13).
December 1974 5
ing specific case serves as a typical example.
When harvested in autumn and winter before
the snow melted, grains were either nontoxic or
only slightly toxic; when harvested after a
relatively mild winter with abundant snow
followed by frequent spring freezing and thaw-
ing, often grains were highly toxic. The disease
usually appeared after victims had eaten only 2
kg of overwintered grain, and death resulted
from the eating of as little as 6 kg. Signs and
symptoms generally appeared within 2 to 3
weeks after ingestion; death occurred 6 to 8
weeks after the uptake of large toxin amounts.
Populations receiving balanced diets were
much less sensitive to the toxins than pop-
ulations subsisting mainly on overwintered
cereals (13). Additional factors influencing the
response to the toxins included the kind of cereal
which was ingested, the altitude, and the
thorough washing of grains in boiling water
before grinding. Prosomillet and wheat were the
cereals most likely to be toxic (Table 2); high
altitude appeared to decrease the incidence of
the disease in several population groups; and the
degree of toxicity was considerably diminished
through thorough washing of the grains in boil-
ing water which, as shown by later studies,
removed some of the toxins.
Biological and chemical properties of the
fungi responsible for ATA are known. The
evidence points conclusively to the Fusarium
molds as primary agents, but climatic con-
ditions also enter the toxicological problem. An
excellent and comprehensive discourse on ATA
is presented by Joffe (12, 13).
Data on the relative toxicities of barley,
millet, and wheat during several years following
the serious outbreaks in the early 1940s are com-
piled in Table 2. Although wheat was most toxic,
millet caused a higher incidence of disease;
millet was consumed by a much larger number
of people, and it was widely grown in areas
where other conditions contributed to a high in-
cidence. Furthermore, the millet ripened too
late to be harvested before winter and early
spring.
Several other conditions were studied in
detail: persistence of toxicity in stored grain,
role of the soil in the process of toxin formation,
toxicity of both vegetable cereal parts and soil,
meteorological conditions, seasonal effects, as
well as a comparison between toxicity of fungal
cultures and cereal samples.
A particularly interesting result of the
research on Fusaria is the immunization
associated with toxic cultures. If investigations
confirm the hypothesis that an immunity can be
conferred on individuals, an exciting new area
will be opened to research in the field of
mycotoxicoses.
Evidence from extensive investigations clearly
demonstrates that the strains of Fusaria vary
greatly in their capacity to produce toxic
materials (14, 15). Among the many factors in-
fluencing toxicity are ecological conditions, par-
ticularly the substrate on which the fungus
grows. The best nutrient sources for fungal
growth are carbohydrates, including starch and
glucose, along with peptone and asparagine as
suppliers of nitrogen. Ammonium sulfate and
Table 2. Toxicity of samples of various cereal crops, 1944-1949, from the Orenburg District.a
Millet Wheat Barley
Degree of Number of Number of Number of
toxicity samples S samples S samples %
Toxic 11 2.6 19 4.6 5 1.9
Slightly toxic 22 5.2 19 4.6 14 5.5
Nontoxic 387 92.2 377 90.8 236 92.6
Total number of
samples examined 420 415 255
a
From Joffe (13).
Environmental Health Perspectives6
sodium nitrate also enhance the production of
toxins. The acidity of the medium, too, is impor-
tant; the most suitable pH values lie between 4.6
and 5.4.
The toxins ofFusarium cultures produce both
localized and general 'effects (12). Localized
effects, as evidenced by skin tests, are restricted
to necrosis of the skin; these confined effects
provide a convenient biologic assay. General
effects comprise defective blood production,
hyperemia of the digestive tract, and acute
organ degeneration. Under practical conditions,
skin testing is now used as a reliable technique
for toxicity determination' of overwintered
grain's.
Guinea pigs and rabbits are most useful for
bioassays. In addition to skin responses, these
animals also exhibit a severe depression of
leukocytic bone marrow elements together with
a general depression of the hemopoietic system.
The clinical picture of ATA parallels striking-
ly the signs and symptoms as well' as the bone
marrow depression observed in stachybotrys
toxicity. The first, second, and third stages of
ATA in human patients'closely resemble the
first, second, and third stages of stachybo-
tryotoxicosis in animals. Local manifestations
are burning sensations in mouth, esophagus,
and stomach, General manifestations, are vomi-
ting and depression of leukopoiesis, erythro-
poiesis, and thrombopoiesis. Although ATA de-
presses the hemopoietic system, the bone mar-
row tends to remain viable. Based on these
observations, several investigators assume that
the toxins associated with overwintered cereals
do not act primarily on the bone marrow but on
other tissues which regulate the hematopoietic
system, the autonomic nervous system, and the
endocrine system.
In ATA, several investigators observed
changes of the nervous system such as impaired
reflexes, general hyperesthesia, cerebral
hemorrhages, encephalitis, and destructive
lesions in the sympathetic ganglia.
The only prophylactic measure against ATA
consists in the elimination of toxic grain from
food.
Stachybotryotoxicosis
A disease of then unknown etiology, but
apparently of a toxic nature, affected horses
throughout the Ukraine in 1931 (16). The disease
was characterized by an unusually high mortali-
ty rate and had clinical and pathological
histories which were unlike any disease entities
previously reported. The early studies of
Drobotko and colleagues (17) established that
the disease was neither contagious nor infec-
tious; unaffected horses were stabled adjacent
to sick ones without contracting the disease, and
attempts to transmit the disease by other
methods failed also. Review of many cases
revealed a relationship between straw used as
roughage or bedding and the appearance of the
toxic disease. It required several years and the
combined efforts from several medical dis-
ciplines to establish the causative agents as
metabolites of the fungus Stachybotrys alter-
nans. Working together, veterinarians and
microbiologists established the etiology,
described the clinical symptoms in detail, and
recommended therapeutic measures as well as
procedures for preventing the disease.
Conclusive evidence of the toxicity of the
material produced by the fungu's was establish-
ed by culturing the mold on artificial media and
feeding it to horses. After being fed sufficient
amounts of this material, the horses developed
signs, symptoms, and lesions which were iden-
tical to those observed in the field. Typically
there was an inflammatory response in the oral
mucosa along with edema of the lips; leukopenia
was always observed.
Following these studies, the disease appeared
in several other areas of Russia and in parts of
eastern Europe as well. Over a 10-year period,
the toxicoses attained enzootic proportions and
then seemed to subside, with only sporadic cases
appearing in those areas where it had previously
been enzootic. Reports of the disease were not
available during World War II, but since the
War, occasional outbreaks have been reported in
several regions (18).
The Russian literature included statements
that the horse was the only large animal suscep-
tible to Stachybotrys toxin; however, in the
United States, Forgacs and co-workers observed
the toxicosis in swine, sheep, and calves as well
as in horses (19). 'A natural outbreak of
stachybotryotoxicosis in cattle has been
reported; it was associated with straw con-
taminated by the fungus (20). More recently the
disease has been produced experimentally in
December 1974 7
laboratory animals including dogs, rabbits,
guinea pigs, and mice (21); chicks, too, were sen-
sitive to Stachybotrys toxin. In Russian ex-
periments, human volunteers were exposed to
aerosols containing toxic strains of S. alternans
or substrate infected with these strains; the
patients developed systemic and localized toxic
manifestations (20).
Studies on the epizootiology of the disease in-
dicate that the first cases in horses usually
appear in the fall when the animals are stabled
and when fodder, hay, or straw make up a con-
siderable portion of the diet. The number of
affected animals increases as winter passes on,
usually reaching a peak about February and
March. The disease generally subsides when the
horses are turned out to pasture. As with other
mycotoxicoses, there is no immunity conferred
upon the host; when the disease occurs on a par-
ticular farm, it is likely to recur, even in the
smaller animals. When the disease appears on a
farm, the number of affected horses quickly
rises within one week to 50% or more of the en-
tire stock; during the second week usually all of
the animals are sick. There is also a peracute
form of the disease in which entire herds can be
violently affected within 6 or 8 hr; such cases
are exceptional, however. The toxin does not
appear to be transmitted through the milk of
the mother, since colts nursing affected mares
do not develop the disease. Age, breed, sex,
physical condition, work load, and other factors
apparently have no influence on the severity or
course of the disease. Although mortality may
be moderate in certain cases, it usually is high;
the highest rate appears in the peracute forms,
in the chronic form, and in animals suffering
from various degrees of malnutrition.
The typical form of the disease (18) occurs in
animals with a continuous exposure to low
levels of the toxin. The initial manifestation
appears as stomatitis; necrosis is obvious about
the mouth, particularly in the wrinkles of the
skin at the mucocutaneous junction. The stoma-
titis then progresses to bleeding, swelling of
both upper and lower lips, and excessive saliva-
tion along with enlargement of the sub-
maxillary lymph nodes. Temperatures may in-
crease only 1-2°C, and the blood may show a
transitory neutrophilia. The duration of this
early stage generally varies from 1 to 3 weeks;
despite continued ingestion of sublethal
amounts of the toxin, the local lesions then
gradually subside and the animals enter an ap-
parent period of clinical remission. During this
period, however, thrombocytes decrease
markedly, clot retraction time increases, and
the blood ultimately fails to coagulate. During
the same period, leukopenia and agranulo-
cytosis develop, the leukocyte count dropping to
2000/cm3 of whole blood or less. Intestinal dis-
turbances of various degrees, including atony,
generally appear during this the second phase of
the disease. The third stage is characterized by
rising body temperatures, leukopenia, and
severe thrombocytopenia. The leukocyte count
often decreases to 100 white cells/cm3 of whole
blood. The animal develops a weak pulse and
often arrythmic heartbeat, along with distur-
bances of the alimentary tract. Pathologic
changes are characteristic: necrotic areas
appear on the mucous membranes of cheek,
gum, tongue, soft palate, and lips; the blood
glucose level drops to about 50% of normal; the
serum bilirubin level increases; and the in-
organic phosphorus content declines by a factor
of 10 or more. This final stage lasts from 1 to 6
days and usually terminates in death.
An atypical form, having-many of the signs,
symptoms, and lesions characterizing the
typical form, also occurs. The main syndrome
comprises nervous disorders; loss of reflexes,
hyperirritability, hyperesthesia, loss of vision,
and inability to move about. Despite anorexia,
the horse continues to drink large quantities of
water even though it swallows with con-
siderable difficulty. Death often ensues from
respiratory failure. In the majority of animals
with the atypical form, no blood changes are
observed.
Thus, the pathology of stachybotryotoxicosis
presents a characteristic set of lesions, including
profuse hemorrhage and necrosis in such varied
tissues as skeletal muscle, subcutaneous tissues,
serous and mucous membranes, and several
parenchymatous organs. Hemorrhages occur in
the diaphragm, mesentery, large intestine,
lymphatic nodes, lung, liver, brain, spinal cord,
and adrenal glands. In stachybotryotoxicosis,
unlike other diseases causing necrosis of the
mucous membranes, the necrotic focal areas are
not surrounded by reactive cells; the afflicted
animal appears to be incapable of providing in-
flammatory reactive cells which form a zone
Environmental Health Perspectives8
demarcating the lesions.
The signs, symptoms, and lesions in other
farm animals generally resemble those de-
scribed in the equine disease (18).
Russian investigators also described stachy-
botryotoxicosis in man; where the disease is en-
zootic in the horse, it frequently occurs in
human populations. Several cases have been de-
scribed in which patients used contaminated
straw for fuel or for sleeping mattresses. As an
occupational malady, the disease afflicted peo-
ple who were exposed to dust aerosols heavily
laden with a variety of mold spores. These oc-
cupations comprised work in cottonseed oil proc-
essing plants, grain elevators, textile mills, and
in plants processing various grains including the
malt of breweries. In all reported cases, a rapid
recovery ensued after the individuals were
removed from the source of toxins. Reexposure
to toxins caused much more serious sequelae in
humans than in animals.
Human patients generally develop a der-
matitis which usually involves the scrotal and
axillary regions; sometimes, however, hands
and other parts of the body are also afflicted.
The dermatitis leads initially to hyperemia,
then to serum exudation, encrustations, and ne-
crosis. In addition to dermatitis, the patients
develop catarrhal angina, bloody rhinitis, cough,
and pains in throat and chest. Leukocytosis is
followed by leukopenia with a sharp drop in
white cell counts occurring in the majority of
patients.
The toxin produced experimentally by patho-
genic strains ofStachybotrys is formed in media
within 10 days and attains its highest level in
about 20 days (18); subsequently, the toxin con-
centration falls but toxin is still detectable after
more than 400 days. The toxin is soluble in
various organic fat solvents; anhydrous ethyl
ether appears to be the best one. It has been
suggested that ingested toxin reacts with gastric
juice and is absorbed in a water-soluble form.
The material can be extracted from infected
straw within about 3 hr after exposure to the
mold. Russian investigators claim (17) to have
isolated the crystalline toxin deciphering an em'-
pirical formula of C25H3406. They suggest that
the toxin is representative of a newly dis-
covered group of naturally occurring cardiac
toxins, but the precise chemical structure has
not been reported. The material is resistent to
sunlight, ultraviolet light, and x-rays; it is ther-
mostable and withstands temperatures of 120°C
for at least 1 hr. It is unaffected by 2% concen-
trations of inorganic or organic acids but is
readily destroyed by alkaline materials.
Based on these findings, Soviet scientists used
sodium, potassium, calcium, and ammonium
hydroxide, as well as ammonia and chlorine gas,
to detoxify roughage intended for animal con-
sumption.
Although members of the genus Stachybdtrys
have been isQlated in almost all areas of the
world where it has been sought, there have been
no documented cases of toxic disease associated
with it in the United States. We should bear in
mind, however, that these fungi are present in
the United States and that, under propet con-
ditions, they have created public health hazards
in other parts of the world.
Penicillium Toxins
Yellowed-Rice Toxins
Shortly after World War II, mold metabolites
capable of inducing liver tumors in animals
were found by the Japanese in domestic rice im-
ported from Spain, Egypt, Thailand, Burma,
Italy, and the United States (22). Several ship-
ments were contaminated with a strain of Peni-
cillium islandicum Sopp, the mretabolite4 of
which proved to be highly toxic, with" liver
damage as the major manifestation.
Although more than 15 kinds of fungi have
been incriminated in moldy or yellowed rice,
this review covers only the most important or
the best know types: P. islandicum Sopp, Peni-
cillium citrinum Thom, and Penicillium citreo-
viride Biourge (Penicillium toxica7ium Miyacke).
The Japanese isolated P. islandicum Sopp in
1948 (23). Tsunoda observed postnecrotic cir-
rhosis of the liver in rats fed for one month or
less on rice contaminated with P. islandicnum.
Voluminous literature recounts the work that
has since been done with P. islandicum by chem-
ists, pathologists, clinicians, pharmacologists,
mycologists, and others (24). Oral admin-
istration of a methanol extract taken from the
fungus mat which had been cultured on Czapek
solution for 14 days induced in mice severe liver
damage, mainly centrolobular necrosis and fatty
degeneration. Further investigations revealed
that the mold metabolites caused chronic
December 1974 9
liver damage including cirrhosis and tumors, in
rats as well as mice; the end result depended on
the amount of moldy rice which had been con-
sumed. According to severity of intoxication,
the liver lesions were categorized as acute, sub-
acute, and chronic (25, 26).
Acute intoxication with atrophy of the liver is
caused by high levels of toxin given over a short
period of time. Animals fed these high levels
become inactive, progressively lose both
muscular and cutaneous tone, and finally die
after a prolonged comatose state similar to
hepatic coma in man. Clinical pathology studies
reveal several signs of liver damage. In human
patients, histopathologic studies show mainly
fatty degeneration and hemorrhagic cen-
trolobular necrosis of the liver.
The subacute and subchronic intoxications,
induced by lower concentrations of mold toxins
over a longer period of time, cause moderate
centrolobular necrosis with subsequent collapse
of the stroma. These processes lead to fibrosis,
liver atrophy, and proliferation of epithelial
cells lining bile ducts in the periportal regions. If
the animal survives for a few weeks, the liver
may show signs of regeneration.
Chronic intoxication develops in mice fed
small to medium doses of moldy rice or mold
metabolites. These mice survive the early stage
of intoxication without showing any signs or
symptoms; they usually have a life span of 6
months or more. Post-mortem examination
yields a wide range of liver damage from
cirrhosis and cancer to slight fibrosis and cell
pleomorphism. As with most other toxic con-
ditions, a broad spectrum of clinical and
histopathologic responses is observed.
The liver tumors have been described by Saito
et al. (26) and by Enomoto (27). Histologically,
the changes range from mild parenchymal cell
hyperplasia to differentiated and undifferen-
tiated liver cell carcinoma. Although there is a
high incidence of liver injury, the incidence of
malignant parenchymal tumors is relatively
low, indicating a low carcinogenic potential for
metabolites of P. islandicum Sopp.
Among laboratory animals, rabbits were the
most susceptible species in regard to
metabolites ofP. islandicum Sopp (24); when fed
1-5% moldy rice, they died within a few days.
Those that survived for longer periods developed
postnecrotic cirrhosis as soon as 90 days after
the initiation of feeding studies. Although
rhesus monkeys also showed acute toxic damage
of the liver, they developed neither cirrhosis nor
tumors as end results of intoxication with
metabolites of P. islandicum.
As shown by several investigators (24), diet
profoundly affects the responses of animals to
toxins of P. islandicum. Both male and female
mice develop acute toxic effects in a short period
of time when fed rice infected with P. islan-
dicum, but the response is greatly enhanced by
low protein intake, as illustrated by the follow-
ing example. The death rate of mice during
three weeks of feeding with an 11% protein diet
containing 3% moldy rice was about 44% in
males and about 25% in females. The death rate
of mice fed the same percentage of moldy
material with a 34% protein diet was 28% in
males and 5% in females. As toward many other
liver toxins and carcinogens, the male of the
species was considerably more sensitive.
Organs other than the liver are also injured
by exposure to toxic metabolites of P. islan-
dicum (28, 29). The pathological-findings include
atrophy of the thymus, spleen, and fat tissues.
Fatty degeneration of the tubular epithelium of
the kidney occurs, and pancreatic cirrhosis oc-
casionally develops in mice and rats. In addi-
tion, various tumors originate in tissues other
than the liver.
One of the toxic agents isolated from the
media in which P. islandicum Sopp was grown
received the name luteoskyrin (30, 31). The
material was obtained from the media as one of
seven pigments, including rugulosin and
cyclochlorotine (24). To isolate pure luteoskyrin
from culture medium, a relatively simple
method was described by Tatsuno (32).
Several physical and chemical properties of
luteoskyrin VI and its related compound,
rugulosin (V) are compiled in Table 3. The
chemical structure of luteoskyrin was deter-
mined with data from color tests, ultraviolet
absorption spectra, infrared absorption spectra,
chemical reactions, NMR spectra, and x-ray dif-
fraction. These various tests were previously
described (24).
One outstanding characteristic of luteoskyrin
is its extreme sensitivity to sunlight, leading to
photochemical changes of luteoskyrin in several
different organic solvents. The product of
photodecomposition is lumiluteoskyrin.
Environmental Health Perspectives10
R = OH
Rubroskyrin
R = H Rugulosin (3)
R = OH Luteoskyrin (I
Table 3. Physiochemical properties of luteoskyrin
and rugulosin.
Property Luteoskyrin Rugulosin
Molecular formula C3oH2U0Z C3oH2oOio
Molecular weight 574 542
Melting point, °C 287 (dec) 290 (dee)
[ap, -880 (acetone) +492 (dioxane)
Infrared (Nujol), cm-'
CO 1623 1690, 1620
OH 3378 3450
aDataof Saito et al. p4).
Luteoskyrin appears to have antimicrobial ac-
tivities against various microorganisms, and
this characteristic has made possible a bioassay
based on the sensitivity of a mutant of
E,scherichia coli Q-11.
As revealed by extensive studies (2$), the
biosynthesis of luteoskyrin depends on en-
vironmental factors. For instance, toxicity tends
to decrease when the mold is grown on various
grains in the followiing order: rice, barley,
wheat, and corn. The addition of certain amino
acids to the culture medium, including
asparagine, glutamine, and malonate, appears
to increase the production of luteoskyrin and of
other pigments as well. As shown by labeling
studies, these amino acids are incorporated into
the luteoskyrin molecule and into the chemical
structure of the related pigments (33).
Luteoskyrin, rugulosin, and their associated
pigments are produced under similar cir-
cumstances, but the two series of compounds
are derived along pathways which diverge at an
early stage of biosynthesis.
December 1974 11
The biological effects of luteoskyrin include a
swelling of the mitochondria and an inihibition
of oxygen uptake by homogenates of rat liver,
kidney, and heart muscle. The major site of in-
hibition apparently involves the mitochondrial
phosphorylation reaction. Luteoskyrin binds to
DNA in M'tro. Studies on liver, microsomal
preparations, and supernatant indicate that the
toxin evokes a high, prolonged incorporation of
cystine into the liver which impairs the transfer
of sulfur-containing amino acids into protein.
Thus, to varying degrees and by different
mechanisms, luteoskyrin apparently damages
several intracellular granules.
Toxicity of luteoskyrin varies with the route
of administration (24). In mice, the LDso (mg/kg
body weight) is as follows: intravenous, 6.65; in-
traperitoneal, 40.8; subcutaneous, 147; and oral,
221. Repeated subcutaneous injection of less
than 1/10 of the LDso over several days produces
the same lethal effect as a single subcutaneous
LDso but requires a longer time. Very young
mice are more sensitive than older ones, and
males are more sensitive than females.
The pathologic effect of luteoskyrin resides
primarily in the liver, being similar in rats,
mice, rabbits, and monkeys. The microscopic
changes of yellow discolored liver can be seen
within 24 hr after exposure. Marked cen-
trolobular necrosis and fatty degeneration oc-
cur, with some nuclear pleomorphism and
hyperchromatosis. Followinng prolonged ex-
posure, mice develop liver tumors but not
cirrhosis.
The pathologic response to rugulosin
reportedly is -almost identical with that to
luteoskyrin.
Besides luteoskyrin, rugulosin, and
associated pigments, a chlorine-containing pep-
tide and another toxin, referred to as islan-
dotoxin, have been isolated from the culture
filtrate of P. islandicu.m. The chlorine-
containing peptide is termed cyclochlorotine; its
structure is unknown; its empirical formula is
C2UH3UNOsCI2, and its melting point is 2510C.
The chemical structure VII has been suggested
for islandotoxin, but the precise structure is still
not clearly established. Although both chlorine-
containing peptide and islandotoxin share cer-
tain characteristics, they apparently are not
identical.
vff
Cyclochlorotine, a rapidly acting hepatotoxin,
causes the disappearance of membrane-bound
ribosomes and glycogen granules from injured
liver cells within a very short time. Thus it dis-
turbs both protein and carbohydrate
metabolisms. In mice, it causes an initial
hyperglycemia followed by hypoglycemia; it
also causes a disturbance in the number of liver
enzymes which accelerates glycogen catabolism
and inhibits glycogen neogenesis.
Pathologic effects ofcyclochlorotine are large-
ly restricted to the liver comprising an in-
terference with circulation and an increased
permeability of the capillaries. (When the pep-
tide is introduced into the skin of dogs, a similar
vascular effect occurs locally and leads to
necrosis of the epidermis and leukocytic in-
filtration.) In addition, vacuolation and hyaline
droplet formation occur in the parenchymal
cells, particularly in the perilobular areas.
Acute toxicity produces also a proliferation of
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
Chronic exposure of mice to the peptide
results in cirrhosis and liver cell carcinoma
along with tumors of the reticuloendothelial
system. Rats develop peritoneal hemorrhage as
the result of acute pancreatic necrosis; these
complications, however, usually occur only after
long-term exposure.
Although the toxins luteoskyrin, islandotoxin,
and cyclochlorotine share many pathological
effects, their biological effects are quite
different. Luteoskyrin and islandotoxin cause
liver damage characterized by centrolobular
necrosis. Cyclochlorotine, on the other hand,
causes damage in the peripheral zone,
characterized by vacuolation of liver and en-
dothelial cells and appearance of hyaline
Environmental Health Perspectives12
droplets in the cytoplasm. A similar cytotoxic
effect results from cysteine deficiency or from
allyl formate administration.
Long-term feeding studies with
cyclochlorotine and luteoskyrin in mice have
shown that luteoskyrin has a hepatotoxic as well
as a possible carcinogenic action, but it is less
potent than aflatoxin. The chlorine-containing
peptide is a cirrhogenic agent and may be car-
cinogenic, although this aspect requires further
study; in limited experiments, a few mice have
developed liver tumors.
An additional toxin isolated from P. islan-
dicum Sopp has been designated erythroskyrine
(34); it has not yet been as well characterized as
the already discussed toxins.
In 1953, Japanese investigators discovered
that some rice imported from Thailand was con-
taminated with Penicillium citrinum Thom, a
producer of potent toxins (22). The mold has
since been found in all rice-producing areas of
the world, including Japan, Burma, Italy,
Egypt, the United States, and more recently in
the People's Republic of China. Mice and dogs
fed rice contaminated with P. citrinum dis-
played enlarged kidneys which, on
histopathologic examination, revealed marked
degeneration and dilatation of the lower
nephrons beneath Henle's loop (24, 35). A
flattening and desquamation of tubular
epithelium obstructed the lumen at the cor-
ticomedullary junction, partially accounting for
the renal lesion. More prolonged feeding of in-
fested rice to mice resulted in glomerular lesions
such as adhesion of the tuft to the capsule. The
renal lesions resembled glomerulonephrosis, a
picture often seen in toxic nephrosis.
Citrinin is the major yellowed-rice toxin
produced by P. citrinum; its chemical structure
(VIII) has been established (36, 37) and its
biosynthesis has been partially determined.
OH
HOOC
CH3
The LD5o of citrinin has been reported for
mice, rats, rabbits, and guinea pigs; the sub-
cutaneous LD5o varies among these species from
35 to 67 mg/kg body weight. Intraperitoneally,
the LD5o is 30 mg/kg in mice and about 50
mg/kg in rabbits.
Besides renal damage, citrinin causes
acetylcholine or pilocarpine-like responses, in-
cluding vasodilation, constriction of the bronchi,
and increased muscular tone.
One additional mold associated with yellowed
rice was isolated several years ago from rice
collected in Taiwan and Japan. Designated as
Penicillium toxicarium Miyake, it was later
shown to be identical with Penicillium
citreoviride Biourge, which had been described
earlier by two laboratories (24). Feeding studies
proved the contaminated rice to be toxic to rats.
Rice infested with P. citreoviride was studied
for its toxicologic effects; more recently, an ac-
tive fraction has been isolated, chemically iden-
tified '(24, 38), and designated as citreoviridin
(IX).
The toxicology of citreoviridin is known to a
limited extent for several mammalian species. It
causes a typical acute poisoning that is
characterized by an early onset of progressive
paralysis in the hindlegs, vomiting, convulsions,
and respiratory disorder. At an advanced stage,
cardiovascular disturbances, flaccid paralysis,
and hypothermia occur along with dyspnea, gas-
ping, and coma; respiratory arrest and death
OCHs HO OH
H3C H
December 1974 13
follow. The symptoms in animals resemble
closely those in human patients suffering from
acute cardiac beriberi-also called shoshin-
kakke-a common disease throughout Asian
countries in the past. The cause of this type of
beriberi remains unknown; there appears to be
ample thiamine in the tissues of patients. In
both man and animals, the disease is charac-
terized primarily by ascending progressive
paralysis.
Despite the very severe clinical symptoms at-
tributable to citreoviridin, histopathological
changes are minimal or not detectable at all.
The Rubratoxins
The rubratoxins are a group of metabolites
produced by Penicillium rubrum Stoll. Growing
on feeds, some strains produce large quantities
of rubratoxins which create an actual hazard to
livestock and a potential hazard to man (39). The
mold grows on a large variety of feedstuffs, and
during the past decade some information on the
growth and toxicity of crude compounds has ac-
cumulated.
In the earliest accounts describing a disease in
cattle and swine, Sippel et al. (40) isolated 13
different molds from toxin 'corn. Only two of
these, A. flavus and P. rubrum caused illness
and death when fed to laboratory experimental
animals. Further studies showed that the isolate
of P. rubrum was considerably more toxic than
that of A. flvus. When fed to pigs o-ve'r a period
of about 5 days, a total dose of 7-8 lb of corn
contaminated with A. flavus resulted in death;
however, a single dose of only 1/2 lb of corn con-
taminated with P. rubrum resulted in death,
usually'within 24 hr.
Burnside et al. (41) reported moldy corn
poisoning in cattle; they isolated -two organisms,
Aspergillus flavus Link and P. rubrum Stoll,
from corn associated with the disease. When
grown in proper media, these cultures produced
a material that was lethal to mice, horses, pigs,
and chick embryos.
Although P. rubrum is probably the most
prominent mold associated with this type of tox-
icosis,' other genera, including Fusaria and
Aspergilli, produce toxins when grown on corn
products; in fact, the naturally occurring dis-
ease probably results more often than not from
the interaction of several toxins produced by dif-
ferent molds. Seibold and Bailey (42) de-
scribed a form of toxicosis in dogs, designated
hepatitis X, in the early 1950s. Following detail-
ed experimental studies, they concluded that
hepatitis X in dogs and moldy corn toxicosis in
pigs shared the same etiology.
After aflatoxins were dis'covered and chem-
ically identified in the 1960s, it was realized
that they acted synergistically with the tox-
ins produced by P. rubrum; although aflatoxin
alone induced many of the manifestations
observed in field cases of hepatitis X, only the
synergistic action of aflatoxin Bi and rubratox'in
B provoked the full spectrum of manifestations
characterizing the disease (43).
Forgacs and Carll (44) described a
hemorrhagic disease related to contaminated
poultry feed. They subsequently demonstrated
that P. rubrum and the closely related species
Penicillium purpurogenum caused good grain to
become toxic to chicks. With the toxic feed, they
reproduced the hemorrhagic disease seen in
field cases.
Isolation of the two principal toxins,
rubratoxin A and rubratoxin B, was 'achieved by
investigators who worked with a partially
purified substance that was produced by molds
grown in pure culture. The toxins 'have been
chemically characterized and their structures
proposed (X and XI) (45-48).
Rubratoxin B (XI) is clearly the principal tox-
in produced by toxigenic strain's of P. rubrum,
but there is still very little known about its dis-
tribution in feeds and foods. Furthermore, ex-
cept for the report of Wogan et al. (49), little in-
formation is available on toxicity of the purified
compounds studied under controlled conditions.
I
Environmental Health Perspectives14
Although it is difficult to assess the role of P.
rubrum in naturally occurring diseases, there is
little doubt that strains of this mold can produce
large quantities of toxic metabolites under
laboratory conditions and that the mold is often
isolated from feeds collected during outbreaks
of disease in animals. The magnitude of the
problem remains to be elucidated.
Both growth and toxin production of P.
rubrum vary considerably, apparently depend-
ing upon the composition of the media upon
which it is cultured. Complex substrates sup-
port considerably greater growth and toxin
production than do synthetic media.
Pure rubratoxins A and B are soluble in
acetone, moderately soluble in alcohols and es-
ters, and minimally soluble in water. The two
compounds are completely insoluble in non-
poplar solvents. Rubratoxin A (X) is much more
soluble in ethyl alcohol, however, than is
rubratoxin B; conversely, rubratoxin B is by far
the more soluble in ethyl acetate. These
characteristics have been used to separate the
compounds individually from the culture
medium. Thin-layer chromatography is useful
for this purpose. From mixtures of benzene and
ethyl acetate, pure rubratoxin B crystallizes as
long lathes with the geometry of hexagonal
plates extended along one axis in the plane of
the hexagon. In diethyl ether, pure rubratoxin B
crystallizes as rosettes. It may crystallize as
regular hexagonal plates, however, from'
solvents such as amyl acetate. The mass spectra
of both rubratoxin A and B are known, as are
the ultraviolet, infrared, and other useful
analytical spectra.
Forgacs and Carll (50) described hemorrhage
and congestion of the breast, lung, kidney,
spleen, and many other organs and tissues of
chicks feeding on grain contaminated with P.
purpurogenum and P. rubrum. Extracts from P.
rubrum grown bn cracked corn were lethal to
guinea pigs, mice, rabbits, and dogs. According
to Wilson and Wilson (45),.the manifestations of
the disease closely resembled those described by
other investigators using moldy feeds.
Sprague-Dawley rats injected with a sub-
lethal dose of crude rubratoxin developed a
severe fatty infiltration of the liver (51). Despite
visible damage to the mitochondria, no signifi-
cant impairment of mitochondrial function was
shown by in vitro tests. Townsend et al. (46)
gave rubratoxins to mice in doses so small that
microscopic lesions were absent. Nonetheless,
metabolic processes in the livers of these mice
were adveirsely affected; after a standard dose of
phenobarbital, the sleepink time was increased.
The liver is clearly the major site of injury in-
flicted by rubratoxins; this is not surprising
because the liver plays a central role in detox-
ification.
Recently, Wogan et al. (49) investigated the
acute and subacute toxicities of rubratoxin B;
they administered the material by various
routes to several species of animals. They
demonstrated an interaction between rubratox-
in B and aflatoxin Bi. In all of the tested species,
the most important lesion was,in the liver, com-
prising congestion, hemorrhagic degeneration,
and necrosis. There was also general depletion
of lymphocytes in the spleen and the lymph
nodes along with frequent hemorrhages at these
sites. Of the various species, cats were the most
sensitive, developing hemorrhages and massive
ascites in addition to the lesions. Following a
sublethal dose of rubratoxin, the livers of guinea
pigs, ducklings, mice, and rats regenerated over
a period of 7 days. Occasionally, mild renal
damage was observed microscopically, but the
finding was not consistent among the various
species or within one particular species.
Chronic toxicity studies yielded a con-
siderable body of important information (49).
Very low doses of rubratoxin B administered
over long periods of time were not carcinogenic,
although they caused severe liver damage
(Tables 4 and 5). Given a maximum tolerated
level of rubratoxin B, none of the 60-week sur-
vivors showed any evidence of neoplastic or even
December 1974 15
Table 4. Lethal potency ofrubratoxin B in several species.a
Weight, No. of Dosing LD5o,
Species Sex g animals route b Vehicle C mg/kg
Rat M 58 60 IP PG 0.36 (0.27-0.49)
Rat F 60 50 IP PG 0.36 (0.28-0.46)
Rat F 59 70 IP DMSO 0.35 (0.28-0.45)
Rat M 60 25 po e DMSO ca. 400
Rat F 58 25 PO DMSO ca. 450
Mouse F 25 25 IP DMSO 0.27 (0.22-0.34)
Mouse F 25 30 IP PG 2.6 (2.0-3.1)
Guinea pig M 565 18 IP DMSO 0.48 (0.41-0.56)
Cat M 3000 3 IP DMSO ca. 0.2
Cat M, F 3000 8 IP PG 1.0-1.5
Dog M 3000 7 IP PG >5.0
Chicken M 500 6 IP PG >4.0
a
Data of Wogan et al. (49).
b Dosing routes: IP, intraperitoneal; PO, by mouth.
I
Vehicles: PG, propylene glycol; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide
d 95% confidence interval.
e
By stomach tube.
Table 5. Toxicity in male rats exposed simultaneously to rubratoxin B and aflatoxin Bi. a
No. of
Total Body weight at preneoplastic
toxin, end of dosing, liver lesions
Treatment regimen mg/rat % of control Mortality at 70-80 wks
Controls
(DMSO 3x/wk for 5 wk) - 100 0/10 0/7
Rubratoxin B
(25 mg/kg, 3x/wk for 5 wk) 39.7 95 0/10 0/7
Aflatoxin Bi
(0.2 ppm in diet for 6 wk) 0.11 102 0/10 6/7
Rubratoxin B and aflatoxin Bi
simultaneously - 86 9/20 5/8
a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
a Data of Wogan et al. (49).
Data of Newberne and Wogan (52).
Environmental Health Perspectives16
preneoplastic lesions; several animals survived
as long as 87 weeks without any evidence of
neoplasia.
The synergism between rubratoxin B and
aflatoxin is important from the standpoint of
public health. Rubratoxins, while not par-
ticularly toxic by themselves, may well be
potentiating factors for other toxins
simultaneously occurring in moldy feeds and
foods. The interaction of the more prominent
mycotoxins must be examined in detail to deter-
mine their hazard to public health.
Other Penicillium Toxins
Other Penicillium toxins comprise patulin,
penicillic acid, and certain lactones; they are
associated with several species of Penicillia and
Aspergilli, including Penicillium urticae,
Penicillium claviforme, Penicillium expansum,
Aspergillus clavatus, Aspergillus giganteus, and
Aspergillus terreus. Although not studied as ex-
tensively as others, the toxins induce significant
biological effects. In mice, they reduce the
lymphocyte count in blood, increase vascular
permeability (resulting in edema), and suppress
the formation of urine. They also elevate the
blood sugar level. Patulin has been used
therapeutically in very low concentrations as a
nose and throat spray and as a treatment for
common head cold.
The molds and their metabolic products were
described in detail by Ciegler et al. (53).
An additional class of compounds,
cyclopiazonic acid and related toxins, are
produced mainly by Penicillium cyclopium
Westling. This mold and its toxic metabolites
have been isolated from peanuts and corn meal.
The biologic effects of cyclopiazonic acid are
only partially known. When the toxin is given
orally to ducks, chicks, and rats, the animals
display convulsions and die within a very short
time. Other but less well-defined toxins are also
associated with P. cyclopium Westling.
Miscellaneous Penicillium toxins were
described by Wilson (54); although some of the
toxic fractions have been isolated, they are
generally not yet sufficiently characterized for
inclusion in the discussion.
Aspergillis Toxins (Aflatoxins)
Although Aspergillus flavus is associated
with most food and feed contaminations, only a
few strains of A. flavus actually produce
aflatoxins; however, these few strains are the
most important producers of aflatoxin. Other
Aspergilli, too, produce aflatoxins (55).
Taber and Schroeder (56) found that
Aspergillus flavus-oryzae, isolated from
peanuts grown in the United States, produced
no aflatoxin Gi or G2, although several cultures
produced Bi. Likewise, the aflatoxins
originating from Penicillia (e.g., Penicillium
citrinum, Penicillium frequentans, Penicillium
variable, and Penicillium puberlum) were con-
sidered a relatively minor hazard (57).
Aspergillus toxins other than aflatoxin were
reviewed previously (57-63).
Early Studies
The majority of the more than 1000
publications about aflatoxins appeared during
the last 10 or 12 years, reflecting an intense in-
terest in mycotoxins, and more specifically in
aflatoxins, which was aroused by the outbreak
of turkey X disease throughout England in 1960
(64).
During the early development of antibiotics, a
fundamental discovery was made that some
materials from antibiotic-producing molds were
toxic in animal trials. However, these molds
were usually discarded because they were poor
producers of antibiotics; little attention was
paid to their potential for producing toxins.
Thus, the recognition of mycotoxins as a threat
to public health was delayed for two or three
decades.
It has long been known that fungi growing on
foods and feeds are ubiquitous; they may con-
taminate virtually every stable foodstuff of
either plant or animal origin. The majority
grows throughout extremely wide ranges of pH
and temperature, making moisture conditions
the primary environmental restriction. On
cereal grains and oil seeds, molds grow at
moisture levels which are commonly en-
countered under storage conditions. These
storage molds mainly are species of Aspergilli
and Penicillia. For instance, moldy corn tox-
icosis in swine, occurring with considerable
frequency in the humid southeastern parts of
the United States, is associated with both
Aspergillus and Penicillium molds (41, 65).
The small number of publications indicated
December 1974 17
clearly the lack of interest in mycotoxin
research prior to the 1960 outbreak of turkeyX
disease. Several of the early reports (40, 66)
associated liver disease in swine with a ration
that contained corn or peanuts. Aspergillus
molds were incriminated in the epizootics of
bovine hyperkeratosis, although later studies in-
dicated that the disease was more complex; it
probably resulted from an interaction of
chlorinated cyclic hydrocarbons with mold tox-
ins (67-69). Forgacs et al. (44, 50) isolated
several molds, most species of Aspergilli and
Penicillia, from feeds that led to a hemorrhagic
disease in poultry. Furthermore, isolates from
these molds on poultry feed were often capable
of reproducing the hemorrhagic syndrome in
birds. These diseases were then designated as
moldy feed toxicoses. The English episode in
turkeys brought together microbiologists and
veterinarians who recognized that toxic
manifestations were caused by the ingestion of
certain mold-contaminated feeds.
During the period from 1960 to 1962, several
later reports (70- 72) about outbreaks of disease
in poultry and fish at diverse geographical
locations incriminated fungi in feeds as the like-
ly etiologic agents. In avian species, the acute
disease resulted in loss of appetite, weakness of
wings, and lethargy. Histologic examination of
tissues revealed an acute hepatic necrosis and
usually a marked bile duct proliferation.
Ultimately, the problem was traced to imported
Brazilian peanut meal in the birds' rations. It
was then discovered that ducklings, swine, and
cattle had also been poisoned by similarly con-
taminated lots of peanut meal. The Brazilian
peanut meal, however, was not alone in causing
toxicity. At about the time when the turkey X
disease broke out, a similar disease, associated
with peanuts processed in East Africa, affected
ducklings in Kenya (73). The early discovery
that ducklings were particularly sensitive to
aflatoxin, as evidenced by a rapid and extensive
bile duct proliferation, was fortuitous; this
species became the major tool for biologic assay.
Following the initial studies of peanut meal
poisoning in turkeys and ducklings, Lancaster et
al. (74) reported that rats developed liver cell
carcinomas when toxic peanut meal was includ-
ed in their diet for 30 weeks or longer. Sargeant
et al. (75) and Nesbitt et al. (76) identified the
toxin-producing organism in the peanut meal as
the saprophytic mold Aspergillusflavus Link ex
Fries, a widely distributed organism that has
been isolated from virtually every staple food
product in the tropical and semitropical areas of
the world (77).
While the turkey X disease was at its height,
an epizootic of liver cancer afflicted hatchery-
reared rainbow trout in Washington and Oregon
(72, 78). Investigations then revealed that liver
carcinoma occurred in fish at many different
locations. Trout raised in hatcheries had for
many years been fed a diet including vegetable
sources of protein, with cottonseed meal as the
major source (79). As a result of many in-
vestigations, the etiology of trout hepatomas
was finally traced to contaminants in the cot-
tonseed meal. Furthermore, the investigators
discovered the influence of nutritional factors
on both the neoplastic processes (80) and the
resistance to carcinogenic toxins (81).
In addition to toxicoses in various domestic
animals and liver carcinomas in trout, an obser-
vation in laboratory rats further heightened the
interest in contaminated feed. During studies
comparing the effects of choline-deficient and
adequate diets, Salmon and Newberne (82)
observed liver carcinoma in rats were fed
diets containing peanut meal. Within a relative-
ly short time, several reports (83, 84) showed
that the contaminant in peanut meal was the
same as that produced by a strain ofAspergillus
flavus which was isolated from toxic meal in
England and identified as a complex of
metabolites (73, 85, 86).
Identification and Characterization of Afla-
toxins
The discovery that the toxins had a
characteristic fluorescence pattern on thin-layer
chromatograms greatly facilitated their isola-
tion and characterization, culminating in the
determination of the molecular formulas of four
components designated as aflatoxins Bi, B2, Gi,
and G2; the four components were distinguished
by their blue or green fluorescence and by their
Rf values on thin-layer chromatograms (87).
More recently, related substances have been
isolated and chemically characterized, the most
important ones being Mi, M2, B2, and G2a(63).
The Mi and M2 fractions, first isolated from the
milk of cows feeding on aflatoxin-contaminated
fodder (88) were later found in the milk of
laboratory rats. Mi and M2 possessed the same
Environmental Health Perspectives18
toxicity as the aflatoxins from which they were
derived (89). On the other hand, the hydrox-
ylated B2a and G2a derivatives of B2 and G2
described by Dutton and Heathcote (90) were
virtually nontoxic, suggesting that con-
taminated foods may be detoxified by acid treat-
ment.
The isolation, purification, and identification
of the various fractions of aflatoxins are
described in detail by several authors 62,
91-93). The structures are shown in Figure 1.
Although not highly specific, quantitative
assays for aflatoxins are reasonably accurate.
The current methodology relies on thin-layer
chromatography, the use of known reference
materials, derivative formation, and bioassay.
The same methodology, however, does not work
satisfactorily for all food products. For example,
corn and corn products require modifications of
the methods that are commonly used to assay
0 0 0 0
0 0
0 0 ~OCH, 0 0 OCH,
B, B,
for aflatoxin in cottonseed, cocoa, oats, and
peanuts (94).
A biological test, using the duckling,
supplements the various chemical methods for
analysis (84). One-day-old ducklings are usually
used, and the suspected toxin is dissolved in
either proplylene glycol, dimethyl sulfoxide, or
some other suitable solvent. The ducklings are
then dosed with varying amounts of the
material, killed within 48-72 hr, and a section
of each liver is examined for characteristic
histologic alterations (Figure 2). The alterations
include periportal liver cell necrosis and bile
duct hyperplasis, the latter being graded to
mirror the concentration of administered
aflatoxin (Table 6). The histologic changes are
described by Newberne et al. (84) and the
relative toxicities of the compounds are listed by
several investigators (95, 96). The bile duct
hyperplasia is not specific for the toxins, but
I-.MIIho.x-allatoxin U2 B2-M4ctioxy-aflatoxin B3
0 0
0
110
0'I 0 OCH,
0 0
HO 0
0 0 OCH,
0 0
ItO 0 OCH,
0 0
0
110 0 0 OCH,
0 0
00
HO
0 0 OCII,
GM,B,,
0 0
( 0
0 I
(I 1C0 0 (1
I-Ac.toxy-allaitoxin B2
FIGURE 1. Chemical structures of aflatoxins and metabolites.
December 1974
Palr;siticol IB83)
I-Etlioxy-allatoxiii B2 -allato\ill ('02
M2
G¢,
19
FIGURE 2. Typical bile duct hi
lowing exposure to aflatox
J3F<vX A*¢WXV provides a reliable confirmation of the results
obtained with chemical isolation and thin-layer
';~ j chromatography.
The biosynthesis of aflatoxins has been
. < studied extensively. In the earlier work (97),
various precursors were labeled and tested for
incorporation into the synthetic pattern of
aflatoxin Bi. Phenylalanine and shikimic acid
appeared implicated as precursors (98).
Although several hypothetical schemes were
I devised, the precise nature of the biosynthesis
remains to be established. On the other hand,
procedures for laboratory synthesis of aflatox-
ins Bi, Gi, and Mi have been developed (99); the
syntheses were designed primarily for verifica-
,a. ^ tion of the structure; the procedures were too
complex to furnish a routine production of
material for experimental use.
A total of 12 structurally related compounds
*Z. #4 1W with similar configurations have been iden-
tified; Buchi and Rae (100) described in detail
both the structure and chemistry of many of
y''#22t<7 t9... ' these compounds. Products of metabolism in the
biological systems also were investigated;
Wogan (63) recently reviewed the chemistry in-
volved in these processes.
yperplasia in duckling liver fol-
cin.
Table 6. Effects of toxic materials on ducklings in 7 days. a
Initial 7-Day Liver weight Average
Dietary weight, weight, Total, % of body bile duct
supplement g g g weight hyperplasia b
None 57 - - c 38.0
None 55 144 5.5 4.7 30.0
None 47 170 11.8 6.3 0
500 jg liquid culture extract 58 127 7.4 5.8 6.0
7.8 ,g wheat culture extract 54 138 9.7 5.0 5.0
2.0 jg pure aflatoxin B, 51 118 6.0 5.0 10.0
15.6Mug pure aflatoxin G, 54 121 5.4 4.4 10.0
50.0 og pure aflatoxin B2 57 147 7.1 4.9 16.0
a
Data of Newberne (84).
b Graded 0 to 4+. multiplied by 10, and averaged.
c Died before 7 days.
Environmental Health Perspectives20
Effects of Aflatoxin on Various Species
Mollusk Eggs: Various biological assay
methods for aflatoxins have been proposed with
the goal of increasing sensitivity and speed of
detection (101). Townsley and Lee (102) reported
that aflatoxin Bi inhibits cell cleavage in fer-
tilized eggs of the mollusk Bankia setacea but
prevents neither fertilization nor nuclear divi-
sion. It has been suggested that the eggs be used
as a bioassay system because their handling re-
quires a minimum of technique and training
and they are sensitive to aflatoxin concen-
trations of 0.05 ,ug/ml. However, limiting
features include the availability of the mollusk,
the requirement of sea water, and the need to
work at low temperatures.
Embryonated Eggs: Embryonated chicken
eggs are also sensitive to aflatoxin, but their use
is limited by high death rates (103, 104). The
biological effects are interesting, however, con-
sisting of growth retardation, edema,
hemorrhage, decreased brain development,
skeletal defects, and beak anomalies. Their non-
specific nature diminishes the usefulness for
assays.
Tissue Culture: Tissue culture studies in-
dicated that aflatoxin suppressed mitotic divi-
sion in heteroploid and diploid embryonic lung
cells (105). In concentrations from 0.5 to 1.0
ppm, aflatoxin reduced growth of heteroploid
embryonic lung cells of human origin (106); at
5.0 ppm, the cells did not grow at all. Nucleolar
volume decreased 12 hr after chick embryonic
cells were dosed with aflatoxin, and the nucleoli
disappeared eventually (62).
Plants: It was reported that aflatoxins
caused albinism in the leaves of young cress.
(Lepidium stivum) that were subjected to
aflatoxin concentrations ranging from 1 to 10
,ug/ml (107). Seed germination was prevented by
higher doses; the authors suggested that the
effects could be elaborated into a simple test for
the detection of aflatoxin; however, this
proposal never was implemented.
Microorganinus: In 1966, Burmeister and
Hesseltine (108) surveyed 325 microorganisms
for sensitivity to aflatoxin. Many of the various
organisms (bacteria, fungi, algae, and protozoa)
were affected, but the damage was not suf-
ficiently specific to warrant further investiga-
tion. Clements (109) used similar methods but
the sensitivity was not sufficient for a useful
test.
Domestic Animals: The carcinogenicity of
aflatoxin is well established. Fish, birds, ferrets,
trout, pigs, sheep, and laboratory rats develop
liver carcinoma under appropriate conditions
(52, 95, 110, 111). Although liver cell carcinomas
comprise the majority, primary tumors also
arise in other organs such as kidney, stomach,
lung, salivary and lacrymal glands, colon, and
skin.
Although aflatoxin poisoning apparently has
long been a problem in animals throughout the
world (112), the majority of records and obser-
vations appeared after 1960, as shown by the
following: Loosmore and Markson (85) observed
that the clinical signs and liver lesions in cattle
suffering from aflatoxin poisoning resembled
those produced by the pyrrolizidine alkaloids.
The liver lesions produced in cattle by these two
different classes of toxins were, in fact, in-
distinguishable. Furthermore, they resembled
lesions observed in children with "childhood
cirrhosis." In 1963, Allcroft and Lewis (113)
reported that calves suffering from aflatoxin
poisoning had a decreased rate of growth and
severe tenesmus. Post-mortem examinations
revealed visceral edema, ascites, and fibrosis of
the liver. Similarly, well-controlled experiments
with steers showed that aflatoxin significantly
decreased weight gains and feed efficiencies
over a 133-day trial (114). Given large doses of
aflatoxins, milk cows showed decreased milk
production and occasional weight loss. When fed
aflatoxin, cattle produce milk containing the Mi
and M2 fractions' In most of the cattle studies,
enzymes of serum and liver were affected, but
the changes were equivocal. As one important
observation, aflatoxin-fed cattle showed a mark-
ed decrease in serum vitamin A (115).
Swine are very sensitive to aflatoxins (116);
clinical observations of aflatoxicosis in swine
have been recorded in detail. As with other
species, the age of the animal is important, the
younger being more sensitive. The marked liver
damage occurs mainly in the centrolobular zone
but may involve the entire lobule in cases of ex-
posure to high concentrations (117). Serum en-
zyme levels are increased, reflecting liver
damage; vitamin A concentrations in serum and
December 1974 21
liver are markedly decreased. Aflatoxin-induced
liver cancer in swine is unknown.
Sheep apparently are least sensitive domestic
animals, although they excrete relatively large
amounts of aflatoxin metabolites in urine and
milk (118). Despite their relative insensitivity,
sheep develop liver damage after exposure to
high levels of aflatoxins; and if exposure con-
tinues over a long period, they develop liver cell
carcinoma, nasal carcinoma, and chondroma
(119).
The early observations of a toxic disease in
dogs in the southeastern United States (42, 112)
led to the discovery that the majority of toxic
episodes were associated with feed containing
peanut meal. The disease, referred to as
hepatitis X, shared many characteristics with
moldy corn poisoning in swine, and in-
vestigators finally concluded that there
probably was a commnon etiologic agent. Dogs
suffered hemorrhages in various tissues and the
liver underwent cell necrosis, severe fatty
change, cirrhosis, and fibrosis. Bile duct
proliferation varied with the amount and dura-
tion of exposure. The disease was reproduced in
dogs by aflatoxin Bi and by a combination of
aflatoxin Bi and rubratoxin B (43).
Poultry are highly susceptible to aflatoxins.
Not only is the liver seriously injured, but the
kidney also sustains damage (83). Ducklings,
quail, turkeys, and chickens (in order of decreas-
ing sensitivity to aflatoxin) respond with bile
duct proliferation and various degrees of liver
cell damage (95). Fatty liver, common in all
species, is most marked in the very young duck-
ling, the condition partly resulting from residue
of the yolk. Long-term studies (65, 120) reveal
that the ducks often develop coexistent liver cell
and bile duct carcinomas as a consequence of ex-
posure to aflatoxins for sufficiently long
periods. The dose to produce carcinoma is quite
low in comparison with carcinogenic doses for
other species developing liver tumors.
Monkeys: Madhavan et al. (121) presented
the pathologic features of lesions produced by
aflatoxin in the livers and kidneys of monkeys.
The administered doses were so high, however,
that the animals did not survive very long; thus,
lesions were primarily acute or subacute toxic
responses. The major findings were biliary
fibrosis associated with severe fatty change and
parenchymal necrosis. Determined chemically,
liver fat was sharply increased.
Cuthbertson et al. (122), conducting a long-
term experiment with cynomologous monkeys,
observed that the feeding of aflatoxin Bi at a
level of 2 ,ug/kg body weight per day had very
little influence on the monkeys; but if the dosage
was increased to 50 ,ug/kg body weight daily, the
monkeys died in 1 to 2 months after initiation of
exposure.
In African monkeys receiving 0.10 to 1.0 mg
aflatoxin per day, survival time ranged from 6
to 22 days, generally depending on the dose
(123). There was a consistent pattern of toxicity
to the liver which was similar to that seen in
man.
During an extensive study of rhesus monkeys,
Deo et al. (124) observed that monkeys receiving
a mixed aflatoxin preparation at a level of 1
mg/kg body weight per day died within about 3
weeks, with extensive hemorrhagic necrosis of
the liver. Monkeys receiving 0.25 mg/kg twice
weekly or 62 mg/kg once weekly survived up to
2 yr; all animals, even those at the lowest dose
level, had liver injury. Dietary protein levels did
not influence the response, perhaps because of
the low toxin dosage.
Svoboda et al. (125), investigating the cellular
damage of aflatoxin Bi to rat and monkey livers,
demonstrated that the damage in rat liver was
usually periportal; the monkey liver showed a
necrosis similar to that observed in human liver
during acute viral hepatitis. Svoboda's studies
were paralleled by Kelly et al. (126), who in-
vestigated liver tumors induced in monkeys by
N-nitrosodiethylamine; prior to tumor forma-
tion, the pathologic changes resembled those
observed in the livers of animals suffering from
hepatitis.
Hazard to Man
Based on studies of chemical carcinogenesis
in recent years, Boyland (127) suggests that
chemical compounds cause at least 90% of
cancer in man, and that naturally occurring
substances induce 80% or more of the cancers
found in Western peoples. Various surveys of
worldwide mortality from cancer also indicate
that environmental factors exert considerable
influence; mortality rates are not uniform,
Environmental Health Perspectives22
depending on the region and the type of popula-
tion. The same applies to liver disease. Oettle
(128) reviewed the earlier concepts concerning
the incidences of liver tumors in different ethnic
groups; malnutrition, liver parasites, viral
hepatitis, and chronic alcoholism are possible
causitive factors, along with senecio alkaloids
and several other environmental toxins.
Shortly after the aflatoxins were discovered,
the question arose whether mycotoxins-and
particularly aflatoxin-might be associated
with high incidences of liver disease, including
liver carcinoma. Typical for the investigative
approach to the problem was the study of
peanuts. Contamination of peanuts was found
in almost all regions of the world (1, 129) in-
cluding the United States (56). Being a major
source of protein in many African communities,
peanuts were examined for contamination, es-
pecially in view of the very high incidence of
liver cancer among several African populations.
The Tropical Products Institute in England
tested peanut samples from Africa, Latin
America, and Asia; less than 50% contained
significant amounts of aflatoxin Bi. On the
other hand, peanut meal and peanut cake were
contaminated to a higher extent, 42% containing
over 0.25 ppm aflatoxin Bi (130). Purchased on
the open market in Uganda, about 15% of the
peanut samples were contaminated with more
than 1 ppm aflatoxin Bi (131). In South Africa,
the yearly peanut crops often contained high
levels of aflatoxins (132) (Table 7).
Aflatoxins were isolated from virtually every
staple food consumed by man (77, 133, 134), and
comprehensive studies confirmed the presence
of aflatoxins in virtually every area of the
world, as discussed in the section on
epidemiology of Mycotoxins in Human Health
(1).
The toxins are most often found in areas like
southeast Asia or parts of Africa where climatic
conditions are especially conducive to mold
growth and where the methods for harvesting
and storage are rather primitive. Now it appears
certain that the regional incidences of
hepatomas are related to tropical climate,
malnutrition, and the consumption of foods con-
taminated with aflatoxin and other substances
(135).
Several investigators (89) presented evidence
that the correlation was not totally valid in
every instance and pointed out that the evidence
suggesting an etiological relationship between
mold metabolites and cancer was, at best,
presumptive. The most useful studies,
therefore, are those dealing with specific pop-
ulations where a possible relationship existed
between aflatoxin consumption and liver dis-
ease.
For example, Campbell and Salamat (136)
reported' high consumption of aflatoxins from
peanuts and other foods in the Philippines
(Table 8). Studying many members of a popula-
tion that manifested an apparent correlation
between a high incidence of liver disease and
consumption of aflatoxin-contaminated peanut
butter, Campbell et al. (137) found that about 15
,ug of aflatoxin Bi had to be ingested in order for
Mi to be detected in a 24-hr urine sample. In
these studies, neither aflatoxin nor its
metabolites were detected in human milk.
Table 7. Incidence of Aspergillus flavus and of aflatoxin above 0.05 ppm in foodstuffs of Swaziland. a
Frequency of Frequency of
No. of A. flavus, samples with
Foodstuffs samples % aflatoxin, %
Maize 256 53.5 1.6
Groundnuts 180 49.4 11.1
Groundnut meal 48 50.0 8.3
Sorghum 39 33.3 7.7
a
Data of Martin et al. (132).
December 1974 23
Table 8. Aflatoxin analyses of Philippine foods (1967-1969). a
No. greater Median (and highest)
No. of than 30 value of samples,
Food samples ,ug/kg ,g/kgb
P.0-MII-1+0 xsnhnIn P71 r, 1 F7 {1 AA'II
Peanut butter,
Philippine (1967-68)
Peanut butter,
imported from U.S.A
Other peanut
products
Nuts and seeds
Tubers
Beans
Soybean products
29
3
32
23
59
29
24
29 155 (8600)
0
11 37 (220)
1 38 (64)
6 68 (440)
2 45 (86)
0 16 (16)
Rice and
rice products
Maize products
(1967-68)
Maize products
(1969)
Cocoa
Livestock feeds
Fish products
Cocoanut products
Cooking oil
Mango
a
Data of Campbell and Salamat (136).
b Values above 10 ,g/kg.
Robinson (138) reviewed the clinical history of
infantile cirrhosis in India and discussed several
possible etiologic factors including mycotoxins,
microbial infections, viral hepatitis, and inges-
tion of various toxins. He examined 43 samples,
of milk from mothers of cirrhotic children and
discovered that a significant number had
fluorescent spots and Rf values that indicated
contamination and aflatoxin Bi. In addition, 18
of 50 urine samples from cirrhotic children were
positive for Bi.
Recent publications by Shank et al. (129,
139-145) provide compelling evidence that
aflatoxins play a role in both chronic and acute
liver disease in populations in southeast Asia.
Particularly convincing is the evidence in
children dying of an acute encephalopathy and
fatty degeneration of the liver and kidney;
significant amounts of aflatoxin are present in
the tissues of these patients at autopsy (145).
Environmental Health Perspectives
1 (IUU)
72 1
14
16 (33)
1
27
11
12 (39)
14
11
0
47 (400)
27
8
19 (29)
7
0
74 (103)
16
0
12
21 (26)
0
0
reanuLs, wnoie 0
24
Influence of Nutrition on Response to Afla-
toxin
The influence of nutrition is particularly in-
teresting, because malnutrition, aflatoxins, and
a high incidence of liver diseases, including liver
cell cancer, coexist in many populations.
The influence of dietary protein was in-
vestigated by many laboratories, but the results
were not consistent. Madhavan et al. (121)
speculated that undernourishment and protein
deficiency, causing kwashiorkor in children,
might be a basis for the induction of infantile
cirrhosis when aflatoxins were superimposed.
To test the effect of dietary protein, they design-
ed experiments in monkeys and observed that
reduced protein intake significantly increased
the susceptibility of monkeys to aflatoxin. When
dose levels of 100 ,ug/day were administered to
both protein-deficient and control animals, all
members of the protein-deficient group died,
whereas those receiving adequate protein sur-
vived. This implied that, conversely, a high-
protein diet in the monkeys would preclude
severe injury from aflatoxin. Although the con-
trol animals on a normal protein diet showed no
effect after one month's exposure to 100 or 250
,Ag aflatoxin per day, the monkeys showed
periportal fatty degeneration of the liver after a
6-month exposure. Rhesus monkeys kept on
either high or low protein diets and exposed to
500 ,g aflatoxin daily developed fatty livers and
biliary fibrosis in 16-30 days. Monkeys on low-
protein diets which received only 100 ,g of toxin
daily showed similar liver changes, again in-
dicating that the protein level of the diet might
significantly influence the response to aflatoxin.
Similarly, Newberne et al. (146, 147), working
with rats given a total dose of 375 ,ug aflatoxin
Bi over 3 weeks, observed that animals given
diets containing 9% protein suffered a higher in-
cidence of liver tumors in a shorter period of
time than did rats receiving diets containing
22% protein. Madhavan and Gopalan (148)
reported that rats fed a low-protein diet (5%)
were more sensitive to the toxic effects of
aflatoxin but less sensitive to the hepatocar-
cinogenic effects than those fed a 20% protein
diet.
Foy et al. (149) discussed the similarity
between carcinoma in Africans and the
aflatoxin-induced hepatic cirrhosis in baboons
suffering from pyridoxine deficiency; in addi-
tion to bile duct hyperplasia, the pyridoxine-
deficient baboons also revealed disturbances in
the liver content of lipid, glycogen, RNA, and
DNA. The changes resembled those induced by
aflatoxin. Thus, these investigators suggested
that the very high incidence of liver cirrhosis
and liver carcinoma in certain African pop-
ulations might result from diets that were
deficient in pyridoxine and contained aflatoxin
from contaminated food; the local beer was
often contaminated with aflatoxin.
Aflatoxin together with pyridoxine deficiency
appear to induce liver damage. It seems
probable that the reduction in pyridoxine im-
pairs the capacity of liver cells to carry out
many of the reactions essential to normal
homeostasis, particularly transamination reac-
tions; these matabolic changes may sensitize the
liver to the toxic effects of aflatoxin.
Newberne et al. (146) determined the in-
fluence of cirrhosis induced by lipotrope deficien-
cy on the sensitivity of rats to low levels of
aflatoxin Bi. The concurrent application of
dietary and toxic injuries increased tumor in-
cidence. Animals returned to a normal diet after
cirrhosis induction and then exposed to aflatox-
in at a level of 1 ppm developed tumors at an
even higher incidence. This seemed to imply
that, once the initial biochemical lesion was in-
duced by the toxin, a return to normal diet ac-
tually speeded up the carcinogenic process.
Other forms of injury in this study, such as
repeated biopsy, did not affect the induction of
liver cell carcinoma.
The populations in several areas with a high
incidence of liver carcinoma also suffer from
marginal lipotrope - methionine and vitamin
B12- deficiencies. Laboratory studies indicate
that marginal deficiencies of lipotropes may
significantly influence the response to aflatoxin.
Rogers and Newberne (150, 151) showed that
rats with marginal lipotrope deficiency were
protected against the acute effects of a single
dose of aflatoxin Bi (Table 9); they speculated
that this protection resulted from the low
resting level of drug-metabolizing enzymes
observed in the animals. However, if this same
total amount of aflatoxin Bi was administered
in several daily doses, the rats were con-
siderably more sensitive (Table 10). Further-
more, deficient animals treated with car-
cinogenic doses of aflatoxin Bi developed liver
tumors in a higher incidence and in a much
December 1974 25
Table 9. Effects of diet on acute toxicity of a single dose of aflatoxin B1.a
2-week
Dosage, Route of mortality
Animal mg/kg b administration Diet No. of rats %
Sprague-Dawley rats 7 Intragastric Control
Marginal
lipotrope
9
7
Intragastric Control
Marginal
lipotrope
Intraperitoneal Control
Marginal
lipotrope
Fischer rats 7 Intragastric Control
Marginal
lipotrope
3/5 60
0/5
4/5 80
0/10
5/5 100
0/5
10/10 100
0/10
a Data of Newberne, and Rogers (152).
b Aflatoxin Bi dissolved in 0.1 ml DMSO.
Table 10. Effect of lipotropes on parenchymal hyperplasia and tumor incidence induced by aflatoxin B,.a
Tumor incidence at
various times after exposure
Appearance of to aflatoxin, %
Dietary hyperplastic cell 6 9 12
treatment clusters months months months
Control 6 months 0 30 71
Severe deficiency none 0 50 60
Marginal deficiency 3 weeks 40 95 95
a Data of Newberne and Rogers (152).
b Rats were given 15 daily doses, 25 Ag, each, of aflatoxin Bi.
shorter period of time than did controls. Possi-
ble mechanisms for these interactions triggered
an ongoing intensive investigation. t
Newberne and Rogers (153) reported that low
dietary vitamin A apparently decreased the in-
duction of liver tumors. Despite this protection
from the carcinogenic effects of aflatoxin,
however, the vitamin A-deficient rats had a
much higher mortality rate and their growth
rates differed somewhat from animals receiving
adequate vitamin A. Furthermore, colon car-
cinomas were observed in a significant number
of deficient rats. Clearly, the influence of
vitamin A on aflatoxin-induced tumors posed an
important problem requiring further investi-
gation.
Environmental Health Perspectives
0
0
26
Influence of Factors Other Than Diet
Goodall and Butler (154) studied the effects of
hypophysectomy on rats fed a diet containing 4
ppm aflatoxin Bi. All of the control animals
developed liver tumors in 49 weeks, whereas
none of the hypophysectomized animals
developed tumors in the same period of time.
Hypophysectomized rats, however, grew little if
any over the period of the experiment, whereas
the other animals grew normally. This dis-
crepancy rendered the interpretation of results
exceedingly difficult. Similar observations,
however, were made under analogous conditions
in experiments with aminofluorenes (155).
Newberne and Williams (156) reported that
rats fed diets containing 0.2 ppm aflatoxin
Bi and 4 ppm diethylstilbestrol developed fewer
liver tumors than those that were treated with
aflatoxin alone. The study included paired-
feeding and feeding-to-weight, indicating that
decreased tumor incidence associated with di-
ethylstilbestrol was not the result of decreased
food intake. The specific mechanisms respon-
sible for protection remained obscure. Further
experiments (157) showed that methionine fed
at 0.2% of the diet acted synergistically with
aflatoxin Bi at 0.4 ppm to induce liver cancer in
rats. However, aflatoxin Bi alone at dietary
levels of 0.4 of 1.5 ppm was more effective in in-
ducing liver tumors than in combination with
urethane at 0.1-0.6% of the diet. Studies in
which rats were exposed to rubratoxin B and to
aflatoxin Bi indicated a sensitization to
rubratoxin, but the evidence for potentiation of
carcinogenesis was equivocal (49).
Reddy and Svoboda (158), studying the effect
of lasiocarpine given to rats with and without
aflatoxin, found that the pyrrolizidine alkaloid
(lasiocarpine) was a hepatocarcinogen in itself;
moreover, it modified the morphologic pattern
of livers in which tumors developed. It also
resulted in a postnecrotic cirrhosis which is not
characteristic of aflatoxin alone. Newberne and
Rogers (159) found that another pyrrolizidine
alkaloid, monocrotaline, also was carcinogenic
for the rat and that it also modified the
histologic structure of livers in which tumors
developed as a result of exposure to both
aflatoxin and monocrotaline. As in earlier
studies in which lasiocarpine failed to inhibit
the induction of liver tumors by
acetylaminofluorene (160), monocrotaline failed
to prevent the induction of liver cell tumors by
aflatoxin, despite its potent antimitotic effect
(161). Monocrotaline was more potent as a syn-
carcinogen when the diet was low in lipotropes.
McLean and Marshall (162) investigated the
influence of phenobarbitone on the induction of
liver cancer by aflatoxin Bi. The aflatoxin was
fed to rats at 5 ppm in the diet for 9 weeks; dur-
ing this period the experimental group received
continuously phenobarbitone in water. The rats
receiving phenobarbitone and aflatoxin had a
lower incidence of liver tumors and a longer
time lag in tumor development in comparison to
rats fed aflatoxin alone. McLean and Marshall
suggested that phenobarbitone induced liver
microsomal enzymes that metabolized aflatoxin
to a noncarcinogenic form or somehow
accelerated its excretion.
Control of the Hazard
Probably the most realistic way to preclude
public health hazards is to prevent aflatoxin for-
mation on foodstuffs in the first place. In order
to achieve this goal, the farmer must cooperate
at harvest time, the grain must be removed
rapidly from the ground, and the grain must be
stored and processed under conditions which are
not conducive to mold growth. The University of
Wisconsin has a useful report on the prevention
of toxin-producing molds in farm commodities
(163).
When aflatoxins are present, however, it is
mandatory to devise means for the inactivation
or detoxification of contaminated materials
supplying nutrition to man and animals. Detox-
ification generally relies on biological, chemical,
or physical removal of the compounds, or on
their chemical or physical inactivation (4, 164).
The details of these procedures are described by
Detroy et al. (62) and by Dollear (165).
In the United States, the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration continuously scrutinizes many
staple foods, particularly oil seeds and cereal
grains, for the presence of aflatoxins; ceaseless
efforts are being made to elucidate the biological
action of mold toxins. The U.S. Department of
Agriculture plays a major role in making infor-
mation about mycotoxins available. The former
widespread contamination of food
products-peanuts, cottonseed meal, soybeans,
rice, wheat, and the majority of cereal
grains-is now under control through improved
December 1974 27
harvesting methods and through surveillance by
the USDA and FDA, greatly reducing the poten-
tial health hazard in the United States. The not
so closely monitored animal feeds, however, still
pose a problem.
In those areas of the world where climate,
harvesting, and storage permit or enhance
mold growth, mycotoxins, particularly those pro-
duced by A. flavus, still present a public health
problem. It is clear that newer and better
methods of harvesting and storing decrease the
contamination, and that the introduction of
these methods is essential for solving the
problem around the world.
Acknowledgement
The author expresses his appreciation to
Herbert B. Gerstner and James Edward Huff
for reviewing and editing the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Purchase, I.F.H., Ed., Mycotoxins in Human Health,
Macmillan Press, London, 1971.
2. Bove, S. J. The Story of Ergot. Karger, Basel, 1970.
3. Gr6ger, D. Ergot. In: Microbial Toxins, Vol. VIII, S.
Kadis, A. Ciegler, and S. J. Ajl, Eds., Academic Press,
New York, 1972, p. 321.
4. Feuell, A. J. Aflatoxin in groundnuts. Part
IX-Problems of detoxification. Trop. Sci. 8: 61 (1966).
5. Gr6ger, D. In: Biosynthese der Alkaloide. K. Mothes
and H. R. Schfitte, Eds. Deutscher Verlag der
Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1969, p. 486.
6. Allport, N. L., and Cocking, T. T. The colorimetric
assay of ergot. Q. J. Pharmacy Pharmacol. 5: 341
(1932).
7. Foster, G. E. The assay of ergot and its preparations. J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. 7(1): 1 (1955).
8. Hofmann, A. Die Mutterkornalkaloide. Enke,
Stuttgart, 1964.
9. Agurell, S. Thin-layer chromatographic and thin-layer
electrophoretic analysis of ergot alkaloids. Relations
between structure, R.M. value and electrophoretic
mobility in the clavine series. Acta. Pharm. Suec. 2:357
(1956).
10. Hoffer, A., and Osmond, H. The Hallucinogens.
Academic Press, New York, 1967.
11. Carlsen, R. A., Zeilmaker, G. H., and Shelesnyak, M. C.
Termination of early (pre-nidation) pregnancy in the
mouse by a single injection of ergocornine
methanesulphonate. J. Reprod. Fertil. 2: 369 (1961).
12. Joffe, A. Z. Toxin production in cereal fungi causing
toxic alimentary aleukia in man. In: Mycotoxins in
Foodstuffs. G. N. Wogan, Ed., M.I.T. Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1965, p. 75.
13. Joffe, A. Z. Alimentary toxic aleukia. In: Microbial
Toxins, Vol. VII., S. Kadis, A. Ciegler, and S. J. Ajl,
Eds., Academic Press, New York, 1971, p. 139.
14. Snyder, W. C., and Hansen, H. N. The species concept
in Fusarium with reference to discolor and other sec-
tions. Am. J. Botany 32: 657 (1945).
15. Prasad, N. Variability of the curcurbit root-rot fungus,
Fusarium (Hypomyces) solani F. curcurbitae.
Phytopathology 39: 133 (1949).
16. Sarkisov, A. K. A toxicologic disease in horses.
Veterinariia (Moscow) 24: 25 (1947).
17. Drobotko, V. G. Strachybotryotoxicosis, a new disease
of horses and humans. Am. Rev. Soviet Med. 2: 238
(1945).
18. Forgacs, J. Stachybotryotoxicosis. In: Microbial Toxins,
Vol. VIII, S. Kadis, A. Ciegler, and S. J. Ajl, Eds.,
Academic Press, New York, 1972, p. 95.
19. Forgacs, J., et al. Toxicity of Stachybotrys atra for
animals. Trans. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 20: 787 (1958).
20. Fortuskny, V. A., et al. An outbreak of
stachybotryotoxicosis in cattle and its therapy.
Veterinariia (Moscow) 36: 67 (1959).
21. Korneev, N. E. Mycotoxicosis in laboratory animals.
Veterinariia (Moscow) 25: 36 (1948).
22. Uraguchi, K. Yellowed rice toxins. Citreoviridin. In:
Microbial Toxins, Vol. VI, A. Ciegler, S. Kadis, and
S. J. Ajl, Eds., Academic Press, New York, 1971, p. 367.
23. Tsunoda, H. Luteoskyrin. In: Toxic Microorganisms:
Mycotoxins, Botulism. M. Herzberg, Ed. U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1970, p. 143.
24. Saito, M., Enomoto, M., and Tatsuno, T. Yellowed rice
toxins. Luteoskyrin and related compounds, chlorine-
containing compounds, and citrinin. In: Microbial Tox-
ins, Vol. VI, A. Ciegler, S. Kadis, and S. J. Ajl, Eds.,
Academic Press, New York, 1971, p. 299.
25. Miyake, M. and Saito, M. Liver injury and liver tumors
induced by toxins of Penicillium islandicum Sopp.
growing on yellowed rice. In: Mycotoxins in Foodstuffs.
G. N. Wogan, Ed., M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
1965, p. 133.
26. Saito, M., et al. Suppression of 3'-Me-DAB carcinogens
in rat by carcinogenic metabolites of Penicillium islan-
dicum Sopp. In: Oncology, 1970-Abstracts, R. W.
Cumley and J. E. McCay, Eds., Proceedings of the 10th
International Cancer Congress, Houston, 1970, Abstr.
25.
27. Enomoto, M. Histopathological studies on
adenomatous nodules of liver induced in mice by
Penicillium islandicum Sopp. Acta Pathol. Jap. 9: 189
(1959).
28. Ishiko, T., et al. Histological studies on the injuries of
various organs except liver of mice and albino rats fed
with "yellowed rice" artificially polluted byPenicillium
islandicum Sopp. Acta Pathol. Jap. 7: 368 (1957).
29. Miyake, M., et al., Toxic liver injuries and liver
cirrhosis induced in mice and rats through long-term
feeding with Penicillium islandicum Sopp.-growing
rice. Acta Pathol. Jap. 10: 75 (1960).
30. Kobayashi, Y., et al. Toxicological studies on the
yellowed rice by Penicillium islandicum Sopp. I. Ex-
perimental approach to liver injuries by long term
feeding with the noxious fungus on mice and rats. Proc.
Japan Acad. 34: 639 (1958).
31. Kobayashi, Y., et al. Toxicological studies on yellowed
rice by Penicillium islandicum Sopp. II. Isolation of the
two toxic substances from the noxious fungus, and
28 Environmental Health Perspectives
their chemical and biological properties. Proc. Jap.
Acad. 34: 736 (1958).
32. Tatsuno, T. Isolation of luteoskyrin from culture
medium. Prod. Probl. Pharm. 18: 180 (1963).
33. Ueno, Y., and Ishikawa, I. Production of luteoskyrin, a
hepatotoxic pigment, by Penicillium islandicum Sopp.
Appl. Microbiol. 18: 406 (1969).
34. Howard, B. H., and Raistrick, H. Studies in the
biochemistry of micro-organisms. 92. The colouring
matters of Penicillium islandicum Sopp. Part. 4.
Iridoskyrin, rubroskyrin and erythroskyrine. Biochem.
J. 57: 212 (1954).
35. Carlton, W. W., Szczech, G. M., and Tuite, J. Toxicosis
in dogs by citrinin. Proceedings, 12th Annual Meeting,
Society of Toxicology, New York, March, 1973 Abstr.
47.
36. Brown, J. P., et al. The chemistry of fungi. Part IV. The
constitution of the phenol, C11HI603, from citrinin. J.
Chem. Soc., 1949: 859.
37. Mathieson, D. W., and Whalley, W. B. Chemistry of
fungi. XLIV. Conformation of citrinin. J. Chem. Soc.,
1964: 4640.
38. Ueno, Y. Production of citreoviridin: a neurotoxic
mycotoxin of Penicillium citreo-viride Biourge. In:
Mycotoxins in Human Health, I.F.H. Purchase, Ed.,
Macmillan Press, London, 1971, p. 115.
39. Moss, M. 0. The rubratoxins, toxic metabolites of
Penicillium rubrum Stoll. In: Microbial Toxins, Vol. VI,
A. Ciegler, S. Kadis, and S. J. Ajl, Eds., Academic
Press, New York, 1971, p. 381.
40. Sippel, W. L., Burnside, J. E., and Atwood, M. B. A dis-
ease of swine and cattle caused by eating moldy corn.
Proceedings, 90th Annual Meeting, A.V.M.A., Toronto,
1953, p. 174.
41. Burnside, J. E., et al. A disease of swine and cattle
caused by eating moldy corn. II. Experimental produc-
tion with pure cultures of molds. Am. J. Vet. Res. 18:
817 (1957).
42. Seibold, H. R., and Bailey, W. S. An epizootic of
hepatitis in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 121: 201
(1952).
43. Newberne, P. M., Russo, R., and Wogan, G. N. Acute
toxicity of aflatoxin B, in the dog. Pathol. Vet. 3: 331
(1966).
44. Forgacs, J., and Carll, W. T. Preliminary mycotoxic
studies on hemorrhagic disease in poultry. Vet. Med.
50: 172 (1955).
45. Wilson, B. J., and Wilson, C. H. Extraction and
preliminary characterization of a hepatotoxic sub-
stance from cultures of Penicillium rubrum. J.
Bacteriol. 84: 283 (1962).
46. Townsend, R. J., Moss, M. O., and Peck, H. M. Isolation
and characterization of hepatotoxins from Penicillium
rubrum. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 18: 471 (1966).
47. Moss, M. O., et al. Rubratoxin B, a proposed structure
for a bis-anhydride from Penicillium rubrum Stoll.
Nature 220: 767 (1968).
48. Moss, M. O., Robinson, F. V., and Wood, A. B. The
structure of rubratoxin A, a toxic metabolite of
Penicillium rubrum. Tetrahedron Letters 5: 367 (1969).
49. Wogan, G. N., Edwards, G. S., and Newbern-e, P. M.
Acute and chronic toxicity of rubratoxin B. Toxicol.
Appl. Pharmacol. 19: 712 (1971).
50. Forgacs, J. and Carll, W. T. Mycotoxicoses. Adv. Vet.
Sci. 7: 273 (1962).
51. Neubert; D., and Merker, H. J. Some effects of toxins
from Microorganisms on mammalian cellular
metabolism and structure. In: Recent Advances in The
Pharmacology of Toxins. H. W. Raudonat, Ed.,
Proceedings, 2nd International Pharmacological
Meeting, Prague, 1963, Vol. 9, Pergamon Press, Lon-
don, 1965, p. 9.
52. Newberne, P. M., and Wogan, G. N. Sequential
morphologic changes in aflatoxin Bi carcinogenesis in
the rat. Cancer Res. 28: 770 (1968).
53. Ciegler, A., Detroy, R. W., and Lillehoj, E. B. Patulin,
penicillic acid, and other carcinogenic lactones. In:
Microbial Toxins, Vol. VI, A. Ciegler, S. Kadis, and S. J.
Ajl, Eds., Academic Press, New York, 1971, p. 409..
54. Wilson, B. J. Miscellaneous Penicllium toxins. In
Microbial Toxins, Vol. VI, A. Ciegler, S. Kadis,.and S. J.
Ajl, Eds., Academic Press, New YQrk, 1971, p. 460.
55. Diener, U. L., and Davis, N. D. Aflatoxin production by
isolates of Aspergillus flavus. Phytopathol. 56: 1390
(1966).
56. Taber, R. A., and Schroeder, H. W. Aflatoxin-
producing potential of isolates of the Aspergilus
flavus-oryzae group from peanuts (Arachis hypogaea).
Appl. Microbiol. 15: 140 (1967).
57. Kulik, M. M., and Holaday, C. E. Aflatoxin, a product
of several fungi. Mycopathol. Mycol. Appl. 30: 137
(1966).
58. Wilson, B. J., et al. Relationship of aflatoxin to
epizootics of toxic hepatitis among animals in the
Southern United States. Am. J. Vet. Res. 28: 1217
(1967).
59. Scott, P. M., van Wallbeek, W., and Forgacs, J. Forma-
tion of aflatoxin by Aspergillus ostianus Wehmer.
Appl. Microbiol. 15: 945 (1967).
60. Wilson, B. J., et al. Investigation of reported aflatoxin
production by fungi outside the Aspergillus flavus
group. Appl. Microbiol. 16: 819 (1968).
61. Wogan, G. N., and Mateles, R. I. Mycotoxins. In: In-
dustrial Microbiology, Vol. 7, D. J. D. Hockenhull, Ed.
Churchill, London, 1968. p. 150.
62. Detroy, R. W., Lillehoj, E. B., and Ciegler, A. Aflatoxin
and related compounds. In: Microbial Toxins, Vol. VI,
A. Ciegler, S. Kadis, and S. J. Ajl, Eds. Academic Press,
New York, 1971, p. 4.
63. Wogan, G. N. Aflatoxin carcinogenesis. In: Methods in
Cancer Research, Vol. 7. H. Busch, Ed., Academic
Press, New York, 1973, p. 309.
64. Blount, W. P. Turkey X disease in turkeys. J. Brit.
Turkey Fed. 9: 52 (1961).
65. Newberne, P. M. Carcinogenicity of aflatoxin-
contaminated peanut meal. In: Mycotoxins in
Foodstuffs. G. N. Wogan, Ed. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1965, p. 187.
66. Bilay, V. I., Ed. Mycotoxicoses of Man and Agricultural
Animals. Office of Technical Services, U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1960.
67. Hansel, W., McEntee, K., and Olafson, P. The effects of
two causitive agents of experimental hyperkeratosiq on
vitamin A metabolism. Cornell Vet. 41: 367 (1951).
68. Sikes, D. and Bridges, M. E. Experimental production
of hyperkeratosis (X disease) in cattle with a
December 1974 29
chlorinated naphthalene. Science 116: 506 (1952).
69. Hoekstra, W. G., Hall, R. E., and Phillips, P. H.
Relationship of vitamin A to the development of
hyperkeratosis (X disease) in calves. Am. J. Vet. Res.
15: 41 (1954).
70. Sargeant, K., et al. Toxicity associated with certain
samples-of groundnuts. Nature 192: 1096 (1961).
71. Austwick, P. K. C., and Ayerst, G. Toxic products in
groundnuts. Groundnut microflora and toxicity. Chem.
Ind. (London) 1963: 55.
72. Wolf, H., and Jackson, E. W. Hepatoma in rainbow
trout. Descriptive and experimental epidemiology.
Science 142: 676 (1963).
73. Asplin, F. D., and Carnaghan, R. B. A. The toxicity of
certain groundnut meals for poultry with special
reference to their effect on ducklings and chickens. Vet.
Rec. 73: 1215 (1961).
74. Lancaster, M. C., Jenkins, F. P., and Philip, J. McL.
Toxicity associated with certain samples of ground-
nuts. Nature 192: 1095 (1961).
75. Sargeant, K., et al. The assay of a toxic principle in cer-
tain groundnut meals. Vet. Rec. 73: 1219 (1961).
76. Nesbitt, B. F., et al. Aspergillus flavus and turkey X
disease. Toxic. metabolites of Aspergillus flavus.
Nature 195: 1062 (1962).
77. Wogan, G. N. Aflatoxin risks and control measures.
Fed. Proc. 27: 932 (1968).
78. Halver, J. E. Aflatoxicosis. and rainbow trout
hepatoma. In: Mycotoxins in Foodstuffs. G. N. Wogan,
Ed., M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1965, p. 209.
79. Sinnhuber, R. O., et al. Dietary factors and hepatoma
in rainbow trout; I. Aflatoxins in vegetable protein
feedstuffs. J. Natl Cancer Ihst. 41: 711 (1968).
80. Sinnhuber, R. O., et al. Dietary factors and hepatoma
in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). II. Cocar-
cinogenesis by cyclopropenoid fatty acids and the effect
of gossypol and altered lipids on aflatoxin-induced liver
cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 41: 1293 (1968).
81. Wunder, W. Resistance and defense-reactions of older
rainbow trout against liver cancer (hepatoma) caused
by aflatoxins. Arch. Fischereiwiss. 22: 51 (1971).
82. Salmon, W. D., and Newberne, P. M. The occurrence of
hepatomas in rats fed diets containing peanut meal as
the major source of protein. Cancer Res. 23: 571 (1963).
83. Newberne, P. M., Carlton, W. W., and Wogan, G. N.
Hepatomas in rats and hepatorenal injury in ducklings
fed peanut meal or Aspergillus flavus extract. Pathol.
Vet. 1: 105 (1964).
84. Newberne, P. M., et al. Histopathologic lesions in
ducklings caused by Aspergillus flavus cultures,
culture extracts, and crystalline aflatoxins. Toxicol.
Appl. Pharmacol. 6: 542 (1964).
85. Loosmore, R. M., and Markson, L. M. Poisoning of cat-
tle by Brazilian groundnut meal. Vet. Rec. 73: 813
(1961).
86. Allcroft, R., and Carnaghan, R. B. A. Toxic products in
groundnuts; biological effects. Chem. Ind. (London)
1.963: 50.
87. Asao, T., et. al. The structures of aflatoxins B and G.
J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 87: 882 (1965).
88. Allcroft, R., and Carnaghan, R. B. A. Groundnut tox-
icity: an examination for toxin in human food products
from animals fed toxic groundnut meal. Vet. Rec. 75:
259 (1963).
89. Purchase, I. F. H. Fungal metabolites as potential car-
cinogens, with particular reference to their role in the
aetiology of hepatoma. S. Afr. Med..J. 41: 406 (1967).
90. Dutton, M. F., and Heathcote, J. G. The structure,
biochemical properties and origin of the aflatoxins
B2 and G2. Chem. Ind. (London) 1968: 418.
91. Crisan, E. V. and Mazzuca, E. Separation of aflatoxin
on selectively deactivated silicic acid. Contrib. Boyce-
Thompson Inst. 23: 361 (1967).
92. Stubblefield, R. D., et al. Production of aflatoxin on
wheat and oats: measurement with recording den-
sitometer. Appl Microbiol. 15: 186 (1967).
93. Rodericks, J. V. Separation and purification of aflatox-
ins Bi, B2, Gi and ,G2, and a comparison of
semisynthetic aflatoxins B2 and G2 with naturally oc-
curring B2 and G2. J. Amer. Oil Chemists Soc. 46: 149
(1969).
94. Campbell, A. D. Report on mycotoxins. J. Assoc. Off.
Anal. Chem. 52: 249 (1969).
95. Newberne, P. AM., and Butler, W. H. Acute and chronic
effects of aflatoxin on the liver of domestic and
laboratory animals: a review. Cancer Res. 29: 236
(1969).
96. Patterson, D. S. P. Metabolism as a factor in deter-
mining the toxic action of aflatoxin in different animal
species. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 287 (1963).
97. Adye; J., and Mateles, R. I. Incorporation of labelled
eompounds into aflatoxins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 86:
418 (1964).
98. Donkersloot, J. A., Hsieh, D. P. H., and Mateles, R. I.
Incorporation of precursors into aflatoxin-Bi. J. Amer.
Chem. Soc. 90: 5020 (1968).
99. BOchi, G., and Weinreb, S. M. The total synthesis of
racemic aflatoxin-Mi (milk toxin). J. Amer; Chem. Soc.
91: 5408 (1969).
100. Bflchi, G., and Rae, D. The structure and chemistry of
aflatoxins. In: Aflatoxin: Scientific Background, Con-
trol, and Implications. L. A. Goldblatt, Ed., Academic
Press; New York, 1969, p. 55.
101. Legator, M. S. Biological assay for aflatoxins. In:
Aflatoxin: Scientific Background, Control, and
Implications. L. A. Goldblatt, Ed., Academic Press,
New York, 1969, p. 107.
102. Townsley, P. M. and Lee, E. G. H. Response of fer-
tilized eggs of the mollusk Bankia setacea to aflatoxin.
J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 50: 361 (1967).
103. Platt, B. S., Stewart, R. J. C., and Gupta, S. R. The
chick embryo as a test organism for toxic substances in
foods. Proc. Nutr. Soc. (London) 21: 30 (1962).
104. Gabliks, J., Schaeffer, W., Friedman, L., and Wogan,
G. N. Effect of aflatoxin Bi on cell cultures. J.
Bacteriol. 90: 720 (1965).
105. Legator, M. S., and Withrow, A. Aflatoxin: Effect on
mitotic cell division in cultured embryonic lung cells. J.
Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 47: 1007 (1964).
106. Legator, M. S., zuffante, S. M., and Harp, A. R.
Aflatoxin: effect on cultured heteroploid human em-
bryonic lung cells. Nature 208: 345 (1965).
107. Schoental, R., and White, A. F. Aflatoxins and
"albinism" in plants. Nature 205: 57 (1965).
30 Environmental Health Perspectives
108. Burmeister, H. R. and Hesseltine, C. W. Survey of the
sensitivity of microorganisms to aflatoxin. Appl.
Microbiol. 14: 403 (1966).
109. Clements, N. L. Rapid confirmatory test for aflatoxin
Bi, using Racillus megaterium. J. Assoc. Off. Anal.
Chem. 51: 1192 (1968).
110. Kraybill, H. F., and Shimkin, M. B. Carcinogenesis
related to food contaminated by processing and fungal
metabolites. Adv. Cancer Res. 8: 191 (1964).
111. Lancaster, M. C. Comparative aspects of aflatoxin-
induced hepatic tumors. Cancer Res. 28: 2288 (1968).
112. Bailey, W. S., and Groth, A. H. The relationship of
hepatitis X of dogs and moldy corn poisoning of swine,
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 134: 514 (1959).
113. Allcroft, R., and Lewis, G. Groundnut meal toxicity in
cattle. Experimental poisoning of calves and a report
on clinical effects in older cattle. Vet. Rec. 75: 487
(1963).
114. Keyl, A. C., et al. Effects of aflatoxin on cattle. In: Tox-
ic Microorganisms: Mycotoxins, Botulism. M.
Herzberg, Ed. U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 1970, p. 72.
115. Lynch, G. P., et al. Responses of dairy calves to
aflatoxin-contaminated feed. J. Dairy Sci. 53: 63 (1970).
116. Barber, R. S., et al. The effects of feeding toxic ground-
nut meal to growing pigs and its interaction with high-
copper diets. Brit. J. Nutr. 22: 535 (1968).
117. Newberne, P. M. Aflatoxins in swine. In: Diseases of
Swine, 3rd ed., H. W. Dunne, Ed., Iowa State Univ.
Press. Ames,' Iowa, 1970, p. 816.
118. Allcroft, R. Aspects of aflatoxicosis in farm animals.
In: Mycotoxins in Foodstuffs; G. N. Wogan, Ed., M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1965, p. 153.
119. Lewis, G., Markson, L. M., and Allcroft, R. The effect
of feeding toxic groundnut meal to sheep over a period
of five years. Vet. Rec. 80: 312 (1967).
120. Carhaghan, R. B. A; Hepatic tumors in ducks fed a low
level of toxic groundnut meal. Nature 208: 308 (1965).
121. Madhavan, T. V.,- Rao, S., and Tupule, P. G. Effect of
dietary protein level on susceptibility of monkeys to
aflatoxin liver'injury. Indian J. Med. Res. 53: 984
(1965).
122. Cuthbertson, W. F. J., Laursen, A. C., and Pratt, D. A.
H. Effect of groundnut meal containing aflatoxin on
Cynomolgus monke'ys. Brit. Med. J. 21: 893 (1967).
123. Alpert,'E. A., Serck-Hanssen, A., and Rajagopolan, B.
Aflatoxin-induced hepatic injury in the African
monkey: Arch. Environ. Health 20: 723 (1970).
124. Deo, M. 'G., Dayal, Y., and Ramalingaswami, V.
Aflatoxins and liver injury in the rhesus monkey. J.
Pathol. 101: 47 (1970).
125. Svoboda, D., Grady, H., and Higginson, J. Aflatoxin Bi
injury in rat and monkey liver. Am. J.'Pathol. 49: 1023
(1966).
126. Kelly, M.G., et al. Induction of hepatic cell carcinomas
in monkeys with N-nitrosodiethylamine. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 36: 323 (1966).
127. Boyland, E. The correlation of experimental car-
cinogenesis and cancer in man. Progr. Exp. Tumor Res.
11: 222 (1969).
128. Oettle, A. G. Cancer in Africa, especially in regions
south of the Sahara. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 33: 383 (1964).
129. Shank, R. C., Wogan, G. N., and Gibson, J. B. Dietary
aflatoxins in human liver cancer. I. Toxigenic molds in
foods and foodstuffs in tropical Southeast Asia. Food
Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 51 (1972).
130. Hiscocks, E. S. The importance of molds in the
deterio'ration of tropical foods and feedstuffs. In:
Mycotoxins in Foodstuffs. G. N. Wogan, Ed., M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1965, p. 15.
131. Lopez, A. and Crawford, M. A. Aflatoxin content of
groundnuts sold for human consumption in Uganda.
Lancet 2: 1351'(1967).
132. Martin, P. M.-D., Gilman, G. A., and Keen, P. The in-
cidence of fungi in foodstuffs and their significance
based on a survey in the eastern Transvaal and
Swasiland. In: Mycotoxins in Human Health, I.F.H.
Purchase, Ed., Macmillan Press, London, 1971, p. 281.
133. Schroeder, H. W. Aflatoxins in rice in the U.S. In: Toxic
Microorganisms: Mycotoxins, Botulism. M. Herzberg,
Ed. U.S. Government 'Printing Office, Washington,
D.C., 1970, p. 56
134. ShotWell, 0. L., et al. Production of aflatoxin on rice.
Appl. Microbiol. 14: 425 (1966).
135. Alpert, M. E., Hutt, M. S. R., and Davidson, C. S.
Hepatoma in Uganda. A'study in geographic pathology.
Lancet 1: 1265 (1968).
136. Campbell, T. C., and Salamat, L. Aflatoxin ingestion
and excretion by humans. In: Mycotoxins in Human
Health. I. F. H. Purchase, Ed. Macmillan Press,- Lon-
don, 1971, p. 270.
137. Campbell, T. C., et al. Aflatoxin Mi in human urine.
Nature 227: 403 (1970).
138. Robinson, P. Infantile cirrhosis of the liver in India,
with special reference to probable aflatoxin etiology.
Clin. Pediatr. 6: 57 (1967).
139. Shank, R. C., et al. Dietary aflatoxins and human liver
cancer. II. Aflatoxins in market foods and foodstuffs of
Thailand and Hong Kong. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 61
(1972).
140. Shank, R. C., et al. Dietary aflatoxins and human liver
cancer. III. Field survey'of rural Thai'families for in-
gested aflatoxins. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 71 (1972).
141. Shank, R. C., et al. Dietary aflatoxins and human liver
cancer. IV. Incidence of primary liver cancer in two
municipal populations of Thailand. Food Cosmet. Tox-
icol. 10: 171 (1972).
142. Shank, R. C., et al. Dietary aflatoxins and human liver
cancer. V. Duration of primary liver cancer and
prevalence of hepatomegaly in Thailand. Food Cosmet.
10: 181 (1972).
143. Shank, R. C. Dietary aflatoxin loads and the incidence
of human hepatocellular carcinoma in Thailand. In:
Mycotoxins in Human Health. I. F. H. Purchase, Ed.,
Macmillan Press, London, 1971, p. 245.
144. Bourgeois, C., et al. Acute aflatoxin Bi toxicity in the
macaque and its similarities to Reye's syndrome. Lab.
Invest. 24: 206 (1971).
145. Bourgeois, L., et al. Encephalopathy and fatty
degeneration of the-viscera: a clinicopathologic analysis
of 40 cases. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 56: 558 (1971).
146. Newberne, P. M. Harrington, D. H., and Wogan, G. N.
Effects of cirrhosis and other liver insults on induction
of liver tumors by aflatoxin in rats.'Lab. Invest. 15: 962
(1966).
147. Newberne, P. M., Rogers, A. E., and Wogan, G. N.
December 1974 31
Hepatorenal lesions in rats fed a low-lipotrope diet and
exposed to aflatoxin. J. Nutrit. 94: 331 (1968).
148. Madhavan, T. V., and Gopalan, C. The effect of dietary
protein on carcinogenesis of aflatoxin. Arch. Pathol.
(Chi.) 85: 133 (1968).
149. Foy, H., et al. Hepatic injuries in riboflavin and
pyridoxine deficient baboons-possible relations to
aflatoxin induced hepatic cirrhosis and carcinoma in
Africans. Nature 212i 150 (1966).
150. Rogers, A. E., and Newberne, P. M. Aflatoxin Bi car-
cinogenesis in lipotrope-deficient rats. Cancer Res. 29:
1965 (1969).
151. Rogers, A. E., and Newberne, P. M. Nutrition and
aflatoxin carcinogenesis. Nature 229: 62 (1971).
152. Newberne, P. M., and Rogers, A. E. Aflatoxin car-
cinogenesis in rats: dietary effects. In: Mycotoxins in
Human Health, I. F. H. Purchase, Ed., Macmillan
Press,-London, 1971, pp. 198-199.
153. Newberne, P. M., and Rogers, A. E. Rat colon car-
cinomas associated with aflatoxin and marginal
vitamin A. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 50: 439 (1973).
154. Goodall, C. M., and Butler, W. H. Aflatoxin car-
cinogenesis: inhibition of liver cancer induction in
hypophysectomized rats. Int. J. Cancer 4: 422 (1969).
155. Shirasu, Y., et al. Effects of pituitary hormones and
prefeeding N-hydroxy-N-2-fluorenylacetamide on the
metabolism of this carcinogen and on physiologic
parameters. Cancer Res. 26: 600 (1966).
156. Newberne, P. M., and Williams, G. Inhibition of
aflatoxin carcinogenesis by diethylstilbesterol in male
rats. Arch. Environ. Health 19: 489 (1969).
157. Newberne, P. M., Hunt, C. E., and Wogan, G. N.
Neoplasms in the rat associated with administation of
urethan and aflatoxin. J. Exptl. Molec. Pathol. 6: 285
(1967).
158. Reddy, J. K., and Svoboda, D. Effect of lasiocarpine on
aflatoxin B, carcinogenicity in the rat. Arch. Pathol.
93: 55 (1972).
159. Newberne, P. M., and Rogers, A. E. Nutrition,
monocrotaline, and aflatoxin Bi in liver carcinogenesis.
Plant Foods for Man 1: 23 (1973).
160. Rogers, A. E., and Newberne, P. M. Lasiocarpine: fac-
tors influencing its toxicity and effects on liver cell
division. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 18: 356 (1971).
161. Bull, L. B., Culvenor, C. C. J., and Dick, A. T. The
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In: Frontiers of Biology, Vol. 9.
A. Neuberger and E. L. Tatum, Eds. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1968, p. 174.
162. McLean, A. E. M.; and Marshall, A. Reduced car-
cinogenic effects of aflatoxin in rats given phenobar-
bitone. Brit. J. Exptl. Pathol. 52: 322 (1971).
163. Anon. Development of Aspergillus f7avus and aflatox-
ins in harvested forage. Research Bulletin R2412,
Research Division, College of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, July, 1972.
164. Coomes, T. J., et al. Experimental detoxification of
groundnut meals containing aflatoxin. Nature 209: 406
(1966).
165. Dollear, F. G. Detoxification of aflatoxins in foods and
feeds. In: Aflatoxin: Scientific Background, Control,
and Implications. L. A. Goldblatt, Ed., Academic Press,
New York, 1969, p. 360.
32 Environmental Health Perspectives
