Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 81, pp. 157-162, 1989
Perturbations of the Immune System by
Xenobiotics
by Michael 1. Luster,* Michael F. Ackermann,*
Dori R. Germolec,* and Gary J. Rosenthal*
Classically, immunotoxicology has been defined as the study of adverse effects on the immune system as-
sociated with exposure to environmental chemicals, pharmacologic agents, and biologicals. Although a mul-
titude of immune system defects may occur, these can be generally categorized as immunomodulation (im-
mune suppression or potentiation), hypersensitivity (i.e., allergy), and autoimmunity. We present here a brief
synopsis ofthe ontogeny of immunotoxicology as a discipline including methodology currently used in our
laboratory, as well as in others, for investigating the immunomodulatory potential ofchemicals at the cellu-
lar and biochemical level. Additionally, we summarize some studies related to the immunosuppressive effects
of one particular compound, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Last we discuss potential future
directions and challenges in the field of immunotoxicology.
Background
Immunotoxicology can be defined as the study of the
adverse effects of environmental chemicals, certain ther-
apeutics, and biologicals on the immune system. The ad-
verse effects that may occur include immunomodulation
(i.e., suppression or potentiation), hypersensitivity (i.e., al-
lergy), and, in rare instances, autoimmunity. Although
chemical-induced autoimmune diseases are not well
documented, the extent of chemical-induced hypersensi-
tivity has been known for a long time (1,2). Some of the
industrial materials with known or presumed allergic
etiology are shown in Table 1. More recently, a large body
of information has also developed demonstrating that ex-
posure to certain chemicals or drugs can produce im-
munosuppression in experimental animals (Thble 2) (3-5).
In contrast to immunosuppressive drugs, however, only
a limited number ofreports indicate immune dysfunction
following a human exposure to chemical xenobiotics.
The sensitivity of the immune system to these chemi-
cals is probably due as much to the general properties of
the xenobiotic (eg. reactivity with macromolecules) as to
the complex nature ofthe immune system, which encom-
passes antigen recognition and processing; cellular inter-
actions involving cooperation, regulation, and amplifica-
tion; cell activation, proliferation, and differentiation; and
*Division ofTexicology Research and Testing, National Institute of En-
vironmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709.
Address reprint requests to M. I. Luster, Division of Tbxicology Re-
search and Testing, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
P. 0. Box 12233, Research Tliangle Park, NC 27709.
mediator production. The immunosuppressive effects as-
sociated with exposure to xenobiotics are often accompa-
nied by increased susceptibility to challenge with infec-
tious agents or tumor cells. Although only limited studies
in humans have been conducted, effects similar to those
observed in rodents have been reported in several in-
stances following therapeutic, inadvertent, or occupa-
tional exposure to xenobiotics exemplifying characteris-
T'able 1. Industrial materials known or presumed to cause
allergic problems.a
Material
Platinum salts
Cotton dusts
Castor bean, green coffee bean
papain, pancreatic extracts, organic
dusts, and molds
Formaldehyde
Grain and flour
Hog trypsin, ethylenediamine
phthalic anhydride, beryllium
trimellitic anhydride, and
diisocyanates (TDI, HDI, and MDI)
Phenylglycine acid chloride,
sulfone chloramides, ampicillin,
spiramycin, piperazine, amprolium
hydrochloride, and antibiotic dust
Wood dusts
Vegetable gums (acacia, karaya)
and natural resins
Organophosphate insecticides
Pyrolysis products of polyvinyl
chloride and label adhesives
aModified from Luster and Dean (2).
Industry
Metal-refining
Iextile
Oil and food
Garment, laboratory
Farmers, bakers, and
mill operators
Chemical, plastic,
rubber, and resin
Pharmaceutical
Wood mills, carpenters
Printers
Farmers
Meat wrappers
LUSTER ET AL.
Table 2. Examples of immunological abnormalities associated with chemical exposure in rodents and humans.
Laboratory immune Human immune
Chemical class Example abnormality abnormalitya
Polyhalogenated aromatic TCCD + +
hydrocarbons PCB + +
PBB + +
HCB + NK
Heavy metals Lead +
Cadmium +
Methyl mercury +
Aromatic hydrocarbons (solvents) Benzene + +
Toluene + +
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons DMBA + NK
BaP + NK
MCA + NK
Pesticides O,O,S-TMP + NK
Carbofuran + NK
Chlordane + NK
Organotins DOTC + NK
DBTC + NK
Aromatic amines Benzidine + +
Oxidant gases (air pollutants) NO2 + NK
03 + +
SO2 + NK
Others Asbestos + +
DMN + NK
aNK not known; ±, positive and negative findings have been reported.
tics of secondary immunodeficiency disease. Among these
effects include altered immune responses in Michigan
residents and farmers exposed to polybrominated
biphenyls (PBBs) through the consumption of contami-
nated livestock and dairy products (6); Chinese and Jap-
anese exposed to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and
dibenzofurans through contaminated rice oil used in cook-
ing (7); Spanish residents exhibiting "toxic oil syndrome"
following ingestion of isothiocyanate-derived imidazo-
lidinethione adulterated rapeseed oil (8); factory workers
with aplastic anemia and leukemia occupationally exposed
to benzene (9); and AIDS patients who develop myelotox-
icity following azidothymidine (AZT) therapy (10).
Increased susceptibility to infectious disease and ne-
oplasia has been a recurring consequence of chronic im-
munosuppression or aberrant lymphoid cell differentia-
tion in several of these cohorts. For example, the
frequency ofneoplasia among Michigan PBB-cohort mem-
bers exhibiting immune dysfunction is approximately
15-fold greater than that observed in the control Wiscon-
sin farmer cohort (J. G. Bekesi, personal communication).
These concerns are also supported by the side effects as-
sociated with the therapeutic use of chemical immunosup-
pressants that are used to treat certain autoimmune,
collagen-vascular, and chronic inflammatory diseases, as
well as to prevent rejection of transplanted organs. For
example, therapeutic immunosuppression frequently
causes complications from bacterial, viral, fungal, and
parasitic infections.
Another complication of immunosuppression in trans-
plant patients has been a high frequency of secondary
cancers (11). Partial or complete regression of the secon-
dary cancers often occurs ifthe therapy is terminated. In
a large sampling of renal transplant patients who sur-
vived 10 years, approximately 50% developed cancer. The
types of tumors observed were heterogenous and in-
cluded skin and lip cancer (21-fold increase over the
general population), non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (28- to
49-fold increase), Kaposi's sarcoma (400- to 500-fold in-
crease), and carcinomas of the cervix (14-fold increase).
These examples suggest that perturbations in the im-
mune system may be associated with a wide spectrum of
diverse pathologic conditions, some ofwhich may only be-
come detectable after a long latency. However, whether
exposure to xenobiotics present in the environment in-
fluences immunocompetence ofthe general population un-
der nonnal circumstances is not known and remains a cen-
tral question.
Methodology
The immune system is a complex network comprised of
several cell types (i.e., lymphocytes, macrophages,
granulocytes, and natural killer cells) whose variety of
functions include maintaing homeostasis and health. The
mode of its activity resembles that of the endocrine sys-
tem in that circulating cellular and soluble components
can act at sites far removed from their point of origin. The
system continuously undergoes proliferation and differen-
tiation. Its primary responsibility is the defense against
invasion by pathogenic microbial agents and spontane-
ously arising neoplasms. In doing so, the intensity and
specificity of the immune response must be highly regu-
lated and capable of discerning self from nonself.
Since the immune system is a complex organization of
cells with a variety offunctions, appropriate evaluation of
chemical-mediated effects necessitates the examination of
multiple immune functions. One ofthe focuses among im-
munotoxicologists has been the development and im-
plementation of a tiered panel of assays to identify im-
158
CHEMICAL-INDUCED IMMUNOTOXICITY
Table 3. Panel for detecting immune alterations following chemical or drug exposure in rodents.a
Parameter
Screen (Tier I)
Immunopathology
Humoral-mediated immunity
Cell-mediated immunity
Nonspecific immunity
Comprehensive (Tier II)
Immunopathology
Humoral-mediated immunity
Cell-mediated immunity
Nonspecific immunity
Host resistance challenge
Models (end points)b
Procedures
Hematology: complete blood count and differential
Weights: body, spleen, thymus, kidney, liver
Cellularity: spleen
Histology: spleen, thymus, lymph node
Enumerate IgM antibody plaque-forming cells to T-dependent
antigen (SRBC); LPS mitogen response
Lymphocyte blastogenesis to mitogens (Con A) and mixed
leukocyte response against allogeneic leukocytes
Natural killer (NK) cell activity
Quantitation of splenic B- and T-cell numbers
Enumeration of IgG antibody response to SRBCs
Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) cytolysis; delayed hypersensitivity
response (DHR)
Macrophage function [quantitation of resident peritoneal cells and
phagocytic ability (basal and activated by MAF)]
Syngeneic tumor cells
PYB6 sarcoma (tumor incidence)
B16F10 melanoma (lung burden)
Bacterial models
Listeria monocytogenes (mortality)
Streptococcus species (mortality)
Viral models
Influenza (mortality)
Parasite models
Plasmodium yoelli (Parasitemia)
aThe testing panel was developed using B6C3F1 female mice.
bFor any particular chemical being tested, only two or three host resistance models are examined.
munosuppression or enhancement. The National
Toxicology Program (NTP) at the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) uses a flexible
testing panel composed of two tiers (Table 3). This test-
ing configuration has undergone a 4-year developmental
and interlaboratory validation period (12) and is now rou-
tinely used to evaluate the potential oftherapeutic or en-
vironmental chemicals to modulate immune function in
mice. Immune testing configurations have also been
described in rats (13,14).
The assays listed under Tier I represent a simple screen
and include measurements for cell-mediated immunity
(CMI), humoral-mediated immunity (HMI), and natural
killer (NK) cell activity, as well as immunopathology, the
latter of which is part of the standard protocol in sub-
chronic studies conducted by the NTP. The likelihood of
detecting potent immunotoxicants using Tier I is high, but
will decrease for weaker immunotoxicants, such as those
that affect only a specific cell population or subpopulation.
Nonetheless, based upon the data from compounds that
have completed both Tier I and II testing, no compound
has been found to affect an assay in Tier II without dem-
onstrating some effect on Tier I.
The assays listed in Tier II, which allow more flexibil-
ity than Tier I, represent a more comprehensive evalua-
tion of the immune system, more likely to identify af-
fected cell types. Criteria usually fulfilled prior to
initiating tests in Tier II include lack of overt toxicity at
doses where altered immune function(s) are observed in
Tier I and evidence that immunotoxicity occurs at rele-
vant dose levels. With pharmaceuticals, this relates to the
anticipated therapeutic dose, while with environmental
chemicals, this would depend on the anticipated or
documented human exposure levels. Evidence of a dose-
response relationship would also be an important prereq-
uisite for proceeding to Tier II. The types ofassays used
in Tier II include quantitation of splenic B- and T-cells, in-
cluding subpopulations, secondary (IgG) antibody
responses, T-cell effector function, and macrophage activ-
ity, as well as resistance to challenge with tumor cells or
infectious agents.
Regarding CMI, we have examined both delayed hyper-
sensitivity responses (DHRs) and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CTL) activity, and accumulating evidence indicates that
the latter provides more sensitivity and reproducibility
for assessing chemical-induced immunotoxicity. The use
ofmultiple assays in a testing configuration allows the es-
tablishment of an immune profile similar to that used to
diagnose primary or acquired immunodeficiency diseases.
Because of the variability in some of the immune
responses, an alteration in a single parameter is normally
insufficient to label a compound as immunotoxic. Details
describing these methodologies are published elsewhere
(12,15).
Host resistance models were developed to evaluate the
relationship between the immune function tests and more
biologically relevant end points (16,17). This was partic-
ularly important ifthe immunological data are to be used
in risk assessment evaluation. The host resistance models
listed in Table 3 have been correlated with immune func-
tion assays using data from animals exposed to approxi-
mately 15 chemicals over a 4-year period (Table 4). In
general, changes in specific immune functions correlated
with certain host resistance assays. For example, in-
159
LUSTER ETAL.
creased suppression of the antibody plaque-forming cell
response and proliferative response to lipopolysaccharide
were accompanied by increased susceptibility following
challenge with influenza virus and mouse malaria (Plas-
modium), agents in which resistance is mediated, at least
in part, by antibody. The correlation observed between
functional measurements and challenge models, albeit
preliminary, attempts to provide insight into the biologi-
cal significance of the various measures of immune func-
tion studied. This type of analysis should provide a bet-
ter understanding of the relevant immune effector
mechanism(s) involved in host resistance, as well as the
degree of suppression ofimmune function necessary to al-
ter host resistance (i.e., functional reserve). Additional
qualitative and quantitative information in this area
should also improve the accuracy with which the effects
of chemicals or drugs on the immune system can be
predicted.
Immunotoxic Xenobiotics
Of the list of immunotoxic compounds shown in Table
2, one ofthe most extensively studied classes of environ-
mental chemicals examined for immunotoxicity in ex-
perimental animals or humans is the halogenated aro-
matic hydrocarbons (HAHs), and, in particular,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated
biphenyls (PBBs), dibenzo-p-dioxins, and dibenzofurans.
Despite the species variability associated with the toxic-
ity of these compounds, studies in laboratory animals ex-
posed during neonatal or adult life with HAHs and, in
particular, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
have indicated that the immune system is one ofthe most
sensitive targets for toxicity (5,18-20). In mice, TCDD
causes thymic atrophy, myelotoxicity, inhibition of the
complement system, suppression oflymphocyte functions,
and increased susceptibility to challenge with infectious
agents or transplantable tumor cells. In contrast, NK cell
activity and macrophage functions appear spared. The
type of effect observed is dependent, to a large extent, on
the age of the animal at the time of exposure.
Following perinatal or, in some cases, chronic exposure,
the primary immune effects are associated with thymic
atrophy and suppression of cell-mediated immunity that
mimics neonatal thymectomy. Altered differentiation of
intrathymic precursor cells, as occurs following neonatal
thymectomy, has not been evaluated following perinatal
TCDD exposurea However, T-cells from treated mice dem-
onstrate altered homing patterns (19), a feature charac-
teristic of undifferentiated T-cells. Furthermore, in vitro
studies using a thymocyte and thymic epithelial cell cocul-
ture system have shown that pretreatment of thymic
epithelial cell monolayers with TCDD inhibits their abil-
ity to stimulate T-cell differentiation (21). With the use of
murine bone-marrow chimeras, it has been shown that in-
hibition of CILs by subchronic TCDD exposure is due to
the Ah genotype of the host and not of the grafted stem
cell, further supporting involvement of a secondary tis-
sue (22). In contrast to subehronic or perinatal exposure,
acute exposure of adult rodents to HAHs has its major
effect on rapidly proliferating cell populations, including
hematopoietic stem cells and B-lymphocytes, the effect
manifested as suppressed antibody responses. Unlike
CMI, TCDD inhibits hematopoiesis and B-cell function by
directly inhibiting maturation of the B-lymphocytes or
bone marrow stem cell.
Myelotoxicity, thymic atrophy, and immunosuppression
by TCDD and PCBs appear to be associated with
stereospecific binding to the Ah receptor, which is pres-
ent at low concentrations in both lymphoid tissue and lym-
phoid cells (5). This has been supported in genetic studies
using Ah-responsive and -nonresponsive mouse strains,
including mouse strains congenic at the Ah locus, where
the immunotoxic effects of TCDD segregate with the Ah
genotype. This can be seen in Figure 1, where a dose-
dependent suppression of the antibody response to
trinitrophenylated-lipopolysaccharide antigen occurred
when purified splenic B-cells obtained from Ah-
responsive mice were cultured with TCDD, but not when
TCDD was cultured with cells from the nonresponsive
strain. In contrast, dexamethasone, another potent im-
munosuppressant that acts via a steroid receptor mech-
anism, did not show these strain differences. In addition
to genetic studies, structure-activity studies showed that
the binding affinity ofvarious HAH congeners to the Ah
receptor correlates with their potency to induce im-
munosuppression.
Although immunotoxicity by HAHs is mediated
through binding to the Ah receptor, the mechanisms
responsible for toxicity following interaction of the
receptor-ligand complex with the Ah locus are unknown.
In fact, additional loci may be involved, as certain tissue-
Table 4. Correlation between host susceptibility and depressed immune function.a
Challenge NK Proliferation Antibody
model cytotoxicity MLR PHA LPS PFC DHR
PYB6 sarcoma 0.45b 0.46* 0.20 0.02 0.22 0.61*
B16F10 melanoma 0.54* 0.02 0.15 0.16 0.15 ND
Listeria 0.01 0.47t 0.37* 0.08 0.01 0.19
Influenza 0.11 0.78* 0.03 0.70* 0.83' ND
Plasmodium 0.24 0.59 0.67 0.64* 0.78t ND
aAbbreviations: MLR, mixed lymphocyte reaction; PHA, phytohemagglutinin; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; PFC; DHR, delayed hypersensitivity re-
sponse; ND, not done.
bCorrelation coefficient as determined by Spearman's Rank Correlation Test (rho values).*
Significant correlation at p < 0.05.
t Significant correlation at p < 0.01.
160
CHEMICAL-INDUCED IMMUNOTOXICITY
2500 v
U
Ah
(1) * DEX Ah /-
rJ CJDEX Ah -/-
w
2000
1500 1CL
-J
z
~-500.
0
0 10-10 to-9 g- to-7
CONCENTRATION of TCDD or DEXAMETHASONE (M)
FIGURE 1. Effect of TCDD or dexamethasone (DEX) on TNP-LPS
plaque-forming cells from B-cells obtained from Ah responsive
B6C3F1 and Ah-nonresponsive DBA mice. B-cells were cultured in
the presence of TCDD or dexamethasone plus TNP-LPS for 4 days
and assayed for plaque forming cells using TNP-coupled SRBCs.
Asterisk (*) denotes significantly different from vehicle response at
p < 0.05. From Luster et al. (24).
specific responses, such as epidermal hyperplasia in hair-
less mice, appear to be regulated by at least two genetic
loci, Ah and hr (23). Immunosuppression by TCDD does
not occur via a cellular depletion mechanism or qualita-
tive and/or quantitative changes in regulatory products,
as has been shown to occur with corticosteroids (5,18). In
epidermal cell lines, TCDD alters normal patterns of
proliferation and/or differentiation. Likewise, it has been
proposed that TCDD induces similar effects in thymic
epithelial cells and lymphocytes. For example, TCDD
causes terminal differentiation of thymic epithelial cells
(21) and blocks the terminal differentiation of murine B-
lymphocytes into plasma cells (24). This latter effect is as-
sociated with qualitative and quantitative changes in
phosphorylated proteins that are related to growth
promoting activity (i.e., tyrosine kinase) (Clark and Lus-
ter, in preparation). Thus, existing data indicate that
TCDD immunotoxicity results from altered patterns of
cell proliferation and differentiation in distinct lymphoid
targets.
Conclusions and Future Direction
The immune system is composed of several cell popu-
lations where maturation of each population is subject to
orderly control by endogenous hormones and exogenous
bacterial products. These mediators possess activation,
growth-promotion, and/or differentiation properties, and
are under the influence of potent, but not well-understood
regulators. From observations in rodents and limited
studies in humans inadvertently exposed, it is apparent
that a number of xenobiotics adversely affect the immune
system. This can occur through disruption of cell matu-
ration or regulation, as well as through cytotoxic pro-
cesses. These examples, combined with our currect knowl-
edge about the pathogenesis of disease, support the
possibility that chemical-induced damage to the immune
system may be associated with a wide spectrum ofdiverse
pathological conditions, some ofwhich may only become
detectable after a long latency. Likewise, exposure to im-
munotoxic xenobiotics might represent additional risks to
individuals with already fragile immune systems (e.g.,
malnutrition, infancy and old age). However, it is impor-
tant that caution be exercised when attempting to ex-
trapolate meaningful conclusions from experimental data
or isolated epidemiological studies to risk assessment for
low-level human exposure.
Because ofthe functional heterogeneity ofthe immune
system, efforts to assess chemical-induced immunotoxic-
ity in laboratory animals and humans have historically
been performed using a tiered approach with multiple as-
says. A similar configuration as described here has re-
centlybeen included in EPA's Federal Insecticide, Fungi-
cide and Rodenticide Act regulations for immunotoxicity
testing ofbiochemical pesticides. The value ofincorporat-
ing immunological rodent data for the toxicological assess-
ment of drugs, chemicals, and biologicals for human risk
assessment has been increasingly accepted. The preced-
ing decade of research has provided a data base of im-
munotoxic and nonimmunotoxic compounds, studies cor-
relating immune dysfunction and altered host resistance,
and a better standardized panel ofmethods for detecting
immunomodulatory chemicals. In the near future, re-
search related to methodology is needed to further refine
and validate immune function tests and host resistance
assays, particularly in the rat; develop, refine, and validate
better testing methods to evaluate the effects of chemi-
cal inhalation on lung immunity; determine the need and
relevance of methods for assessing hematopoietic and
polymorphonuclear leukocyte functions; develop and
evaluate in vitro methodology as screens for detecting
chemical-induced immunotoxicity using rodent and hu-
man immune cells; develop improved methods for evalu-
ating chemical-induced hypersensitivity and autoimmu-
nity; and develop a testing battery to examine dysfunction
in humans occupationally or environmentally exposed to
chemicals shown to be immunotoxic in laboratory animals.
In addition to risk assessment, scientists are using the
immune system as in vitro model systems for studying
toxic mechanisms at the cellular and molecular levels.
Routine parameters measured in toxicology studies, such
as blood or tissue cellularity, are often considerably less
sensitive indicators of toxicity than immune function
tests. The lymphocyte and macrophage, in particular, pos-
sess a number of characteristics that make them an ap-
propriate model for examining the effects of various
agents on cell maturation and function. Among these are
their capacity to undergo activation in vitro in response
to antigens or nonspecific stimuli, expression of gene
products that can be used as markers of differentiation,
the identification and availability of specific growth
promoting factors (e.g., interleukins), and their potential
to undergo terminal differentiation resulting in produc-
* TCDD Ah * /-
n Tenn AKk
161
162 LUSTER ETAL.
tion of soluble mediators (e.g., monokines, lymphokines,
or antibody) or providing effector function (e.g., tumor tar-
get cell killing).
The authors thank L. Oyster for her help in preparing this manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. NIAID Task Force Report. DHEW, NIH Publication No. 79-387,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1979.
2. Luster, M.I., and Dean, J.H. Immunological hypersensitivity result-
ing from environmental or occupational exposure to chemicals: A
state-of-the-art workshop summary. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 2:
327-330 (1982).
3. Vos, J. G. Immune suppression as related to toxicology. CRC Crit.
Rev. Toxicol. 5: 67-101 (1977).
4. Dean, J. H. Murray, M. J., and Ward, E. C. Toxic responses of the
immune system. In: Toxicology (C. Klassen, M. Amdur, and J. Doull,
Eds.), MacMillan Publishing Co., New York, 1986, pp. 245-285.
5. Luster, M. I., Blank, J. A., and Dean, J. H. Molecular and cellular
basis ofchemically induced immunotoxicity. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol.
Toxical. 27: 23-49 (1987).
6. Bekesi, J. G., Holland, J. G., Anderson, H. A., Fischbein, A. S.,
Rom, W, Wolff, M. S., and Selikoff, I. Lymphocyte function ofMichi-
gan dairy farmers exposed to polybrominated biphenyls. Science
199: 1207-1209 (1978).
7. Lee T.-P., and Chang, K.-J. Health effects of polychlorinated
biphenyls. In: Immunotoxicology and Immunopharmacology (J.
Dean, M. Luster, A. Munson, and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven Press,
New York, 1985, pp. 415-422.
8. Kammuller, M. E., Penninks, A. H., and Seinen, W. Spanish toxic
oil syndrome is a chemically induced GVHD-like epidemic. Lancet
i: 1174-1175 (1984).
9. Snyder, R. The benzene problem in historical perspective. Fundam.
Appl. Toxicol. 4: 692-699 (1984).
10. Richman, D. D. Fischl, M. A., Grieco, M. H., Gottlieb, M. S., Vol-
berding, P. A., Laskin, 0. L. Leedom, J. M., Groopman, J. E., Mild-
van, D., Hirsch, M. S., Jackson, G. G., Durack, D. T., Nusinoff-
Lehrman, S., and the AZT Collaborative Working Group. The tox-
icity of azidothymidine (AZT) in the treatment of patients with
AIDS and AIDS-related complex. N. Engl. J. Med. 4: 192-199
(1987).
11. Penn, I. Neoplastic consequences of immunosuppression. In: Im-
munotoxicology and Immunopharmacology (J. Dean, M. Luster, A.
Munson, and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven Press, New York, 1985, pp.
79-90.
12. Luster, M. I., Munson, A. E., Thomas, P. T., Holsapple, M. P.,
Fenters, J. D., White, K. L., Jr., Lauer, L. D., Germolec, D. R.,
Rosenthal, G. J., and Dean, J. H. Methods evaluation. Development
ofa testing battery to assess chemical-induced immunotoxicity: Na-
tional Ibxicology Program's guidelines for immunotoxicity evalu-
ation in mice. Fundam. Appl. Ibxicol. 10: 2-19 (1988).
13. Koller, L. D., and Exon, J. H. The rat as a model for immunotoxic-
ity assessment. In: Immunotoxicology and Immunopharmacology
(J. Dean, M. Luster, A. Munson, and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven Press,
New York, 1985, pp. 99-112.
14. Vos, J. G. Immunotoxicity assessment: Screening and function
studies. Arch. Toxicol. Suppl. 4: 95-108 (1980).
15. Dean, J. H., Cornacoff, J. B., Rosenthal, G. J., and Luster, M. I. The
immune system: Evaluation of injury. In: Methods in Toxicology
(A. W. Hayes, Ed.), Raven Press, New York, in press.
16. Murray, M. J., Kerkvliet, N. I., Ward, E. C., and Dean J. H. Models
for the evaluation tumor resistance following chemical or drug ex-
posure. In: Immunotoxicology and Immunopharmacology (J. Dean,
M. Luster, A. Munson, and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven Press, New York,
1985, pp. 113-122.
17. Bradley, S. G. Immunological mechanisms of host resistances to
bacteria and parasites. In: Immunotoxicity and Immunopharma-
cology (J. Dean, M. Luster, A. Munson, and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven
Press, New York, 1985, pp. 45-54.
18. Vos, J. G., Faith, R. E., and Luster, M. I. Immune allerations. In:
Halogenated Biphenyls, Terphenyls, Napthalenes, Dibenzodioxins
and Related Products (R. Kimbrough, Ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam,
1980, pp 241-266.
19. Thomas P., and Faith, R. Adult and perinatal immunotoxicity in-
duced by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons. In: Immunotoxicol-
ogy and Immunopharmacology (J. Dean, M. Luster, A. Munson,
and H. Amos, Eds.), Raven Press, New York, 1985, pp. 305-313.
20. Silkworth, J., and Vecchi, A. Role ofthe Ah receptor in halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbon toxicity. In: Immunotoxicology and Im-
munopharmacology (J. Dean, M. Luster, A. Munson, and H. Amos,
Eds.), Raven Press, New York, 1985, pp. 263-275.
21. Greenlee, W. F., Dodd, K. M., and Irons, R. D. Inhibition of
epithelial-mediated T cell maturation by tetrachlorodibenzo-p-
dioxin. Ibxicologist 4: 751 (1984).
22. Clark, D., Sweeney, G., Safe, S., Hancock, E., Kilburn, D., and Gual-
die, J. Cellular and genetic basis for suppression of cytotoxic T cell
generation by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons. Immunophar-
macol. 6: 143-153 (1983).
23. Poland, A., and Knutson, J. C. 2,3,7,8-Ttrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons: Examination of
the mechanism of toxicity. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Tbxicol. 22:
517-554 (1982).
24. Luster, M. I., Germolec, D. R., Clark, G., Wiegand, G., and Rosen-
thal, G. J. Selective effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) and corticosteroid on in vitro lymphocyte maturation. J.
Immunol. 140: 928-935 (1988).
