Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 82, pp. 51-56, 1989
Long-Term Hematopoietic Damage:
Concepts, Approaches, and Results
Relevant to the Study of Environmental
Toxins
by Nydia G. Testa* and Thomas M. Dexter*
The hematopoietic tissue is one of the prime examples of hierarchical tissues, where mature cells with a
limited life span are continually replaced as a result ofproliferation and differentiation from stem and pro-
genitor cells. In the bone marrow, these processes are controlled by growth factors and by cell to cell inter-
actions, the latter being specially important for the regulation of the stem-cell population. In the study of
long-term hematopoietic damage, we have to distinguish between deleterious effects of the environmental
toxins on the stem and progenitor cells, and on the stromal bone marrow cells which are part ofthe regula-
tory hematopoietic microenvironment. In some experimental situations, the function of the tissue may be
subnormal, not because of stem cell damage (which may also be present), but becguse of damage to regula-
tory environmental populations. Because ofthe high degree oforganization ofthe hematopoietic tissue (not
immediately obvious from histological sections), the heterogeneity of the stromal cell populations, and their
different capacities to regenerate after cytotoxic insult, the stromal damage is likely to be heterogeneous
and would tend to be expressed functionally at later times than acute hematopoietic injury. While microen-
vironmental damage may be of importance in the induction of hematopoietic failure, the primary target in
leukemogenesis is likely to be the stem cell. However, experimental data support the concept that regula-
tory microenvironmental influences may hinder or favor the development of leukemia.
Introduction
The continuous physiological replacement ofvast num-
bers ofmature hematopoietic cells is the end result ofor-
dered processes of cell proliferation, differentiation, and
maturation that start at the level of hematopoietic stem
cells. Stem cells generate progenitor cell populations with
more limited proliferation capacity, which are able to
differentiate only along one or two hematopoietic line-
ages. Progenitor cells will, in turn, give rise to the more
mature cells that are recognizable morphologically and
that comprise about 99% ofthe hematopoietic cells in the
bone marrow.
The hematopoietic tissue has the capacity to respond
quickly and effectively to increased demand for mature
cells, for example, to replace blood loss or to deal with in-
fection and can maintain this response for prolonged
periods oftime. The finely tuned mechanisms involved in
the regulation ofprogenitor cells are becoming relatively
understood, but less is known about the regulation of
stem cells, either their self-reproduction (a crucial factor
in maintaining hematopoietic function in the long term)
*Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital and Holt
Radium Institute, Withington, Manchester M20 9BX, UK.
Address reprint requests to N. G. Testa, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, Christie Hospital and Holt Radium Institute, Withington,
Manchester M20 9BX, UK.
or their commitment to differentiation. Here, we shall
analyze the relative contribution of damage to stem and
progenitor cell populations and to the regulatory microen-
vironment within which hematopoiesis takes place to the
long-term function of the tissue.
Structure of the Hematopoietic
Tissue
The first clonal assay in experimental hematology was
based on the observation that after the injection ofbone
marrow cells into lethally irradiated mice, some ofthe in-
jected cells (CFU-S) lodge in the spleen and, by clonal
proliferation, give rise-to visible colonies that contain not
only cells of several hematopoietic and lymphoid lineages,
but also cells able to generate further spleen colonies
upon retransplantation (1-3).
There is, however, great heterogeneity in the meas-
ured potential ofthe spleen colony-forming cells: some of
the CFU-S are not multipotential or able to self-
reproduce, and may only be able to give rise to commit-
ted progenitors and to cells of only one hematopoietic
lineage (4,5). However, at least some spleen colony-
forming cells can be equated to stem cells, and the CFU-S
assay remains widely used as an indirect, but reliable, es-
timate of the stem cell capacity of the tissue in several
TESTA AND DEXTER
experimental approaches. The existence of stem cells has
been elegantly demonstrated by showing that the
hematopoietic and lymphoid systems of a potentially
lethally irradiated mouse can be repopulated by the
progeny of a single cell, which can be detected by the
presence of either a chromosome marker or an inserted
retroviral marker (6,7). A multipotential cell, which over-
laps with and is able to generate CFU-S, is the murine
mixed colony-forming cell (Mix-CFC), detected by an in
vitro clonal assay (8). A similar cell can be detected in hu-
mans (9). Committed progenitor cells (CFCs) that give
rise to the different hematopoietic lineages are also
studied using in vitro clonal assays (10) where they are
induced to proliferate in response to hematopoietic
growth factors (colony-stimulating factors, CSFs). The hi-
erarchical organization ofthese cell populations is shown
in Figure 1.
Regulation of Hematopoiesis
The hematopoietic growth factors, commonly referred
to as colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) (Table 1) (11-14)
were first detected by their capacity to induce prolifera-
tion and maturation of colony forming cells in vitro. Some
of them appear to be largely lineage restricted, with M
(macrophage)CSF acting on cells whose proliferation will
result only in the production of macrophages, and G
(granulocyte)-CSF, inducing production of neutrophilic
granulocytes. In contrast, interleukin 3 (IL-3) will pro-
mote not only the development of the committed progen-
itor cells, but will also stimulate the development ofMix-
CFC. Similarly, GM-CSF will not only stimulate the pro-
duction of neutrophilic granulocytes and macrophages,
but will also stimulate progenitor cells to produce eo-
sinophils and megakaryocytes. These two factors will also
induce red cell development from primitive progenitor
cells in the presence of erythropoietin. Other growth fac-
tors isolated more recently may also have a wider range
STEM CEI.LS
ofaction than initially thought (Table 1). Other molecules,
collectively described as biological response-modifiers,
can influence hematopoiesis directly or indirectly, al-
though by themselves they do not act as growth factors
(i.e., they cannot induce colony formation by progenitor
cells). They include prostaglandins, interferons, tumor
necrosis factor, and transforming growth factors. Among
them there are also some interleukins that have effects
on myeloid and lymphoid cells, but their mode and range
ofaction have yet to be established. A comprehensive list
ofeffects is found in O'Garra et al. (15). The most relevant
here is interleukin 1 (IL-1) which, per se, does not stimu-
late colony formation. In this context, it was first
described as a potentiation factor called hematopoietin 1,
which induces primitive progenitor cells into a state in
which they are able to respond to M-CSF stimulation,
with production ofmacrophages (14). Whether this is the
only, or even the main effect of IL-1 on hematopoiesis re-
mains to be determined.
The role ofgrowth factors in hematopoiesis was eluci-
dated by devising experimental in vitro systems where
the action ofpurified factors on purified target cells could
be investigated. However, the bone marrow is a complex
heterogeneous tissue with a well-defined anatomical
structure. Although bone marrow sections examined
microscopically show an apparently random collection of
cells, determinations of the incidence of colony-forming
cells and nonhematopoietic stromal cells show a nonran-
dom, nonhomogeneous distribution of different cell popu-
lations within the marrow space in mice (12). The data for
humans is more limited (16). Also, cell populations that
produce regulatory factors are more concentrated in cer-
tain areas. This presumably leads to different regulatory
influences being exerted in local domains. By using long-
term bone marrow cultures, it has been established that
complex cell interactions influence the growth and devel-
opment of stem cells. In these cultures stromal cells
(fibroblastic-reticular cells, adipocytes, endothelial cells)
PROGENI¶IR CELIS END CELLS
Pre-CFU-S - CFU-S . Mix-CF
Pre-B cells
Pre-T cells
/ ~ Meg-CFC
Eo-CFC
Ba-CFC
BFV-E
0 neutrophils
macrophages
regacaryocytes
(platelets)
-
eosinophils
_ basophils
CFU-E erythrocytes
B lymphocytes
o T lymphocytes
Ncrenclature and references in the text
FIGURE 1. Cell hierarchies in hematopoiesis.
52
STUDY OF HEMATOPOIETIC DAMAGE AFTER ENVIRONMENTAL TOXINS
Table 1. Growth factors and target in vitro colony-forming cells (CFC).
Erythroid
Granulocyte- Early Late
Growth factor Mix macrophage CFC CFC Megakaryocytic Eosinophilic
IL-1 + ?
IL-3 + + + + + +
IL-4 + + + + + ?
IL-5 - - - -
IL-6 ? ? ? ? ? ?
GM-CSF -/+ + -/+ - + +
M-CSF - +
G-CSF _ + _ _
Megacaryocytes-CSF - - - - +
Erythropoietin - - - + +
a(+) Stimulation; (-) no effect; (?) not known.
form a complex multilayer attached to the surface ofcul-
ture flasks, forming a microenvironment within which ac-
tive hematopoiesis may take place for several months
(14). Hematopoietic growth factors, such as M-CSF and
GM-CSF may be produced within the adherent layer, but
they are not released at significant levels into the growth
medium. IL-3, however, has not been detected in such
cultures (14). This culture system, unlike the clonal assays
for progenitor cells, allows sustained renewal and
differentiation ofstem cells. These events are likely to be
crucially influenced by the capacity of stem cells to bind
to stromal cells, a step critical before stromal cell-bound
regulatory factors may influence them. This step may
also be needed before growth factors bound to extracel-
lular matrix molecules (themselves cell-bound?) (14,1?)
may interact with the stem cells.
It follows that events that may damage the regulatory
milieu of stem cells can be studied using long-term cul-
tures. As will be seen from the following discussions, in-
stances where defects in the regulatory stroma may be
the causative factor in subnormal hematopoiesis have
been documented.
Long-Term Hematopoietic Injury
More is known about long-term damage after cytotoxic
agents (drugs and radiation) used as therapy for malig-
nant disease than about the effect of environmental
toxins. Clearly, one important reason for this is that
studies relevant to the therapy ofmalignancy usually deal
with maximum tolerated doses where doses are known
and where clear effects are observed, whereas a frequent
problem in environmental studies is to decide where a
dose threshold lies (and, indeed, whether a threshold
exists). Also, determining dose-effect relationships by
measuring biological effects that are close to the limits of
methodological resolution is a problem after low doses of
toxins.
Fundamental differences, for example, in drug metab-
olism between species ofmammals used in experimental
work and between these mammals and humans compli-
cate the assessment of damage. However, epidemiology
can establish convincing associations between
hematopoietic damage and environmental toxins, even if
the degree, type, and extension of such damage may not
be easily determined. Here, we shall use examples ofex-
perimental studies using drugs or radiation to illustrate
types ofhematopoietic damage and the adaptive response
of the tissue, which may be relevant to the study of en-
vironmental toxins.
Stem Cell Damage Versus
Microenvironmental Damage
Direct damage to stem cells is to be expected after ex-
posure to cytotoxic agents. Just depletion of stem cell
numbers, however, is not a likely cause ofhematopoietic
failure leading to hypoplasia or aplastic anemia. It is
known that the CFU-S population is not reduced after
recovery from severe and repeated proliferation stress
induced by depletion in situ. Repeated administration of
triethilenmelamine (18) or hydroxyurea (19) at doses that
each produced a depopulation of the order of 99% of
CFU-S, was followed by recovery of CFU-S to normal
numbers (18). Furthermore, the quality ofthese cells, i.e.,
their self-reproduction capability, was maintained (19).
After depletion by other treatments, however, CFU-S
numbers never recover to control levels (20). After deple-
tion by busulphan, a phase ofexponential growth follows,
but CFU-S reach only about halfthe numbers in the un-
treated controls. Suboptimal plateau numbers of CFU-S
are also found after treatment with other agents (20).
There are several interesting features in these new
steady states that may follow drug treatment:
a) The level to which the CFU-S recover is not related
to the acute CFU-S kill. Over a range of doses up to the
maximum tolerated dose, following single or repeated ad-
ministration of busulphan, cyclophosphamide or bis-
cloroethyl nitrosourea (BCNU), the CFU-S recover to a
level characteristic ofthe drug but are not influenced by
the dose used (21-23). The level is stable for the rest of
the life-span of the mice. After radiation, however, the
level of the suboptimal plateau is related to dose.
b) The GM-CFC population plateaus at a higher level
than the CFU-S (22,23).
c) In spite ofa and b above, the mature cell output (i.e.,
53
TESTA AND DEXTER
peripheral blood counts) may be normal because of
several compensatory mechanisms (e.g., increased am-
plification from the progenitor cell compartment) that are
called into action (16). However, when the system is
stressed by transplantation, fewer cells are produced
than in controls (22). Also, in some cases, notably after
busulphan, a late hypoplasia develops (24) in the treated
mice. A similar picture may develop after repeated radi-
ation treatment (25). It is not clear whether this syn-
drome should be considered as a preleukemic state.
d) The suboptimal plateau in CFU-S, seen after treat-
ment with some cytoreductive regimes, is not determined
by a reduced self-reproduction or proliferation capacity
of these cells (although those effects may be present).
When transplanted into appropriate recipients the
CFU-S are capable offast exponential growth and often
complete regeneration of the hematopoietic system.
Thus, it is clear that the subnormnal hematopoiesis that
may be seen in treated mice may not be (or at least not
primarily) a function of stem cell damage. In many cases
the subnormal plateau in CFU-S numbers could well be
a limitation imposed on them by a damaged regulatory
microenvironment. There is other evidence of microen-
vironmental damage as the main course of disturbed
hematopoiesis after injury: Following treatment with cy-
clophosphamide, the CFU-S with the highest self-
reproduction capacity are spared selectively. From this,
one would expect a good reconstitution of the CFU-S
compartment. However, as stated earlier, subnormal
numbers are observed and in a minority ofmice there is
serious hematopoietic damage manifested as hypoplasia
or myelodysplasia (21). That this may be associated with
damage to the microenvironment is indicated by the find-
ing that a stromal cell population of reticular fibroblastoid
cells is also subnormal (21). There is also evidence that
microenvironmental abnormalities may cause aplastic
anemia in humans (26-29).
In the context of microenvironmental damage by
toxins, it is important to consider not only what the basic
lesions are, but also (and perhaps more importantly)
which are the limiting factors that govern cell production
when hypoplastic syndromes are considered. It would ap-
pear from the experimental data reviewed previously
that even in the presence of stem cell damage, the cru-
cial factor in determining the level ofhematopoiesis is the
damage to the regulatory microenvironment. When in-
duction of leukemia is considered, damage to stem cells
is the most likely primary consideration. Microenviron-
mental influences, however, are also likely to play a role
in leukemogenesis. It is known that myeloid leukemic
cells respond to hematopoietic growth factors, and indeed
require them for growth in vitro (30). Furthermore, the
regulatory stroma in long-term cultures favors the reap-
pearance of normal hematopoiesis when bone marrow
from patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia is cul-
tured. The leukemic clonal cells may become undetecta-
ble, and normal, presumably polyclonal, cells reappear
and become predominant (31,32).
Assays for the Study of
Microenvironmental Damage
Several assays to study the hematopoietic microen-
vironment are listed in Table 2. The first described is a
clonal assay that detects a cell population (CFU-F) able
to give rise to colonies of fibroblastoid-reticular cells in
culture (33). Persistent low numbers of CFU-F are found
after acute recovery from treatment with busulphan (fol-
lowing a pattern strikingly similar to that shown by
CFU-S) and also after cyclophosphamide or radiation
(21,23,25).
Implantation of femoral bone SC in mice results in
colonization of the bone cavity by hematopoietic cells of
the host, supported by the donor stroma which develops
in situ. Low numbers of CFU-S are supported by the
stroma ofbusulphan-treated mice (35). Further evidence
of microenvironmental damage after busulphan is ob-
served after implanting bone marrow tissue under the
kidney capsula of mice, a technique originally described
by Friedenstein et al. (36). In this assay, a donor-derived
microenvironment develops at the site of implantation,
which is able to support host-derived hematopoiesis. The
environment provided by marrow from busulphan-
Ts.ble 2. Methods for the study of the microenvironment.a
Method Species Parameters studied
CFU-Fb assay Guinea pig, mouse, human, rabbit, Colony forming incidence, cell type, production of
rat, cat collagen, production of CSF
Long-term bone marrow cultures Mouse, human, tree-shrew, cat Hematopoiesis, stem and progenitor cell production,
production of hematopoietic growth factors, study of
the extracellular matrix, normal and leukemic cell
differentiation, types and function of stromal cells
Subcutaneous implants Mouse (femoral shaft)c Hematopoietic foci, origin of stromal and hematopoietic
Rabbit (bone marrow, demineralized cells, bone formation, fat accumulation, production
bone)c of CSF, production of collagen
Implants under the kidney capsule Guinea pig, rabbit, mouse (bone Bone formation, hematopoietic foci, origin of stromal
marrow, cultured fibroblasts)c and hematopoietic cells
aMethodology reviewed in Testa and Gale (42).
bCFU-F, colony-forming unit, fibroblastic.
crlssues in parentheses are implants.
54
STUDY OF HEMATOPOIETIC DAMAGE AFTER ENVIRONMENTAL TOXINS 55
treated mice is able to support hematopoiesis only at
about 50% of the control level (23).
In long-term bone marrow cultures active hematopoi-
esis depends, as described above, on the formation of a
complex adherent layer of stromal cells (14). The level of
hematopoiesis depends on the functional integrity ofthe
stroma. When normal bone marrow cells are inoculated
onto preformed adherent stromal cell layers derived from
marrow of busulphan-treated mice, the microenviron-
ment they provide is only able to support about 20% of
the level of hematopoiesis seen in cultures where the
stroma was provided by marrow of untreated mice (37).
In the converse experiment, where marrow from treated
mice was inoculated on normal adherent layers, the level
of hematopoiesis was about 80% of controls (normal on
normal). This again indicates that the limiting factor here
is the microenvironmental, not the stem cell damage. A
similar situation is found after chemotherapeutic treat-
ment for lymphoblastic leukemia (38). The considerable
reserve capacity of stem cells to respond to intensive
proliferative stress, calculated to be able to support
hematopoiesis for at least five life-spans in mice (39), may
still be considerable even in a damaged stem cell popu-
lation that is consequently able to comply with the de-
mands for mature cell production. However, drugs and
chemicals, unlike radiation, may have selective effects on
certain subpopulations ofthe stem cell hierarchy. Those
agents that damage the earliest cells (i.e., those cells with
the highest self-reproduction and repopulation capacity)
are more likely to induce stem cell failure than those that
hit selectively more mature populations (20).
The capacity of stromal cells to recover after cytotoxic
injury is likely to be considerably less than that shown
by stem cells. At least some types of stromal cells have
a slow turnover (40) and may also have a long life-span.
Considerable differences in those parameters in the dif-
ferent types ofstromal cells is also to be expected. Also,
injury to them may take a long time to be expressed func-
tionally. For example, the microenvironmental cells in
long-term bone marrow cultures can be sterilized by large
doses of radiation, but they remain able to support
hematopoiesis for 4 to 6 weeks (41). It is only when the
sterilized cells attempt to divide that they will be elimi-
nated. In this context it is of interest to note that tran-
sient normalization of CFU-S may be observed at about
100 days after busulphan treatment. Normal values, how-
ever, are not maintained (23). Another important concept
is that not only the integrity of several cell populations
(with different life-spans and different proliferative poten-
tial to recover after injury) may be required for adequate
regulatory function, but also the correct cell associations
may have to take place and the correct ratios of differ-
ent cell types maintained (42).
Studies ofthe hematopoietic system after exposure to
benzene have so far concentrated on the acute injury.
These studies have demonstrated that CFU-S and CFCs
are sensitive targets for this agent. However, microen-
vironmental damage has also been reported. These data
are reviewed elsewhere in this volume. Long-term
studies ofhematopoietic and stromal cell populations are
of obvious importance in trying to understand the induc-
tion of aplasia and leukemia after exposure to benzene.
The authors are supported by the Cancer Research Campaign, Great
Britain. Thomas M. Dexter is a fellow of the CRC.
REFERENCES
1. Till, J. E., and McCulloch, E. A. A direct measurement of the radi-
ation sensitivity ofnormal mouse bone marrow cells. Radiat. Res.
14: 213-222 (1961).
2. Becker, A. J., McCulloch, E. A., and Till, J. E. Cytological dem-
onstration of the clonal nature of spleen colonies derived from
mouse marrow cells. Nature 197: 452-454 (1963).
3. Siminovitch, L., McCulloch, E. A., and Till, J. E. The distribution
ofcolony-forming cells among spleen colonies. J. Cell. Comp. Phys-
iol. 62: 327-336 (1963).
4. Bleiberg, I., Liron, M., and Feldman, M. Studies on the regulation
of hematopoietic spleen colonies. Blood 29: 469-480 (1967).
5. Magli, M. C., Iscove, N. N., and Odartchenko, N. Transient nature
ofearly hematopoietic spleen colonies. Nature 295: 527-529 (1982).
6. Abramson, S., Miller, R. G., and Phillips, R. A. The identification
in adult bone marrow of pluripotent and restricted stem cells of
the myeloid and lymphoid systems. J. Exp. Med. 145: 1567-1579
(1977).
7. Dick, J. E., Magli, M. C., Huszar, D., Phillips, R. A., and Bern-
stein, A. Introduction ofa selectable gene into primitive stem cells
capable of long-term reconstitution of the hematopoietic system
of w/wv mice. Cell 42: 71-79 (1985).
8. Metcalf, D., Johnson, G. R., and Handel, T. E. Colony formation
in agar by multipotential hematopoietic cells. J. Cell Physiol. 98:
401-420 (1979).
9. Messner, H. A. Human stem cells in culture. Clin. Hematol. 13:
393-404 (1984).
10. Bradley, T. R., and Metcalf, D. The growth of mouse bone mar-
row cells in vitro. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 44: 287-300 (1966).
11. Metcalf, D. Hematopoietic colony stimulating factors. In: Tissue
Growth Factors (R. Baserga, Ed.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981,
pp. 343-384.
12. Lord, B. I., and Testa, N. G. The hematopoietic system: Structure
and regulation. In: Hematopoiesis: Long-Term Effects of Chemo-
therapy and Radiation (N. G. Testa and R. P. Gale, Eds.), Marcel
Dekker, New York, 1988, pp. 1-26.
13. Nicola, N. A. Why do hematopoietic growth factors interact with
each other? Immunol. Today 8: 134-140 (1987).
14. Dexter, T. M., Ponting, I. L. O., Roberts, R. A., Spooncer, E., Hey-
worth, C., and Gallagher, J. T. Growth and differentiation of
hematopoietic stem cells. J. Gen. Physiol., in press.
15. O'Garra, A., Umland, S., De France, T., and Christansen, J. B-cell
factors are pleitotropic. Immunol. Today 9: 45-54 (1988).
16. Testa, N. G., Hendry, J. G., and Molineux, G. Long-term bone mar-
row damage in experimental systems and in patients after radia-
tion or chemotherapy. Anticancer Res. 5: 101-110 (1985).
17. Gordon, M. Y., Riley, G. P., Watt, S. M., and Greaves, M. F. Com-
partmentalization ofa hematopoietic growth factor (GM-CSF) by
glycosaminoglycans in the bone marrow microenvironment. Na-
ture 326: 403-405 (1987).
18. Valeriote, F., and Tolen, S. Extensive proliferative capacity of
hematopoietic stem cells. Cell Tissue Kinet. 16: 1-6 (1983).
19. Ross, E. A. M., Anderson, N., and Micklem, H. S. Serial depletion
and regeneration ofthe murine hematopoietic system. J. Exp. Med.
155: 432-444 (1982).
20. Testa, N. G., Hendry, J. H., and Molineux, G. Long-term bone mar-
row damage after cytotoxic treatment; stem cells and microenviron-
ment. In: Hematopoiesis: Long-term Effects ofChemotherapy and
Radiation (N. G. Testa and R. P. Gale, Eds.), Marcel Dekker, New
York, 1988, pp. 75-91.
21. Molineux, G., Xu, C. X., Hendry, J., and Testa, N. G. A cellular
analysis oflong-tern haematopoietic damage in mice after repeated
treatment with cyclophosplamide. Cancer Chemother. Pharnacol.
18: 11-16 (1986).
56 TESTA AND DEXTER
22. Xu, C. X., Molineux, G., Testa, N. G., and Hendry, J. H. Long-term
damage to hematopoietic subpopulations in mice after repeated
treatment with BCNU or cyclophosphamide. Br. J. Cancer 53:
174-176 (1986).
23. Molineux, G., Testa, N. G., Massa, G., and Schofield, R. An anal-
ysis ofhematopoietic and microenvironmental populations ofmouse
bone marrow after treatment with busulphan. Biomedicine 40:
215-220 (1986).
24. Morley, A., and Blake, J. An animal model ofchronic aplastic mar-
row failure I. Late marrow failure afterbusulphan. Blood 44: 49-56
(1974).
25. Hendry, J. G., Xu, C. X., and Testa, N. G. A cellular analysis of
residual hematopoietic deficiencies in mice after 4 repeated doses
of 4.5 gray x-rays. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 9: 1641-1646
(1983).
26. Abdou, N. E., Verdirame, J. D., Amare, M., and Abdou, N. L. Het-
erogeneity of pathogenetic mechanisms in aplastic anaemia. Ef-
ficacy oftherapy based on in vitro results. Ann. Intern. Med. 95:
43-50 (1981).
27. Ershler, W. B., Ross, J., Finlay, J. L., and Shahidi, N. T. Bone mar-
row microenvironment defect in congenital hypoplastic anaemia.
N. Engl. J. Med. 302: 1321-1327 (1980).
28. Hotta, T., Kato, T., Maeda, H., Yamao, H., Yamada, H., and
Saito, H. Functional changes in marrow stromal cells in aplastic
anaemia. Acta Haematol. 74: 65-69 (1985).
29. Gordon, M. Y., and Gordon-Smith, E. C. Bone marrow fibroblast
function in relation to granulopoiesis in aplastic anaemia. Br. J.
Haematol. 53: 483-489 (1983).
30. Metcalf, D., and Moore, M. A. S. Growth and responsiveness ofhu-
man granulocytic leukaemic cells in vitro. Comp. Leuk. Res. 40:
235-241 (1975).
31. Coulumbel, L., Kalousek, D. K., Eaves, C. S., Gupta, C. M., and
Eaves, A. C. Long-term marrow culture reveals chromosomally
normal hematopoietic progenitor cells in patients with Ph-positive
chronic myelogenous leukaemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 306: 1493-1498
(1983).
32. Chang, S., Coutinho, L., Morgenstern, G., Scarffe, J. H.,
Deakin, D., Harrison, C., Testa, N. G., and Dexter, T. M. Recon-
stitution ofhematopoietic system with autologous marrow taken
during relapse ofacute myeloblastic leukaemiagrown in long-term
culture. Lancet i: 294-295 (1986).
33. Friedenstein, A. M., Chailakhjan, R. K., and Lalykina, K. S. The
development offibroblast colonies in monolayer cultures ofguinea
pig bone marrow and spleen cells. Cell Tissue Kinet. 3: 393-403
(1970).
34. Xu, C. X., Hendry, J. H., and Testa, N. G. The response ofstromal
progenitor cells in mouse marrow to graded repeated doses of
x-rays or neutrons. Radiat. Res. 96: 82-89 (1983).
35. Fried, W., and Adler, S. Late effects of chemotherapy on
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Exp. Hematol. (suppl. 16) 13: 49-56
(1985).
36. Friedenstein, A. J., Petrakova, K. V., Kuralesova, A. I., and
Frolova, G. P. Heterotopic transplants ofbone marrow. Transplan-
tation 6: 230-247 (1968).
37. Anderson, R. W., Matthews, K. I., Crouse, D. A., and Sharp, J. G.
In vitro evaluation ofhaematopoiesis in mice treated with busul-
phan or nitrogen mustard. Biomedicine 36: 149-152 (1982).
38. Testa, N. G., Bhavnani, M., Will, A., and Morris-Jones, P. Long-
term bone marrow damage after treatment for acute-lymphoblastic
leukaemia. In: Hematopoiesis: Long-Term Effects of Chemother-
apy and Radiation (N. G. Testa and R. P. Gale, Eds.), Marcel Dek-
ker, New York, 1988, pp. 279-287.
39. Harrison, D. E., and Astle, C. M. Loss of stem cell repopulating
ability on transplantation. Effects of donor age, cell number and
transplantation procedure. J. Exp. Med. 156: 1767-1779 (1982).
40. Castro-Malaspina, H., Gay, R. E., Resnick, G., Kapoor, N.,
Meyers, P., Chiarieri, D., McKenzie, S., Braxmeyer, H. E., and
Moore, M. A. S. Characterization ofhuman bone marrow fibroblast
colony forming cells (CFU-F) and their progeny. Blood 56: 289-301
(1980).
41. Spooncer, E., Lord, B. I., and Dexter, T. M. Defective ability to
self-renew in vitro ofhighly purified primitive hematopoietic cells.
Nature 316: 62-64 (1985).
42. Testa, N. G., and Gale, R. P., Eds. Hematopoiesis: Long-Term Ef-
fects of Chemotherapy and Radiation. Marcel Dekker, New York,
1988.
43. Testa, N. G. Hematopoiesis regulation, microenvironment; labo-
ratory techniques. In: Proceedings ofthe 20th Congress ofthe In-
ternational Society of Hematology, Buenos Aires, 1984, pp. 24-32.
