Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 82, pp. 7-8, 1989
Introduction: Session on Metabolism
by Dennis V. Parke*
Benzene, discovered by Faraday in 1825, and isolated
from coal-tar by Hofmann in 1845, was not obtained pure
until 1952 when it was synthesized labeled with 14C. Al-
though at that time exposure to benzene was associated
with aplastic anemia, its toxicity was not generally con-
sidered to be a serious problem and was loosely associ-
ated with probable impurities. The material was used
freely as an industrial and laboratory solvent and in
several household products, and process workers often
used benzene in preference of water to clean up at the
end of a shift. The synthesis of [1-'4C] benzene, its par-
tial purification as the nickel ammonium cyanide clathrate
complex, and ultimate chemical purification to constant
specific radioactivity revealed that many simple deriva-
tives ofbenzene described by Beilstein and in the chem-
ical literature were impure and even since have not been
adequately characterized. The use of '4C-benzene in me-
tabolism studies over 30 years ago established unequivo-
cally that 1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene, L-phenylmercapturic
acid, and trans-trans-muconic acid were minor metabo-
lites, a quantitative account was made ofthe major path-
ways of metabolism to phenol, catechol and quinol and
their conjugates, and its oxidative metabolism to 14C02
and to 2-carbon fragments, which resulted in the incor-
poration of '4C into tissue proteins and fatty acids, was
established.
Benzene is radiomimetic, a property probably associ-
ated with its causation of aplastic anemia and possibly
also with its carcinogenicity as, similar to radiation-
induced malignancy, benzene-induced malignancy is
characterized by a multiplicity of tissue sites. This con-
trasts with the monohalobenzenes that are not radiomi-
metic, probably not carcinogenic, and are metabolized
mostly by epoxidation to give the corresponding
catechols and phenylmercapturic acids, which are only
minor metabolites of benzene. Hence, the unique toxic-
ity ofbenzene may well be associated with unique aspects
of its metabolism such as the ring scission product mucon-
dialdehyde, or one or more ofthe polymeric polyphenols
formed from the primary phenolic metabolites. However,
*Department of Biochemistry, University of Surrey, Guildford, Sur-
ley, GU2 5XH, UK.
there is no doubt that multiple mechanisms are involved
in benzene toxicity and carcinogenicity, and these may in-
clude synergism between different metabolites, such as
benzoquinone and mucondialdehyde as suggested by
Snyder (1), or synergism between glutathione-depleting
metabolites ofbenzene and hydroxyl radicals, generated
by futile cycling of cytochrome P-450 or possibly by re-
dox cycling of quinonoid metabolites. Indeed, the forma-
tion of DNA adducts from metabolites ofbenzene may be
of minor importance, as the indications are that benzene
and its metabolites are only weakly genotoxic, at least in
man.
Recent studies on the cytochrome P-450 superfamily of
mixed-function oxidase enzymes have indicated that one
major family, namely, the cytochromes P-448 (P450 I), are
primarily responsible for the activation of carcinogens
and toxic chemicals, while most other families of the
cytochromes P-450 result in their detoxication. Determi-
nation of the conformations of the active sites of these dif-
ferent cytochromes P-450 has enabled chemicals to be
characterized by computer graphic calculation of their
spatial conformations and electronic structures, as sub-
strates of the cytochromes P-448 (P450 I) or cytochromes
P-450, and thus to be identified as potential carcinogens,
mutagens, co-carcinogens, or promoters. By these proce-
dures, benzene is classified as a weak carcinogen and as
a substrate of both the cytochromes P-448 and P-450. In-
deed benzene is a preferential substrate of one particu-
lar family of cytochromes P-450, namely cytochrome
P-450ALC (P450 II E), which metabolizes alcohol, benzene,
and aniline, is known to be induced by these substrates
and is associated with the generation ofhydroxyl radicals,
probably formed by futile cycling of the cytochrome. The
toxicity of alcohol, particularly in necrosis of the gastroin-
testinal tract, is known to be associated with oxygen rad-
ical production. The possibility, therefore exists of a syn-
ergism between alcohol and benzene, and of the role of
reactive oxygen and the formation of circulating lipid
peroxides in the hemopoietic toxicity and carcinogenic-
ity of benzene. It would be valuable to know if the recon-
stituted cytochromes P450 I, P450 II B, and P450 II E,
metabolize benzene to different products.
It should be remembered that the microsomal
8 D. V PARKE
cytochromes P-450 are not confined to the liver but are
ubiquitous to all tissues and that they are also found in
the endoplasmic reticulum of leukocytes. Hence, the
known activation of bone marrow macrophages by ben-
zene (2) may involve induction of cytochrome P450 II E
with subsequent generation of reactive oxygen radicals.
These and many other new developments in the metab-
olism, toxicity, and carcinogenicity of benzene were pre-
sented and discussed by leading researchers in the field
at the recent symposium organized by Drs. Lucier and
Snyder and their committee. Nevertheless, many prob-
lems remain, including the pathways of metabolism in
man, the chemical nature of the ultimate toxic metabo-
lites, the mechanism of benzene carcinogenesis and, in
particular, the risk assessment of exposure to benzene
present in automobile fuels and exhaust emissions.
REFERENCES
1. Snyder, R., Diritriadis, E., Guy, R., Hu, P., Cooper, K., Bauer, H.,
Witz, G., and Goldstein, B. D. Studies on the mechanism of ben-
zene toxicity. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 31-35 (1989).
2. Laskin, D. L., MacEachern, L., and Snyder, R. Activation ofbone
marrow phagocytes following benzene treatment of mice. Environ.
Hbalth Perspect. 82: 75-79 (1989).
