Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 82, pp. 3-6, 1989
Introduction: Occam's Razor Is Dull
by Bernard D. Goldstein*
Introduction
There is a 3-fold rationale for convening this Sympo-
sium on Benzene Metabolism, Toxicity and Carcinogen-
esis. Benzene is a very important chemical. Among the
organic chemicals known to be human carcinogens, ben-
zene is produced in the greatest volume and with the
widest possibilities for human exposure in the workplace
and in the general environment. Second, there is much
lrecent regulatory activity aimed at setting standards or
guidelines to limit the health hazard ofthis known human
leukemogen. Effective public health activity clearly de-
pends upon the best scientific information. Most impor-
tant, however, is the third rationale for this conference,
that this is a very exciting time in the science of benzene
toxicology. This excitement will be evident from the
presentations, as well as from the number and caliber of
the attendees at this meeting.
Accordingly, the goal of this meeting is to present as
many as possible of the exiciting approaches to benzene
research currently being used around the world. To that
end, the Organizing Committee has invited presentations
from diverse groups with differing scientific approaches
and viewpoints; the common theme being the possibility
of obtaining insight into the mechanism by which this
ubiquitous cornerstone of our chemical era produces its
adverse effects in humans.
This is a research conference. Our intention is not to re-
solve controversy; it is to present whatever controver-
sies exist about the science underlying benzene toxicity
to the attendees, with the aim ofincreasing the likelihood
that further scientiflc studies will address and diminish
these uncertainties. It is not a consensus conference, nor
do we intend to provide direct advice to regulatory agen-
cies. However, we firmly believe that furthering the un-
derstanding of the basic mechanisms of benzene toxicity
will inevitably lead to beneficial public health decisions
capable of preventing the toxicity of this potent chemical.
Being an introductory speaker in a conference on a sub-
ject as broad as benzene is in essence a license to shoot
at any target. I will use this license indiscriminately,
*University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Department of Environmental and Community
Medicine, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854.
choosing different areas based in part upon my own in-
terests, a sense of the need to challenge certain assump-
tions, and the recognition that many very important
areas can be ignored as they will be covered in depth and
with much greater expertise by conference participants.
What follows is an idiosyncratic approach to the overall
topic.
Occam's Razor Is Dull
My major point, and one that I believe summarizes the
insight provided by much ofthe current research, is that
Occam's razor is dull. The medieval philosopher William
of Occam is known for his very good advice to all ex-
perimentalists that the most likely explanation among a
group of hypotheses is the simplest one. This has led
many of us to seek the single benzene metabolite respon-
sible through a single biochemical mechanism for the pro-
duction of a specific bone marrow effect resulting in all
of the hematological toxicity. My beliefis that the major
message from this conference will be that benzene tox-
icity involves more than one metabolite acting through
more than one mechanism producing more than biologi-
cal effect.
Role of Metabolites Derived from
Phenol
The evidence for a role in benzene toxicity of poly-
hydroxylated benzene metabolites, alone or in combina-
tion, continues to increase (1,2). Still left unanswered is
why administration of phenol does not itself produce
overt hematologic toxicity. Formation of polyhydrox-
ylated metabolites from benzene occurs primarily
through the initial formation of phenol, yet administer-
ing phenol alone, which presumably would produce the
same polyhydroxylated metabolites, does not lead to a
dose-responsive bone marrow aplasia.
One possible explanation is that benzene effects are due
to a combination of one or more hydroxylated metabolites
with a ring-opened product, such as muconaldehyde,
which would not be formed from phenol alone. Other pos-
sibilities exist, including a difference in metabolism of
phenol in the presence ofbenzene. It is important that the
B. D. GOLDSTEIN
question of the lack of hematological toxicity of ad-
ministered phenol be addressed before fully accepting a
role for polyhydroxylated benzene metabolites in
hematotoxicity.
Chromosomal Effects
One of the more intriguing aspects of benzene toxicol-
ogy is the fact that it consistently tests negative in most
of the short-term assays for mutagenic agents. However,
it is indisputable that benzene exposure leads to DNA
damage in view of the readily observed cytogenetic ab-
normalities in humans and in laboratory animals (3). The
gross chromosomal abnormalities seen in individuals with
benzene hemtotoxicity at first glance suggest major dam-
age to chromosomes or the chromosome sorting process,
well beyond what one might expect from epigenetic or
promotion-related phenomena. This has for many years
suggested to me the possibility that the mechanism of
benzene toxicity might include some cross-linking of
DNA contents or DNA to nucleohistone. Obviously,
there are a number of potential metabolites of benzene,
including ring-opened products (4), which could be very
efficient cross-linking agents. Biomedical observation of
gross chromosomal abnormalities in benzene-exposed in-
dividuals should be kept in mind by those who are put-
ting together a mechanism model for benzene toxicity.
Benzene Cancer Biology
There are a number of persistent questions about the
biology ofbenzene-induced cancer that deserve comment.
These include the very important point, raised by the
studies of Maltoni and those of the NTP, as to whether
benzene is a pancarcinogen in humans (5,6). This could
conceivably be assessed in humans by thorough evalua-
tion of published large cohort studies of potentially
benzene-exposed work forces (e.g., refinery workers) us-
ing an increase in the standard mortality ratio for leuke-
mia as a marker for benzene effect in this population. We
must also recognize that we still have not fully clarified
the likelihood that benzene causes hematological ne-
oplasms other than acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.
Another issue in cancer biology that is potentially of
great pertinence to benzene toxicity concerns whether
the initiationlpromotion/progression tumor model is valid
for benzene-induced leukemia.
The frequent observation in humans of benzene-
induced aplastic anemia progressing through a preleu-
kemic stage to frank acute myeloblastic leukemia (7)
strongly suggests that a tumor progression model would
be pertinent to benzene leukemogenesis. However, tu-
mor promotion is more problematic. I am unaware of a
classic animal initiation/promotion model for acute my-
elogenous leukemia. Furthermore, the usual 5- to 10-year
latency period for AML following exposure to benzene or
other leukemogenic agents is markedly shorter than solid
tumor carcinogenesis in humans. Thus, while it is tempt-
ing to discuss the effects of benzene metabolites in terms
oftumor initiation and promotion, we must recognize that
this model has not yet been shown to be pertinent to hu-
man leukemia.
Sensitivity to Benzene
The extent to which individuals differ in their suscep-
tibility to benzene is an important issue. There is no ques-
tion that some difference in sensitivity will occur, as with
any biological variable. However, despite some interest-
ing observations in families (8), I do not believe that there
is particularly clear-cut evidence at present of any unique
sensitivity-certainly none as great as the idiosyncratic
reaction that occurs with chloramphemicol-induced aplas-
tic anemia. Further evaluation of the extent and deter-
minants of human sensitivity to benzene await exploita-
tion of recent advances in benzene toxicology coupled
with new understanding of the molecular biology under-
lying human susceptibility.
Interactive Effects
The observed hematological effects in any individual
may not be due to benzene alone. That exposure to ben-
zene by itself can cause aplastic anemia appears unques-
tionable. It is also highly likely to be a sole cause of acute
myelogenous leukemia. However, there is more than am-
ple evidence that other chemicals can interact with ben-
zene (7). Studies of toluene are particularly of interest for
two ways. The first is that the interaction is a protective
one, as would be predicted by our understanding of ben-
zene metabolism (9). The second is that as benzene and
toluene concentrations are lessened to realistic ambient
levels, the extent of interaction decreases until it can no
longer be detected, including no evidence of interaction
at low levels in humans (10). The implications are that not
all interactions are additive or synergistic, and that, as
might be expected from the known mechanisms of inter-
action, these are far less likely to occur as concentrations
become lower.
Risk Assessment
One can confidently anticipate that the risk assessment
quantitatively relating benzene to human leukemia will
continue to be a source of much controversy. The ink is
hardly dry on the document decreasing the benzene stan-
dard from 10 ppm to 1 ppm, about one decade after origi-
nally proposed by Eula Bingham, and demands have de-
veloped to further decrease this standard. A current risk
assessment used by OSHA suggests that a 40-year ex-
posure to 1 ppm benzene in essence doubles the lifetime
risk of dying from acute myelogenous leukemia, a risk in
the range of 1 in 1000. Thus, the allowable workplace
standard leads to a relatively high risk as compared to the
usual regulatory approach.
There are a number of points that I believe should be
kept in mind when we consider the controversy concern-
4
INTRODUCTION
ing the risk assessment ofbenzene. The first is that there
is reasonably good agreement among the various risk as-
sessment approaches. In fact, the risk assessment based
upon animal data independent of epidemiological studies
performed by EPA agrees to the first decimal point with
the risk assessment developed from the epidemiological
data independent ofthe animal studies (11). Then why the
controversy? Very simply, when I state my belief that
there is good agreement among the various risk assess-
ments, this is based upon a data quality objective for risk
assessment that defines an order of magnitude as being
relatively good agreement. On the other hand, even a
2-fold difference, e.g., between 1 ppm and 0.5 ppm for the
current OSHA standard, can be of major importance to
the various groups contesting the benzene standard. Un-
fortunately, there is insufficient data and understanding
of benzene to be able to begin to approach what is the
micro level for most chemical risk assessment. Accord-
ingly, there is a legitimate reason to carefully review the
basis for the existing benzene risk assessment. A major
part of the uncertainty in the risk assessment developed
from the epidemiological studies is the extent to which
human exposure to benzene is accurately depicted. This
will be addressed at the present conference. However, let
me again emphasize that legitimate arguments that are
occurring on the micro scale ofrisk assessment should not
be taken as a reflection of inadequacy in risk assessment
at the macro level in which it is usually employed.
Underlying all of the risk assessments for benzene is
the assumption that as a carcinogen it is appropriate to
use a no-threshold model. What is in fact the likelihood
that there is some threshold ofregulatory importance for
the causation of leukemia by benzene? In as much as wa-
ter quality standards for benzene are being placed at 1
ppb, perhaps even less now in California under Proposi-
tion 0.000065, a threshold of regulatory importance could
be relatively low. It is also conceivable that such a thresh-
old, if it exists, could be ofregulatory importance for com-
munity standards but of no importance toward the work-
place standard, which is much higher. A good toxicologist
can of course come up with many reasons why a com-
pound such as benzene might have a threshold for its leu-
kemic effects. Rather than discussing these in detail, let
me point out what I hope should be obvious by now. It
is unrealistic to expect to establish such a threshold
through epidemiological studies in view of the powerless-
ness of the negative in such studies, or through standard
animal dose-response studies looking at cancer as an end
point simply because of the enormous number of animals
that would be necessary even if an appropriate model of
acute leukemia was available.
If such a threshold exists, the only way it will be iden-
tified is through basic mechanistically oriented research
that demonstrates conclusively the pathways by which
benzene exposure leads to acute myelogenous leukemia.
For those in industry who would like to believe that such
a threshold does exist, let me suggest to them that it is
only through the support of basic mechanistically
oriented research one would be able to discover such a
threshold. If in 8 years of the Reagan Administration we
have not changed the regulatory philosophy ofthe United
States that a known human carcinogen is guilty until
proven innocent of having no threshold, all of industry's
continued lobbying and political effects on behalf of a
threshold for a compound such as benzene are simply use-
less. The funds would much better be spent in the basic
research that might show that a threshold of regulatory
importance does exist. Even if such research does not
show that a threshold of regulatory importance exists, in-
dustry has nothing to lose as much as they are now and
will undoubtably in the future be held to such a conclu-
sion.
Exposure Assessment
We need to improve our ability to assess exposure to
benzene, from the source to the external portal of entry
in humans and from this portal of entry to the target or-
gan. The focus of risk assessment for benzene has been
almost exclusively on the hazard side, particularly on de-
termining a unit risk number for cancer. Far less atten-
tion has been placed on the exposure side of the dose-
response equation. In order to determine risk to society,
we need to know more about exposure. Advances in tech-
nology have made personal exposure monitors for ben-
zene inhalation much more readily available. There is a
reasonable data base to extrapolate the information con-
cerning the amount ofbenzene that is inhaled that stays
in the body. One can make certain presumptions about in-
gested benzene in water, but far less is known about food,
particularly in terms of bioavailability. Even more re-
search is needed to understand the extent to which ben-
zene alone or in a solvent mixture penetrates through the
skin. Cross media assessments must take into account the
fact that benzene in water can readily off-gas into air so
that groundwater contamination with benzene can lead
to inhalation as the major route of exposure.
The development of molecular markers based on ad-
ducts of benzene metabolite to macromolecules will be
powerful tools for exposure assessment. Such markers
may be a very useful means of integrating the extent to
which human exposure has occurred once pharmacoki-
netics have been fully worked out. Elucidation of the
pharmacokinetics ofbenzene and its metabolites may also
provide very useful markers of exposure through simple
tests using urine. For example, urinary phenol has long
been used as a marker of benzene exposure, its major
drawback being the presence of other sources of phenol
in the environment, which makes the test not very
specific at relatively low levels of benzene exposure.
However, other metabolites of benzene, although pres-
ent in urine in lower amounts than phenol, may be more
specific, as there may not be other environmental
sources.
The ideal marker, of course, would be somehthing like
carboxyhemoglobin (COHb). COHb provides an integra-
tor of previous exposure over a known period of time, as
well as being an end point on the pathway by which car-
bon monoxide produces its adverse effect.
5
6 B. D. GOLDSTEIN
Toxic Torts
Benzene will get increasing attention in the public eye
as a leukemogenic agent because of the activities of the
legal profession. The field of toxic torts is one of the ma-
jor growth industries in America. Approximately 1 out
or every 200 Americans die of leukemia. My guess is that
one can find a history of significant benzene exposure,
whether causally related or not, in at least one out of ev-
ery five deaths, which translates into about 2000 cases a
year. As the legal profession becomes more and more ef-
ficient, and as advances in analytical chemistry find ben-
zene in more and more ambient sources, one can expect
that a greater percentage of this number of potentially
benzene-related cases will come to litigation every year,
particularly as a recent jury award in one case was
$108,000,000 (since vacated on appeal). Of all cancers,
leukemia is particularly evocative and dreadful to a jury.
This tends to increase the likelihood of awards and there-
fore the likelihood of litigation.
On the other hand, as in all toxic tort situations, the
strict "reasonable medical probability" approach (i.e.,
more likely than not) in essence allows the polluter to in-
crease risk to society by 99% without being held account-
able for any of the resultant cases of leukemia. This is also
clearly inappropriate public policy. The assistance of the
scientifi'c community is greatly needed if we are to be able
to deal reasonably as a society with the situation of toxic
torts. Advances in such areas as biomarkers and in ex-
posure assessment will greatly assist in the awarding of
claims when they are justified and the prevention of spu-
rious claims which do so much to tie up our legal system
and increase costs to all.
Summary and Conclusions
Benzene presents one of the most intriguing challenges
in our' attempts to prevent disease by developing effec-
tive regulatory approaches firmly based upon science.
The major lesson to be learned from the intense ex-
perience in the past few years is that it is only through
research aimed at providing a basic understanding of ben-
zene toxicology can we meet this challenge.
I thank mY colleagues through the yeairs for their hell) in formulat-
inig these approaches, particularly Gisela Witz, Cairr-oll Sny(ler, Robelrt
Sniv(ler, and Robitn Willsoi). Seecreta-rial sup)port was expertly provi(le(l
by Cecile Stapleton. Research Nas plerforme(l undiel NIH grant
ES02558.
REFERENCES
1. Ironis, R. D. Quinionies as toxic metabolites of benzene. J. Toxicol.
Environ. Health 16: 673-676 (1985).
2. Eastmoiond, D. A., Smith, M. T., and( Irlonis, R. D. An inter-action
of benizenie metabolites reproduces the myelotoxicity observed with
beoizenie exl)osure. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 91: 85-95 (1987).
3-. Forni, A. M., Cappellini, A., Pacifico, E., and Vigliani, E. C. Chro-
mosome chacnges acnd( their evolutionl in subjects with l)ast exp)osure
to beozenie. Ar-ch. Environi. Health 23: 385-391 (1971).
4. Latriano, L., Gol(isteini, B. D., an(l Witz, G. Formation of
muconaldehyde, ain open-ring metabolite of benzenie, in mouse livel
microsomes: An additional p)athway for toxic metabolites. Pr oc.
Natl. Acad(l. Sci. 83: 8356-8360 (1986).
O. Maltoni, C., Cotti, G., Valgimigli, L., acnd( Mond(riiole, A. Zvmbal
gland(i carceinomas in Iratts following exposure to benizelne by inha-
lation. Am. J. Ind(t. Med. 3: 11-16 (1982).
6. NTP Technicial Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis
Stu(dies of Benizene (CAS No. 71-43-2) NF344/N Rats andl B6C3F1,
Mice (Gavage Stu(dies). National Toxicology Prog- am, NTP TF 289,
U.S. Department of Heatlth andl Human Services, 1984.
7. Goldstein, B. D. Hematotoxicity in humans. In: Benzene Toxicity:
A Critical Evaluation (S. Laskin and B. D. Goldstein, Eds.), J. Tox-
icol. Environ. Health, Supplement 2, 1977, pp. 69-105.
8. Andrews, L. S., Lee, E. W., witmei, C. M., Koesis, J. J., andl
Snydler, R. Effects of toluenie on the metabolism, dlisposition an(l
hemopoietic toxicity of [3Hlbenzene. Biochem. Pharlmacnol. 26:
293-300 (1977).
9. Sato, A., and Nakajima, T. Dose-dependent metabolic interaction
between benizenie andl toluenie in vivo an(l in vitro. Toxicol. AppI.
Pharmacol. 48: 249-25(6 (1979).
10. Aksov, M., Erdem, S., Erdogan, G., and(l Dinieol, G. Combination
of genietic factors and(i chronic eexposure to benizenie in the aetiol-
ogy of leukaemia. Hum. Hered. 26: 149-153 (1976).
11. Gol(dsteiin, B. D. Risk assessment and(l risk management of benizenie
bv the environmental p)rotection agency. In: Banbury Report 19:
Risk Quanititationi andl Regulatory Policy, Col(d Spring Harbor Lab-
oratory, Col(d Spring Harbor, NY, 1985, pp. 293-304.
