Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 94, pp. 261-263, 1991
Meeting Report
Identification of Sentinel Health Events As
Indicators of Environmental Contamination *
by Charles J. Rothwell,t Charles B. Hamilton,' and
Paul E. Leaverton§
The consensus process was applied to addressing a public health topic; this was a novel endeavor. The following ques-
tion was addressed: What role, ifany, should sentinel health events play in the decision-making process for identifying
the effects ofenvironmental exposure? The panel developed three levels ofsentind health events lists: thosethatare clearly
identifiable, those that are potential signs, and those that are indicatorsofbody burdens. Additionally, thepanel developed
several salient statements regardig the principles ofenvnmental health suvilance and, especialy, reommendations
for future research.
Introduction
During October 30-November 1, 1989, a panel ofindividuals
skilled in avariety ofenvironmental health fields met in Asheville,
North Carolina. Each ofthe panelists has a professional interest
in preventing the adverse human health effects that result from
environmental contamination. The objective ofthis meeting was
to examine critically the use of sentinel health events as an ap-
proach for improving the capability for public health response.
This conference was designed as a sequel to the 10th Biraud-
MacJannet Seminar in Veyrier-du-Lac, France (May 4-6, 1988),
which revealed among other things the inadequacies of tradi-
tional health reporting systems.
The Panel was asked to address fourquestions andbelieves that
this paper is generally responsive to those questions. The ques-
tions were:
a) What role, ifany, should sentinel health events (SHEs) play
in the decision-making process for identifying the effects ofen-
vironmental exposure? Response: A well-defined of environ-
mentally related SHEs should providedecision-makers with a set
ofhuman health indices. These events could signal the need to
initiate actions to prevent health impairment from related en-
vironmental exposures.
b) What criteria should be used in identifying such events?
Response: Criteria are spelled out in "Methods."
c) How should the occurrence of sentinel health events be
brought to the attention ofthe public health system? Specifically,
*See Appendix for other panel members.
tData Processing and Services, National Center for Health Statistics, 3700
East-West Highway, Rockville, MD 20782.
$Department of Health, Leisure and Safety, University of Tennessee, 1914
Andy Holt Avenue, Knoxville, TN 37996-2700.
'Department ofEpidemiology and Biostatistics, University ofSouth Florida,
13301 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, Tampa, FL 33612-3899.
Address reprint requests to T. Aldrich, Cancer Surveillance Section, P.O. Box
27687, Raleigh, NC 27611-7687.
how should these events be listed? How should these events be
reported? Response: A response directly to how events should be
listed is given in "Conclusions." For how to report events, the
Panel recommends thata follow-upconference beheldto address
the specific use ofthe SHEs proposed in this paper. The Panel
further recommends that these conclusions be brought to the
attention ofindustrial managers, public health agency staffand
directors, affected or potentially affected citizens, advocacy
groups, political leaders, professional societies, and educators.
d) Whatdirection should future research take to improve cur-
rent knowledge in this area? Response: Research is needed to im-
prove our ability to define specific preclinical illnesses, early
biological effects, and exposure doses. Specific biomarkers that
identify exposure dose and early effects would greatly advance
the field, as would an ability to discriminate between degrees of
host susceptibility, perhaps by means ofgenetic markers. Finally,
demonstration projects could help define the effectiveness of
various types ofaction for specific SHEs.
Methods
In 3 days ofdeliberations, the Panel addressed the following
issues: a) the role ofsentinel health events or someothermeasure
ofexposure or health outcome thatwould improve the decision-
making process for identifyingthehumanhealth effects thatmay
result from environmental contamination, and b) how such a list
of events or measures can be collected and used by the public
health community.
The Panel accepted a definition ofa sentinel health event: a
preventable disease, disability, or untimely death whose occur-
rence serves as a warning signal. The occurrence ofan SHE is
to be considered an indication that an environmentally induced
health effect may have occurred and implies that some action
should be considered. That action may consist of further in-
vestigationoranalysis, orit may involve a reduction orcessation
ROTHWELL ETAL.
ofexposures, depending on the circumstances.
The Panel derived its formulation of sentinel health events
from concepts articulated by Rutstein et al. (1). That work,
however, focused exclusively on occupational exposures and on
individual cases with specific and preventable etiologies. In
adapting these concepts to general environmental settings, the
Panel emphasized nonoccupational exposures and extended the
idea ofsingle-case sentinel health events to include certain pat-
terns ofhealth effects and chemical body burdens withinpopula-
tions that may suggest environmental origins.
The Panel decideda) notto include occupationally related sen-
tinel health events that are reported elsewhere; b) notto consider
indices of contamination of the ambient environment as such.
This exclusion applies to effects found in animals, fish, and
vegetation; c) to provide a list ofevents or measures that is not
exhaustive but may be suggestive ofcriteria that can be used to
select such measures; d) to include events or possible reactions
regardless ofwhether data systems arecurrently available to col-
lect such information; and e) notto address the roleofsmoking,
drinking, drug use, or radiation, either alone or as factors that
aggravate the effects of environmental exposures. These con-
siderations were considered to bebeyond the scopeofthe Panel's
deliberations.
The Panel was concerned with the extent to which environ-
mental contamination may cause adverse health effects in
humans. Answering this question is greatly complicated by a)
our present ability to define potential exposure precisely or to
measure doses accurately; b) the long and variable latency
periods for effects associated with most environmental expo-
sures; c) the relative rarity ofmost environmentally related dis-
eases; d) the nonspecificity of most potential outcomes. Only
rarely can one attribute delayed health events to a particular ex-
posure strictly on the basis ofclinical features; e) the possibility
that multiple factors may interact;f) and inadequate health data
systems.
In the face of these uncertainties an urgent need exists for
systematic guidance by which an association between en-
vironmental exposures and health outcomes can be evaluated.
This guidancecan be served by surveillance ofSHEs withtheob-
jectiveofavoiding unnecessary disease, disability, andpremature
death consequent to environmental exposures. Ideally, SHEs
would be specific for particular environmental exposures; occur
shortly afterexposure; identified through simple, inexpensive,
and well-standardized methods; identified through existing
health surveillance mechanisms such as vital records, hospital
discharge data, disease registeries; and capable of leading to
preventive action.
The first category ofindicators identified by the Pafiel refers
to individual events that may occur in only one person but may
also affect many exposed individuals. The latter categories reflect
events that may affect whole populations.
Conclusions
Category I. ClearlyIdentifiable, Environmentally
Caused SHEs
The Panel considered a widerangeofpotential SHEs, noneof
which fittheentire setofideal criteria forthiscategory (specifici-
ty, short latency, ease of identification). Examples that most
closely fit the criteria are described below and include several
acute environmental exposures and two cancers.
Poisoning (pesticides, toxic gases, heavy metals, solvents,
chemicalspills). Poisonings produce short latency effects from
high-dose exposures, but some have long-term effects. In com-
munity settings, they may signal wider exposures that require
public health action. They are identifiable through medical
record sources (hospitals, emergency rooms, poison control
centers, physician notifications).
Methemoglobinemia. Methemoglobinemia is subacute or
chroniccondition, usually manifest in infants, resulting fromex-
cessive nitrate levels in drinking water. Public health identifica-
tion requires access to medical records in hospitals or through
physicians.
Mesothelioma. Mesothelioma is a rare form ofcancerofthe
lining membranes of the thoracic or abdominal cavity and is
largely specific for asbestos exposure, independent ofcigarette
smoking, and sometimes arises in settings ofnonoccupational
exposure wherethedegreeofexposure may notbeextensive. The
tumor can be identified through existing tumor registries and
medical records, although not very reliably through death cer-
tificates. Latency usually exceeds 20 years.
Hepatic angiosarcoma. Hepatic angiosarcoma is a rare liver
cancer in humans that is attributable to a considerable degree to
vinyl chloride monomer exposure. No cases of angiosarcoma
have yetbeen attributed unequivocally to nonoccupational, en-
vironmental contamination with vinyl chloride. However, any
case of angiosarcoma should alert public health officials and
health careproviders to apossible environmental source, which
may include arsenic and thorium in addition to vinyl chloride.
Angiosarcoma can be identified with some reliability in tumor
registries and through medical record systems but not in vital
records. Latency is long (10-30 years).
The Panel also discussed SHEs in a broader environmental
context. This extended beyond chemical contaminants and en-
compassed physical environmental stresses such as noise and ex-
treme weatherconditions, as well as certain infectious diseases,
commonly food or waterborne. Although such considerations
werebeyondthe specific focus ofthePanel, the continuing need
forpublic health departments to address environmental concerns
over a wide spectrum ofetiologies should be recognized.
Category II. Potential Signs ofPopulation
Exposure to Environmental Contaminants
Theadverse healthevents listed below arenotnecessarily attri-
butable to environmental contamination because they occur at
somebackground rate or level in thegeneral populationamong
persons with little exposure to environmental pollutants. How-
ever, whenthese events occur inapopulationatahigherratethan
expected, theexcess should serve as a warning signthatenviron-
mentalexposuresmayaccountforsomeoftheexcess. Toserveas
warning signs, therefore, the rates oftheseevents mustbe com-
paredinbothexposedandnonexposedgroupsorinapopulation
beforeandaftertheintroductionofanenvironmentalcontaminant.
Theoccurrenceofoneoftheseevents in an individual is notan
SHE. Butan excess frequency ofone oftheseevents in apopula-
tion may be auseful indicatorofundueexposure to environmen-
tal contamination.
262
SENTINEL HEALTHEVENTS
Theseeventsmaybedividedintothreegroupsbasedontheac-
cessibilityofthedata(Table 1). ResponsesidentifiedinlistsBand
CofTable 1 includepreclinicalindicatorsofadversehealtheffects,
andas such, maybeamongthemostsensitiveandearlyresponses
toenvironmental contamination. Theymaybeparticularly useful
in studies thatcomparebaselineor pre-exposure, conditions with
postexposure changes, and in studies that seek to determine
whethersubtleeffectshavebeeninducedinapopulationbythein-
troductionofanewsourceofenvironmentalcontamination, such
as a hazardous waste treatment facility. They require special
surveysbecausesuchdataarenotroutinelyobtainedinclinicalset-
tings. Itmustberememberedthatmeasurementsofbiologic func-
tion require standardized methods.
Category Ill. Indicators ofBody Burdens
Potentially Due to Environmental Exposures
The Panel identified several conditions for which measure-
ments demonstrate thatenvironmental exposures haveoccurred,
whether or notthese could lead to explicit illnesses. In general,
these conditions imply some biochemical handicap and have
been designated by the term "body burden." These will not
Table 1. Potentialsigns ofpopulation exposure to
environmental contaminants.
Disease Source'
A. Diseases identifiable through existing health reporting systems
Low birth weight Vital statistics
Birth defects Vital statistics, hospital
discharges, birth defect
registries
Spontaneous abortions Hospital discharges
Chronic respiratory disease in children Hospital discharges
Active leukemia in children Cancer registries, vital
statistics, hospital discharges
Acute granulocytic leukemia in adults Cancer registries, vital
statistics, hospital discharges
Aplastic anemia Hospital discharges, vital
statistics
Asthma in children Hospital discharges
Dermatitis and dermatoses Hospital discharges
Skin cancer Cancer registries, hospital
discharges
Malignant melanoma Cancer registries, hospital
discharges, vital statistics
Lung cancer in nonsmokers Cancer registries
Bladder cancer in nonsmokers Cancer registries
Primary liver cancer in nondrinkers Cancer registries
B. Diseases/defectsnotusuallyidentifiablethroughexistinghealthreportingsystems
Acute sensory irritation (eye, respiratory, olfactory)
Developmental defects
Hearing loss in children
Chromosome defects
C. Deviation from normal biological functions requiring special surveys to detect
Neurological function
Immunological function
Renal function
Cardiac function
Hematologic function
Respiratory function
Reproductive function
Liver function
Auditory function
aExpected sources for information about the diseases; sources may not exist
in all communities and may not contain desired information.
Table 2. Indicators ofbody burdens potentially due to
environmental exposures.
Blood lead (ZPT)a
Heavy metals in blood, urine, hair, nails
Carboxyhemoglobin b
Organophosphates (cholinesterase)
PCBs and PBBs (polychlorinated and polybrominated biphenyls)
Other pesticides
Adductsc
aZPT, zinc protoporphyrin, an easily measured metabolite involved with the
structural materials of hemoglobin. Lead impairs the use of ZPT and hence
elevated ZPT in screening tests indicates a likelihood ofa lead body burden.
bCholinesterase is an enzyme that is specifically blocked by organophosphate
pesticides, and a decrease in cholinesterase may reflect a relatively recent ex-
posure to such pesticides.
cAdducts are combinations of pollutants with one or more molecules in the
body, such as DNA or hemoglobin, which tend to persist and can be detected at
very low concentrations.
usually be available from ordinary health data sources but will
require special surveys directed at specific hypotheses (Table 2).
An example might be a person with a blood lead level of 25
ztg/1OO g, whenunexposed persons have 12 ztg/1OO g. The expos-
ed person is said to have a body burden of lead. This third
category is used to reflectthe occurrence ofan environmental ex-
posure and the absorption ofa detectable dose by an individual.
A single occurrence could serve as an SHE.
Development of this statement was supported by conference grant R13/
ATR401154-01 fromthe Agency forToxic Substancesand Disease Registry tothe
NorthCarolinaDepartmentof Environment, Health, and Natural Resources. The
viewsexpressed inthisstatementaresolelythoseofthePanelanddonotnecessarnly
reflect the viewsofthepanelists' professional affiliations orthoseofATSDR.
Appreciation is expressed to the following persons: program contributors: John
Callahan, Richard Ehrenberg, William Horn, Robert Meyer, and Thomas Ro-
koske; for candidate SHE lists: Paul Garbe and John Stockwell; for program
discussion and document review: Tom Atkeson, Delton Atkinson, Vladimir
Dvorak, Clay Easterly, and James Tenny.
Appendix
Other Panel Members
JEANNE BURG
Agency forToxic Substances and
Disease Registry
Atlanta, GA
JOHN DUNBAR
Ambulatory Sentinel Practice
Network ofNorth America;
Medical University of South
Carolina
Charleston, SC
JACK GRIFFITH
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency
Research Triangle Park, NC
ROBERT GUSTAFSON
Pembroke State University
Pembroke, NC
JOHN GOLDSMITH
Ben-Gurion University ofthe
Negev
Beer Sheva, Israel
CLARK HEATH
American Cancer Society
Atlanta, GA
DARLENE MESERVY
University ofUtah
Salt Lake City, UT
CARL SHY
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC
KATHRYN SURLES
Department ofEnvironment, Health
and Natural Resources
Raleigh, NC
MARTHA WALSTON
Department ofJustice
Raleigh, NC
REFERENCE
1. Rutstein, D. D., Mullan, R. J., Frazier, T. M., Halperin, W. E., Melius, J.
M., and Sestito, J. P. Sentinel health events (occupational): a basis for physi-
cian recognition and public health surveillance. Am. J. Public Health 73:
1054-1062 (1983).
263
