Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 82, pp. 43-49, 1989
Differences in the Pathways for Metabolism
of Benzene in Rats and Mice Simulated by a
Physiological Model
by Michele A. Medinsky,* Patrick J. Sabourin,* Rogene F.
Henderson,* George Lucier,t and Linda S. Birnbaumt
Studies conducted by the National Toxicology Program on the chronic toxicity ofbenzene indicated that
B6C3F1 mice were more sensitive to the carcinogenic effects ofbenzene than were F344 rats. A physiologi-
cal model was developed to describe the uptake and metabolism of benzene in rats and mice. Our objective
was to determine if differences in toxic effects could be explained by differences in pathways for benzene
metabolism or by differences in total uptake ofbenzene. Compartments incorporated into the model included
liver, fat, a poorly perfused tissue group, a richly perfused tissue group, an alveofar or lung compartment
and blood. Metabolism ofbenzene was assumed to take place only in the liver and to proceed by four major
competing pathways. These included formation ofhydroquinone conjugates (HQC), formation ofphenyl con-
jugates (PHC), ring-breakage and formation ofmuconic acid (MUC), and conjugation with glutathione with
subsequent mercapturic acid (PMA) formation. Values for parameters such as alveolar ventilation, cardiac
output, organ volumes, blood flow, partition coefficients, and metabolic rate constants were taken from the
literature.
Model simulations confirmed that during and after 6-hr inhalation exposures mice metabolized more benzene
on a mmole per kilogram body weight basis than did rats. After oral exposure, rats metabolized more ben-
zene than mice at doses above 50 mg/kg because ofthe more rapid absorption and exhalation ofbenzene by
mice. Model simulations for PHC and PMA, generally considered to be detoxification metabolites, were similar
in shape and dose-response to those for total metabolism. However, simulations for the metabolites represen-
tative ofthe putative toxication pathways, HQC and MUC, indicated that after both oral and inhalation ex-
posures mice would produce more of these metabolites than rats at all concentrations. This was due to the
greater rates of metabolism to these metabolites for mice compared to rats. Increased metabolism of ben-
zene through the HQC and MUC pathways in mice is consistent with the observed susceptibility ofthis spe-
cies to benzene toxicity.
Introduction
Benzene is an important and widely used industrial sol-
vent (1). Epidemiology studies have shown an increase of
leukemias and aplastic anemia in workers exposed to ben-
zene (2). To estimate the potential carcinogenic effects of
benzene, the National Toxicology Program (NTP) orally
exposed F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice to benzene in corn
oil for 2 years (3). Mice were identified in these studies
as the more sensitive species. An increased incidence of
*Inhalation Toxicology Research Institute, Lovelace Biomedical and
Environmental Research Institute, P.O. Box 5890, Albuquerque, NM
87185.
tNational Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, P.O. Box
12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709.
Address reprint requests to M. A. Medinsky, Inhalation Toxicology
Research Institute, Lovelace Biomedical and Environmental Research
Institute, P.O. Box 5890, Albuquerque, NM 87185.
lymphomas, lung tumors, and glandular tumors was
noted.
It is generally recognized that metabolism of benzene
is necessary for the expression of toxicity. What is not
known, however, is the ultimate toxic metabolite or com-
bination of metabolites. Figure 1 is a simplified scheme
for the metabolism ofbenzene. The metabolites outlined
in the scheme were based on the work of Sabourin et al.
(4-6) and Bechtold et al. (7) who studied the metabolism
ofbenzene in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice after oral or in-
halation exposure. Included in this scheme are two puta-
tive toxic metabolites, benzoquinone and muconaldehyde.
The pathways for the formation of these reactive metabo-
lites suggest that levels ofthe stable metabolites, hydro-
quinone conjugates and muconic acid, could be used as
markers for the formation of benzoquinone and
muconaldehyde. For example, a species with a high ca-
pacity for formation ofhydroquinone conjugates might be
MEDINSKY ET AL.
assumed to produce more benzoquinone compared to a
species with a low capacity for formation ofhydroquinone
conjugates. The two other pathways in Figure 1 repre-
sent pathways leading to formation of two important
groups of detoxification metabolites, the phenyl and mer-
capturic acid conjugates.
Toxicokinetic models can be used to offer insights into
the mechanisms that produce toxic effects and to explain
the differences noted in the toxic effects between species.
Models can also be used for extrapolation. Typical ex-
trapolations include those from animal studies to human
exposures, from a single to continuous exposure, and
from high to low concentrations.
The objectives of our study were to develop a physio-
logical model to simulate the metabolism of benzene af-
ter oral or inhalation exposure and to compare results of
model simulations conducted for rats and mice. We
wanted to determine if differences in toxic effects seen
in rats and mice could be explained by differences in path-
ways for metabolism or by differences in total metabo-
lism.
Benzene Physiological Model
Structure
The physiological model constructed to describe the
metabolism ofbenzene, the differential equations driving
the model, and experimental data used to derive model
parameters have been described elsewhere (8,9). This
model is an adaption ofthat proposed by Ramsey and An-
derson (10). A diagram of the model is presented in Fig-
ure 2 and the parameters incorporated into the model to
describe disposition ofbenzene by rats and mice are pre-
sented in Table 1. As indicated in Table 1, the physiolog-
ical parameters such as cardiac output, alveolar ventila-
tion, blood flow to organs, organ volumes, body weight,
and the chemical parameters such as blood/air and tis-
BENZENE
MUCONIC ACID
Vmax
B3ENZOOUINONE BENZENE
L.. .BENZOQUINONE; OXIDE Vmax, muc
[f ~ ~~~r \\r--Km,mucHYDOQNl \ | MUCONALDEHYDE
HYDROOUINOL PHENOL:l max, pma
~~ ~ L.~~..
-l Km, pma
Vmax,hqc Vmax. phc
Km, hqc Km, phc
HYDROQUINN E JMOJPHENYL PHENYL
CONJUGATES CONJUGATES MRACTUIDS
FIGURE 1. Scheme for metabolism of benzene. Biochemical rate con-
stants are outlined in Table 1. This scheme for metabolism of ben-
zene takes place in the liver compartment described in Fig. 2. (C])
Represent metabolites of benzene that were measured and used in
model simulations; (LI) represent intermediate metabolites that were
not incorporated into the model.
FIGURE 2. Physiological model of benzene metabolism. Metabolism of
benzene was presumed to take place in the liver compartment. Path-
ways for benzene metabolism incorporated into the model are shown
in Fig. 1.
sue/blood partition coefficients for benzene were taken
from the literature. Values for gastrointestinal-liver
transport and the metabolic rate constants were adjusted
until results from model simulations compared favorably
to data determined by Sabourin et al. (5,9). Methods for
these determinations have been described previously (8).
In this model benzene can be inhaled or ingested. In-
haled benzene will be absorbed into the blood in propor-
tion to the benzene blood/air partition coefficient pre-
sented in Table 1. Once in the blood, benzene will be
transported to other organs in proportion to blood flow
to that organ (or group of tissues) and the benzene tis-
sue/blood partition coefficient. Ingested benzene is as-
sumed to be translocated from the gastrointestinal tract
to the liver by a first order process.
Tissue compartments included in the model were a)
liver, the only organ where metabolism ofbenzene takes
place; b) group ofpoorly perfused tissues including mus-
cle and skin, c) a group of richly perfused tissues includ-
ing bone marrow, kidney, and intestines; and d) a fat com-
partment. The poorly perfused tissues are important
because of the large body mass they represent, the
rapidly perfused tissues because of the large blood flow
to these tissues, and the fat compartment because of its
large partition coefficient. Large tissue mass, high blood
flow, and increased solubility will each result in signifi-
cant amounts of benzene being distributed to that com-
partment. However, the kinetics of distribution will be
different for each compartment.
Any benzene that does not partition into any of the
above compartments will return to the lungs through the
venous circulation. Depending on the alveolar concentra-
tion of benzene, benzene in the venous blood can parti-
tion into the alveolar space and be exhaled. During a
prolonged inhalation exposure, an equilibrium can be es-
tablished between the alveolar concentration and venous
concentrations ofbenzene. However, there are situations
in which there will be a net efflux of benzene from the
blood into the alveolar space, such as after an oral ex-
posure or after the end ofan inhalation exposure. This is
because the concentration of benzene in the alveolar
44
BENZENE PHYSIOLOGICAL MODEL
Table 1. Parameters used in the physiological simulation model for benzene metabolism in F344 rats and B6C3F, mice.
Value
Parameter Rats Mice
Physiological
Aveolar ventilation, L/hr kga 32.4 55.3
Cardiac output, L/hr -
kgb 19.4 34.8
Gastrointestinal transfer, fraction/hr 0.25 3.0
Body weight, kg 0.288 0.030
Blood flow (fraction of cardiac output)b
To liver 0.25 0.25
To fat 0.09 0.09
To poorly perfused tissuesc 0.15 0.15
To richly perfused tissuesd 0.51 0.51
Organ volumes (fraction of body weight)'
Blood 0.056 0.056
Liver 0.03 0.03
Fat 0.11 0.11
Poorly perfused tissues 0.74 0.74
Richly perfused tissues 0.06 0.06
Chemical
Molecular weight, g/mole 78.2 78.2
Partition coefficientsf
Liver/blood 1.0 1.0
Fat/blood 28.0 28.0
Poorly perfused tissues/blood 0.6 0.6
Richly perfused/blood 1.0 1.0
Blood/air 18.0 18.0
Biochemical parametersg
Vmax,, mole/hr* kg 122 200
Kin, Jmole/L 40 1.0
Vmax, phc, jimole/hr kg 174 333
Ki, phc, Amole/L 5 3.0
Vmax pmc, ,Amole/hr * kg 104 90
Ki, pmc, umole/L 15 4.0
V.ax, hqc, Hmole/hg * kg 1.7 27
Ki, hqc, Mmole/L 0.5 0.1
Vmax, mucI jAmole/hr kg 3.5 12
Km, muc,Mmole/L 0.5 0.1
aExperimentally determined (9).
bData from Ramsey and Andersen (10).
cIncludes muscle, skin and bone.
dIncludes kidneys, brain, heart, spleen, intestines, bone marrow, etc.
'Data from Dutcher et al. (11) and Birnbaum et al. (12).
'Data from Thomas (13).
gRefer to Fig. 1
space will be lower than the concentration of benzene in
the blood for both oral and inhalation exposure.
In the model, metabolism ofbenzene occurs only in the
liver. Michaelis-Menten kinetics are used to model the
formation of the benzene metabolites outlined in Figure
1. Both the total amount ofbenzene metabolized and the
total amounts of the individual metabolites formed are
tracked in this model. Initially benzene is metabolized to
benzene oxide, which is further metabolized by one of
four pathways. The first metabolite is formed by rear-
rangement of the benzene oxide to phenol followed by
conjugation of phenol to phenyl sulfate or phenyl
glucuronide. Thus, for the purposes ofmodel simulations,
the total amounts of phenyl sulfate and phenyl
glucuronide were combined and expressed as total phenyl
conjugates. A second pathway for benzene oxide metab-
olism consisted of reaction with glutathione and subse-
quent modification of the mercapturic acids. This path-
way was represented by combining the total amounts of
prephenyl mercapturic acid and phenyl mercapturic acid.
The third pathway for benzene metabolism involved rear-
rangement of benzene oxide to phenol, oxidation to
hydroquinone, and conjugation to hydroquinone
glucuronide or sulfate. For this pathway total amounts
of hydroquinone glucuronide and hydroquinone sulfate
formed were combined. The fourth pathway was metab-
olism of benzene oxide to muconic acid presumably
through a muconaldehyde intermediate. Although ben-
zene could be metabolized to other metabolites such as
catechol or trihydroxybenzene, only very low levels of
these metabolites were found in animal studies (4-6) and
thus pathways for formation of these metabolites were
not included in our model.
Benzene Physiological Model
Simulations
Using the parameters in Table 1 and the model struc-
ture described in Figure 2 (8), we conducted simulations
of uptake ofbenzene by rats and mice over a range oforal
45
MEDINSKY ET AL.
or inhalation exposures. The total amount of benzene
metabolized as well as the formation ofindividual metabo-
lites was simulated over a 48-hr period. Results ofmodel
simulations for total benzene metabolized after exposure
of rats and mice to a range of concentrations are pre-
sented in Figure 3. The oral simulations represent metab-
olism ofbenzene following a single bolus gavage with var-
ious doses of benzene. The inhalation exposures
represent metabolism ofbenzene during and after a sin-
gle 6-hr inhalation exposure. To facilitate comparisons be-
tween rats and mice, model simulations were expressed
as Mmole benzene metabolized per kilogram body weight.
Thus, all comparisons described are in terms of relative
amounts.
Simulations demonstrated that for mice, formation of
more benzene metabolites could be achieved by inhala-
tion exposure over a 6-hr period as compared to oral ex-
posures. For rats, similar amounts of benzene were
metabolized after inhalation exposure or oral administra-
tion. It is apparent that for any given inhaled benzene
concentration, mice will metabolize more benzene as com-
pared to rats (Fig. 3). Total metabolism ofbenzene in rats
and mice is similar for oral exposures up to 50 mg ben-
zene/kg. Above that, rats metabolize more benzene than
do mice.
Similar pictures are presented for the phenyl con-
jugates as indicated in Figure 4 and the phenyl mercap-
turic acids in Figure 5. Model simulations indicated that
mice produce more of these metabolites after inhalation
exposure compared to rats on a per kilogram body weight
basis. Except for very low oral doses, rats produce more
ofthese metabolites as compared to mice when expressed
on a per kilogram body weight basis.
In looking at the hydroquinone conjugates (Fig. 6) and
muconic acid (Fig. 7), markers for toxic metabolites, the
simulations are very different than those seen for the
detoxification metabolites or for total metabolism. In the
case ofthe hydroquinone metabolites, mice produced far
greater amounts ofthese metabolites after all inhalation
or oral exposures compared to rats. For example,
1 0OOr
800-
a
w
I
z
E
QL
600-
400-
200-
IRATI
MICE-O, AT1RAT-0
.s
.MICE-I
LA'Rnn1 ...
1 I-IJ 10
1 boo
1300
250
200 .J
0
150 o
cm
100 E
50
0uuu
ELmoIes METABOLITES/kg
FIGURE 3. Total metabolism of benzene in rats and mice compared af-
ter oral administration (0) or a single 6-hr inhalation exposure (1).
Lines represent results of model simulations for rats and mice.
a
-I
.4
z
E
1300
200 j .
01
0I
Jw
4m
-.o0%%
100
.Lmoles PHENYLGLUC AND PHENYL SO4 /kg
FIGURE 4. Phenyl conjugates excreted by rats and mice compared af-
ter oral administration (0) or a single 6-hr inhalation exposure (1).
Lines represent results of model simulations for rats and mice.
1000 ' 300
800 / 7
t;L , < ; / MicelJ
0 /002003200
-J m
1 000 , ' /00
z
_~~-RtlN
EL400- E
800 /|Rt0
Mice- Rat-. - Mice-I 1
0 0 / - 10
0 0
0 100 200 300
Mmoles MERCAPTURIC ACIDS/kg
FIGURE 5. Phenyl mercapturic acids excreted by rats and mice com-
pared after oral administration (0) or a single 6-hr inhalation exposure
(1). Lines represent results of model simulations for rats and mice.
1000 I 300
Rat-II
800 JRat-0
a ~~~~~~~~/Mice-0 Mice-I
Lu 200
I ccI / ~~~~~~~~0
oL400
I /
0 100 200 300
/imoles HO GLUC and HO SO04/kg
FIGURE 6. Hydroquinone conjugates excreted by rats and mice com-
pared after oral administration (0) or a single 6-hr inhalation exposure
(I). Lines represent results of model simulations for rats and mice.
46
u ;uu I uuu
BENZENE PHYSIOLOGICAL MODEL
a /
/ -210
I
~~~~~~0
E~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~CL
-~~//100
E
01. ~~~~~~~~~~0
0 40 80 120 140
pLmoles METABOLITES/kg
FIGURE 7. Muconic acid excreted by rats and mice compared after oral
administration (0) or a single 6-hr inhalation exposure (1). Lines
represent results of model simulations for rats and mice.
amounts of hydroquinone conjugates produced by rats at
300 mg/kg oral exposures were similar to levels produced
by mice after only 12 mg/kg exposure. Since hydroqui-
none is considered to be a marker for benzoquinone, one
ofthe putative toxic metabolites, these model simulations
are consistent with the observed differences in toxicity
between rats and mice orally exposed to benzene.
Larger amounts ofmuconic acid, a marker for the puta-
tive toxic metabolite muconaldehyde, were'also seen in
mice after oral or inhalation exposure compared to rats.
After oral administration these results are not as dra-
matic as those seen for hydroquinone. Considering that
after oral exposure rats metabolize more total benzene
compared to mice when expressed on a *mole per kilo-
gram body weight basis, the larger amounts of muconic
acid for mice indicated that a greater portion ofbenzene
metabolism is through the muconic acid pathway in mice.
Discussion and Extrapolation
The major results of model simulations were that me-
tabolism to hydroquine conjugates and muconic acid rep-
resent significant metabolic pathways in mice. In con-
trast, rats metabolize benzene primarily to the phenyl
conjugates and the phenyl mercapturic acids. This
differential metabolism of benzene by rats and mice is
consistent with the increased susceptibility to the toxic
effects ofbenzene exhibited by mice compared to rats as
noted in chronic oral toxicity studies conducted by the
National Toxicology Program (3). Increased formation of
hydroquinone conjugates and muconic acid may be an in-
dication that increased concentrations of either benzo-
quinone, unconjugated hydroquinone, muconaldehyde, or
a combination ofthese metabolites are present in the tar-
get tissues of mice compared to rats.
Currently, the model structure presented here does not
enable us to predict the concentration of these uncon-
jugated and reactive metabolites in tissues such as the
target cells of the bone marrow. We are simulating only
the formation ofthe end products ofbenzene metabolism,
the water soluble urinary metabolites. As such we have
assumed for purposes of simplification that metabolism
of benzene occurs only in the liver. This may or may not
be true. It is likely that the target organs such as bone
marrow are capable of metabolism ofbenzene, phenol, or
hydroquinone. Thus, distribution ofthese compounds to
tissues such as bone marrow is an important process to
consider in the formation of physiological models in the
future.
One ofthe most useful features ofa physiological model
is insight into the factors that are critical in the uptake
and metabolism ofa chemical. For example, the rate con-
stants for metabolism of benzene by rats and mice are
very different. As indicated in Table 1, the maximum
rates for metabolism of benzene oxide to the hydroquin-
one conjugates and muconic acid are higher for mice com-
pared to rats. These higher maximum rates result in for-
mation of more of these metabolites.
The rate constants for benzene metabolism in Table 1
can be divided into two groups. The first group includes
metabolites with a small apparent K., hydroquinone, and
muconic acid. The second group includes metabolites with
a large apparent Ki, the phenyl conjugates, and mercap-
turic acids. Km is defined in Michaelis-Menten kinetics as
the concentration ofthe substrate at which the reaction
velocity is half-maximal. In addition, the detoxification
metabolites have larger Vmax than do the toxification
metabolites. This suggests that metabolism to hydroquin-
one and muconic acid are low-capacity, high-affinity path-
ways while metabolism to phenyl conjugates and mercap-
turic acids follows a higher capacity, lower affinity
enzyme system.
The implication of the relationshlip between these
parameters can be seen in Figures 8A and 8B. These
figures compare total metabolism and the formation ofin-
dividual metabolites by mice as a function of 6-hr inhala-
tion exposure to various concentrations ofbenzene. Above
approximately 75 ppm the phenyl conjugates are the pre-
dominant metabolites produced. Equal amounts of the
hydroquinone conjugates and the mercapturic acids are
formed. Muconic acid is produced in the smallest quan-
tity. However, for concentrations below 200 ppm, the ef-
fect of the differences in the Km values of the pathways
is apparent (Figure 8B). At concentrations below approx-
imately 35 ppm, the hydroquinone conjugates are
produced in the highest quantity. Above that concentra-
tion the production ofthe phenyl conjugates exceeds that
ofthe hydroquinone conjugates, which increases in a non-
linear manner. Similarly, at concentrations below approx-
imately 75 ppm, muconic acid is produced in greater
amounts than the mercapturic acids. Above 75 ppm, for-
mation of mercapturic acids exceeds that ofmuconic acid.
Figure 8B suggests that the proportion of total metab-
olism due to individual metabolites at high concentrations
(e.g., above 200 ppm) is not predictive of metabolism at
lower concentrations. Since the putative toxic metabo-
lites are preferentially produced at low concentrations,
this means that linear extrapolation ofmetabolite profiles
from high concentrations to low concentrations will un-
derestimate the contribution of the putative toxic
metabolites to total metabolism. Iftoxicity is proportional
to the flux of benzene through the putative toxication
47
MEDINSKY ET AL.
a
wN
0
4
I-w
E
2000 A
1500 -
/~~~~~~~--nY spn Co4.20
1 000
/Mercapturic Acids
/1 / /Hydroquinone Conjugates
1:1- Muconic Acid
0 SI I I I I I I I Inl
%^ % -_ -__
u 200 400 600 l
INHALED CONCENTRATION (ppm)
CM
0
wN
0
m4
I-
wEU
4)
0
E
800 1000
3
z>
U a
NO
z CO
m (P
*a'
_3 W
E
N
- w
0
m
4
I-
uJ
1000r
A
50mg/kg
800 _
Ka
Rrnn L
40
20
0 0.5
0 /
0 3 6 9 12
HOURS AFTER GAVAGE
50 100 150
INHALED CONCENTRATION (ppm)
FIGURE 8. Comparison ofbenzene metabolites produced by mice after
inhalation of benzene for 6 hr. Lines indicate model simulations for
total metabolism or individual groups for concentrations up to 1000
ppm benzene (A) or 200 ppm benzene (B).
pathways ofmuconaldehyde and benzoquinone formation,
and if there is no threshold in the concentration of
metabolites required to elicit a toxic response, then lin-
ear extrapolation of toxic effects obtained at high doses
may underestimate the risk at low exposures.
The physiological model can also be used to gain in-
sights into differences in the uptake of a chemical as
related to different exposure routes. For example, after
oral exposure rats metabolize more benzene than do mice,
yet after inhalation exposure mice metabolize more ben-
zene at all exposure concentrations (Fig. 1). In both cases
the identical Vmax and Km for overall metabolism ofben-
zene are used for inhalation or oral exposure, although
different metabolic parameters are used for rats and
mice. In the model simulations, the differences in uptake
between rats and mice were due to the differences in the
gastrointestinal translocation rate constants for these
species (Table 1). This is demonstrated in Figure 9A in
which the total metabolism of benzene by mice is simu-
lated following oral exposure to 50 mg benzene/kg. In
these simulations, the gastrointestinal-liver translocation
rate constant was varied from 4 hr-' to 0.5 hr-'. The simu-
lations demonstrate that decreasing the rate constant for
gastrointestinal transport ofbenzene increased the total
time over which benzene was transported to the liver.
This slower delivery ofthe same total amount ofbenzene
ultimately results in more benzene being metabolized.
Any benzene that is not metabolized will be exhaled (9).
a0
-
X 3-
XZ
i O
Lu
N >-
z o
cocm m
-J
0
B
Ka
4
0.5
HOURS AFTER GAVAGE
FIGURE 9. Effect of variations in the gastrointestinal transfer rate con-
stant (Ka) on cumulative total metabolism (A) ofbenzene by mice af-
ter oral exposure to 50 mg benzene/kg body weight or on the exha-
lation of unmetabolized benzene (B).
Figure 9B demonstrates the effect of alterations in the
gastrointestinal translocation rate constant on the
amount of benzene exhaled. As the rate constant in-
creased, the total amount ofbenzene exhaled increased.
Thus, benzene that is not metabolized by the liver can
partition into the blood. As this blood passes through the
lungs the benzene will be exhaled proportional to the
blood/air partition coefficient. Model simulations are con-
sistent with the observations of Sabourin et al. (9) who
demonstrated that with increasing oral exposure an in-
creasing fraction ofthe benzene was exhaled unmetabo-
lized.
In contrast, the uptake or metabolism ofbenzene after
inhalation exposure is the result of the differences in Vm.
and Km between species (Fig. 10). Although the rate of
alveolar ventilation of mice is approximately twice that
ofrats, suggesting that the mice will inhale more benzene
than will rats; they will also exhale more benzene. Metab-
olism of benzene is related to the concentrations in the
arterial blood going to the liver. For any given air con-
48
vv
BENZENE PHYSIOLOGICAL MODEL 49
2000
300 ppm - 6hr.
a
N
1600 -
o 8%esm/Mouse Ventilation
0 a
abo ism/Rat Ventilation
LU
z
800 taboism/Mouse Ventilation
zite tJI==- /Rat Ventilation
0
E
0 3 6 9 12
HOURS AFTER START OF EXPOSURE
FIGURE 10. Effect of alveolar ventilation on metabolism of benzene.
Lines are results of model simulations of cumulative total metabo-
lism during and after a 6-hr exposure to 300 ppm benzene. Parameters
used in the simulations are indicated in Table 1.
centration, the concentration of benzene in the blood is
directly related to the blood:air partition coefficient,
which is identical for rats and mice. Thus, as demon-
strated in Figure 10, simulation of an inhalation exposure
with rat ventilation parameters and mouse nietabolic rate
constants results in a total amount of benzene metabo-
lized that is similar to results with both mouse ventila-
tion and metabolism parameters. Simulations with mouse
ventilation-rat metabolism and rat ventilation-rat metab-
olism produce comparable results.
In summary, a physiological model has been used to de-
scribe the uptake and metabolism of benzene. Model
simulations as well as the experimental data of other in-
vestigators (4-7,9) indicate that metabolism of benzene
in mice favors the pathways leading to the putative toxic
metabolites, benzoquinone and muconaldehyde, whereas
metabolism ofbenzene in rats is primarily through detox-
ification pathways. These predictions are consistent with
the observed increased sensitivity ofmice to the toxic ef-
fects of benzene compared to rats.
Research was conducted under U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
Contract DE-AC04-76EV01013 through an Interagency Agreement
(222-ES-20092) with the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences. The facilities used for this research were fully accredited by
the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.
The authors acknowledge the excellent technical assistance ofGretchen
Wells and the helpful suggestions ofa number of our colleagues at the
LITRI and the NIEHS.
REFERENCES
1. Kalf, G. F. Recent advances in the metabolism and toxicity ofben-
zene. CRC Crit. Rev. in Toxicol. 18: 141-159 (1987).
2. Aksoy, M., and Erdem, S. Follow-up study on the development of
leukemia in 44 pancytopenic patients with chronic exposure to ben-
zene. Blood 52: 285-292 (1978).
3. Huff, J. E. Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Benzene (CAS
No. 71-43-2) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fj Mice (Gavage Studies).
Technical Report No. 289. National Tbxicology Program, DHHS,
Research Triangle Park, NC, 1986.
4. Sabourin, P. J., Bechtold, W. E., and Henderson, R. F. A high pres-
sure liquid chromatographic method for the separation and quan-
titation ofwater-soluble radiolabeled benzene metabolites. Anal.
Biochem. 170: 316-327 (1988).
5. Sabourin, P. J., Bechtold, W. E., Griffith, W. C., Birnbaum, L. S.,
Lucier, G., and Henderson, R. F. Effect ofexposure concentration,
exposure rate, and route ofadministration on metabolism ofben-
zene by F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.,
submitted.
6. Sabourin, P. J., Bechtold, W. E., Birnbaum, L. S., Lucier, G., and
Henderson, R. F. Diffeience in the metabolism of inhaled 3H-
benzene by F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol. Appl. Phar-
macol. 94: 128-140 (1988).
7. Bechtold, W. E., Sabourin, P. J., and Henderson, R. F. A reverse
isotope dilution method for determining benzene and metabolites
in tissues. J. Anal. Toxicol. 12: 176-179 (1988).
8. Medinsky, M. A., Sabourin, P. J., Lucier, G., Birnbaum, L. S., and
Henderson, R. F. A physiological model for simulation ofbenzene
metabolism by rats and mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., sub-
mitted.
9. Sabourin, P. J., Chen, B. T., Lucier, G., Birnbaum, L. S., Fisher, E.,
and Henderson, R. F. Effect ofdose on the absorption and excre-
tion of '4C-benzene administered orally or by inhalation in rats and
mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 87: 325-336 (1987).
10. Ramsey, J. C., and Anderson, M. E. A physiologically based
description ofthe inhalation pharmacokinetics of styrene monomer
in rats and humans. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 73: 159-175 (1984).
11. Dutcher, J. S., Medinsky, M. A., Bond, J. A., Cheng, Y. S., Snipes,
M. B., Henderson, R. F., and Birnbaum, L. S. Effect ofvapor con-
centration on the disposition of inhaled 2,3-dichloropropene in
Fischer-344 rats. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 5: 997-1005 (1985).
12. Birnbaum, L. S., Decad, G. M., and Matthews, H. B. Disposition
and excretion of 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran in the rat. Tox-
icol. Appl. Pharmacol. 55: 342-352 (1980).
13. Thomas, R. D. Drinking Water and Health, Vol. 6. National
Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1986.
