Measurement of Volatile Organic
Compounds in Human Blood
David L. Ashley, Michael A. Bonin, Frederick L. Cardinali,
Joan M. McCraw, and Joe V. Wooten
National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are an important public health problem throughout the
developed world. Many important questions remain to be addressed in assessing exposure to
these compounds. Because they are ubiquitous and highly volatile, special techniques must be
applied in the analytical determination of VOCs. The analytical methodology chosen to measure
toxicants in biological materials must be well validated and carefully carried out; poor quality
assurance can lead to invalid results that can have a direct bearing on treating exposed persons.
The pharmacokinetics of VOCs show that most of the internal dose of these compounds is
quickly eliminated, but there is a fraction that is only slowly removed, and these compounds may
bioaccumulate. VOCs are found in the general population at the high parts-per-trillion range, but
some people with much higher levels have apparently been exposed to VOC sources away from
the workplace. Smoking is the most significant confounder to internal dose levels of VOCs and
must be considered when evaluating suspected cases of exposure. Environ Health Perspect
104(Suppl 5):871-877 (1996)
Key words: volatile organic compounds, blood, methods, pharmacokinetics, reference range,
smoking
Introduction
The field of risk assessment is becoming
better defined as researchers continue to
investigate the sources of exposure to toxic
chemicals and their health effects. Risk
assessment includes four components: haz-
ard identification (determining which haz-
ards are present), dose-response assessment
(determining how biological systems
respond to contaminants), exposure assess-
ment (determining the extent of exposure),
and risk characterization (determining
whether this exposure constitutes a threat
to the health of exposed populations) (1).
Trace analytical techniques are essential in
assessing exposure, internal dose (the level
of a particular agent within the body), and
This paper was presented at the Conference on Air
Toxics: Biomarkers in Environmental Applications
held 27-28 April 1995 in Houston, Texas. Manuscript
received 29 May 1996; manuscript accepted 5 June
1996.
Send correspondence to Dr. D.L. Ashley, Mailstop
F17, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
4770 Buford Highway NE, Atlanta, GA 30341-3724.
Telephone: (770) 488-7962. Fax: (770) 488-4609.
E-mail: dlal@cehehil.em.cdc.gov
Abbreviations used: VOCs, volatile organic com-
pounds; NIOSH, National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health; NHANES l1l, Third National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey; amu, atomic mass
unit.
biologically effective dose (the level of an
active agent at the sight of action). Internal
dose measurements of toxicants, their
metabolites, or protein and DNA adducts
provide an assessment of exposure that can
be related to resulting health outcomes and
thus provide important information upon
which risk assessment is based.
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
are a class of chemicals that are commonly
encountered by people as they go about
their daily routines. Exposure to chloro-
form and other chlorinated hydrocarbons
occurs when people shower or bathe with
chlorinated water (2). Air levels of many
VOCs are increased when air fresheners or
other consumer products are used (3).
Smoking causes an increase in blood ben-
zene and toluene levels (4). Trihalometh-
ane levels in blood are increased in
swimmers and bath attendants swimming
or working in indoor swimming pools (5).
Tetrachloroethene is found in the blood of
workers in dry-cleaning establishments and
in the blood of the people living directly
above these businesses (6). Commuters are
exposed to methyl-tert-butyl ether when
this compound is used as a gasoline oxy-
genate (7). Thus, people can be exposed to
VOCs through avenues other than what
are usually considered traditional sources of
exposure (occupation, water pollution,
ambient air pollution, industrial accidents).
Exposure to VOCs is associated with a
wide variety of symptoms, but most of the
acute health effects associated with these
substances are the result of occupational
exposure, controlled laboratory experi-
ments on animals and people, or substance
abuse and not of low-level exposure. The
symptoms of VOC exposure range from
slight respiratory irritation to death. For
example, upper respiratory irritation has
occurred in workers exposed to styrene (8).
Liver damage has been manifested as toxic
jaundice among factory workers exposed to
chloroform (9), and cases of carbon tetra-
chloride hepatotoxicity have been reported
in humans (10). Central nervous system
depression has been associated with expo-
sure to carbon tetrachloride (11), methylene
chloride (12), tetrachloroethene (13), and
toluene (14). National agencies, including
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, and international agencies
such as the World Health Organization
and the International Agency for Research
on Cancer have declared benzene to be a
human carcinogen. Kidney damage has
resulted from exposure to carbon tetrachlo-
ride (15). VOCs have been reported as the
likely cause of death in cases of intentional
inhalation of 1,1,1-trichloroethane (16)
and exposure to carbon tetrachloride (15).
Because of these documented health effects
and others, there is ample reason for concern
about the toxicity of VOCs in spite of the
lack of understanding about morbidity and
mortality resulting from low-level exposure.
Method Considerations
Measuring low levels of VOCs in human
biological media accurately and reproducibly
presents a complex analytical problem that
requires special techniques and exceptional
care. Volatile organic compounds by defi-
nition are highly evaporative, and analytes
can easily be lost while samples or stan-
dards are being manipulated. Loss of
analytes from the unknown samples is of
particular concern, since there are no ana-
lytical checks that will indicate this loss,
and inaccurate results can lead to normal
blood levels being reported when the inter-
nal dose is actually elevated. On the other
hand, because many VOCs are commonly
found in various consumer products and are
popular laboratory solvents, it is reasonable
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol I Ox, Supplement x * Month Year
-----I
871
ASHLEY ET AL.
that contamination might occur during
sample collection or analysis. Such conta-
mination would have the opposite effect of
volatility by causing normal blood levels of
VOCs to be measured as elevated. Blood is
a highly complex matrix with numerous
compounds present that are separated
along with VOCs when purge-and-trap or
headspace sampling is used. These addi-
tional compounds can interfere with the
analytical response of the VOCs of interest
and prevent accurate characterization. A
proper quality-assurance program considers
all aspects of the analysis process from
sample collection to data reporting and
minimizes and/or characterizes all possible
sources of error in measurement. A com-
plete discussion of each of these aspects is
beyond the scope of this review, but some
of the more common sources of error in
VOC measurement and ways of reducing
or eliminating their effects can be described.
Sample collection can be a major source
of error in measurements of VOCs in
blood. A VOC sample collection system
should only use materials that have been
proven to not introduce VOCs into blood
samples and should not allow the blood
samples to be exposed to the atmosphere.
Because isopropyl alcohol or other cleaning
materials can be introduced into the collec-
tion needle when a vein is punctured, these
substances should not be used, or their
volatile components should be removed
before a sample is collected. Samples have
been collected into either commercial
vacutainers or glass syringes. Brugnone
et al. (17) and Angerer et al. (18) have col-
lected blood into glass syringes and then
introduced this sample into glass tubes
containing EDTA. This procedure allows
for careful cleaning of the sample collec-
tion materials to remove contamination,
but it does necessitate the use of an addi-
tional sample manipulation step. Gill et al.
(19) have shown that significant VOC loss
can occur with sample handling, and thus
sample manipulation steps should be mini-
mized. DeLeon and Antoine (20) collected
blood into unprocessed commercial vacu-
tainers, but the baseline VOC levels they
reported for 198 specimens showed a pat-
tern of blood VOC concentrations that
was similar to the later reported pattern of
contamination from the vacutainers them-
selves (21). Ashley et al. (22) collected
blood samples in commercial vacutainers
that had been processed to remove VOC
contaminants. This method simplifies the
sample collection step while preventing
contamination. Ashley et al. collected
blood into vacutainers containing sodium
fluoride and potassium oxalate. These
chemicals were previously described as
important in VOC measurement because
they inhibit esterase activity (23).
Figure 1 shows the levels of bromo-
form, m-/p-xylene, and 1,4-dichloroben-
zene found in blood collected in processed
and unprocessed vacutainers along with
detection limits and the typical blood levels
in subjects with no known occupational
exposure. The measurements of these three
compounds are varyingly affected by vacu-
tainer decontamination. Bromoform is
found in the normal population at concen-
trations less than the detection limit of
20 ppt, and processed vacutainers do not
add significant contamination. Bromoform
levels in blood samples collected in unpro-
cessed vacutainers, however, are signifi-
cantly higher and increase as samples are
stored for up to 1 week. Blood levels of
m-/p-xylene are typically higher than the
analytical detection limit and greater than
background vacutainer levels determined
by measuring the concentration of blank
water added to processed vacutainers (less
than the detection limit). As with bromo-
form, processed vacutainers do not con-
tribute any measurable contamination of
m-/p-xylene, and unprocessed vacutainers
contribute a substantial contamination that
increases upon storage. The mean blood
level of 1,4-dichlorobenzene is well above
the detection limit of 13 ppt and the back-
ground vacutainer level, but the concentra-
tions of this compound in samples taken
in processed vacutainers are the same as
concentrations in samples in unprocessed
vacutainers. This indicates that, under
normal conditions, vacutainers do not
contribute significantly to the blood levels
of 1,4-dichlorobenzene, as unprocessed
vacutainers do to the blood levels of bro-
moform and m-/p-xylene. These results
demonstrate that for some VOCs, decon-
taminating the sample collection materials
is critical if blood concentrations are to be
determined accurately.
Angerer et al. (18) suggested that samples
can be frozen at liquid nitrogen tempera-
tures, but in most cases, samples have been
stored at 40C (17,22,24). Freezing the sam-
ples will lyse the red blood cells and may
change the equilibrium within the matrix.
Wang et al. (25) stated that samples can be
successfully stored at 40C for up to 40 days,
and Ashley et al. (26) confirmed this by
demonstrating that whole blood samples
can be stored at 40C in decontaminated
vacutainers for at least 50 days.
1000 - E Detection limit
M Typical blood
C. * Processed
. 800 - M Unprocessed -1 day ---e-----------------------
.° * Unprocessed - 6 days
=
0
-o-0
0
Bromoform m-/p-Xylene 1,4-Dichlorobenzene
Figure 1. Detection limits, typical blood levels, and
measured blood levels of bromoform, m-/p-xylene, and
1,4-dichlorobenzene collected in processed and
unprocessed vacutainers. Separate results are given
for blood collected in unprocessed vacutainers and
stored for either 1 or 6 days.
Both headspace analysis and purge-and-
trap techniques have been used to remove
the volatile constituents from blood. In
contrast to headspace analysis, the purge-
and-trap method is a dynamic process that
is capable of removing a higher percentage
of the VOCs into the gas stream, where
they are available for later analysis. The use
of an antifoam agent is critical in purge-
and-trap analysis of VOCs, and the
antifoam must be present at a level high
enough to prevent blood from foaming.
Cailleux et al. (27), however, described the
contamination that resulted from their use
of antifoam, and Michael et al. (28) sug-
gested that the contamination resulting
from the use of antifoaming agents makes
purge-and-trap analysis of blood VOCs
impractical. Erickson et al. (29) helped
solve this problem by showing that by
heating antifoam agents under vacuum, the
volatile contaminants could be removed,
enabling the subsequent incorporation of
purge-and-trap techniques into blood
VOC analysis (22).
The choice of analytical instrumenta-
tion is based on three variables: sensitivity,
selectivity, and cost. Depending on the
particular application, these variables carry
different weights in the decision-making
process. For recent measurements ofVOCs
in blood from subjects with low-level expo-
sure, three analytical instruments have
been used. All of these instruments include
the use of gas chromatography for analyte
separation, but they use different detection
systems. These detection systems are, in
order of increasing cost per sample, flame
ionization detection (18), low-resolution
mass spectrometry (4,24), and magnetic-
sector mass spectrometry (22). These
systems have detection limits typically in
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996872
MEASUREMENT OF VOCs IN BLOOD
the low parts-per-trillion range that are
necessary to measure blood levels resulting
from low-level exposure, but they differ in
analyte selectivity. As shown by Angerer et
al. (18), many volatile compounds are pre-
sent in blood. Most of these are not of
interest in a particular application, but they
can interfere with the analytes that are of
interest. In some cases, gas chromatogra-
phy temperature control can remove these
interferences, but when a large number of
VOCs are being measured, these interfer-
ences can be prohibitive. Low-resolution
mass spectrometry improves this problem
significantly because choosing a particular
mass of interest can remove most interfer-
ences. For some analytes, interferences are
still present, and either a nonoptimal mass
must be chosen for quantitation or a
higher-resolution mass spectrometric
detection method must be used (30). The
differences between these techniques are
shown in Figure 2, which includes the
retention time region in which chloroform
is found at scan 606. Figure 2A is a total
ion chromatogram trace (no mass discrimi-
nation) and shows that the complexity of
the trace prevents the quantitation of this
analyte. In Figure 2B, a nominal mass win-
dow is applied, which eliminates some of
the complexity, but chloroform is still a
shoulder on another interfering peak.
Figure 2C shows a medium-resolution
(3000 resolving power) mass window
applied to these same data. The improve-
ment in selectivity due to higher resolution
is shown by complete separation from
interfering peaks. Thus, when using purge-
and-trap methods and gas chromatogra-
phy, researchers can accurately quantitate
chloroform in blood only with accurate-
mass mass spectrometry. Using medium-
resolution mass spectrometry as a detector
for gas chromatography has enabled
researchers to simultaneously measure 32
VOCs at the low parts-per-trillion level in
10 ml ofhuman blood (22).
Pharmacokinetics
Exposure is not a static process. When an
individual contacts a contaminant, his or
her internal dose levels change with time
depending on many physical, chemical, and
metabolic processes. Pharmacokinetics is the
field of investigation that describes these
processes, and studies in this field can range
from the simple measuring of a contami-
nant's half-life in the body to complex mod-
eling of concentration changes in multiple
organ systems during uptake and elimina-
tion. Understanding the pharmacokinetics
A
4,
a,
0J
a)
co
0~
C.,
a,
B
624
C
606
580 590 600 610 620 630 SCAN
Figure 2. Gas chromatographic traces of blood examined by using purge-and-trap isolation and mass spectromet-
ric detection with varying mass windows: (A) total ion chromatogram (no mass differentiation); (B) nominal mass
(1 amu); and (C) accurate mass (0.03 amu).
ofVOCs is critical in relating internal dose
levels to exposure and in understanding the
dynamics of distributed dose that can lead
to health effects. Studies of the pharmaco-
kinetics ofVOCs have been carried out for
many years, and even though these processes
are far from completely understood, some
parts of the processes have been described
by investigators.
For example, the rate that VOCs enter
and leave the body through the lungs is a
function of the partitioning of the individ-
ual compounds between lipid and aqueous
sites in the body. The compounds with a
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996 873
ASHLEY ET AL.
greater lipid solubility will deposit in fat
and be eliminated more slowly than those
compounds that are lipophobic. Vapor
pressure can also influence the pharmaco-
kinetics of these compounds because the
lungs are an important route of elimina-
tion. Researchers evaluating the kinetics of
internal dose levels of VOCs have found
that uptake and elimination follow similar
patterns. Astrand (31) has shown that dur-
ing the exposure phase, blood levels of
VOCs increase rapidly and then level off.
Monster et al. (32) found this same effect
during the elimination phase of tetra-
chloroethene (half-life 12-55 hr), during
which the levels of tetrachloroethene
dropped rapidly at first and then much
more slowly. A similar result has been esti-
mated for tetrachloroethene levels in breath
(33). Brugnone et al. have determined
shorter half-lives of4.5 hr for toluene (34),
8 hr for benzene (35), and 3.9 hr for
styrene (36). These disparities in the half-
lives of VOCs may be a function of differ-
ent lipid/water partition coefficients for the
substances or ofvariations in exposure sce-
narios. Overall, the data consistently indi-
cate that the extent and length of exposure
will affect the elimination kinetics because
a longer, more intense or repeated exposure
will allow the compounds to more readily
deposit into adipose tissue.
The uptake and elimination of VOCs
from the body is controlled by a series of
dynamic mechanisms controlling the
movement of compounds through various
body stores and metabolizing these com-
pounds into more water-soluble entities.
The elimination phase ofVOCs after expo-
sure gives insight into the various body
stores from which VOCs are removed.
Investigators have shown that the VOC
elimination phase is a multiexponential
process. The results of some of these inves-
tigations are shown in Table 1, where the
results have been organized in an attempt
to reconcile the reported half-lives. It is
clear from these reports that at least two
exponentials with half-lives of 10 to 60
min and 2 to 4 hr are required to success-
fully describe the elimination of benzene
and toluene. Two other exponential com-
ponents have also been reported, one with
a very short half-life of 1.6 min and the
other with a very long half-life of 20 to
90 hr. Measuring these last two exponen-
tial components requires that the sample
collection be specifically designed to
observe them. Because of the extreme
requirements for measuring these exponen-
tial components, samples in some studies
Table 1. Half-lives of benzene and toluene internal dose with multiexponential regression fits.
First half-life Second half-life Third half-life Fourth half-life
Compound Exponentials (min) (min) (min) (hr) Reference
Benzene 2 156 24 (37)
Benzene 3 1.6 30 222 (38)
Benzene 3 55 192 19.7 (39)
Benzene (breath) 2 28 248 (40)
Toluene 3 9 120 90 (41)
Toluene (breath) 2 19 124 (40)
may not have been collected at the times
necessary to detect the shortest and longest
exponential components. It is also quite
conceivable that the shortest and longest
exponential components may result from
anomalies in the data.
Experimentally determining multi-
exponential elimination of VOCs after
short-term exposure has suggested that the
different exponential components derive
from different body stores (41,42). Quick
elimination from the blood, an intermedi-
ate half-life in muscle, and a much longer
half-life in adipose tissue have been sug-
gested as a means of explaining the various
exponential components. Thus, the lipid
solubility of the compound of interest and
the length of exposure time will be impor-
tant factors in the fraction of deposition
that occurs in the separate sites.
Accumulation of chemicals in the body
occurs whenever uptake exceeds elimina-
tion. The studies done to determine VOC
pharmacokinetics also suggest that with
repeat exposure of long enough duration,
bioaccumulation may occur. Some mea-
surements have been performed on workers
repeatedly exposed to VOCs over a matter
of weeks. Berlin et al. (37) exposed volun-
teers to low levels of benzene over 5 days
for 6 hr/day. These workers showed accu-
mulation during the exposure period and
continued to release benzene for more than
a week after the exposure ended. Brugnone
et al. (36) found bioaccumulation of
styrene in workers exposed repeatedly over
a week. Nise and Orbeck (43) found this
same result in workers who were repeatedly
exposed to toluene. Preshift levels of these
VOCs in workers increased during the
week they were exposed because their
internal dose levels had not returned to
baseline between exposures. Bioaccumu-
lation in VOC exposure is important
because most exposures to these com-
pounds occur repeatedly and are usually
not one-time events. Thus, although short-
term exposure experiments give insight
into the pharmacokinetics of VOCs, they
are of limited value in most exposure
scenarios. In repeat exposure cases, the
exponential component with the longest
half-life will have the greatest influence on
internal dose levels, and in many cases
bioaccumulation can occur. The extent of
bioaccumulation will depend on the level
of exposure, the length of time during
which exposure occurs, and the time
period between exposure events.
Reference Range
Studies have been performed to determine
the background blood concentrations of
VOCs in individuals with no known occu-
pational exposure. A summary of the
studies that have examined more than 50
subjects is given in Table 2. Significant
background levels of six nonchlorinated
aromatic hydrocarbons, two chlorinated
aliphatic compounds, and one chlorinated
aromatic compound have been found. The
levels are found generally in the parts-per-
trillion to low parts-per-billion range, with
styrene and ethylbenzene at the lowest lev-
els and 1,4-dichlorobenzene at the highest.
These compounds have common house-
hold applications, so it is not surprising
that measurable levels are found in people
without any known occupational exposure
to VOCs. Their presence in gasoline and
tobacco smoke and their use as deodoriz-
ing, degreasing, and dry-cleaning agents
present many opportunities for people to
be exposed to them.
Reference ranges for VOCs have been
determined by two research groups, one
located in Italy and the other in the United
States. For all analytes that have been eval-
uated by both groups, the levels reported in
the United States (44) are lower than the
levels reported in Italy (17,25,35,36). This
may result from differences in sample col-
lection procedures, analytical methodol-
ogy, or the exposure of the populations
examined. Samples from the United States
were collected into specially prepared vacu-
tainers with sodium fluoride and potassium
oxalate as the anticoagulant and then
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996874
MEASUREMENT OF VOCs IN BLOOD
Table 2. Background reference range levels of VOCs in blood from subjects with no known occupational exposure.a
Compound Subject group No. of subjects Mean level (ppt) Reference
1,1,1-Trichloroethane All 574 340 (44)
1,4-Dichlorobenzene All 1037 1900 (44)
Benzene Nonsmokers 293 200 (35)
Benzene Smokers 138 380 (35)
Benzene All 883 130 (44)
Ethylbenzene All 631 110 (44)
m-/p-Xylene All 649 370 (44)
o-Xylene All 711 140 (44)
Styrene All 81 220 (36)
Styrene All 657 74 (44)
Tetrachloroethene All 590 190 (36)
Toluene All 269 1100 (17)
Toluene Nonsmokers 179 810 (25)
Toluene Smokers 53 900 (25)
Toluene All 604 520 (44)
aStudies with more than 50 subjects.
stored at 40C. Samples from Italy were
collected into a heparinized syringe and
injected into a glass vial before being stored
at 5°C. Differences in background levels
may result from low-level contamination of
the anticoagulant or differences in the
methods of sample handling. The analyti-
cal methodology was similar for the two
methods used except that nominal-mass
mass spectrometry without isotope dilution
was used in studies done in Italy. Our
experiments suggest that there is no inter-
ference when nominal-mass mass spectro-
metry is used to measure benzene, toluene,
or styrene in human blood, but differences
in sample workup procedures may alter
this finding. The subjects of the study in
the United States were a subset of those
participating in the Third National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES III), an investigation of indi-
viduals across the United States. Although
the VOC measurements were not probabil-
ity-based to predict a larger population,
subjects came from urban and rural envi-
ronments, all races, both sexes, and all
regions of the country. The subjects in the
Italian studies were police officers, white-
collar workers, blue-collar workers, and
chemical workers (25,35) or hospital staff
and blood donors (36). Thus, these popu-
lations may have different background
exposures to VOCs.
The distribution of detectable 1,4-
dichlorobenzene levels in the blood of
NHANES III participants is shown in
Figure 3. Of the members of this popula-
tion, 96% had blood levels that were above
the detection limit of 73 ppt (ng/l), and
75% of those with detectable concentra-
tions had blood levels of 1000 ppt or less.
The remaining 25% had significantly
higher levels, up to as high as 50,000 ppt.
Thus, most people in the United States
have 1,4-dichlorobenzene blood levels less
than 1 ppb, although some with no known
occupational exposure have significantly
elevated blood levels. Some individuals
with elevated levels were found in the
NHANES III population for all of the
compounds listed in Table 2, confirming
the wide extent ofexposure to VOCs apart
from occupational sources.
Smoking
The blood levels of benzene and toluene
reported by Brugnone et al. (35) and
Wang et al. (25) are given in Table 2,
which lists separate blood levels for smok-
ers and nonsmokers. Studies by many
researchers of both blood and breath have
shown that internal dose levels of certain
VOCs are significantly different in smokers
than in nonsmokers. Levels of benzene and
toluene have also been determined in
breath by Wallace et al. (45) and in blood
by Ashley et al. (in preparation). These two
studies differ from the work by Brugnone
et al. (35) and Wang et al. (25) in that
they also report elevations in internal dose
levels of styrene, ethylbenzene, m-/pxylene,
and o-xylene in smokers and thus indicate
that smoking is an important source of
exposure to aromatic VOCs. Wallace et al.
(45) have even suggested that smoking is
the most significant source of exposure to
benzene. Passive exposure to tobacco smoke
has not yet been shown to have an effect on
blood VOC concentrations, but such an
effect may also be significant.
To accurately evaluate the environ-
mental effects on internal dose levels of
VOCs, one must account for smoking as a
confounding factor. In some cases, low-
level exposure to benzene, toluene, or
styrene might not be detected because the
effect ofsmoking may confound the analy-
sis designed to detect elevations in blood
levels. Therefore, steps must be taken to
either remove smokers from the subject
population or correct for the confounding
effect ofsmoking on VOC levels. Ashley et
al. (in preparation) have suggested using
2,5-dimethylfuran as a marker for smoking
and a method for adjusting the data col-
lected from smokers to eliminate the con-
tribution of smoking to blood VOC levels.
This technique has yet to be completely
assessed, but it shows that identifying a
volatile compound that is unique to a par-
ticular activity can be a useful technique in
separating the effect of environmental
exposure from the effect of exposure to
other known sources ofthat compound.
Conclusions
Investigators have recently performed
studies to understand the link between
exposure to VOCs and health effects.
Methods have been developed that can
accurately and precisely measure these com-
pounds in blood through the use of tech-
niques that are becoming more commonly
12 -
Median
10
+1 8-
a,
a) ~~~~~~~~~~~Mean
01
100 200 500 1000 2000 5000 10,000 20,000 50,000
Blood concentration, ppt
Figure 3. Frequency distribution (percent of total) of the concentration of 1,4-dichlorobenzene in blood. Subjects
are a subset of the population enrolled in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. The blood
concentrations are plotted using a log scale.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996 875
ASIILFY FT AL.
used throughout the analytical community.
Care must be exercised when using these
methods, because contamination and loss
of analyte are still significant concerns, but
these methods are feasible and have been
performed by various research groups. The
levels ofVOCs in the body change rapidly
upon exposure and following cessation of
exposure. Internal dose levels of most
VOCs decrease rapidly after exposure
ceases, with most having a half-life of a few
hours, but the actual decrease depends on
the exposure scenario. A fraction of a par-
ticular VOC may have a longer half-life
that can result in bioaccumulation with
repeated exposure. The pharmacokinetics
of VOCs in the body must be taken into
account when evaluating possible expo-
sures. Reference range studies indicate that
most VOCs occur in the parts-per-trillion
range in the blood ofpeople with no known
occupational exposure, but there are some
individuals with significant exposure even
among this group. The largest confounding
factor in evaluating exposure to VOCs is
whether a person smokes. Smoking can lead
to elevated levels of many aromatic VOCs
and can obscure the effects of environmen-
tal exposure to these compounds. The
effects of smoking on VOC levels must
always be taken into account whenever
exposure evaluations are performed.
REFERENCES
1. National Research Council. Human Exposure Assessment for
Airborne Pollutants. Advances and Opportunities.
Washington:National Academy Press, 1991.
2. Andelman JB, Meyers SM, Wilder LC. Volatilization of
organic chemicals from indoor uses of water. In: Chemicals in
the Environment (Lester JN, Perry R, Sterritt RM, eds).
London:Selper Ltd, 1986;323-330.
3. Bayer CW, Black MS, Galloway LM. Sampling and analysis
techniques for trace volatile organic emissions from consumer
products. J Chromatogr Sci 26:168-173 (1988).
4. Brugnone F, Perbellini L, Faccini GB, Pasini F, Maranelli G,
Romeo L, Gobbi M, Zedde A. Breath and blood levels of ben-
zene, toluene, cumene and styrene in non-occupational expo-
sure. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 61:303-311 (1989).
5. Cammann K, Hubner K. Trihalomethane concentrations in
swimmers' and bath attendants' blood and urine after swim-
ming or working in indoor swimming pools. Arch Environ
Health 50: 61-65 (1995).
6. Popp W, Muller G, Baltes-Schmitz B, Wehner B, Vahrenholz
C, Schmieding W, BenninghoffM, Norpoth K. Concentrations
oftetrachloroethene in blood and trichloroacetic acid in urine of
workers and neighbours of dry-cleaning shops. Int Arch Occup
Environ Health 63:393-395 (1992).
7. Moolenaar RL, Hefflin BJ, Ashley DL, Etzel RA. Methyl ter-
tiary butyl ether in human blood after exposure to oxygenated
fuels in Fairbanks, Alaska. Arch Environ Health 49:402-409
(1994).
8. NIOSH. Criteria for a Recommended Standard: Occupational
Exposure to Styrene. DHHS (NIOSH) Publ. No. 83-119.
Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, 1983.
9. Phoon WH, Goh KT, Lee LT, Tan KT, Kwok SE. Toxic jaun-
dice from occupational exposure to chloroform. Med J
Malaysia 30:31-34 (1983).
10. Straus B. Aplastic anemia following exposure to carbon tetra-
chloride. JAMA 155:737-739 (1954).
11. Cohen MM. Central nervous system in carbon tetrachloride
intoxication. Neurology 7:238-244 (1957).
12. Stewart RD, Fisher TN, Hoeko MJ, Peterson JE, Baretta ED,
Dodd HC. Experimental human exposure to methylene chlo-
ride. Arch Environ Health 25:342-348 (1972).
13. Rowe VK, McCollister DD, Spencer HC, Adams EM, Irish
DD. Vapor toxicity of tetrachloroethylene for laboratory ani-
mals an human subjects. Ind Hyg Occupat Med 5:566-579
(1952).
14. Devathasan G, Low D, Teoh PC, Wan SH, Wong PK.
Complications of chronic glue (toluene) abuse in adolescents.
Aust N Z J Med 14:39-43 (1984).
15. Norwood WD, Fuqua PA, Scudder BC. Carbon tetrachloride
poisoning. Ind Hyg Occupat Med 1:90-100 (1950).
16. Droz PO, Nicole C, Guberan E. Sniffing 1,1,1-trichloroethane:
Simulation oftwo fatal cases. In: Safe Use ofSolvents (Collings
AJ, Luxon SG, eds). New York:Academic, 1982;153-159.
17. Brugnone F, Gobbi M, Ayyad K, Giuliari C, Cerpelloni M,
Perbellini L. Blood toluene as a biological index ofenvironmen-
tal toluene exposure in the "normal" population and in occupa-
tionally exposed workers immediately after exposure and 16
hours later. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 6:421-425 (1995).
18. Angerer J, Scherer G, Schaller KH, Miller J. The determination
of 6enzene in human blood as an indicator of environmental
exposure to volatile aromatic compounds. Fres J Anal Chem
339:740-742 (1991).
19. Gill R, Hatchett SE, Osselton MD, Wilson HK, Ramsey JD.
Sample handling and storage for the quantitative analysis of
volatile compounds in blood: the determination of toluene by
headspace gas chromatography. J Anal Toxicol 12:141-146
(1988).
20. DeLeon IR, Antoine SR. Clinical screening test for toxic volatile
organic chemicals in blood. Clin Ecol 2:108-109 (1985).
21. Cardinali FL, McCraw JM, Ashley DL, Bonin MA, Wooten
JV. Treatment of vacutainers for use in the analysis of volatile
organic compounds in human blood at the low parts-per-tril-
lion level. J Chromatogr Sci 33:557-560 (1995).
22. Ashley DL, Bonin MA, Cardinali FL, McCraw JM, Holler JL,
Needham LL, Patterson DG. Determining volatile organic
compounds in human blood from a large sample population by
using purge and trap gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Anal Chem 64:1021-1029 (1992).
23. Ramsey JD, Flanagan RJ. Detection and identification of
volatile organic compounds in blood by headspace gas chro-
matography as an aid to the diagnosis of solvent abuse. J
Chromatogr 240:423-444 (1982).
24. Dunemann L, Hajimiragha H. Development of a screening
method for the determination ofvolatile organic compounds in
body fluids and environmental samples using purge and trap
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Anal Chim Acta
283:199-206 (1993).
25. Wang G, Maranelli G, Perbellini L, Guglielmi G, Brugnone F.
Reference values for blood toluene in the occupationally nonex-
posed general population. Int Arch Occup Environ Health
65:201-203 (1993).
26. Ashley DL, Bonin MA, Cardinali FL, McCraw JM, Wooten
JV, Needham LL. Important considerations in the ultra-trace
measurement of volatile organic compounds in blood. In:
Applications of Molecular Biology in Environmental
Chemistry (Minear RA, Ford AM, Needham LL, Karch NJ,
eds). New York:Lewis, 1995:135-146.
27. Cailleux A, Turcant A, Allain P, Toussaint D, Gaste J, Roux,
A. Gas chromatographic analysis of volatile compounds in
water and biologica samples with an automatic injector.
J Chromatogr 391:280-289 (1987).
28. Michael LC, Erickson MD, Parks SP, Pellizzari ED. Volatile
environmental pollutants in biological matrices with a headspace
purge technique. Anal Chem 52:1836-1841 (1980).
29. Erickson MD, Alsup MK, Hyldburg PA. Foam prevention in
purge and trap analysis. Anal Chem 53:1265-1269 (1981).
876 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996
MEASUREMENT OF VOCs IN BLOOD
30. Bonin MA, Ashley DL, Cardinali FL, McCraw JM, Patterson
DG Jr. Importance of enhanced mass resolution in removing
interferences when measuring volatile organic compounds in
human blood by using purge-and-trap/gas chromatography-
mass spectrometry. J Am Soc Mass Spectr 3:831-841 (1992).
31. Astrand I. Uptake of solvents in the blood and tissues of man.
A review. Scand J Work Environ Health 1: 199-218 (1975).
32. Monster AC, Boersma G, Steenweg H. Kinetics of tetra-
chloroethylene in volunteers: influence ofexposure concentration
and work load. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 42:303-309
(1979).
33. Wallace LA, Pellizzari ED, Hartwell TD, Sparacino C,
Whitmore R, Sheldon L, Zelon H, Perritt R. The TEAM Study:
personal exposures to toxic substances in air, drinking water, and
breath of 400 residents of New Jersey, North Carolina, and
North Dakota. Environ Res 43:290-307 (1987).
34. Brugnone F, De Rosa E, Perbellini L, Bartolucci GB. Toluene
concentrations in the blood and alveolar air ofworkers during the
workshift and the morning after. BrJ Ind Med 43:56-61 (1986).
35. Brugnone F, Perbellini L, Maranelli G, Romeo L, Guglielmi G,
Lombardini F. Reference values for blood benzene in the occu-
pationally unexposed general population. Int Arch Occup
Environ Health 64:179-184 (1992).
36. Brugnone F, Perbellini L, Wang GZ, Maranelli G, Raineri E, De
Rosa E, Saletti C, Soave C, Romeo L. Blood styrene concentra-
tions in a "normal" population and in exposed workers 16 hours
after the end of the workshift. Int Arch Occup Environ Health
65:125-130 (1993).
37. Berlin M, Gage JC, Gullberg B, Holm S, Knutson P, Tunek A.
Breath concentration as an index ofthe health risk from benzene.
Studies on the accumulation and clearance of inhaled benzene.
Scand J Work Environ Health 6:104-111 (1980).
38. Sato A, Nakajima T, Fujiware Y, Hirosawa, K. Pharmacokinetics
ofbenzene and toluene. Int Arch Arbeitsmed 33:169-182 (1974).
39. Pekari K, Vainiotalo S, Heikkila P, Palotie A, Luotamo M,
Riihmaki V. Biological monitoring of occupational exposure to
low levels of benzene. Scand J Work Environ Health
18:317-322 (1992).
40. Raymer JH, Pellizzari ED, Thomas KW, Cooper SD.
Elimination of volatile organic compounds in breath after
exposure to occupational and environmental microenviron-
ments. J Exp Anal Environ Epidemiol 1:439-451 (1991).
41. Nise G, Attewell R, Skerfving S, Orbek P. Elimination of
toluene from venous blood and adipose tissue after occupa-
tional exposure. BrJ Ind Med 46:407-411 (1989).
42. Wallace L, Pellizzari E, Gordon S. A linear model relating
breath concentrations to environmental exposures: applications
to a chamber study offour volunteers exposed to volatile organic
compounds. J Exp Anal Environ Epidemiol 3:75-102 (1993).
43. Nise G, Orbeck P. Toluene in venous blood during and after
work in rotogravure printing. Int Arch Occup Environ Health
60:31-35 (1988).
44. Ashley DL, Bonin MA, Cardinali FL, McCraw JM, Wooten
JV. Blood concentrations of volatile organic compounds in a
nonoccupationally exposed US population and in groups with
suspected exposure. Clin Chem 40:1401-1404 (1994).
45. Wallace L, Pellizari ED, Hartwell TD, Perritt R, Ziegenfus R.
Exposures to benzene and other volatile organic compounds
from active and passive smoking. Arch Environ Health
42:272-279 (1987).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 104, Supplement 5 * October 1996 877
