Criteria Air Pollutants and Toxic Air Pollutants
Helen H. Suh,1 Tina Bahadori,2 Jose Vallarino,1 and John D. Spengler1
1Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Environmental Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 2Electric Power Research Institute, Palo
Alto, California, USA
This review presents a brief overview of the health effects and exposures of two criteria
pollutants-ozone and particulate matter-and two toxic air pollutants-benzene and formaldehyde.
These pollutants were selected from the six criteria pollutants and from the 189 toxic air pollutants
on the basis of their prevalence in the United States, their physicochemical behavior, and the
magnitude of their potential health threat. The health effects data included in this review primarily
include results from epidemiologic studies; however, some findings from animal studies are also
discussed when no other information is available. Health effects findings for each pollutant are
related in this review to corresponding information about outdoor, indoor, and personal exposures
and pollutant sources. Key words: benzene, exposures, formaldehyde, health effects, ozone,
particulate matter, VOCs. - Environ Health Perspect 1 08(suppi 4):625-633 (2000).
http.//ehpnetl.niehs.nih.gov/docs/2000/suppl-4/625-633suh/abstract.html
Criteria and toxic air pollutants represent two
classes of air pollutants with diverse chemical
and physical properties. Criteria pollutants, as
designated under the Clean Air Act of 1971,
include pollutants that are ubiquitous in the
United States and are known or strongly sus-
pected to be harmful to public health and the
environment (1). Currently, six pollutants are
designated as criteria pollutants: particles with
aerodynamic diameters under 10 and 2.5 lpm,
ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, car-
bon monoxide, and lead. For each of these
pollutants, a primary health-based National
Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS)
under the Clean Air Act has been established,
which sets the "safe" amount ofthe pollutant
that can be present in the air (1).
One hundred eighty-nine other poten-
tially harmful air pollutants are designated as
toxic or hazardous air pollutants (HAPs)
under the Clean Air Act (Table 1). HAPs
include a diverse set of pollutants, including
those that have multiple sources and that are
prevalent in the environment, as well as other
less prevalent pollutants that can be intro-
duced by sudden accidental releases. HAPs
include metals, other particles, gases adsorbed
onto particles, and vapors from fuels and
other sources. About 70% of the pollutants
classified as hazardous air pollutants fall into
the category of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). These compounds are the principal
components in atmospheric reactions that
form ozone and other secondary pollutants.
Currently, industrial processes and fuel com-
bustion sources account for 47% and less
than 3% of the total VOC emissions, respec-
tively (2). The diversity in chemical species
and sources is reflected in the number of
adverse health effects that may result from
exposures to HAPs, including acute illnesses
such as nausea, chronic diseases such as
cancer, as well as a variety of immunologic,
neurologic, reproductive, developmental, and
respiratory disorders.
This article is a brief overview of the
health effects, properties, and exposures of a
subset of criteria and toxic air pollutants,
including ozone and particulate matter for
the criteria pollutants and benzene and
formaldehyde for the HAPs. This subset of
pollutants was selected on the basis of their
prevalence in the United States, their
physicochemical behavior, and the magnitude
of their potential health threat. Because of
space limitations, discussions of their adverse
health effects focus primarily on findings
from epidemiologic studies.
Criteria Air Pollutants
Ozone
Ground-level ozone, the primary constituent
of urban smog, is a secondary pollutant
formed in the atmosphere through photo-
chemical reactions involving nitrogen oxides
and VOCs. It was first designated as a criteria
pollutant under the Clean Air Act in 1971
(1). Its NAAQS was subsequently revised in
1979 and again most recently in 1997. In its
current form, the primary NAAQS sets an 8-
hr standard for ozone of 0.08 ppm (based on
a 3-year average of the annual fourth highest
daily maximum 8-hr ozone concentrations)
to replace (in a phased-in manner) the previ-
ous standard based on a 1-hr averaging time.
(Note that the NAAQS for ozone is currently
undergoing judicial review. As a result, both
the previous 1-hr ozone standard of 0.12
ppm and the new 8-hr standard are currently
in effect.)
The NAAQS for ozone was established
on the basis of its effects on the human res-
piratory system. Ozone is a known pul-
monary irritant affecting the respiratory
mucous membranes, other lung tissues, and
respiratory functions. It impairs the normal
mechanical function of the human lung, the
effects ofwhich manifest themselves through
symptoms such as chest tightness, cough,
wheezing, and lung function decrements (3).
Ozone-induced decrements in lung volume,
specifically forced vital capacity (FVC) and
forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEVI) are
primarily due to decreases in inspiratory
capacity. With less severe exposures, lung vol-
umes generally recover within 2-6 hr, with
normal baseline function typically reestab-
lished within 24 hr. Although small changes
in lung function (when unaccompanied by
discomfort symptoms or impairment of oxy-
gen uptake) may not interfere with normal
activity in healthy individuals, small changes
in lung function for people with pre-existing
disease could result in clinically significant
adverse effects. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) has deter-
mined that these effects may arise in sensitive
individuals, including children, the elderly,
asthmatics and other individuals with preex-
isting respiratory conditions, and result in an
approximately 10% decrease in pulmonary
function, a level deemed by the U.S. EPA to
be an adverse effect.
The adverse effects ofozone on the respi-
ratory system may also manifest themselves
as more serious clinical outcomes such as
hospital admissions, emergency room visits,
chronic illness, and possibly death.
Numerous epidemiologic studies, for exam-
ple, have shown ambient ozone concentra-
tions to be associated with increased hospital
admissions for pneumonia, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma,
and other respiratory ailments. These associa-
tions have generally been shown for ozone,
using multivariate models that included
other pollutants, such as particulate matter,
CO, and sulfur dioxide (SO2). Burnett et al.
(4), for example, compared air pollution data
to hospital admissions for 16 cities across
Canada for a 10-year period (1981-1991).
During the months when ozone levels are
high (April-December), the study found
This article is part of the monograph on Environmental
and Occupational Lung Diseases.
Address correspondence to H.H. Suh, Harvard
School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Ave., 1-1309,
Boston, MA 02115 USA. Telephone: (617) 432-0647.
Fax: (617) 432-4122. E-mail: hsuh@hsph.harvard.edu
Received 8 March 2000; accepted 26 June 2000.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000 625
SUH ETAL
Table 1. List of Clean Air Act-designated hazardous air pollutants (1).
Chemical name
Acetamide DDE Hexamethylphosphoramide Propionaldehyde
Acetonitrile Diazomethane Hexane Propoxur (Baygon)
Acetophenone Dibenzofurans Hydrazine Propylene dichloride
2-Acetylaminofluorene 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane Hydrochloric acid Propylene oxide
Acrolein Dibutylphthalate Hydrogen fluoride 1,2-Propylenimine
Acrylamide 1,4-Dichlorobenzene(p) Hydrogen sulfide Quinoline
Acrylic acid 3,3-Dichlorobenzidene Hydroquinone Quinone
Acrylonitrile Dichloroethyl ether Isophorone Styrene
Allyl chloride 1,3-Dichloropropene lindane (all isomers) Styrene oxide
4-Aminobiphenyl Dichlorvos Maleic anhydride 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-
Aniline Diethanolamine Methanol p-dioxin
o-Anisidine N,N-Diethyl aniline Methoxychlor 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
Asbestos Diethyl sulfate Methyl bromide Tetrachloroethylene
Benzene 3,3-Dimethoxybenzidine Methyl chloride Titanium tetrachloride
Benzidine Dimethyl aminoazobenzene Methyl chloroform Toluene
Benzotrichloride 3,3-Dimethyl benzidine Methyl ethyl ketone 2,4-Toluene diamine
Benzyl chloride Dimethyl carbamoyl chloride Methyl hydrazine 2,4-Toluene diisocyanate
Biphenyl Dimethyl formamide Methyl iodide o-Toluidine
Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate 1,1-Dimethyl hydrazine Methyl isobutyl ketone Toxaphene
Bis(chloromethyl)ether Dimethyl phthalate Methyl isocyanate 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
Bromoform Dimethyl sulfate Methyl methacrylate 1,1,2-Trichloroethane
1,3-Butadiene 4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol, and salts Methyl tert butyl ether Trichloroethylene
Calcium cyanamide 2,4-Dinitrophenol 4,4-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol
Caprolactam 2,4-Dinitrotoluene Methylene diphenyl diisocyanate 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
Captan 1,4-Dioxane 4,4'-Methylenedianiline Triethylamine
Carbaryl 1 ,2-Diphenylhydrazine Naphthalene Trifluralin
Carbon disulfide Epichlorohydrin Nitrobenzene 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
Carbon tetrachloride 1,2-Epoxybutane 4-Nitrobiphenyl Vinyl acetate
Carbonyl sulfide Ethyl acrylate 4-Nitrophenol Vinyl bromide
Catechol Ethyl benzene 2-Nitropropane Vinyl chloride
Chloramben Ethyl carbamate N-Nitroso-N-methylurea Vinylidene chloride
Chlordane Ethyl chloride N-Nitrosodimethylamine Xylenes (isomers, mixture)
Chlorine Ethylene dibromide N-Nitrosomorpholine o-Xylenes, m-Xylenes
Chloroacetic acid Ethylene dichloride Parathion p-Xylenes
2-Chloroacetophenone Ethylene glycol Pentachloronitrobenzene Antimony compounds
Chlorobenzene Ethylene imine Pentachlorophenol Arsenic compounds (inorganic)
Chlorobenzilate Ethylene oxide Phenol Beryllium compounds
Chloroform Ethylene thiourea p-Phenylenediamine Cadmium compounds
Chloromethyl methyl ether Ethylidene dichloride Phosgene Chromium compounds
Chloroprene Formaldehyde Phosphine Cobalt compounds
Cresols/Cresylic acid Heptachlor Phosphorus Coke oven emissions
o-Cresol, n-Cresol Hexachlorobenzene Phthalic anhydride Cyanide compoundsa
p-Cresol Hexachlorobutadiene Polychlorinated biphenyls Glycol ethersb
Cumene Hexachlorocyclopentadiene 1,3-Propane sultone Manganese compounds
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Hexachloroethane P-Propiolactone Mercury compounds
acid, salts and esters Hexamethylene-1,6-diisocyanate Nickel compounds Fine mineral fibersc
Lead compounds Selenium compounds Polycylic organic matterd
Radionuclides radon includede
NOTE: Listings containing the word "compounds" and for glycol ethers, unless otherwise specified, include any unique chemical substance that contains the named chemical as part of its infrastructure.
'X'CN where X = H' or a group where a formal dissociation may occur. %ncludes mono- and di-ethers of ethylene, diethylene, and triethylene glycol R-(OCH2CH2)n -OR' where n = 1, 2, or 3 R = alkyl or aryl
groups R' = R, H, or groups which, when removed, yield glycol ethers: R-IOCH2CH)n-OH. Polymers are excluded from the glycol category. clncludes mineral fiber emissions from facilities manufacturing or
processing glass, rock, or slag fibers of average diameter 1 pm or less. 'Includes organic compounds with more than one benzene ring, and which have a boiling point greater than or equal to 1000C. 'A
type of atom which spontaneously undergoes radioactive decay.
positive associations between the previous
day's 1-hr maximum ozone concentration
and respiratory admissions, after controlling
for S02, NO2, CO, soiling index, and dew
point temperature. The authors found rela-
tive risk (RR) values ranging between 1.043
(p < 0.0001) and 1.024 (p = 0.0258) for a
30-ppb increase in ambient ozone, depend-
ing on the covariate selection and the cities
examined. In addition to ozone, particulate
matter and carbon monoxide were also posi-
tively associated with respiratory hospitaliza-
tions. Findings from this study were
consistent with earlier studies of other U.S.
and Canadian cities (5-9). Together, they
suggest that approximately 3-20% ofrespira-
tory admissions are associated with ambient
ozone (10).
Ozone has also been linked to increased
asthma-related emergency room visits for all
age groups in studies by Cody et al. (9) and
Weisel et al. (11) in New Jersey and by Stieb
et al. (12) in New Brunswick, Canada. These
associations were strongest when ambient
ozone levels exceeded 75 ppb (12).
Correspondingly, exposure to ozone has also
been associated with acute respiratory prob-
lems in asthmatics, including increased
asthma symptoms (13), asthma rates (14),
asthma attacks (15), wheeze (16), cough (17),
reduced pulmonary function (16,17), and
shortness of breath (18). These associations
have been shown in both children (14,15,18)
and adults and have been demonstrated for a
number ofU.S. cities.
Less consistent have been results from epi-
demiologic studies investigating associations
between ozone and both chronic illness and
premature mortality. Several recent studies
have suggested that ambient ozone concentra-
tions are associated with the development of
chronic illnesses, such as adult onset of
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000626
CRITERIA AND TOXIC AIR POLLUTANTS
asthma (19-21). These results are supported
by data from animal studies in which expo-
sure to ozone for months and years has been
shown to cause structural changes in several
regions of the respiratory tract, with the
effects in the deep lung where most chronic
airway diseases of the lung occur (3). These
effects are not reversible, raising concerns that
seasonal exposures to ozone may have a
cumulative impact over many years (22-24).
The sensitivity to chronic ozone exposures
varies by species (25), with the rat having the
lowest response (26,27) and the monkey the
greatest (22,28). Together, these findings led
the U.S. EPA (3) to conclude that prolonged
ozone exposures cause structural changes in
several regions ofthe respiratory tract, which
in turn may lead to chronic adverse effects
in humans. Evidence of these ozone-related
chronic effects in humans, however, has not
been conclusive in part because of the rela-
tively small number of studies investigating
this issue. A far greater number ofepidemio-
logic studies have been performed to investi-
gate associations between ozone and
mortality, with most conducted over the
past 5 years. While the growing body ofepi-
demiologic studies suggests that there may
be a positive association between ozone and
premature mortality, possible confounding
by other air pollutants such as particulate
matter have made the interpretation of these
results difficult.
Although many questions remain regarding
ozone's health effects, it is clear that exposure
to currently observed ambient ozone concen-
trations can result in adverse effects to the
human respiratory system. As a result, sub-
stantial efforts have been made to reduce
ozone concentrations in areas located
throughout the United States, through reduc-
tions in anthropogenic emissions of VOCs
and NOX, which cause the bulk of ozone
found in the troposphere.
Reductions in NOX and VOC emissions
can have long-reaching effects on ambient
ozone concentrations. Like many secondary
pollutants, ozone is regionally distributed and
once formed tends to travel with the prevail-
ing winds. Since ozone formation relies on
sunlight, ambient ozone concentrations are
highest during the summer months and dur-
ing the early afternoon hours. In addition,
ambient ozone varies spatially, as ambient
concentrations tend to be higher in remote
and suburban areas compared to urban areas
(29,30), as the result of 03 removal by NO
emitted by motor vehicles. Ambient ozone
concentrations also tend to increase with alti-
tude, as ozone concentrations have been
shown to be higher in mountain compared to
valley communities (31).
In 1997, the revision to the 03 NAAQS
set forth that the 1-hr standard will no
longer apply to an area once the U.S. EPA
determines that the area has air quality data
meeting the 1-hr standards. In response to
the revised ozone NAAQS, the U.S. EPA
revoked the 1-hr 03 NAAQS in most coun-
ties in the United States, leaving 226 coun-
ties (and 38 nonattainment areas) where the
1-hr standard still applies. Currently, 24 of
the 38 one-hour ozone nonattainment areas
are classified as either serious, severe, or
extreme, with most ofthe 24 areas located in
areas on the east or west coast of the United
States (Table 2). Three areas, however, are
located in Texas and two areas located near
Chicago, Illinois. Together, the 24 one-hour
nonattainment areas have a total population
ofabout 84 million people.
Outdoor ozone concentrations, together
with activity patterns and housing characteris-
tics, are the primary determinants ofexposures
to ozone, since ozone has few indoor sources.
Like outdoor concentrations, both indoor con-
centrations and personal exposures to ozone
are highest in the summer months; however,
both indoor and personal ozone levels tend to
be substantially lower than those outdoors
(29). Short-term (< 1 hr) personal ozone expo-
sures, however, have been shown to be compa-
rable to those outdoors, when monitored
individuals spent their time in outdoor activi-
ties (32. Furthermore, both indoor concentra-
tions and personal exposures to ozone tend to
be highest for individuals living in non-air
conditioned and other well-ventilated homes
(29,33). Results from several exposure studies
have shown that outdoor ozone concentrations
are poor surrogates for personal exposures, as
outdoor concentrations explain relatively little
of the variability in personal exposures
(29,31,33). Microenvironmental models
developed to date have been able to explain lit-
tle of the variability in personal ozone expo-
sures; however, models do represent a slight
improvement over outdoor concentrations
alone (29). Poor model performance clearly
demonstrates the need for additional research
to improve our understanding offactors affect-
ing personal ozone exposures and our ability to
predict these exposures.
Particulate Matter
Epidemiologic studies have shown consistent
and significant associations between ambient
PMo (filne particulate matter with aero-
dynamic diameters less than or equal to
10 pm) concentrations and increased daily
mortality and morbidity (34-38). The epi-
demiologic studies were conducted in com-
munities across the United States using a
variety of study designs, including short-term
exposure, prospective cohort (time-series),
cross-sectional, and meta-analyses studies.
Despite their differences in design, methodol-
ogy, and target population, findings from
Table 2. Serious, severe, or extreme ozone nonattain-
ment areas in the United States in 1999.
Atlanta, GA Serious
Baltimore, MD Severe
Baton Rouge, LA Serious
Boston-Lawrence-Worcester, MA-NH Serious
Chicago, Gary-Lake County, IL-IN-WI Severe
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX Serious
El Paso, TX Serious
Greater Connecticut, CT Serious
Houston-Galveston, Brazoria, TX Severe
Los Angeles-South Coast Air Basin, CA Extreme
Milwaukee-Racine, WI Severe
New York-New Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-CT Severe
Phoenix, AZ Serious
Philadelphia-Wilmington, Trenton, Severe
PA-NJ-DE-MD
Portsmouth-Dover-Rochester, NH-ME Serious
Providence-Pawtucket-Fall River, RI-MA Serious
Sacramento, CA Severe
San Diego, CA Serious
San Joaquin Valley, CA Serious
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompac, CA Serious
SE Desert Modified AQMA, CA Severe
Springfield, MA Serious
Ventura County, CA Severe
Washington, DC-MD-VA Serious
these studies were remarkably consistent, as
the relative risk estimates for total mortality
and morbidity were comparable across
studies.
The time-series studies, in particular, pro-
vided evidence that ambient particulate pollu-
tion at currently observed levels is associated
with increases in daily human mortality
(39-42). Relative risk estimates from these
mortality studies indicate that an increase in
ambient particulate concentrations of 50
pg/m3 is associated with a relative risk of
1.015-1.085 in the general population. Even
higher relative risks were observed for senior
citizens and for those with preexisting respira-
tory conditions (39-42).
Despite the consistency of these findings,
the interpretation of results from these studies
remains controversial. Much of this contro-
versy arises from the fact that the particulate
component(s) responsible for the observed
adverse health effects has not yet been identi-
fied nor has the biologic mechanism that
results in the observed adverse effect been
determined. These difficulties arise in large
part from the fact that particulate matter is a
mixture ofpollutants. At its simplest, inhalable
particulate matter is composed of two distinct
size fractions, those with aerodynamic diame-
ters (da) less than or equal to 2.5 pm (PM2 5)
or fine particles, and those with aerodynamic
diameter between 2.5 and 10 pm or coarse
particles (PM2.5-10). The two size fractions
have different origins and compositions. Fine
particles originate primarily from combustion
sources (such as automobiles, power plants,
and wood stoves), either through the conden-
sation ofvolatilized materials (primary particu-
late matter), or from precursor gases reacting
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000 627
SUH ET AL.
in the atmosphere to form secondary partides.
The major components of fine particles often
include sulfates, carbonaceous materials,
nitrates, trace elements, and water (43).
Coarse particles, in contrast, are formed by
mechanical crushing, grinding, or abrasion of
surfaces and are suspended and dispersed by
wind and anthropogenic activity such as traf-
fic and agricultural activities. Coarse particles
are primarily composed of aluminosilicates
and other oxides of crustal elements in soil
and fugitive dust.
As a result of their physical and chemical
differences, exposures to PM2.5 and PM1o may
have different adverse effects. Indirect evidence
from studies using British Smoke, coefficient
ofhaze (COH), or sulfates as indicators offine
particle concentrations suggest that PM2.5 is
most strongly associated with the observed
increases in mortality and morbidity (44-46).
Direct evidence was provided by the Six-Cities
study, which found RR values ranging from
1.020 to 1.056 per 25 ig/m3 PM2.5, whereas
coarse particles generally showed small
and nonsignificant RR values (except for
Steubenville, Ohio, RR = 1.061 per 25 gg/m3)
(47). On the basis ofthese results, the authors
concluded that in most cases associations
between excess mortality and PM1o were
derived mainly from the PM2.5 fraction. This
conclusion is supported by results from a
recent analysis ofelemental data from the Six-
Cities study (48). In a combined analysis of
data from the six cities, a 10-pg/m3 increase in
PM2.5 from mobile sources accounted for a
3.4% increase in total mortality, whereas an
equivalent increase in PM2.5 from coal com-
bustion sources accounted for a 1.1% increase.
In contrast, PM2.5-associated crustal particle
levels were not associated with daily mortality.
It is important to note that these results
are not universal, as coarse-but not fine-
particles have been implicated as the toxic
agent in other epidemiologic studies. For
example, in a study conducted in Mexico
City, Mexico (4p), ambient PM2.5 was found
to have no statistically significant impact on
either total mortality or mortality by age or
cause. A 10 pg/m3 increase in ambient coarse
particle concentrations, however, was associ-
ated with a 4.5% [95% confidence interval
(CI): 2.4-6.5%] increase in total mortality, a
9.8% increase in respiratory mortality (95%
CI: 3.4-16.2%), a 3.9% increase in cardiovas-
cular mortality (95% CI: 0.1-7.7%), and a
5.4% increase (95% CI: 2.6-8.1%) in mortal-
ity in individuals above 65 years of age. The
apparent inconsistency in the study findings is
not known but may be due to differences in
partide composition or study population.
Recent findings from toxicologic studies
and epidemiologic studies of cardiovascular
effects have suggested a plausible biologic
mechanism by which particles can cause
damage. In toxicologic studies, exposures to
concentrated ambient air particles have been
associated with significant alterations in
breathing patterns and acute inflammatory
responses, as demonstrated by neutrophil
influx and increased vascular permeability in
normal and chronic bronchitic rats (50,51).
Concentrated ambient air particles (CAPs)
have also been shown to result in hematologic
changes in rats, including elevated polymor-
phonuclear leukocyte levels (52).
Consistent with these results, subtle alter-
ations in pulmonary and systemic cell profiles
were also found when normal canines were
exposed to concentrated air particles (53).
These changes were not associated with the
total mass concentrations but were instead
associated with specific particulate components
(as identified using factor analysis techniques).
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), total peripheral
white blood cell (WBC) counts, and circulat-
ing neutrophils and lymphocytes, for example,
were correlated with an aluminum/silicon fac-
tor, which may result from an effect of crustal
particles on pulmonary inflammation. The
nickel/vanadium factor was associated with
increased circulating neutrophils and BAL
macrophages, suggesting a link between com-
bustion-related metals and peripheral blood
parameters. Significant red blood cell changes
(e.g., decrements in red blood cell counts and
hemoglobin levels), which were also observed
in a study of elevated ambient particle levels
(54), were associated with the sulfur factor.
The authors suggested that these hematological
alterations may potentially be linked to cardiac
effects (54).
Support for this theory has been provided
by recent epidemiologic studies of elderly
individuals. In these studies, ambient PM2.5
levels were associated with reduced cardiovas-
cular function as assessed using heart rate vari-
ability (HRV) (55-57), defibrillator discharge
measures (58), and increased plasma viscosity
(59). Liao et al. (55) in Baltimore, Maryland,
and Gold et al. (57 in Boston, for example,
found elevated ambient PM2.5 to be associated
with reductions in time domain HRV mea-
sures-SDDN (standard deviation of normal
RR intervals) and r-MSSD (square root ofthe
mean ofthe squared differences between adja-
cent normal RR intervals). In the Boston
study, a 14.3 pg/m3 increase in ambient
PM2.5 during the hour ofand the three hours
prior to cardiac monitoring resulted in a 6.1-
ms reduction in r-MSSD during slow breath-
ing. These findings differed from those
reported by Pope et al. (56) in Utah, in which
reduced SDNN but increased r-MSSD was
associated with ambient PM2.5 levels. Reasons
for the inconsistency in the study findings are
unclear, but may be due to differences in par-
ticle composition, sample size, or study popu-
lation. Despite this inconsistency, findings
from these studies suggest that PM2.5
exposures may disturb short-term autonomic
function, which may partially account for
observed associations between particulate pol-
lution and cardiovascular mortality.
Considerable research has been conducted
to assess the levels and nature of particulate
exposures, particularly in the outdoor envi-
ronment. These studies have demonstrated
that ambient fine and coarse particle mass
concentrations tend to be weakly correlated
or uncorrelated, as would be expected due to
their different sources (60). Ambient fine
(PM2.5) and inhalable (PM1o) particulate
concentrations, however, tend to be strongly
correlated with ozone in the "high-sulfur
source" and downwind transport regions, and
with sulfate, a fine particulate constituent, as
well. These regions of the Eastern United
States and Southern Canada experienced the
greatest PM2.5, PM10, and S042- concentra-
tions during the spring and summer months
(May-September).
In the Eastern United States, ambient
PM2.5 and PM1O concentrations are relatively
uniform across large metropolitan areas, espe-
cially in the summer months (61-63). This
spatial uniformity suggests that concentra-
tions measured at a single ambient monitor-
ing site are able to reflect particulate
concentrations across an urban area. For
coarse particles, however, a single ambient
monitoring site would not be sufficient, as
coarse particles vary spatially with population
density. In the Eastern United States, PM2.5
comprises the majority of PM1o, accounting
for approximately 75% of PM1o in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (61).
Outdoor PM2.5 concentrations may
differ, at times substantially, from indoor
concentrations. Indoors, cigarette smoke is
the most significant particulate source, as
mean indoor concentrations in homes with
smoking have been shown to be approxi-
mately 20-30 pg/m3 higher than concentra-
tions inside homes without smokers (64-66).
Although less significant, kerosene heaters,
cooking, and cleaning have also been identi-
fied as important indoor particulate sources
(67-69). The influence of these indoor par-
ticulate sources is strongest in indoor environ-
ments with low air exchange rates, as these
low air exchange rates provide sufficient time
for the particles emitted from indoor sources
to accumulate (68,69).
Similarly, personal PM2.5 exposures have
been shown to differ from corresponding out-
door concentrations, as personal PM2.5 expo-
sures have been shown to be both higher
(70,71) and lower (72-74) than correspond-
ing outdoor levels. These personal-outdoor
differences have been attributed to the varying
activity level of the study cohorts, in which
individuals who were relatively sedentary,
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000628
CRITERIA AND TOXIC AIR POLLUTANTS
such as those with COPD, measured in the
Bahadori et al. (73) study had lower indoor,
and thus lower personal, exposures to particu-
late matter.
Despite these observed differences, longi-
tudinal associations between personal PM2.5
and PM1o exposures and outdoor concentra-
tions are relatively strong (71,73-75). For
example, cross-sectional analysis of data from
Phillipsburg, New Jersey, where personal
PM1o exposures of 14 individuals were mea-
sured for 14 days, resulted in an 12 of only
0.037 (p = 0.008). When analyzed by individ-
ual across time, however, a median R2 value of
0.46 was found (75). Similar results were
found in studies conducted in a variety of
other cities and for diverse study populations.
The strength of the personal-ambient
associations has also been shown to be
strongly influenced by the indoor ventilation
conditions (33,76). Associations between per-
sonal PM2.5 exposures and ambient concen-
trations were strongest when individuals
spent most of their time in well-ventilated
environments (R2 = 0.80) and lowest when
individuals spend most oftheir time in poorly
ventilated environments (R2 = 0.25)
(Figure 1) (33). Similar analyses for S042, a
fine particulate constituent with no major
indoor sources, showed that the strength of
the personal-ambient association varied little
with the indoor ventilation conditions
(Figure 2). The weaker personal-ambient
associations for individuals spending time in
poorly ventilated indoor environments for
PM2.5 compared to SO42- were attributed to
the greater influence of indoor particulate
sources in these environments (33).
Upon review ofthe available scientific evi-
dence linking exposures to ambient particulate
matter to adverse health and welfare effects,
the U.S. EPA revised the NAAQS for particu-
late matter (77). These new rules include a
new PM2.5 annual standard set at 15 pg/m3
and a new 24-hr standard of65 pg/m3.
Although now in effect, the new standard
is currently undergoing judicial review and is
clearly the subject of considerable contro-
versy, with much ofthis scientific controversy
focusing on the ability ofoutdoor concentra-
tions to estimate exposures. The studies con-
ducted to date have provided important
information about the relationship between
personal particulate exposures and corre-
sponding outdoor concentrations. However,
they have also raised significant questions
about the nature of personal exposures, the
relative contributions of both outdoor and
indoor concentrations to overall exposure lev-
els, and the factors that may influence these
relationships. In this context, the link
between ambient air pollution and adverse
health effects remains ambiguous, thus mak-
ing it difficult to identify the toxic agent
responsible for the observed adverse effects.
Addressing these issues will be critical to our
ability to protect the public from particulate
air pollution.
Hazardous Air Pollutants
In contrast to the criteria pollutants, relatively
little has been done to characterize the con-
centrations, exposures, and health risks for
most of the HAPs. Still less is known about
the human health effects ofHAP exposures at
concentrations found in the ambient environ-
ment, as most of what is known has been
obtained from occupational and animal
studies. These studies, along with efforts to
characterize the potential public health
impacts of HAPs using monitoring data, dis-
persion models, and emission estimates, have
implicated 189 air pollutants as chemicals
whose presence in the air may be associated
with adverse human health effects.
Sources of HAPs are numerous and
include outdoor (i.e., industrial processes,
motor vehicles), indoor (i.e., building materi-
als) and activity-based sources (i.e., smoking,
dry cleaning). Studies characterizing concen-
trations and exposures to numerous HAPs
suggest that concentrations for most HAPs are
higher indoors as compared to levels found
outdoors (78,79). Similarly, these studies have
found that personal exposures typically exceed
both outdoor and indoor sources. These
results can be explained by a number of
factors including the accumulation of HAP
concentrations within enclosed indoor envi-
ronments as well as the importance of indoor
and activity-specific or occupational sources of
HAP exposure. In a review of VOC levels,
Wallace (78) found that indoor VOC concen-
trations were twice that of concentrations
found outdoors. Similarly, personal exposures
were found to be 3 times that of correspond-
ing outdoor concentrations. Higher personal
VOC exposures were attributed to the fact
that individuals spend a majority (- 90%) of
their time indoors (80), where numerous
.. =o: 412W.IrLtX:721
Sl~~~geL
10 SO* *~ ~ 40o
AmvtijzgAn3)
Figure 1. Personal vs ambient PM2.5 by ventilation sta-
tus: results from Baltimore, Maryland, older adult study.
fvent represents the fraction of time the monitored indi-
vidual spent in indoor environments with open windows.
Adapted from Sarnat et al. (33).
indoor sources exist. These indoor sources
include dry-cleaned clothing (tetrachloro-
ehtylene), mothballs and restroom deodorizers
(para-dichlorobenzene), building materials
(formaldehyde, styrene) and office products
such as glues and correction fluid (1,1,1-
trichloroethane). Identification of these
sources and reducing or eliminating the use of
products containing these HAPs can help
in reducing or minimizing exposures to
various VOCs.
Despite the findings that show higher
indoor concentrations than outdoor concen-
trations, a number of recent studies suggest
that outdoor HAPs concentrations in several
U.S. cities may also constitute a health con-
cern. In the U.S. EPA's Assessment System
for Population Exposure Nationwide
(ASPEN) study (81), emissions data for vari-
ous HAPs were inputted into an atmospheric
dispersion model to estimate outdoor concen-
trations in each ofthe 60,803 census tracts of
the contiguous United States for 1990.
Model results showed outdoor concentration
estimates for benzene and formaldehyde, for
example, were greater than the cancer bench-
mark concentrations in over 90% of the cen-
sus tracts. Approximately 200 census tracts
had modeled air pollution levels over 100
times the benchmark for at least one of the
HAPs (82). These estimates of high outdoor
HAP concentrations strongly support the
need for further characterization of HAPs
concentrations and exposures.
Estimates of high cancer risks from HAP
exposures are supported by a report presented
before Congress on March 1, 1999, in which
outdoor Los Angeles, California, basin levels
were characterized for 10 HAPs (83). Results
from this report indicated that 9 of the 10
HAPs were present outdoors at levels that
exceeded additional lifetime cancer risks of
one in a million-the health-based goal for
HAPs outlined in the Clean Air Act. Outdoor
concentrations of benzene and formaldehyde
in particular were exceptionally high and were
.a5-
C 15-
10-
5-
I1 1 1I I
tw '~
.. .
. 5 IS 15 20 25 30 35
Ambient(g9fm8)
Figure 2. Personal vs ambient S042- by ventilation sta-
tus: results from Baltimore, Maryland older adult study.
fvent represents the fraction of time the monitored indi-
vidual spent in outdoor environments with open win-
dows. Adapted from Sarnat et al. (33).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000 629
SUH ET AL.
49 and 72 times greater than their respective
benchmark doses for cancer risk. The health
effects and exposures for benzene and
formaldehyde are discussed briefly below.
Benzene
Of the HAPs, benzene is perhaps the most
widely studied. Benzene is a gaseous pollutant
that is ubiquitous in the environment. It is
used as a constituent in motor fuels; as a sol-
vent for fats, waxes, resins, oils, inks, paints,
plastics, and rubber; in the extraction of oils
from seeds and nuts; and in photogravure
printing. It is also used in the manufacture
detergents, explosives, pharmaceuticals, and
dyestuffs (84,85). In addition, the public is
exposed to benzene as a result of direct and
indirect cigarette smoke, home use ofsolvents
and gasoline, and leaking underground
storage tanks.
Benzene is absorbed into the human body
via various pathways, including inhalation,
dermal contact, and ingestion. Exposures to
benzene, even at low doses, have been linked
to a variety of acute and chronic adverse
health effects. Inhalation exposures to ben-
zene, for example, may result in a variety of
neurologic symptoms, including drowsiness,
dizziness, headaches, unconsciousness, and
even death after exposures to very high levels.
Similarly, ingestion exposures to large
amounts of benzene may result in vomiting,
dizziness, convulsions, and may be fatal (84).
In animal studies, neurologic, immuno-
logic, and hematologic effects from inhalation
and oral exposures to benzene have been
observed. Laboratory tests in rats, mice, rab-
bits, and guinea pigs have shown benzene to
have low acute toxicity through inhalation,
moderate acute toxicity through ingestion, and
low or moderate acute toxicity through dermal
exposure. Benzene toxicity can be enhanced
with co-exposure to ethanol (86). Hematologic
effects have also been observed after chronic or
long-term inhalation of benzene, which has
been shown to cause blood disorders through
damage to the bone marrow. Aplastic anemia,
excessive bleeding, and damage to the immune
system may develop from chronic benzene
exposures, as a result ofchanges in blood levels
of antibodies and loss ofwhite blood cells. In
addition, chronic benzene exposures were
shown to produce both structural and numeri-
cal chromosomal aberrations in humans and to
result in increased incidence of leukemia in
individuals occupationally exposed to benzene
(87,88). As a result, the U.S. EPA has classified
benzene as a Group A known human carcino-
gen. On the basis of results from human and
animal studies, benzene has been estimated to
have an inhalation unit risk for cancer of8.3 x
10Se( svg/m3)- (86)o
Several studies have been p)erformed to
characterize benzene exposures. In an
Environment Canada-sponsored outdoor
monitoring study, 5,000 twenty-four-hour
benzene samples were collected at 40 urban
and rural monitoring stations (89). Median
benzene concentrations were highest at urban
street sites and at sites influenced by point
sources, whereas median benzene concentra-
tions were lowest at rural and suburban sites.
Significantly higher 95th percentile benzene
concentrations were reported at sites influ-
enced by point sources (89).
Twelve-hour outdoor benzene concentra-
tions-along with 12-hr personal exposures
and exhaled breath values-were also mea-
sured in a variety of communities across the
United States in the U.S. EPA Total
Exposure Assessment Methodology (TEAM)
study, which was conducted in the early
1980s (78). Results from this study showed
that as was the case in the Canadian study,
outdoor concentrations were also higher in
urban compared to suburban cities. In addi-
tion, benzene was found at all of the TEAM
sites. Major sources of benzene exposures
were identified and included active (39%)
and passive (5%) cigarette smoking, automo-
biles (18%), and industrial (3%), home
(16%), and personal (18%) sources (78).
Because many of these sources are
located indoors, benzene concentrations
inside homes are generally higher than those
outdoors (78). In Elizabeth-Bayonne, New
Jersey, one of the TEAM studies, for exam-
ple, the geometric mean indoor benzene
concentration was substantially higher than
that outdoors, with indoor concentrations
highest inside homes with smokers (78).
Median and 95th percentile indoor concen-
trations in Elizabeth-Bayonne were 15 and
78 pg/m3. These high concentrations may
specifically be attributed to the presence of
indoor benzene sources. In areas with high
outdoor concentrations, the ability of ben-
zene to penetrate indoors may be an impor-
tant exposure factor. In a study of 10 Boise,
Idaho, homes with no major indoor VOC
sources, the penetration efficiency and the
indoor removal rate for benzene were esti-
mated to equal one and zero, respectively
gS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.........
U
0142 M l;T 2 3 4 5 -5
Figure 3. The distribution of indoor benzene concentra-
tion measurements, from the U.S. EPA BASE study of 69
buildings from 1996 through 1998 (103).
(90). Indoor benzene concentrations have
been found to be substantially lower in large,
nonresidential buildings, as mean, median,
and 95th percentile indoor concentrations in
the U.S. EPA Building Assessment Survey and
Evaluation (BASE) study of69 buildings were
only 1.3, 1.2, and 2.8 pg/m3, respectively
(Figure 3). Lower concentrations observed in
the BASE study may be attributed to the fact
that measurements were made in large office
buildings compared to homes, where large
HVAC systems are more prevalent and the
penetration efficiency of benzene from out-
door to indoor environments may be lower.
Personal benzene exposures also tend to
be higher than those outdoors. As was the
case outdoors, personal levels were highest in
urban than in suburban locations. Median
daytime and nighttime outdoor, personal,
and breath concentrations, for example,
ranged between 10 and 20 pg/m3 in the
industrialized Elizabeth-Bayonne (Figure 4)
and urban Los Angeles communities (Figure
5), whereas median concentrations in subur-
ban Antioch-Pittsburg, California, were
lower, ranging between 1 and 10 pg/m3
(Figure 6). As shown in Figure 7, concentration
distributions observed in Antioch and
Pittsburg were comparable to those reported
for most of California in the 1990-1996
California Air Resources Board-sponsored
statewide benzene summary (mean and
median outdoor concentrations ranged
Population exceeding
concentration shown
115,200 64,000 12,800 1,280
90% 50% 10% 1%
100 -
10:
12,800 64,000 115,200 127,000
10% 50% 90% 99%
Population below concentration shown
Figure 4. The estimated frequency distributions of
benzene personal air exposures, outdoor air concen-
trations, and exhaled breath values for the combined
Elizabeth-Bayonne, New Jersey, target population
(n = 128,000). All air values are for 12-hr integrated
samples. The breath value was taken following the
daytime air sample (6:00 AM-6:00 PM). All outdoor
samples were in the vicinity of the participants
homes (78).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000
|-* Personal air In - 344) Night
a- ---m Breath (n-320) /
*----- Outdoor air (n- 86) Day
1~~~~~~ -
A ,. Night
, . Day
//
Id,
I,l/ 1
1 0
400
1 qi
630
CRITERIA AND TOXIC AIR POLLUTANTS
between 0.82 and 7.38 gig/m3). It should
also be noted that the exposure assessment
in the Antioch and Pittsburg areas was con-
ducted in well-ventilated indoor environ-
ments, another factor leading to lower
personal benzene exposures.
Benzene concentrations have been shown
to be highest in motor vehides, with concen-
trations inside motor vehicles up to 8 times
that ofcorresponding ambient concentrations
(78). Correspondingly, short-term (1-hr) per-
sonal benzene exposures have also been
shown to be highest during motor vehicle-
related activities, such as commuting by car
or bus and during activities at gasoline sta-
tions (32,78,90-94).
Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde is a gaseous pollutant with
many outdoor and indoor sources. Outdoors,
major formaldehyde sources include power
plants, manufacturing facilities, incinerators,
and automobile exhaust emissions (95). In
addition, forest fires and other natural com-
bustion sources also introduce formaldehyde
into the ambient air. The highest levels of
airborne formaldehyde have been detected in
indoor air, where it is released from various
building materials, such as processed particle-
board and plywood, and consumer products
and are emitted from tobacco smoke.
Formaldehyde may also be present in food,
either naturally or as a result ofcontamination.
i-
,E 100--
ClD
=L
cn
0
Co
CD
o 10-
C.)
Population exceeding
concentration shown (1,000x)
300 100 10 1
1 5 20 40 60 80 95 99
Cumulative frequency (%)
Figure 5. The estimated frequency distributions of ben-
zene personal air exposures, outdoor air concentrations,
and exhaled breath values for the South Bay section of
Los Angeles, California. California target population
(n = 360,000). All air values are for 10- to 14-hr inte-
grated samples. The breath value was taken following
the daytime air sample (6:00 AM-6:00 PM). All outdoor
samples were in the vicinity of the participants homes
(February 1984) (78).
Formaldehyde is used predominantly as a
chemical intermediate. As a chemical build-
ing block, its use can be traced to consumer
goods through a wide spectrum of manufac-
turing processes. Formaldehyde, for example,
is used in the manufacture of urea, phenol,
and melamine resins and for a variety ofspe-
cial industrial chemicals. In addition,
formaldehyde is used as a preservative in
medical laboratories and as an embalming
agent in mortuaries. It also has minor uses in
agriculture, as an analytical reagent, in con-
crete and plaster additives, cosmetics, disin-
fectants, fumigants, photography, and wood
preservation (96). Formaldehyde (as urea
formaldehyde foam) was extensively used as
an insulating material until 1982, when it was
banned by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission. Formaldehyde can be emitted
from the coating that provides permanent
press quality to fabrics and draperies.
Exposures to formaldehyde have been
shown to result in a variety of acute adverse
effects. Airborne concentrations of
formaldehyde above 100 ppb, for example,
can cause irritation of the eye, nose, and
throat irritation and effects on the nasal
cavity. The severity of irritation increases as
concentrations increase; at 100 ppm,
formaldehyde is immediately dangerous to
life and health. Dermal contact causes vari-
ous skin reactions including sensitization,
which might force persons thus, sensitized to
E
CD
c
0
Co
c)
c
0
C.)
10 :
1-:
0.1
Population exceeding
concentration shown (1,000x)
50 20 10 5 21
1 5 20 40 60 80 95 99
Cumulative frequency (%)
Figure 6. The estimated frequency distributions of
benzene personal air exposures, outdoor air concen-
trations, and exhaled breath values for the residents
of Antioch and Pittsburg, California (popula-
tion = 360,000). All air values are for 10- to 14-hr inte-
grated samples. The breath value was taken following
the daytime air sample (6:00 AM-6:00 PM). All outdoor
samples were in the vicinity of the participants homes
(June 1984) (78).
find other work. Coughing, wheezing, chest
pains, and bronchitis are also symptoms of
formaldehyde exposure. Formaldehyde is
ranked as a non-threshold contaminant by
the U.S. EPA Office of Planning and
Standards. The RfD (reference dose) for
formaldehyde is 0.2 mg/kg/day based on a
decrease in body weight gain and effects on
the stomach in rats (9~).
As with acute effects, chronic inhalation
exposures to formaldehyde have been associ-
ated with respiratory symptoms and eye,
nose, and throat irritation (98). Results from
animal studies suggest that the adverse health
mechanism may occur through damage to the
nasal respiratory epithelium and lesions in the
respiratory system (9$9l. In addition, chronic
formaldehyde exposures were linked, in one
study to an increased incidence of menstrual
disorders and pregnancy problems in women
workers using urea-formaldehyde resins;
however, potential confounding factors were
not examined in this study, making results
from this study difficult to interpret. In
another study, an association between
formaldehyde exposure and increased sponta-
neous abortions was not found for hospital
equipment-sterilizing workers.
Chronic formaldehyde exposures have
also been associated in occupational studies
with increased incidence of lung and
nasopharyngeal cancer (100). This associa-
tion is considered to be "limited," rather
than "sufficient," due to possible exposure
to other agents that may have contributed
to the excess cancers. An increased inci-
dence of nasal squamous-cell carcinomas
due to inhalation exposures to formalde-
hyde has been observed in animal studies
(101). Formaldehyde is classified as a prob-
able human carcinogen (cancer-causing
agent) by the U.S. EPA, with a estimated
inhalation unit risk of 1.3 x 10-5 (1Ig/m3)-1.
Average lifetime inhalation exposures to
formaldehyde concentrations of 8 pg/m3,
for example, would result in an approximate
one-in-a-ten thousand increased chance of
developing cancer over the span of a
lifetime.
-.
.
c
0.
~
3-
cJ
c 2iCo
0
ci
Co
c 1-
c
c)ol
mC 1
90 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
Year
Figure 7. The 1990-1996 statewide benzene summary
for California, measured by the California Environmental
Protection Agency, Air Resources Board (104).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000
* Personal air (n= 70)
- -- Breath (n=67) .
_ Night
.' zn^..
* - Personal air (n=110)O
~- BreatHn=110)
Day
,0
Night ' :
Day d /
l1
LUM l w |
--.-- Median
---*--- Mean
--*- 90th percentle1
631
SUH ET AL
Ambient formaldehyde concentrations of
this magnitude are common in the United
States, where the average ambient formalde-
hyde concentrations reported in U.S. urban
areas ranges between 11 and 20 ppb
(13.5-24.6 pigIm3). Figure 8 shows the distri-
bution of 24- and 3-hr time integrated mea-
surements collected in New York City and
Los Angeles in 1997. Environment Canada
has reported maximum ambient formalde-
hyde of 31.15 pg/m3, with means ranging
from 1.8 to 8.8 pg/m3 in urban areas.
Formaldehyde levels in homes have been
reported ranging between 100 and 3,680 ppb
in homes (123-4,526 pg/m3) (78). As was
the case with benzene, indoor formaldehyde
concentrations inside large, nonresidential
chp:rcment
Mmn
CD
CDo 10-
E* 5- , ;
O
NY24hr NY3hr LA 4hr LA3hr
1997
Figure 8. The distribution of 24- and 3-hr time inte-
grated measurements collected in New York City and
Los Angeles, California, 1997 (105).
25-
20-
= 15-
5 10 15 25 3 4
Formaldehyde concentraton (gg/m3)
Figure 9. The distribution of indoor formaldehyde con-
centration measurements, from the U.S. EPA BASE study
of 69 buildings from 1996 through 1998 (103).
cm 500-
450-
- 400-
350-
.0 250-
*~200-
E 150_
w 150
>- 100-
050-
E 2/05 2/12 2/19 3/01 3/08 3/18 3/22 3/29 4/9 4/12
0
a- 1998
Figure 10. The measured formaldehyde emission rates
of 10 homes measured over 10 consecutive weeks in
northern Japan from February 5 through April 141(106).
buildings are much lower, with mean,
median, and 95th percentile formaldehyde
levels in the U.S. EPA BASE study of 13.6,
13.1, and 22.8 pg/m3, respectively (Figure 9).
There are several factors that influence the
emission of formaldehyde from materials.
Two of the best understood are temperature
and relative humidity. As the temperature
and humidity increase, the emission rate of
formaldehyde also increases. The measured
formaldehyde emission rates of 10 homes
measured over 10 consecutive weeks in
Northern Japan, from February 5 through
April 14 are shown in Figure 10. The
formaldehyde emission rate in all homes
increased on average with the increasing air
temperature and humidity as winter transi-
tioned into spring, A third important factor is
the age of the home. As the home ages, the
building materials emit less formaldehyde.
Since the early 1980, as a result ofthe rash of
formaldehyde poisonings attributable to urea-
formaldehyde foam insulation, low-level
exposure to formaldehyde has been suspected
ofinitiating chemical hypersensitivity (102).
REFERENCES AND NoTEs
1. Clean Air Act, 33 United States Code Sec. 1241 Et Esq., 1971.
2. U.S. EPA. National Air Quality and Emissions Trend
Report. Washington, DC:U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 1998.
3. U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related
Photochemical Oxidants. Research Triangle Park, NC:U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, National Center for
Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and
Development, 1996.
4. Burnett RT, Brook JR, Yung WT, Dales RE, Krewski D.
Association between ozone and hospitalization for respiratory
diseases in 16 Canadian cities. Environ Res 72:24-31 (1997).
5. Ozkaynak H, Xue J, Severance P, Burnett RT, Raizenne ME.
Associations between daily mortality, ozone, and particulate air
pollution in Toronto, Canada. Paper presented at the
Colloquium on Particulate Air Pollution and Human Mortality
and Morbidity, Irvine, California, 1994.
6. Thurston GD, Ito K, Kinney PL, Lippmann M. A multi-year study
of air pollution and respiratory hospital admissions in three
New York State metropolitan areas: results for 1988 and 1989
summers. J Expos Anal Environ Epidemiol 2:429-450 (1992).
7. Thurston GD, Ito K, Hayes CG, Bates DV, Lippmann M.
Respiratory hospital admissions and summertime haze air pollu-
tion in Toronto, Ontario: consideration of the role of acid
aerosols. Environ Res 65:271-290 (1994).
8. Schwartz J. Air pollution and hospital admissions for the elderly
in Birmingham, Alabama (1994). Am J Epidemiol 139:589-598
(1994).
9. Cody RP, Weisel CP, Birnbaum G, Lioy PJ. The effect of ozone
associated with summertime photochemical smog on the fre-
quency of asthma visits to the hospital emergency departments.
Environ Res 58:184-194 (1992).
10. American Lung Association. Breathless: air pollution and hospi-
tal admissions/emergency room visits in 13 cities. New
York:American Lung Association, 1998.
11. Weisel CP, Cody RP, Lioy PJ. Relationship between summer-
time ambient ozone levels and emergency department visits for
asthma in central New Jersey. Environ Health Perspect
103(suppl 2):97-102 (1995).
12. Stieb DM, Burnett RT, Beveridge RC, Brook JR. The association
between ozone and asthma emergency department visits in
Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada. Environ Health Perspect
104:1354-1360(1996).
13. Holguin AH, Buffler PA, Contant CF, Stock TH, Kotchmar D, His
BP, Jenkins DE, Gehan BM, Noel LM, Mei M. The effects of
ozone on asthmatics in the Houston area. In: Evaluation of the
Scientific Basis for Ozone/Oxidants Standards: Proceedings of
the APCA International Specialty Conference, November 1984.
14. Bates DV, Baker-Anderson M, Sizto R. Asthma attack periodic-
ity: a study of hospital emergency visits in Vancouver. Environ
Res 51:51-70(1990).
15. Whittemore AS, Korn EL. Asthma and air pollution in the Los
Angeles area. Am. J Public Health 70:687-696 (1980).
16. Lebowitz MD, Collins L, Holberg CJ. Time series analyses of
respiratory responses to indoor and outdoor phenomena.
Environ Res 43:332-341 (1987).
17. Krzyzanowski M, Quackenboss JJ, Lebowitz MD. Relation of
peak expiratory flow rates and symptoms to ambient ozone.
Arch Environ Health 47:107-115(1992).
18. Ostro BD, Lipsett MJ, Mann JK, Krupnick A, Harrington W. Air
pollution and respiratory morbidity among adults in Southern
California. Am J Epidemiol 137:691-700 (1993).
19. Abbey DE, Moore J, Petersen F, Beeson L. Long-term ambient
concentrations of total suspended particulates and oxidants as
related to incidence of chronic disease in California Seventh-
Day Adventists. Environ Health Perspect 94:43-50 (1991).
20. Abbey DE, Petersen F, Mills, PK, Beeson WL. Long-term ambi-
ent concentrations of total suspended particulates, ozone, and
sulfur dioxide and respiratory symptoms in a nonsmoking popu-
lation. Arch Environ Health 48:33-46 (1993).
21. McDonnell WF, Abbey DE, Nishino N, Lebowitz MD. Long-term
ambient ozone concentrations and the incidence of asthma in
nonsmoking adults: the AHSMOG study. Environ Res
80:110-121 (1999).
22. Tyler WS, Tyler NK, Last JA, Gillespie MJ, Barstow TJ.
Comparison of daily and seasonal exposures of young monkeys
to ozone. Toxicology 50:131-144 (1988).
23. Tepper JS, Costa DL, Lehmann JR, Weber MF, Hatch GE.
Unattenuated structural and biochemical alterations in the rat
lung during functional adaptation to ozone. Am Rev Respir Dis
140:493-501 (1989).
24. Tepper JS, Wiester MJ, Weber MF, Fitzgerald S, Costa DL.
Chronic exposure to a simulated urban profile of ozone alters
ventilatory responses to carbon dioxide challenge in rats.
Fundam AppI Toxicol 17:52-60 (1991).
25. Travis CC, White RK, Ward RC. Interspecies extrapolation of
pharmacokinetics. J Theor Biol 142:285-304 (1990).
26. Chang LY, Huang Y, Stockstill BL, Graham JA, Grose EC,
Menache MG, Miller FJ, Costa DL, Crapo JD. Epithelial injury
and interstitial fibrosis in the proximal alveolar regions of rats
chronically exposed to a simulated pattern of urban ambient
ozone. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 115:241-252 (1992).
27. Chang LY, Stockstill BL, Menache MG, Mercer RR, Crapo JD.
Consequences of prolonged inhalation of ozone on F344/N rats:
collaborative studies. Vil: Morphometric analysis of structural
alterations in alveolar regions. 3-39 Research Rep no. 65.
Cambridge, MA:Health Effects Institute, 1995.
28. Harkema JR, Plopper CG, Hyde DM, St. George JA, Wilson DW,
Dungworth DL. Response of macaque bronchiolar epithelium to
ambient concentrations of ozone. Am J Pathol 143:857-866
(1993).
29. Liu L-JS, Koutrakis P, Suh HH, Mulik JD, Burton RM. Use of per-
sonal measurements for ozone exposure assessment: a pilot
study. Environ Health Perspect 101:318-324(1993).
30. Waldman JM, Lioy PJ, Thurston GD, Lippmann M. Spatial and
temporal patterns in summertime sulfate aerosol acidity and
neutralization within a metropolitan area. Atmos Environ (B)
24:115-126 (1990).
31. Geyh, AS, Xue, J, Ozkaynak, H, Spengler JD. The Harvard
Southern California Chronic Ozone Exposure Study: assessing
ozone exposures of grade-school-age children in two southern
California communities. Environ Health Perspect 108(3):1-6
(2000).
32. Chang LT, Koutrakis P, Catalano P, Suh HH. Hourly personal
exposures to fine particles and gaseous pollutants: results from
Baltimore, MD. J Air Waste Manag (in press).
33. Sarnat J, Koutrakis P, Suh HH. Assessing the relationship
between personal particulate and gaseous exposures of senior
citizens living in Baltimore, MD. J Air Waste Manag (in press).
34. Dockery DW, Pope CA Ill, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH, Fay ME,
Ferris BGJ, Speizer FE. An association between air pollution
and mortality in six U.S. cities. N EngI J Med 329(24):
1753-1759(1993).
35. Dockery DW, Schwartz J, Spengler JD. Air pollution and daily
mortality: associations with particulates and acid aerosols.
Environ Res 59:362-373 (1992).
36. Ozkaynak H, Thurston GD. Associations between 1980 U.S.
mortality rates and alternative measures of airborne particle
concentration. Risk Anal 7(4(:449-461 (1987).
37. Pope CA ll, Dockery OW, Spengler JD, Raizenne ME.
Respiratory health and PM10 pollution: a daily time series
632 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement4 * August 2000
CRITERIA AND TOXIC AIR POLLUTANTS
analysis. Am Rev Respir Dis 144:668-674 (1991).
38. Schwartz J, Dockery DW. Increased mortality in Philadelphia
associated with daily air pollution concentrations. Am Rev
Respir Dis 145:600-604(1992).
39. Ito K, Thurston GD. Daily PM10 mortality associations: an inves-
tigation of at-risk subpopulations. J Expos Anal Environ
Epidemiol 61):79-95 (1996).
40. Kinney PL, Ito K, Thurston GD. A sensitivity analysis of mortal-
ity/PM-10 associations in Los Angeles. Inhalat Toxicol 7:59-69
(1995).
41. Schwartz J. Air pollution and hospital admissions for respira-
tory disease. Epidemiology 7(1):20-28 (1996).
42. Styer P, McMillan N, Gao F, Davis J, Sacks J. Effect of outdoor
airborne particulate matter on daily death counts. Environ
Health Perspect 103(5):490-497 (1995).
43. Wilson WE, Suh HH. Fine particles and coarse particles: con-
centration relationships relevant to epidemiologic studies. J Air
Waste Manag 47(12):1238-1249 (1997).
44. Katsouyanni K, Karakatsani A, Messari I, Touloumi G, Hatzakis A,
Kalandidi A, Trichopoulos D. Air pollution and cause specific mor-
tality in Athens. J Epidemiol Commun Health 44:321-324 (1990).
45. Thurston GD, Ito K, Lippman M, Hayes C. Reexamination of
London, England, mortality in relation to exposure to acid
aerosols during 1963-1972 winters. Environ Health Perspect
79:73-82 (1989).
46. Touloumi G, Pocock SJ, Katsouyanni K, Trichopoulos D. Short-
term effects of air pollution on daily mortality in Athens: a time-
series analysis. Int J Epidemiol 23:957-967 (1994).
47. Schwartz J, Dockery DW, Neas LM. Is daily mortality associ-
ated specifically with fine particles? J Air Waste Manag
46:2-12 (1996).
48. Laden F, Neas LM, Dockery DW, Schwartz J. Association of fine
particulate matter from different sources with daily mortality in
six U.S. cities. Environ Health Perspect (in press).
49. Castillejos M, Borja-Aburto VH, Dockery DW, Loomis D. Coarse
particles and mortality in Mexico City. Inhalat Toxicol 12(suppl
1 ):61-72 (2000).
50. Clarke RW, Catalano P, Murthy GG, Koutrakis P, Wolfson JM,
Sioutas C, Godleski JJ. Pulmonary function and inflammatory
response alterations following inhalation of concentrated urban
air. lnhalatToxicol 11:101-120(1999).
51. Clarke RW, Catalano P, Coull B, Koutrakis P, Murthy GG, Rice T,
Godleski JJ. Age-related responses in rats to concentration
urban air particles (CAPs). lnhalat Toxicol (in press).
52. Gordon T, Nadziejko C, Schlesinger R, Chen LC. Pulmonary and
cardiovascular effects of acute exposure to concentrated ambient
particulate matter in rats. Toxicol Lett 96-97:285-288 (1998).
53. Clarke RW, Coull B, Reinisch U, Catalano P, Killingsworth CR,
Koutrakis P, Kavouras I, Murthy GGK, Lawrence J, Lovett E, et
al. Inhaled concentrated air particles induce pulmonary inflam-
mation and hematological changes in canines. Environ Health
Perspect (in press).
54. Godden DJ, Seaton A, Soutar A, Crawford V, Elton R, McNerlan S,
Cherrie J, Watt M, Agius J, Stout R. Hematological changes asso-
ciated with exposure to particulate air pollution: results of a panel
study. In: Proceedings Third Colloquium Particulate Air Pollution
and Human Health, 6-8 June 1999, Durham, North Carolina.
55. Liao D, Creason J, Shy C, Williams R, Watts R, Zweidinger R.
Daily variation of particulate air pollution and poor cardiac
autonomic control in the elderly. Environ Health Perspect
107:521-525 (1999).
56. Pope CA Ill, Verrier RL, Lovett EG, Larson AC, Raizenne ME,
Kanner RE, Schwartz J, Willegas GM, Gold DR, Dockery DW.
Heart rate variability associated with particulate air pollution.
Am Heart J 138:890-899 (2000).
57. Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J, Lovett E, Larson A, Nearing B,
Allen GA, Verrier M, Cherry R, Verrier R. Ambient pollution and
heart rate variability. Circulation 1267-1273 (2000).
58. Peters A, Liu E, Verrier RL, Schwartz J, Gold DR, Mittleman M,
Baliff J, Oh JA, Allen GA, Monahan K, et al. Air pollution and
incidence of cardiac arrythmia. Epidemiology 11:11-17 (2000).
59. Peters A, Doring A, Wichmann HE, Koenig W. Increased plasma
viscosity during the 1985 air pollution episode: a link to mortal-
ity? Lancet 349:1582-1587 (1997).
60. Spengler JD, Thurston GD. Mass and elemental composition of
fine and coarse particles in six U.S. cities. J Air Pollut Contr
Assoc 33(12):1162-1171 (1983).
61. Burton RM, Suh HH, Koutrakis P. Spatial variation in particulate
concentrations within metropolitan Philadelphia. Environ Sci
Technol 30:400-407 (1996).
62. Suh HH, Allen GA, Koutrakis P. Spatial variation in acidic sul-
fate and ammonia concentrations within metropolitan
Philadelphia. J Air Waste Manag 45:442-452 (1995).
63. Suh HH, Nishioka Y, Allen GA, Koutrakis P, Burton RM. The
Metropolitan Acid Aerosol Characterization study: results from
the summer 1994 Washington, DC field study. Environ Health
Perspect 105(7):826-834 (1997).
64. Spengler JD. Harvard's indoor air quality respiratory health
study. Paper presented at the Indoor Air '87: The 4th
International Conference on Indoor Air Quality and Climate,
Berlin, Federal Republic of Germany, 1987.
65. Ozkaynak H, Xue J, Weker RA, Butler DA, Koutrakis P, Spengler
JD. The Particle TEAM (PTEAM) Study: Analysis of the Data;
Volume Ill: Final Report (EPA/600/R-95/098). Washington,
DC:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1996.
66. Ozkaynak H, Xue J, Weker RA, Butler DA, Koutrakis P, Spengler
JD. Project Summary, The Particle TEAM Study (PTEAM):
Analysis of the Data (EPA/600/SR-95/098). Research Triangle
Park, NC:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1997.
67. Koutrakis P, Briggs SLK, Leaderer BP. Source apportionment of
indoor aerosols in Suffolk and Onondaga counties, New York.
Environ Sci Technol 26(3):521-527 (1992).
68. Abt E, Suh HH, Allen GA, Koutrakis P. Characterization of indoor
particle sources: a study conducted in the metropolitan Boston
area. Environ Health Perspect 108:35-44 (1999).
69. Long CM, Suh HH, Koutrakis P. Characterization of indoor parti-
cle sources using continuous mass and size monitors. J Air
Waste Manag (in press).
70. Spengler JD, Treitman RD, Tosteson TD, Mage DT, Soczek ML.
Personal exposures to respirable particulates and implications for
air pollution epidemiology. Environ Sci Technol 19:700-707 (1985).
71. Rojas L, Suh H, Koutrakis P. Relationships among personal,
indoor, and outdoor fine and coarse particulate concentrations
for individuals with COPD. J Expos Assess Environ Epidemiol
10:294-306 (2000).
72. Tamura K, Ando M, Sagai M, Matsumoto Y. Estimation of lev-
els of personal exposure to suspended particulate matter and
nitrogen dioxide in Tokyo. Environ Sciences (Tokyo) 4:37-51
(1996).
73. Bahadori T, Suh HH, Rojas L, Koutrakis P. Characterization of
personal PM10 and PM2.5 exposures for individuals with COPD:
results from a pilot study in Nashville, TN. J Environ Epidemiol
Expos Assess (in press).
74. Janssen NAH, Hoek G, Harssema H, Brunekreef B. A relation-
ship between personal and ambient PM10. Epidemiology (suppl)
64(4:S45 (1995).
75. Lioy PJ, Waldman JM. The personal, indoor, outdoor concentra-
tions of PM-10 measured in an industrial community during the
winter. Atmos Environ 248:57-66 (1990).
76. Suh HH, Koutrakis P, Spengler JD. Validation of personal expo-
sure models for sulfate and aerosol strong acidity. J Air Waste
Manag 43:845-850 (1993).
77. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR, Part 50:
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter,
Final Rule (Regulation). Fed Reg 62:38651-38701 (1997).
78. Wallace LA. The TEAM Study: Summary and Analysis. Vol I.
U.S. EPA, EPA 600/6-87/002a, NTIS PB 88-100060. U.S.
Washington, DC:Environmental Protection Agency, 1987.
79. Tucker WG. Characterizing emissions and health effects of
sources of indoor air contaminants-introduction. Ann NY Acad
Sci 641:1-6 (1992).
80. Robinson J, Thomas J. Time Spent in Activities, Locations, and
Microenvironments: A California-National Comparison.
EPA/600/4-91/006. Washington, DC:U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 1991.
81. Rosenbaum AS, Axelrad DA, Woodruff TJ, Wei YH, Ligocki MP,
Cohen JP. National estimates of outdoor air toxics concentra-
tions. J Air Waste Manag 49(10):1138-1152 (1999).
82. Woodruff TJ, Axeirad, Caldwell J, Morello-French R,
Rosenbaum A. Public health implications of 1990 air toxics con-
centrations across the United States. Environ Health Perspect
106(5):245-251 (1998).
83. Exposure To Hazardous Air Pollutants in Los Angeles. Prepared
for Rep. Henry A. Waxman, Minority Staff Report, Committee
on Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, March
1, 1999.
84. Sittig M. Handbook of Toxic and Hazardous Chemicals and
Carcinogens. 2nd ed., Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, NJ. 1985.
85. The Merck Index: An Encyclopedia of Chemicals, Drugs, and
Biological (Annual) (Budavari S, O'Neil MJ, ed). Rahway,
NJ:Merck & Co 1996.
86. ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Benzene (Draft). Atlanta,
GA:Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 1991.
87. Rinsky RA, Young RJ, Smith AB. Leukemia in benzene workers.
Am J Ind Med 2:217-245 (1981).
88. Rinsky RA, Smith AB, Hornung R, Filloon TG, Young RJ, Okun
AH, Landrigan PJ. Benzene and leukemia: an epidemiologic risk
assessment. N EngI J Med 316)17):1044-1050 (1987).
89. Dann T. Ambient air measurements of benzene at Canadian
monitoring sites, 1987-1993, Ottawa, Ontario:Canada
Environment, Canada Environmental Techonology Centre, 1994.
90. Lewis CW. Sources of air pollutants indoors: VOC and fine par-
ticulate sources. J Expos Anal Environ Epidemiol 1(1):31-44
(1991).
91. Chan CC, Ozkaynak H, Spengler JD, Sheldon L. Driver exposure
to volatile organic compounds, CO, ozone, and NO2 under differ-
ent driving conditions. Environ Sci Technol 25:964-972 (1991).
92. Jo WK, Park KH. Concentration of volatile organic compounds
in the passenger side and the back seat of automobiles. J
Expos Anal Environ Epidemiol 9:217-227 (1999).
93. Lawryk NJ Weisel CP. Concentrations of volatile organic com-
pounds in the passenger compartments of automobiles. Environ
Sci Technol 30:810-816 (1996).
94. Weisel CP, Nicholas NJ, Lioy PJ. Exposure to emissions from
gasoline within automobile cabins. J Expos Anal Environ
Epidemiol 2:79-96 (1992).
95. U.S. EPA. Technical Background Document to Support
Rulemaking Pursuant to the Clean Air Act - Section 112 (g).
Ranking of Pollutants with Respect to Hazard to Human Health.
EPA-450/3-92-010. Research Triangle Park, NC:U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 1994.
96. WHO. Environmental Health Criteria for Formaldehyde. Vol 89.
Geneva:World Health Organization, 1989.
97. U.S. EPA. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) on
Formaldehyde. Cincinnati, OH:U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 1993.
98. Calabrese EJ, Kenyon EM. Air Toxics and Risk Assessment.
Chelsea, MI:Lewis Publishers, 1991.
99. National Library of Medicine. Hazardous Substances Databank
(HSDB, online database). Bethesda, MD:National Institutes of
Health, 1993.
100. Blair A, Stewart PA, Hoover RN, et al. Mortality among indus-
trial workers exposed to formaldehyde. J NatI Cancer Inst
76(6):1071-1084 (1986).
101. Kerns WD, Pavkov KL, Donofrio DJ, Gralla EJ, Swenberg JA.
Carcinogenicity of formaldehyde in rats and mice after long-
term inhalation exposure. Cancer Res 43:4382-4392 (1983).
102. Levine SA, Reinhardt MS. Biochemical-pathology initiated by
free radicals, oxidant chemicals, and, therapeutic drugs in the
etiology of chemical hypersensitivity disease. J Orthomol Psych
12)3):166-183 (1983).
103. Spengler JD. Personal communication.
104. California Air Resources Board. Air Quality Database. Air
Quality Branch. PT SD-99-01 1-CD, 1999.
105. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. AIRS: Aerometric
Information Retrieval System. [Available: http://www.epa.
gov/airs/].
106. Vallarino J, Spengler J, Nishioka Y, Kawai S, Yanagisawa Y.
Evaluation of material selection as a strategy for improving
indoor air quality in new residential construction. Presented at
Indoor Air 99, 8-13 August 1999, Edinburg, Scotland.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 4 * August 2000 633
