Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 43, pp. 9-19, 1982
Diseases Associated with
Immunosuppression
by Eugene R. Heise*
Impairment of any of the major components of the immune system (T-cells, B-cells,
phagocytes, complement) may result in clinical immunodeficiency. Immune defects can arise
from intrinsic or heritable defects of lymphoid elements, failure of normal cellular differentia-
tion, viral infection or other acquired causes. Clinical impairment of immunity is expressed as
a marked susceptibility to opportunistic and pathogenic organisms which are difficult to
control and by an increased risk of malignancy, allergy and autoimmune disease. Certain
immunodeficiency disorders are associated with aberrant immune regulation. The major types
of immune deficiency are characterized by unique patterns of infections depending on the level
at which the defect occurs and the pathogenic mechanisms of the parasite. The basic defects of
representative primary and secondary immunodeficiencies are discussed in relation to observed
immunologic consequences.
Overview
Normal host defenses require the participation
of four major immune systems: T-lymphocytes,
B-lymphocytes, phagocytes and complement. Dis-
eases associated with immunologic deficiency com-
prise a large group of disorders which are hetero-
geneous in their clinical expression and in their
pathogenesis. It is possible to categorize immuno-
deficiency disorders in several ways (1). However,
no completely satisfactory classification has thus
far emerged. One approach is to distinguish between
primary and secondary immunodeficiency (Table
1). Primary immunodeficiencies originate from a
defect within one or more of the four immune
systems. This group generally is subdivided into
disorders of the T-cell system, the B-cell system or
both B- and T-cells. Primary immunodeficiencies
typically are hereditary and are manifest early in
life as repeated infections caused by microorganisms
which produce infections in normal children that
are not serious. Secondary immunodeficiency may
be defined as a disorder affecting host defenses in
*Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Bowman
Gray School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina
27103.
February 1982
which the initiating factor arises outside of the
immune system or is not restricted to immune
elements. Secondary immune impairment occurs
more frequently than primary immunodeficiency
and commonly occurs in an older age group.
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) and nucleoside phos-
phorylase (NP) deficiency can be considered in this
category since the biochemical defect is not limited
to lymphocytes. Excessive loss of lymphocytes or
immunoglobulin from the gastrointestinal and gen-
itourinary tracts or the lymphatic system due to
congenital malformations, to surgical accidents, to
disease or to other cause can also depress immuni-
ty. Another common cause of immunosuppression
is infectious disease, especially viral disease, which
impairs the function of lymphocytes or the devel-
opment of lymphoid organs. The widespread use of
immunosuppressive agents and cytotoxic drugs in
recipients of organ transplants, cancer patients
and patients with autoallergic disorders can lead to
states of severe immunologic deficiency. Immuno-
logic recovery following irradiation may require as
long as a year. In protein-calorie malnutrition, a
marked lymphopenia develops and defects in lym-
phocyte function may occur.
Recent advances have greatly improved our
understanding of immunodeficiency disorders. The
9
advances include (1) the ability to isolate and
identify distinct subpopulations of lymphoid cells,
(2) the demonstration of functionally separate
subpopulations of lymphocytes with unique surface
antigens (2-5) and (3) the development of func-
tional assays for the different lymphocyte sub-
populations. These advances now permit immuno-
logic defects to be localized to a particular devel-
opmental or regulatory pathway. Similar advances
in leukocyte biology have identified and localized
many defects in neutrophils, macrophages and the
complement system. It should be emphasized that
the various immune systems are closely integrated
such that a defect in one system may have effects
in other systems. Thus, deficient T helper cells
may result in poor antibody responses. Improved
understanding of the precise site of the defects in
Table 1. Categories of impaired immune function.
Category
Primary immunodeficiency
Defects of T-lymphocytes
Defects of B-lymphocytes
Combined T- and B-cell deficiency
Secondary immunodeficiency
Multisystem biochemical defects
Loss of lymphocytes or immunoglobulin
Immunosuppressive infections
Chemical or physical immunosuppression
Nutritional deficiency
Neoplasia
Defects of specific immune mechanisms
Intrinsic defects of lymphoid cells
Impaired differentiation of lymphoid cells
Disorders of immune regulation
Defects of nonspecific defense mechanisms
Defects in phagocytosis or microbicidal killing
Defects of the complement system
immune mechanisms could lead to a new classification
of immunodeficiency based on mechanisms (Table
1). Already it is possible to distinguish several
mechanisms of defects in specific and nonspecific
immunity. For example, the defect can be intrinsic
if an abnormality exists in hemopoeisis, lympho-
poeisis or enzyme production, or there may be a
failure in the differentiation pathway leading to
effector T-cells or to antibody-secreting B-cells,
resulting from abnormalities of the microenviron-
ments which provide the short-range signals for
T- and B-cell differentiation. Another likely possibil-
ity is that of disturbances of immune regulation
involving T-cells, B-cells and macrophages. A
second group of functional disorders are those that
involve the nonspecific defense mechanisms. This
latter group would include intrinsic defects in
phagocytes affecting motility, phagocytosis or micro-
bicidal mechanisms and defects in the system of
complement proteins.
The principal manifestations of impaired host
defenses are recurrent and severe infections caused
by opportunistic microorganisms. These infections
are difficult to treat with appropriate antibiotics.
The types of infections provide important clues to
the particular system(s) deficient in function (Table
2). For example, recurrent infections with encap-
sulated pyogenic bacteria could indicate a defect in
either the B-cell system (immunoglobulin deficiency),
the phagocyte system or the complement system.
In contrast, patients with defective T-cell-mediated
systems are especially susceptible to infections by
intracellular parasites including fungi, bacteria and
viruses, which present as pneumonia or as chronic
infections of the skin, mucous membranes or other
tissues. Complications of combined B- and T-cell
deficiency generally are more serious than those
caused by B-cell deficiency.
Table 2. Some complications of immunodeficiency.
Defective system Etiology Pattern of infectious complications
T-cells SCID, Severe viral infections (chicken pox, measles, cytomegalovirus,
thymic hypoplasia, herpesvirus)
treated malignancy, Pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis carinii
immunosuppression Opportunistic fungi (Candida, Aspergillus, Nocardia)
Intrauterine or post-transfusion graft-versus host disease
B-cells IgG, IgM, or Severe infections with pyogenic bacteria, hepatitis virus, ECHO virus,
IgA deficiency live poliovirus vaccine and protozoa (Giardia)
Polymorphonuclear Defective killing Severe and/or recurrent pyogenic skin infections
leukocytes Superficial fungal infections
Chronic osteomyletis (Klebsiella and Serratia sp.)
Complement Severe and/or recurrent pyogenic infections
Environmental Health Perspectives10
ImmunodeficiencyAssociated with
Intrinsic Defects in Lymphoid
Cells
The most profound of the immunodeficiency
diseases are included in a heterogenous group
referred to as severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID), which is characterized by disorders in
both the T-cell and B-cell systems (Table 3). The
most severe of these is reticular dysgenesis arising
from a defect at the level of hematopoietic stem
cells which results in the virtual absence of T-cells,
B-cells and neutrophils. In the Swiss type of
SCID, lymphoid cells fail to develop, although
hematopoietic stem cells are normal. T- and B-cells
are greatly diminished, and neither responds to
antigenic stimulation. Another type is SCID asso-
ciated with a deficiency of adenosine deaminase
(ADA). This enzyme deficiency prevents the con-
version of adenosine to inosine and deoxyadenosine
to deoxyinosine, resulting in an accumulation of
deoxy ATP, which is toxic, especially to lympho-
cytes. Some patients with SCID have normal
numbers of B-cells. However, T-cell-mediated immu-
nity is almost always deficient. Some cases of ADA
deficiency have been reconstituted with red blood
cell transfusions (7). The ADA in the red cells
reduced the level of deoxy ATP and restored
lymphocyte function. ADA-deficient SCID patients
also have been successfully treated by bone mar-
row transplantation. Recently, Gelfand et al. (8)
described a form of SCID with normal numbers of
B- and T-lymphocytes. The lymphocytes from
these patients failed to proliferate when stimu-
lated in vitro. Investigation revealed that the
lymphocytes were defective in lateral mobility of
membrane receptors (frozen membrane) possibly
caused by a defect in the assembly of cytoplasmic
microtubules.
Another enzyme deficiency involves the enzyme
purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) which basi-
cally is a condition with impaired T-cell function
but with normal B-cell function. The enzyme PNP
catalyzes the conversion of inosine to xanthine and
of guanosine to guanine in the purine catabolic
pathway. The immunologic abnormalities in PNP
deficiency consist of diminished delayed hypersen-
sitivity responses, reduced numbers of circulating
T-cells and reduced in vitro proliferative responses
to mitogens, antigens and allogeneic cells. Serum
immunoglobulin levels and antibody responses are
normal. Evidence has been presented which sug-
gests that deoxyguanosine triphosphate is a toxic
metabolite responsible for the immunodeficiency
(9).
Immunodeficiencies Involving
Impaired Differentiation of
Lymphoid Cells
Disorders thought to involve impaired matura-
tion of T- and B-cells are listed in Table 4. Thymic
hypoplasia (DiGeorge syndrome) is believed to
result from an undefined intrauterine insult affect-
ing the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches.
Consequently, the microenvironment necessary for
T-cell development fails to develop. Patients with
the DiGeorge syndrome have increased suscepti-
bility to sinusitis, recurrent pneumonia and diar-
rhea. The infections are often caused by Candida
albicans and protozoa. The absolute lymphocyte
count is usually normal, with a reduced percentage
of T-cells and an increased percentage of B-cells.
T-cell-mediated functions are decreased markedly,
whereas B-cell functions are remarkedly normal,
considering that T-cells are required for initiation
of immune responses to most antigens. Fetal thy-
mus transplants have resulted in rapid restoration
of T-cell function even when the thymus transplant
was enclosed in a millipore filter, which suggests
that a lack of thymic hormones may be responsible
for this disease.
X-linked agammaglobulinemia is manifest by
early onset of recurrent infections with encapsu-
lated pathogenic bacteria (i.e., staphylococci, pneu-
mococci, streptococci and hemophilus) and with
several viruses, specifically, hepatitis virus and
enterovirus (ECHO virus and poliovirus). Patients
Table 3. Immunodeficiency diseases involving intrinsic defects in lymphoid cells.a
Immunologic defect
Clinical diagnosis Presumed level of basic defect Cellular abnormalities Functional deficiencies
SCID, reticular dysgenesis Hematopoeitic stem cell T-, B-, and phagocytes CMI, antibody, phagocytosis
SCID, Swiss type Lymphocytic stem cell T-, B-cells CMI, antibody
SCID with ADA deficiency Adenosine deaminase deficiency T + B cells CMI, antibody
Purine nucleoside
phosphorylase deficiency Absent or abnormal enzyme T-cells CMI
aAfter Waldmann et al. (6).
11February 1982
Table 4. Immunodeficiency diseases involving impaired differentiation of lymphoid cells.a
Immunologic defect
Diagnosis Presumed level of basic defect Cellular abnormalities Functional deficiencies
Thymic hypoplasia Failure of thymic development T CMI± antibody
X-linked agammaglobulinemia Failure of pre-B maturation ± suppressor T-cells B Antibody
Transcobalamine II deficiency Failure of B-cell differentiation, vitamin Plasma cells Antibody and
B12 deficiency phagocytosis
Common variable Failure of pre-B to B-cell maturation B Antibody
immunodeficiency (one type)
Ataxia telangiectasia Thymic failure and failure of terminal T, IgA, IgE
maturation of B., B cells plasma cells CMI ± antibody
Transient hypogamma- Impaired terminal differentiation of B-cells Plasma cells Antibody
globulinemia (infancy)
Selective IgA deficiency Failure of terminal differentiation of Ba IgA plasma cells IgA antibody
aAfter Waldmann et al. (6).
with this disorder exhibit low concentrations of all
immunoglobulin classes except IgE. These patients
lack circulating B-cells and plasma cells in stimu-
lated nodes. In contrast, the thymus is normal,
and normal thymic-dependent areas are present in
peripheral tissues. Evidence has been obtained
which indicates that the defect occurs at the level
of the transition from pre-B-cells to B-cells. Dosch
et al. (10) demonstrated that a patient with X-linked
disease possessed precursor B-cells which could
develop surface IgM after a period of in vitro
culture and that the transition from pre-B-cells to
antibody-producing cells could occur in vitro.
Deficiency in transcobalamin II, a protein impor-
tant in transport of vitamin B12 in the blood, is
associated with normal numbers of circulating
B-cells and T-cells (11). However, plasma cells are
absent and virtually no immunoglobulins or specific
antibodies are produced. Following vitamin B12
therapy the patient is able to make antibodies,
suggesting that vitamin B12 is necessary for the
transformation of B-cells into immunoglobulin-
producing plasma cells.
Common variable immunodeficiency comprises a
heterogeneous group of disorders associated with
high incidence of infections caused by encapsulated
extracellular organisms and reduced immunoglobu-
lins. One subgroup of common variable immuno-
deficiency apparently is caused by an intrinsic
defect in B-cell differentiation. This inference is
based on the demonstration that in vitro cultures
of whole or separated cell populations stimulated
with polyclonal B-cell mitogens did not synthesize
or secrete immunoglobulin molecules (12).
Ataxia-telangiectasia is associated with recur-
rent sinopulmonary infections and an increased
incidence of malignancy especially lymphoreticular
12
tumors. Abnormalities of both T-cell and B-cell
systems are present in most patients. The most
prominent abnormality in the B-cell system is a
deficiency of IgA and/or IgE. B-cells bearing
surface IgA are present, which indicates that the
defect probably is at the level of terminal differen-
tiation rather than an inability to synthesize the
alpha chain (H chain) of IgA.
Selective IgA deficiency is manifested by respi-
ratory and gastrointestinal disease as can be
expected because IgA plays an important role in
humoral immunity of mucosal surfaces. Moreover,
IgA deficiency is associated with an increased risk
of allergy, autoimmune disease and carcinoma.
Antibodies to IgA are relatively frequent in indi-
viduals lacking this immunoglobulin. In the major-
ity of patients an intrinsic defect in the B-cell
system leads to failure of IgA bearing cells to
develop into IgA synthesizing and secreting plasma
cells (13). An excess of IgA suppressor cells does
not seem to play a role in IgA deficiency.
Disorders Involving
Abnormalities of
Immunoregulatory Cells
Aberrant immunoregulation is postulated for
several autoimmune diseases (14) and immuno-
deficiency. Data supporting this hypothesis have
been obtained by various in vitro methods includ-
ing: determination of TM (IgM Fc receptor) and
TG (IgG Fc receptor) bearing T-cells, mitogen-
driven B-cell immunoglobulin synthesis and use of
monoclonal antibodies to T-cell differentiation anti-
gens. Using monoclonal antibodies, Reinherz and
colleagues (15, 16) demonstrated disturbances in
Environmental Health Perspectives
the normal immune homeostatic mechanisms in
several immunodeficiency diseases, autoimmune
disorders and other conditions (Table 5). Four
different patterns of T-cell disturbances have been
distinguished. The first type consists of a deficiency
of helper T-cells, which is observed in one type of
common variable immunodeficiency. A second group
of conditions includes acute graft versus host
disease (GVH), scleroderma, Sjogren's disease,
hemolytic anemia and sarcoidosis. This group is
reported to exhibit excessive numbers of activated
helper T-cells and reduced numbers of suppressor
T-cells. The third pattern is that of reduced
numbers of suppressor T-cells with adequate num-
bers of helper T-cells. This pattern is consistent
with results obtained by others who have enumer-
ated the TM (helper) and TG suppressor subsets
or have used mitogen-driven antibody secretion
assays for functional studies. A fourth pattern is
that of quantitatively increased numbers of acti-
vated suppressor T-cells. In this subset of common
variable immunodeficiency, the suppressor T-cell
abnormality probably plays a primary role. This is
suggested by experiments in which purified B-cells
and monocytes from which T-cells had been removed
were able to synthesize immunoglobulins in vitro.
Moreover, unseparated lymphocytes from these
patients synthesized IgM normally when they
were cultured in the presence of hydrocortisone
succinate, a drug which inhibits activation of
suppressor cells (13).
Immunodeficiency Associated with
Lymphoreticular Malignancies
Neoplasms of B- and T-cells frequently are
associated with disorders of cellular or humoral
immune mechanisms. These immunodeficiencies
are of particular interest in relation to mechanisms
of immune regulation. Several examples of B-cell
and T-cell malignancies will be considered.
Chronic lymphoblastic leukemia (CLL) is a neo-
plasm characterized by the accumulation of exces-
sive numbers of small lymphocytes in the blood,
bone marrow or other tissues. In more than 95% of
cases, the cells express surface immunoglobulin
that is restricted as to heavy-chain type, light-
chain type and antibody specificity. These findings
indicate that the CLL cells are clonally derived.
CLL frequently causes a secondary immunode-
ficiency which is characterized by decreased humoral
responses and immunoglobulin levels together with
some diminution of cell-mediated immunity (17).
Decreased synthesis is the major factor in the
reduced serum immunoglobulin levels (18). The
cause of the decreased immunoglobulin production
has not been defined, but does not appear to be
caused by excessive suppressor T-cell activity (19).
Multiple myeloma is a disease characterized by
monoclonal proliferation of plasma cells in the bone
marrow and lytic bone lesions. Usually, serum or
urine monoclonal myeloma paraproteins are pres-
ent. The paraproteins represent a homogeneous
population of immunoglobulins or Ig subunits,
especially light (L) chains (kappa or lambda). In
some cases myeloma proteins are found to have
specific antigen binding activity, often directed
against phospholipid moieties common to cell mem-
branes.
In certain animal models, the proliferation of
monoclonal plasma cells has been found to be reg-
ulated by T-cells and macrophages, similar to
the amplication and suppression of normal B-cell
differentiation. The function of residual polyclonal
B-cells is often markedly impaired in patients with
multiple myeloma leading to depression of humoral
immunity and to reduced heterogeneity of Ig
molecules in immunoelectrophoresis determinations.
To a lesser extent, nonspecific host defenses and
cell-mediated immunity also are impaired (20, 21).
A summary of the immunologic abnormalities is
shown in Table 6.
Table 5. Disorders of human T-cell subsets defined by monoclonal antibodies.
Phenotypea
Disease Presumed abnormality T4+ T5+ IA+
Subset of patients with common variable immunodeficiency Deficient TH cells I n n
Acute GVH, scleroderma, Sjogrens, sarcoid, Excessive TH cells (act.) with t I t
hemolytic anemia deficient Ts cells
Systemic lupus erythematosis Deficient Ts cells n I n
Subset of patients with common variable ID; infectious Excessive Ts cells (act.) n T t
mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus, chronic GVH
an = normal numbers ofa T-cell subset; I + = nonpolymorphic determinant of I-region associated-like protein; T4 = TH cell antigen
defined by a monoclonal antibody; T5 = Ts cell antigen defined by a monoclonal antibody.
February 1982 13
Table 6. Immunologic features of multiple myeloma.
Humoral immunity
Serum paraproteins (80%)
Urinary paraproteins (50%)
Moderately reduced levels of nonmyeloma immunoglobulins
Reduced or absent natural antibodies
Impaired antibody formation
Decreased synthesis and increased catabolism of immuno-
globulins
Reduced numbers of circulating B-cells
Suppression of mitogen-induced immunoglobulin synthesis
Nonspecific host defenses
Reduced levels of serum complement (ClQ, C2, C4)
Decreased granulocyte migration and adhesiveness
Decreased granulocyte lysozyme concentration
Cell-mediated immunity
Decreased ability to develop primary DH responses
Inconsistent depression of delayed hypersensitivity to
common antigens
Infectious complications
Recurrent bacterial infection is a common com-
plication of multiple myeloma. Bacterial infection
is the presenting feature in about 25% of myeloma
patients (22) and may be the immediate cause of
death (23). The major type of infections are
pneumonia caused by pneumococci or staphylococci
and urinary tract infections caused by gram-
negative organisms (E. coli, Pseudomonas, Proteus
and Kelbsiella) (24). The major immunologic defect
observed in myeloma patients is in the humoral
system. Broder and Waldmann (25) recently con-
cluded that at least one mechanism for the humoral
deficiency observed in myeloma patients is a block
in polyclonal B lymphocyte maturation and immu-
noglobulin synthesis. However, these patients also
have defects in antigen nonspecific host defenses
that include dysfunction of granulocytes and of the
complement system. These authors also conclude
that if a clinically significant abnormality of cellu-
lar immune function exists, it is smaller in magni-
tude compared to deficiency of humoral immunity.
In one study, untreated myeloma patients were
found to have circulating suppressor cells that
inhibited mitogen-induced immunoglobulin synthe-
sis (26). The suppressor cells were Fc receptor-
positive and nonphagocytic.
Hodgkin's disease is a malignant lymphoma
which is associated with increased incidence of
infection (27) and defects in T-cell-mediated immu-
nity (28). The abnormalities of cell-mediated immu-
nity and lymphocyte function are seen in a propor-
tion of untreated cases with early disease (stage I
and II). Moreover, the degree of depression is
related to the clinical stage of disease, i.e., deficiency
is more marked in advanced stages of disease
(stage III and IV), independent of treatment
14
(radiotherapy or chemotherapy) which is itself
immunosuppressive. Pretreatment absolute lym-
phocyte counts are significantly correlated with
clinical stage, skin test reactivity and life expec-
tancy in Hodgkin's disease (29, 30). Reduced skin
test reactivity to common microbial antigens or to
primary sensitization with dinitrochlorobenzene
(DNCB) is commonly observed (31-33). Decreased
delayed hypersensitivity is not specific for any
single antigen (anergy). In some cases, lympho-
cyte function as assessed by lymphocyte prolifera-
tion in vitro, is reduced at only low PHA concen-
trations (34). In more severe disease, decreased
proliferative responses to all concentrations of
PHA are observed (35). Significant reduction in
the percentages of E-rosette-forming cells (T-cells)
is an inconsistent finding (36, 37) which may be
related to the occasional finding that patient plasma
or serum can inhibit E-rosette formation (38) and
lymphocyte transformation (39). The inhibitors
present in plasma from active Hodgkin's patients
may be due to the presence of T-cell antibodies
(lymphocytotoxins) (40) or nonimmunoglobulins,
especially lipoproteins.
Several investigators have suggested that exces-
sive suppressor cell activity may be responsible for
the immune deficiency in Hodgkin's disease. For
example, Engleman et al. (41) reported that 41 of
70 (58%) of Hodgkin's disease patients had a
disproportionate number of circulating suppressor
cells capable of inhibiting mixed lymphocyte reac-
tions. Goodwin et al. (42) obtained data indicating
that the suppressors are glass-adherent, prosta-
glandin E2-producing mononuclear cells, which
suggests that macrophages are responsible for the
suppression. Interestingly, a defect in the ability
of peripheral monocytes from patients to ingest
and kill Candida organisms by a myeloperoxidase
independent system was reported recently (43).
The data strongly suggest that abnormal function-
ing macrophages are important in the pathogene-
sis of immunodeficiency in Hodgkin's disease.
Several neoplasms of immunoregulatory T-cells
have been investigated in recent years. Sezary's
syndrome is a form of T-cell lymphoma with
circulating malignant cells which have a propensity
for infiltrating the epidermis. About one half of
Sezary syndrome patients have a homogeneous
population ofneoplastic but functional helper T-cells
(44). Another interesting malignant disease of
regulatory cells is a T-cell leukemia of adult onset
which has been reported in Japan, near the site of
an atomic bomb explosion on the island of Kyushu.
In these cases there was no mediastinal mass. The
leukemia cells were identified as T-cells on the
basis of E-rosette formation and by cytotoxicity
Environmental Health Perspectives
using a heterologous T cell antiserum. Japanese
adult T-cell leukemia differs from Sezary syn-
drome in that typical Sezary cells are absent,
cellular infiltration of the skin occurs in the dermis
rather than the epidermis and infiltration of the
bone marrow occurs.
Immunodeficiency Associated
with Infectious Disease
Specific immunity to several viral diseases, such
as herpes, measles, rubella and vaccinia depends
on T-cell-mediated immunity. Primary or second-
ary immunodeficiency of the T-cell system is asso-
ciated with recurrent and often fatal viral disease,
as previously noted. Conversely, certain viruses
themselves are immunosuppressive when they infect
immunocompetent cells. The best examples of
immunosuppression secondary to viral disease are
the paramyxovirus infections (measles, mumps
and influenza). In these viral infections, delayed
hypersensitivity is depressed within the first few
days and persists for several weeks. The exact
mechanism responsible for anergy following mea-
sles infection remains uncertain. However, at least
three mechanisms can be considered. First, mea-
sles virus infection produces a lymphopenia, leav-
ing fewer effector cells available for eliciting delayed
hypersensitivity reactions. Second, measles virus
can infect stimulated and proliferating lympho-
cytes and thus may directly interfere with the
function of lymphocytes which are engaged in
specific immune responses. Third, measles virus
may compete with antigen for receptors on the
lymphocyte surface.
Depressed delayed hypersensitivity is also asso-
ciated with certain bacterial and fungal infections,
especially disseminated and granulomatous infec-
tions with intracellular organisms. Classic exam-
ples are miliary tuberculosis and active pulmonary
tuberculosis, coccidiomycosis, histoplasmosis, blas-
tomycosis and lepromatous leprosy (46). Anergy
has been significantly associated with both lym-
phocytopenia and leukocytosis. However, functional
abnormalities of lymphocytes or macrophages prob-
ably are responsible for anergy in these diseases.
Several laboratories have studied the regulation of
delayed hypersensitivity in experimental animal
models (47-49). Transient suppression of delayed
hypersensitivity can be accomplished by admin-
istration of specific soluble antigen to animals with
established skin test responsiveness. Antigen-
induced suppression of delayed hypersensitivity
February 1982
exhibits several features that resemble that seen
in anergy. Animals sensitized to multiple antigens
and challenged with mg quantities of a single
specific antigen exhibit a profound, but transient,
period of complete anergy which may persist for
several days or weeks. This period of nonspecific
unresponsiveness is followed by a second phase of
hyporesponsiveness which is specific for the chal-
lenge antigen (49). Dwyer et al. (48) obtained
evidence which strongly suggests that lympho-
cytes of a desensitized animal are competent but
are actively suppressed in vivo. These investiga-
tors suggested that the products of stimulated
suppressor T-cells exert a local effect on bystander
lymphocytes (50). Presumably both specific and
nonspecific suppressor factors are active at differ-
ent times in order to explain both phases of
anergy.
More recently, the relationship between granu-
loma formation and delayed hypersensitivity was
studied in our laboratory (51). The results of this
study indicated that dermal delayed hypersensitiv-
ity and allergic granuloma formation in the skin
are both suppressed in sensitized animals following
systemic challenge with specific antigen. In this
model, pulmonary granulomas were unaffected.
This data indicated to us that delayed hypersensi-
tivity and allergic granulomatous responses which
depend on circulating T-cells are controlled by the
same regulatory system.
Immunodeficiency Associated
with Autoimmune Disease
Immunodeficiency can occur in patients with
B-cell hyperreactivity as in systemic lupus eryth-
ematosis (SLE). An increased risk of infection
prior to therapy is likely, although firm evidence is
lacking. Pyelonephritis, pneumonia and septicemia
are relatively common. Organisms causing these
infections typically are pyogenic bacteria, espe-
cially Staphylococci. Although the basis of this
predilection of infections is uncertain, possible
explanations could include low serum complement
levels, abnormal leukocyte function and abnormali-
ties in regulatory T-cells. Individuals with IgA
deficiency seem to be predisposed to develop
autoantibodies and autoimmune disease. This asso-
ciation may be the result of an inability of the host
to prevent the entrance of antigens from mucous
surfaces that are sufficiently similar to autologous
antigens to induce an immune response to autolo-
gous tissue antigens or both.
15
Disorders Involving Excessive
Loss of Immunoglobulins and
Lymphocytes
Hypoimmunoglobulinemia may result from loss
of protein into the urinary and gastrointestinal
tract (Table 7). Loss of protein into the urine
occurs when there is a defect in the renal glomeru-
lar membrane or in renal tubules. In nephrotic
syndrome there is selective loss of the 7S immuno-
globulins (IgG, IgA, etc.) with little or no loss of
19S IgM.
Protein can also be lost into the gastrointestinal
tract; however, this rarely leads to clinically evi-
dent immunodeficiency. Intestinal lymphoangiectasia
is an exception because in this disease, loss of
immunoglobulins is accompanied by loss of lym-
phocytes secondary to abnormalities of lymphatic
channel development or other disease processes.
Patients with this disorder have abnormalities in
both cellular and humoral immunity. Serum con-
centrations of IgG, IgM and IgA are reduced
although the rate of synthesis is normal. The
defect in cell-mediated immunity is more profound
than that in humoral immunity. These patients
become markedly lymphopenic and are depleted in
long-lived lymphocytes, which is analogous to
thoracic duct drainage, a well-known and effective
immunosuppressive procedure.
Disorders of Neutrophilic
Phagocytes
Neutrophils are short-lived cells which are spe-
cialized for ingestion and destruction of certain
classes of microorganisms. Failure of chemotaxis
(directed locomotion), phagocytosis or intracellular
killing results in increased susceptibility to oppor-
tunistic infections with bacteria; however, patients
do not generally experience difficulties with viruses
or protozoa.
Disorders of neutrophil function may be divided
into intrinsic and extrinsic defects (Table 8). In
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), granulocytes
and monocytes are deficient in NADH or NADPH
oxidase or NADPH reductase. The defect in kill-
ing appears to be at the level of post-phagocytic
oxygen metabolism involved with the generation
of hydrogen peroxide (H202) or 02- Organisms
causing infection in CGD are almost always cata-
lase producers (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Serratia
marscens, Aspergillus). Catalase-producing organ-
isms rapidly destroy hydrogen peroxide, whereas
catalase-negative organisms, such as pneumococci,
do not destroy the available hydrogen peroxide of
the phagocyte which the cell uses to effect micro-
bial killing, most likely by interaction with myel-
operoxidase and halide (52).
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a rare multisystem
disorder. The striking morphologic disorder con-
sists of giant cytoplasmic inclusions derived from
azurophilic granules (lysosomes) which are present
in many cells, including granulocytes and mono-
cytes. Both types of phagocytes are deficient in
microbicidal and chemotactic activity. A primary
defect in tubulin affecting microtubule polymeriza-
tion and degranulation has been suggested as the
basis of the disorder.
Extrinsic causes of neutrophil dysfunction are
numerous and are often related to leucopenia or
decreased opsonization, abnormal chemotaxis or
other defects. When the total number of function-
ing neutrophils is reduced below a critical level
(- 1000/pul), infection is likely to ensue. Leukope-
nia is frequently drug-induced. Anti-inflammatory
drugs (e.g., corticosteroids) characteristically in-
duce abnormalities in neutrophil adherence and
migration in addition to many other actions. Another
mechanism is the premature destruction of neu-
trophils resulting from formation of neutrophil
antibodies, as in autoimmune neutropenia, which
may cause removal of neutrophils via antibody-
dependent lymphocyte-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).
In drug-induced immune neutrophenia, the cells
may absorb drug-antibody immune complexes which
may result in neutrophil destruction via an inno-
cent bystander mechanism.
Abnormal phagocytosis can be secondary to a
large number of other disorders. In diabetes, for
example, chemotaxis and bacterial ingestion is
decreased. Decreased phagocytic function is also
Table 7. Disorders involving excessive catabolism or excretion.
Diagnosis Presumed level of basic defect Immunologic defect
Familial hypercatabolic hypoproteinemia Hypercatabolism of serum proteins Decreased Ig levels
Myotonic dystrophy Hypercatabolism of IgG Decreased IgG levels
Nephrotic syndrome Sieving property of glomerular membrane Decreased IgG levels
Intestinal lymphangiectasia Disorder of lymphatic channels with loss of lymph fluid Diminished CMI ± AB
and cells
Environmental Health Perspectives16
Table 8. Neutrophil disorders.
Intrinsic Extrinsic
Enzymatic defects Leukopenia
Defective 02- and H202 generation Drugs and toxins
Chronic granulomatous disease Adrenocorticosteroids
G6PD deficiency Ethanol
Myeloperoxidase deficiency Aminopyrine, phenylbutazone
Degranulation defects Immune
Chediak-Higashi syndrome Neutrophil antibodies
Locomotion and chemotasis defects Radiation
Lazy leukocyte syndrome Disease
Aplastic anemia, acute leukemia
Deficiency of opsonins
Immunodeficiencies of Ig or complement
Neoplastic disease
Multiple myeloma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
secondary to burns, alcoholic cirrhosis malnutri-
tion and sickle cell disease.
Myeloperoxidase deficiency in leukocytes can be
hereditary or secondary to refractory anemias or
leukemias. In some cases, an increased susceptibil-
ity to Candida or staphylococci have been noted.
Myeloperoxidase reduces hydrogen peroxide and
in the presence of intracellular halide (iodine) leads
to production of a lethal substance, as previously
mentioned. The intracellular killing of these organ-
isms in vitro is delayed compared to normal
leukocytes.
Disorders of the Complement
System
The physiologic role of complement is clearly
illustrated by the diseases which occur in comple-
ment deficiency states or when complement is
activated under inappropriate circumstances. Pa-
tients with deficiencies in early components of the
classic pathway (i.e., Clr, Cls, C4, and C2) have
increased susceptibility to systemic lupus eryth-
ematosis or other collagen vascular diseases. This
finding may indicate the role of complement in
efficient destruction of viruses or in the removal or
inactivation of some types of immune complexes.
Complement C3 and C3b deficiency is associated
with recurrent infections with pyogenic bacteria.
About half of patients with deficiencies of the
terminal components, i.e., C5, C6, C7 and C8, have
recurrent infections with Neisseria organisms (gono-
cocci and meningococci), apparently because cytol-
ysis with these organisms is complement-dependent.
In conclusion, clinically apparent immunodeficiency
is associated with frequent and persistent infec-
tions. Recurrent infections with the same organ-
ism or with organisms of low pathogenicity together
with an incomplete response to appropriate antibi-
otics are suggestive of impaired immunity. Other
features of certain immunodeficiency disorders in-
clude an increased risk of malignancy, autoallergic
disease and allergy. Specific hereditary immuno-
deficiencies manifest additional anatomic and consti-
tutional features. Impaired T-cell immunity generally
is more serious than deficient B-cell immunity. In
secondary immunodeficiency, normal function gen-
erally is restored once the underlying disease or
condition is corrected.
REFERENCES
1. Horowitz, S. D. and Hong, R. The pathogenesis and
treatment of immunodeficiency. In: Monographs in Allergy,
S. Karger, Basel, 1977, pp. 1-198.
2. Gathings, W. E., Lawton, A. R., and Cooper, M. D.
Immunofluorescent studies of the development of pre-B
cells, B lymphocytes and immunoglobulin isotype diversity
in humans. Eur. J. Immunol. 7: 804-810 (1977).
3. Kung, P. C., and Goldstein, G. Functional and develop-
mental compartments ofhuman T lymphocytes. Vox Sanguin.
39: 121-127 (1980).
4. Reinherz, E. L., and Schlossman, S. F. Regulation of the
immune response. Inducer and suppressor T-lymphocyte
subsets in human beings. New Engl. J. Med. 303: 370-373
(1980).
5. Reinherz, E. L., Kung, P. C., Goldstein, G., and
Schlossman, S. F. A monoclonal antibody reactive with
the human cytotoxic suppressor T cell subset pre-
viously defined by a heteroantiserum termed TH2. J.
Immunol. 124: 1301-1307 (1980).
6. Waldmann, T. A., Strober, W., and Blaese, R. M. T and B
cell immunodeficiency diseases. In: Clinical Immunology,
C. W. Parker, Ed., W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1980,
pp. 314-375.
7. Cohen, A., Hirshhorn, R., Horowitz, S. D., Rubenstein,
A., Polmar, S. H., Hong, R., and Martin, D. W. De-
oxyadenosine triphosphate as a potentially toxic metabolite
in adenosine deaminase deficiency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(U.S.) 75: 472-476 (1978).
February 1982 17
8. Gelfand, E. W., Oliver, J. M., Schuurman, R. K.,
Matheson, D. S., and Dosch, H. M. Abnormal lympho-
cyte capping in a patient with severe combined
immunodeficiency disease. New Engl. J. Med. 301:
1245-1248 (1979).
9. Cohen, A., Gudas, L. J., Ammann, A. J., Stall, G. E. J.,
and Martin, D. W. Deoxyguanosine triphosphate as a
possible toxic metabolite in the immunodeficiency associ-
ated with purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency. J.
Clin. Invest. 61: 1405-1409 (1978).
10. Dosch, J., Percy, M. E., and Gelfand, E. W. Functional
differentiation of B lymphocytes in congenital agamma-
globulinemia. I. Generation of hemolytic plaque forming
cells. J. Immunol. 119: 1959-1964 (1977).
11. Hitzig, W. H., Dohmann, U., Pluss, H. J., and Vischer, D.
Hereditary transcobalamin II deficiency: Clinical findings
in a new family. J. Pediatr. 85: 622-628, (1974).
12. Siegal, F. P., Siegal, M., and Good, R. A. Suppression of
B-cell differentiation by leukocytes from hypogamma-
globulinemic patients. J. Clin. Invest. 58: 109-122 (1976).
13. Waldmann, T. A., Broder, S., Krakauer, R., Durm, M.,
Meade, B., and Goldman, C. Defect in IgA secretion and
IgA specific suppressor cells in patients with IgA deficiency.
Trans. Assoc. Am. Phys. 89: 219-224 (1976).
14. Fauci, A. S., Steinberg, A. D., Haynes, B. F., and
Whalen, G. Immunoregulatory aberrations in systemic
lupus erythematosis. J. Immunol. 121: 1473-1479 (1978).
15. Reinherz, E. L., Geha, R., Wohl, M. E., Morimoto, C.,
Rosen, F. S., and Schlossman, S. F. Immunodeficiency
associated with loss of T4+ inducer T-cell function. New
Engl. J. Med. 304: 811-816 (1981).
16. Reinherz, E. L., Parkman, R., Rappeport, J., Rose, F. S.
and Schlossman, S. F. Aberrations of suppressor T cells in
human graft-versus-host disease. New Engl. J. Med. 300:
1066-1068 (1979).
17. Miller, D. G. Immunologic disturbances in lymphoma and
leukemia. In: Immunologic Deficiency Diseases, M. Santer,
Ed., Brown and Co., Boston, 2nd ed., 1971, pp. 548-570.
18. Lio, A., Strober, W., Broder, S., Polmar, S. H., and
Waldmann, T. A. The metabolism of IgE in patients with
immunodeficiency states and neoplastic conditions. J. Clin.
Invest. 59: 743-755 (1977).
19. Fu, S. M., Chiarazzi, N., Kunkel, H. G., and Halper, J. P.
Induction of in vitro differentiation and immunoglobulin
synthesis of leukemic B lymphocytes. Clin Res. 26: 514A
(1978).
20. Fahey, J. L., Scroggins, R., Utz, J. P., and Szwed, C. F.
Infection, antibody response and gamma globulin compo-
nents in multiple myeloma and macroglobulinemia. Am. J.
Med. 35: 698-707 (1963).
21. Broder, S., and Waldmann, T. A. Characteristics of multi-
ple myeloma as an immunodeficiency disease. In: Progress
in Myeloma, M. Potter, Ed., Elsevier North Holland,
Amsterdam-New York, 1980.
22. Barandun, S., Morel, A., Skvaril, F., and Keller, H.
Immunoperturbation in paraproteinemia. Birth Defects 11:
95-98 (1975).
23. Twomey, J. J. Infections complicating multiple myeloma
and chronic lymphocyte leukemia. Arch. Intern Med. 132:
562-565 (1973).
24. Zinneman, H. H., and Hall, W. H. Recurrent pneumonias
in multiple myeloma and some observations on immuno-
logic response. Ann. Int. Med. 41: 1152-1163 (1954).
25. Broder, S., Humphrey, R., Durm, M., Blackman, M.,
Meade, B., Goldman, C., Strober, W., and Waldmann, T.
Impaired synthesis of polyclonal (non-paraprotein) immu-
noglobulins by circulating lymphocytes from patients with
multiple myeloma: Role of suppressor cells. New Engl. J.
Med. 293: 887-892 (1975).
26. Paglieri, T., and McKenzie, M. R. Studies on the patho-
genesis of an immune defect in multiple myeloma. J. Clin.
Invest. 59: 1120-1133 (1977).
27. Casazza, A. R., Duvall, C. P., and Carbone, P. P.
Summary of infectious complications in Hodgkin's disease.
Cancer Res. 26: 1290-1296 (1966).
28. Kaplan, H. S. The nature of the immunologic defect. In:
Hodgkin's Disease. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1972.
29. Young, R. C., Corder, M. P., Haynes, H. A., and DeVita,
V. T. Delayed hypersensitivity in Hodgkin's disease: A
study of 103 patients. Am. J. Med. 52: 63-72 (1972).
30. Swan, H. T., and Knowelden, J. Prognosis in Hodgkin's
disease related to lymphocyte count. Brit. J. Haematol. 21:
343-349 (1971).
31. Brown, R. S., Haynes, H. A., Foley, H. T., Godwin, H.
A., Berard, C. W., and Carbone, P. P. Hodgkin's disease:
Immunologic, clinical and histologic features of 50 untreated
cases. Ann. Intern. Med. 67: 291-302 (1967).
32. Sokal, J. E., and Primikirios, M. G. The delayed skin test
response in Hodgkin's disease and lymphosarcoma: Effect
of disease activity. Cancer 14: 597-607 (1961).
33. Levy, R., and Kaplan, H. S. Impaired lymphocyte function
in untreated Hodgkin's disease. New Engl. J. Med. 290:
181-186 (1974).
34. Faguet, C. B. Quantitation of immunocompetence in Hodg-
kin's disease. J. Clin. Invest. 56: 951-957 (1975).
35. Ziegler, J. B., Hansen, P., and Penny, R. Intrinsic defect
in Hodgkin's disease: Analysis of the phytohemagglutinin
dose-response. Clin. Immunol. Immunopath. 3: 451-460
(1975).
36. Bobgrove, A. M., Fuks, Z., Strober, S., and Kaplan, H. S.
Quantification of T and B lymphocytes and cellular immune
function in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 36: 169-179 (1975).
37. Anderson, E. Depletion of thymus dependent lymphocytes
in Hodgkin's disease. Scand. J. Haematol. 12: 263-269
(1974).
38. Fuks, Z., Strober, S., and Kaplan, H. S. Interaction
between serum factors and T lymphocytes in Hodgkin's
disease. New Engl. J. Med. 295: 1273-1278 (1976).
39. Gaines, J. D., Gilmer, A., and Remington, J. S. Deficiency
of lymphocyte antigen recognition in Hodgkin's disease. In:
International Symposium on Hodgkin's Disease, H. S.
Kaplan, Ed., Natl. Cancer Inst. Monograph 36: 117-121
(1973).
40. Mendius, J. R., DeHoratius, R. J., Messner, R. P., and
Williams, R. C., Jr. Family distribution of lymphocytotoxins
in Hodgkin's disease. Ann. Int. Med. 84: 151-156 (1976).
41. Engleman, E. G., Hoppe, R., Kaplan, H., Comminskey, J.,
and McDevitt, H. D., Suppressor cells in the mixed
lymphocyte reaction in healthy subjects and patients with
Hodgkin's disease. Clin. Res. 26: 513A (1978).
42. Goodwin, J. S., Messner, R. P., Bankhurst, A. D., Peake,
G. T., Saiki, J. A., and Williams, R. C., Jr. Prostaglandin-
producing suppressor cells in Hodgkin's disease. New
Engl. J. Med. 297: 963-968 (1977).
43. Estevez, M. E., Sen, L., Bachmann, A. E., and Pavlovsky,
A. Defective function of peripheral blood monocytes in
patients with Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.
Cancer 46: 299-302 (1980).
44. Broder, S., Uchiyami, T., and Waldmann, T. A. Neoplasms
of immunoregulatory cells. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 72: 724-731
(1979).
45. Uchiyami, T., Yodoi, J., and Sagawa, K. Adult T-cell
leukemia: Clinical and hematologic features in 16 cases.
Blood 50: 481-492 (1977).
46. Heiss, L. I., and Palmer, D. L. Anergy in patients with
18 Environmental Health Perspectives
leukocytosis. Am. J. Med. 56: 323, (1978).
47. Uhr, J. W., and Pappenheimer, A. M. Delayed hypersensi-
tivity. III. Specific desensitization of guinea pigs to protein
antigens. J. Exptl. Med. 108: 891-904 (1958).
48. Dwyer, J. M., and Kantor, F. S. Regulation of delayed
hypersensitivity. Failure to transfer delayed hypersensitiv-
ity to desensitized guinea pigs. J. Exptl. Med. 137: 32-41
(1973).
49. Heise, E. R., Rowland, E., and Beatty, N. Antigen and
immune complex induced suppression of delayed hypersen-
sitivity. In: The Reticuloendothelial System in Health and
Disease, H. Friedman, M. R. Escobar, and S. M. Reichard,
Eds., Plenum Press, New York, 1976, pp. 189-198.
50. Dwyer, J. M., Mangi, R. J., Gee, B., and Kantor, F. S.
Comparison of anergy of sarcoidosis and experimentally
induced anergy in guinea pigs. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 278:
28-35 (1976).
51. Schroff, R. W., Heise, E., Myrvik, Q. N., and Shannon, B.
T. Selective suppression of granuloma formation and delayed
hypersensitivity in rabbits. Inf. Immun. 28: 269-276 (1980).
February 1982 19
