Entviron mental Health Perspectives
101(Siuppl 5): 143-148 (19931)
Use of Rodent Carcinogenicity Test Results
for Determining Potential Cancer Risk to
Humans
by Peter F. Infante
A high proportion of "human" and "probable human" carcinogens as categorized by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer have been identified through observations in
workers. The excess cancer risk has often been quite high. Most substances known to cause can-
cer in humans are now known to cause cancer in animals. In the past two decades, an increas-
ing number of substances first shown to cause cancer in animals are now known to cause or are
highly suspected of causing cancer in humans (and quite often in workers). The observations
necessitate the use of rodent cancer test results for identifying and regulating potential envi-
ronmental carcinogens. The role of cell proliferation (CP) in the carcinogenic response is
important from a regulatory view in terms of both qualitative and quantitative evidence. If CP
influences the carcinogenic response, the use of such data to modify dose response in the low-
dose range is another factor that needs to be considered. Presentations at this symposium, how-
ever, indicate that CP data at the present time should not be incorporated into cancer risk
assessments. More simple concepts that affect quantitative dose response and that may result
in an artificially low estimated risk but could be adjusted for in the bioassay protocol have usu-
ally been ignored. A balanced approach would be to incorporate all known factors that influ-
ence quantitative estimates of cancer risk when conducting animal cancer bioassays and.
extrapolating those results to humans.
Introduction
During the past decade, advances have been made
toward understanding the mechanisms of carcinogene-
sis. As part of this research, attention has been focused
on the potential role of cellular proliferation (CP) in
chemical carcinogenesis. Some researchers believe
that CP per se is a cause of cancer (1-3). Some argue
that the standard cancer bioassay protocol is a poor
surrogate for identifying human carcinogens because
the cancer response observed in these studies is simply
a reflection of increased CP related to the high dose
used (2). Others have been more cautious in their
interpretation of data on CP as it relates to a carcino-
genic response (4-6).
The resolution of these arguments is important to
regulatory agencies. Qualitative evidence of carcino-
genicity plays a major role in hazard communication
Health Standards Program, Occupational Safety & Health
Administration, 200 Constitution Avenue N.W., Washington, DC
20210.
This paper was presented at the Symposium on Cell Proliferation
and Chemical Carcinogenesis that was held January 14-16, 1992, in
Research Triangle Park, NC.
requirements related to toxicologic information that
must be included on material safety data sheets or on
labels for specific chemicals and products. Quantitative
evidence is used to determine dose response, which in
many cases leads to establishment of permissible expo-
sure limits. If CP influences the carcinogenic response,
the use of such data to modify dose response in the
low-dose range is another factor that needs to be con-
sidered.
The above argument leads to the following ques-
tions: Can animal bioassays be used to predict carcino-
genic responses in humans? Are there alternatives to
animal studies for identifying carcinogens? Should CP
data be used to modify cancer dose response in experi-
mental studies? To answer these questions, one first
needs to review the type of data that have been avail-
able for identifying human carcinogens on a qualitative
basis to determine whether the use of animal cancer
results bear any relation to cancer response in humans.
Second, one needs to evaluate data for cancer dose
response in experimental animals and in humans for
the same substances to determine whether the experi-
mental protocols result in a quantitative overestimate
or underestimate of cancer risk to humans. Whether
CP should be used for modifying dose response as car-
P. F. INFANTE
ried out by regulatory agencies has been the subject of
this symposium. Below, I deal with each of the ques-
tions raised above with emphasis on occupationally
related cancer.
Occupational Cancer
To evaluate the benefits of animal cancer tests to
identify carcinogens, one has to look historically at the
data used to classify agents as carcinogens. Most sub-
stances now categorized as "human carcinogens" were
initially identified through case reports and more
recently through epidemiologic studies of industrial
workers who were unknowingly exposed to high levels
ofa large variety oftoxic substances and physical agents.
The bladder carcinogenicity of several aromatic
amines [2-naphthylamine, benzidine, 4-aminobiphenyl
(7) and more recently ortho-toluidine (8)] was identi-
fied through the study of industrial workers. Based
upon epidemiologic studies and case reports, several
additional aromatic amines that have been shown to
induce cancer in experimental animals have subse-
quently demonstrated an association between their
exposure and bladder cancer in workers. For example,
workers exposed to 4,4'-methylenedianiline (MDA)
have demonstrated a significant proportional increase
in mortality from bladder cancer (9). Case reports have
indicated an association between bladder cancers and
industrial exposure to 4,4'-methylenebis-2-chloroani-
line (MOCA) (10). Several of the benzidine-based dyes
are known to metabolize back to benzidine in both ani-
mals and humans (11); on the basis of this information
it is not unreasonable to consider all of the benzidine-
based dyes as human bladder carcinogens.
A large number of petrochemicals are also known to
be human carcinogens based on case reports and epi-
demiologic study of workers. For example, a causal
connection between chemical exposure and cancer has
been demonstrated among workers exposed to petro-
chemicals such as vinyl chloride [brain, liver, lung can-
cer (7)], bischloromethyl ether [lung cancer (7)], ben-
zene [leukemia and lymphoma (12)], automotive gasoline
[leukemia and lymphoma (13,14)], and formaldehyde
[nasal and lung cancer (15)].
The human carcinogenicity of a number of metals
was also determined through the study of industrial
workers. Arsenic is known to cause lung and skin can-
cer and angiosarcoma of the liver (7); chromium is
known to cause lung cancer (7), and nickel is known to
cause lung and nasal sinus cancer (7) among industrial
workers. Other metals such as beryllium and cadmium
were first identified as carcinogens in experimental
animals and are also known to cause cancer in humans
based on the study of workers (16-18). A recent study
of workers manufacturing inorganic lead for use in
gasoline demonstrates a significantly elevated risk of
rectal cancer (19).
The International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) has identified 56 substances or workplaces as
being causally connected to human cancer. Of these,
the majority have been identified through observa-
tions in industrial workers. If one were to add to this
list the substances classified by IARC as category 2A
carcinogens-mostly substances that have demon-
strated cancer in experimental animals and for which
there is some evidence in humans (though not consid-
ered conclusive by IARC)-an additional 46 sub-
stances and workplaces could be added to the list as
probably carcinogenic to humans. A large number of
this latter group were also identified through observa-
tions in workers.
Given that such a disproportionately high number of
human carcinogens have been identified in the work-
place and that such a large number of animal carcino-
gens are found at high exposure levels in the occupa-
tional setting, how much of environmental cancer can
be attributed to occupation? Is it 2-8%, as suggested
by Doll and Peto in 1981 (20)? Is it 2%, as mentioned
by Ames at this symposium (21)? Or is it 10-33%, as
suggested by Stallones and Downs (22)? The answer is
not known because data are not available to make such
a determination for the occupational contribution, nor
for the contribution from other factors as well. But
what is known is that a variety of occupational groups
have a high relative risk for site-specific cancers.
With knowledge of this high cancer risk among
workers, the Occupational Safety and Health Admin-
istration (OSHA) promulgated a standard in 1980 to
lay out the groundwork for identifying, classifying, and
regulating potential occupational carcinogens (23). It
was the intention ofthis policy to rely on animal cancer
tests when available to identify and control carcino-
gens in the workplace. In its carcinogen policy, OSHA
stated that the problems of regulatory agencies con-
cerning regulation of human exposure to possible car-
cinogenic substances was most eloquently phrased by
Richard Bates (23):
...it is often necessary to control exposure for which there
is some evidence of hazard before that evidence has reached
the point that scientists would universally regard as conclu-
sive. The alternative, to continue exposure until there is con-
clusive evidence of human hazard, is a form of human experi-
mentation that our society finds increasingly unacceptable.
Can Animal Bioassays Be Used for
Predicting Potential Carcinogenic
Responses in Humans?
Qualitative Evidence of Cancer in
Humans and Test Animals
Since the publication of the OSHA cancer policy in
1980, evidence supporting the use of animal cancer
tests as a surrogate for identifying human carcinogens
appears to be even stronger. As shown by Tomatis et
al. in 1989 (24), 91% of the substances classified by
144
USE OF RODENT BIOASSAYS FOR CANCER RISK
IARC as "human carcinogens" show sufficient evi-
dence of carcinogenicity in one or more animal species.
The three human carcinogens for which there was no
evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animals
were ethanol, soot, and asbestos-containing talc. The
sensitivity may be even better than the 91% indicated
by Tomatis et al. (24). Although ethanol has not
demonstrated carcinogenicity in experimental animals,
the epidemiologic data relate to alcoholic beverages,
and it is not clear whether the cancer response in the
latter studies is a result of the ethanol or contaminants
in the beverages. For soot and asbestos-containing
talc, experimental carcinogenicity studies have not
been conducted.
Likewise, there is a growing number of substances
that were first identified as being carcinogenic in
experimental animals and were later confirmed to
cause cancer in humans (24). If one adds to this list the
number of substances that IARC has categorized as
demonstrating sufficient evidence in animals and limit-
ed evidence in humans (25) (most of the 46 substances
listed in IARC category 2A), the list is much longer.
Therefore, the sensitivity of animal cancer studies for
identifying human carcinogens and the ability to pre-
dict human carcinogens based on the rodent bioassay
support the use of animal cancer tests to identify car-
cinogens.
Quantitative Evidence of Cancer
With regard to the extrapolation of quantitative evi-
dence of cancer in experimental animals to humans,
difficulties are recognized. OSHA has a preference for
determining dose response based on epidemiologic
studies when they provide good information on expo-
sure and relative risk of cancer. However, such data
are lacking for a majority of carcinogens that need to
be regulated. Thus, it often has been necessary for
OSHA to rely on experimental data to estimate dose
response for humans. In doing so, OSHA uses mathe-
matical models that give a statistical fit to the experi-
mental data. The agency makes a dose adjustment
based on differences in body weight between animals
and humans. The maximum likelihood estimate (MLE)
is used to provide the best estimate of risk, though ref-
erence has been made to the upper 95% confidence
limit.
With regard to quantitative extrapolation of cancer
results in animals to humans, the appropriateness of
such procedures can only be determined through a
comparison of toxicologic and epidemiologic study
results. There is a limited number of substances, how-
ever, for which adequate study results with good dose
information is available for both animal and human
studies. Nonetheless, analyses by Allen et al. (26), in
general, show a good correlation between the test
results in animals and humans.
For substances regulated under Section 6(b) of the
OSHA Act since the Supreme Court decision on ben-
zene in 1980, data indicate that the risks estimated
from animal and human data are similar. For benzene
(27) and ethylene oxide (28), the risks projected from
epidemiologic data were about 10 times higher than
those based on experimental data. For formaldehyde,
the risk projected from epidemiologic data also appear-
ed higher (15). On the other hand, the risk of cancer
estimated from epidemiologic data for cadmium is both
higher and lower than the range of risks projected
from experimental data (29).
Significance of Cancer Risks to
Workers
Ames has also raised the issue of regulating insignifi-
cant risks (21). Such a situation, however, does not
arise in relation to the occupational setting. If one con-
siders the new permissible limits (PELs) that have
been set for occupational carcinogens based on human
data (in order to avoid any argument about extrapola-
tion of risks from experimental data) since the Supreme
Court decision on benzene in 1980, the remaining risk is
still very high (30). The permissible exposure limit
(PEL) of 1 ppm for benzene was associated with an
occupational lifetime (45 years) excess cancer risk
(based on leukemia only) of 10 per 1000 employees; the
new arsenic PEL of 10 jtg/m3 was associated with an
excess lung cancer risk of 8-12 per 1000 workers; the
new asbestos PEL of 0.2 fibers/cm3 was associated with
an excess cancer risk (lung, gastrointestinal, mesothe-
lioma) of 6.7 per 1000 workers, plus an additional risk of
asbestosis of 5 per 1000 employees (30).
Because of economic feasibility, the agency conclud-
ed that it was not possible to set a low PEL for these
substances. Perhaps some of the ancillary provisions of
the standards will help to further reduce risk. For
example, with the benzene standard, the ancillary pro-
visions include an action level of one-half the PEL
which serves as an incentive for employers to achieve
this limit, thereby eliminating costs for compliance
with other provisions of the standard; medical surveil-
lance to identify and remove workers who develop var-
ious cytopenias; training, education, and exposure
monitoring requirements to inform workers of the haz-
ards and to identify and reduce fugitive emissions.
Thus, cancer risks to workers are extremely high
before regulation and, although significantly reduced
as a result of regulation, still remain high in compari-
son to risks regulated by other Federal agencies.
Are There Alternatives to Animal
Studies for Identifying
Carcinogens?
There are some people who object to the use of ani-
mal cancer tests to identify and regulate carcinogens
to protect the health of the public (1,2,31). The alterna-
tive is to rely on evidence in humans. Given the pro-
145
P. F. INFANTE
portion of human carcinogens that have been identified
among workers in the past, as indicated above, the
requirement of confirmatory evidence of carcinogenici-
ty in humans would translate to relying on the identifi-
cation of excessive cancer risks in workers more than
50% ofthe time. There are obvious problems with rely-
ing on observations in humans: the data arrive too late,
if at all, resulting in unnecessary death from pre-
ventable causes of cancer; should an occupational
cohort be identified for study, exposure data are often
lacking, making dose-response analyses impossible to
conduct; the latency period for most forms of cancer is
long, necessitating years of follow-up during which
time a tremendous cancer burden can accrue to work-
ers and other individuals, resulting in great medical,
administrative, and social costs to the public (32).
Even at the completion ofan epidemiologic study, sci-
entists may argue for a long time about whether the
evidence is conclusive or suggestive. Given the high
correlation between animal cancer test results and evi-
dence of cancer in humans, a delay in taking regulatory
action based on animal data until there is universal
agreement on the epidemiologic evidence could be con-
sidered a form of human experimentation (23), particu-
larly in reference to occupational exposures where such
high relative risks of cancer continue to be identified.
There also has been discussion about reducing the
doses in animal cancer tests because of the concern
that toxicity and increased CP is responsible for the
tumors observed in the animals tested at high doses.
However, elimination of the high-dose level in the test-
ing protocol will ultimately result in lessened sensitivi-
ty in the tests and further reliance on human studies to
identify carcinogens.
Should CP Data Be Used to Modify
Cancer Risk Assessments?
Two of the questions raised at the beginning of this
symposium were: Should CP data be used to modify
quantitative estimates of cancer risk? How should such
data be used (33)? From presentations and discussions
of this issue, it seems too early to answer these ques-
tions. However, if, in the future, data on CP appear to
be relevant for modifying quantitative cancer risk
assessments for specific chemicals, regulatory agencies
would presumably make such adjustments (and seek
public comment) provided that mechanistic informa-
tion is available to indicate how such data affect the
cancer dose response and agreement is reached on how
such data are to be incorporated into risk assessments.
It is always attractive to incorporate new data into
the quantitative risk assessment analyses. In this spe-
cific case, the use of CP data may give the superficial
appearance that risk assessment methodology is being
improved because information at the cellular and sub-
cellular level is being used to modify dose response.
However, the use of such data to modify dose response
has not been justified.
OSHA conducts risk assessment and promulgates
permissible exposure levels in an open process before
the public. Any individual with an interest in the sub-
ject of the regulation is invited to participate in the
informal rule-making process. If information in the
future indicates that CP data should be incorporated
into risk assessment for a particular substances, the
agency will go as far as the scientific data allow.
Some Factors in the NTP Bioassay
That Result in Underestimation of
Cancer Risk
There may be some concern that lack of use of CP
data may result in overestimation of cancer risks in the
low-dose range when extrapolating from animals to
humans. However, in addition to factors related to
underestimation of cancer risks when extrapolating
from animals to humans, as mentioned by Bailar et al.
(34), there are a number of factors related to current
bioassay procedures that result in underestimation of
risk. These factors, as mentioned below, could be taken
into consideration with data currently available.
Adjustments for these factors, however, are not
included in the estimates of cancer risk based on can-
cer bioassay data.
First, most risk assessments based on cancer bioas-
says do not take into consideration "wasted dose," as
they still employ the instantaneous cancer model. In
the animal cancer studies, dose is usually counted until
the animals die or until terminal sacrifice, at which time
histopathology is conducted to evaluate tumor
response. In this manner, dose is counted up to the time
of death. Hence, one is indirectly making the assump-
tion that the tumors developed at the time of terminal
sacrifice or at the time of death. For this reason, the
tumors are being considered as if they occurred instan-
taneously in relation to the final dose received by the
animals. (This is also the case with risk assessments
based on epidemiologic data, but the impact is not as
great because most deaths occur when the worker is no
longer exposed to the substance under study.) Thus,
dose is usually overestimated in the dose-response
analyses based on the rodent bioassay.
Second, the standard National Toxicology Program
(NTP) bioassay protocol uses a 24-month sacrifice.
This aspect of the protocol for the rat portion of the
studies will usually underestimate the yield of tumors
because many tumors induced by the test substances
may not appear until after this time period in the life
span of the rat. For example, if one looks to the cancer
bioassay for cadmium, the first lung cancer was not
observed in Wistar rats until age 22 months, and by
the 31-month terminal sacrifice, 75% of the animals in
the high-dose group developed lung carcinoma (35). In
the low-dose group, 25% of the animals developed lung
cancer. A 24-month sacrifice would have resulted in a
nonsignificant increase in cancers, and it would have
146
USE OF RODENT BIOASSAYS FOR CANCER RISK 147
been erroneously concluded that cadmium was not car-
cinogenic. One of the justifications for the 24-month
sacrifice is that the background cancer rates rise to
such an extent at 24 months that it becomes difficult
after that age to conduct a proper histopathologic eval-
uation. Nevertheless, the current procedure still
results in an underestimation of the cancer yield. A
possible solution to the problem would be to restrict
caloric intake of the animals and extend the terminal
sacrifice to 30 months.
Third, most risk assessments have used a cumulative
dose concept in estimating dose associated with cancer
risk (36). Yet, this assumption may not be correct,
resulting in overestimation of dose necessary for mani-
festation of the toxic effect. There is ample evidence
with a well-studied substance such as benzene that
cumulative dose is not the correct measure of dose.
The degree of toxicity from benzene exposure is relat-
ed to the mode in which the cumulative dose is
received. Intermittent exposure to a lesser cumulative
dose results in more aplastic anemia, red blood cell
reduction, a greater suppression of polychromatic ery-
throcytes, and a greater incidence of cancer in experi-
mental animals as compared to the full dose given on a
more continuous basis (12). Most of the cancer risk
assessments based on cancer bioassays or epidemiolog-
ic studies have used a cumulative dose concept.
Fourth, in the rodent bioassay, animals are exposed
to a single test chemical at a time, and yet human pop-
ulations are exposed from prenatal life through child-
hood to adult life to a large variety of carcinogens and
other conditions that may amplify the carcinogenic
response. Although relatively little research has been
conducted to evaluate interaction of carcinogenic expo-
sures with other factors (e.g., medications, immune
deficiency, hormonal imbalances), additive and syner-
gistic interaction between carcinogens and other toxic
substances has been demonstrated repeatedly (37-39).
Thus, single chemical administration to experimental
animals will underestimate quantitative cancer risk
when extrapolating to humans.
The above factors are known to underestimate cancer
risk when conducting dose-response analyses based on
the rodent bioassay. In some of these situations, it
would be relatively simple to make the necessary cor-
rections, yet they are not made. On the other hand, it
seems there is a fair amount of discussion about using
cell proliferation data to adjust quantitative risk
assessments when the merits of such procedures are
speculative. Prediction of cancer risk to humans by use
of experimental data will only improve when all factors
known to be related to cancer response are incorporat-
ed into the procedure.
REFERENCES
1. Abelson, P. H. Testing for carcinogens with rodents. Science
249:1357 (1990).
2. Ames, B. N., and Gold, L. S. Too many rodent carcinogens: mito-
genesis increases mutagenesis. Science 249: 970-971 (1990).
3. Cohen, S. M., and Ellwein, L. B. Cell proliferation in carcinogen-
esis. Science 249: 1007-1011 (1990).
4. Weinstein, I. B. Mitogenesis is only one factor in carcinogenesis.
Science 251: 387-388 (1991).
5. Pererra, F. P. Carcinogens and human health: Part 1. Science
250: 1644-1645 (1991).
6. Rall, D. P. Carcinogens and human health: Part 2. Science 251:
10-11 (1991).
7. IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Humans, Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating
of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42. International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, 1987.
8. Ward, E., Carpenter, A., Markowitz, S., Roberts, D., and
Halperin, W. Excess number of bladder cancers in workers
exposed to ortho-toluidine and aniline. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 83:
501-506 (1991).
9. NIOSH. Health Hazard Evaluation Report No. HETA 82-146-
1388, Boeing Vertol Company, Philadelphia, PA, National
Institutes for Occupational Safety and Health, Washington, DC,
(1983).
10. Ward, E., Halperin, W., Thun, M., Grossman, H. B., Fink, B.,
Koss, L., and Osorio, A. M. Bladder tumors in two young males
occupationally exposed to MBOCA. Am. J. Ind. Med. 14:267-272
(1988).
11. OSHA and NIOSH. Health Hazard Alert: Benzidine-, o-
Tolidine-, and o-Dianisidine-Based Dyes. DHHS (NIOSH)
Publication No. 81-106, Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, Washington, DC, 1980.
12. Infante, P. F. Benzene and leukemia; the 0.1 ppm ACGIH pro-
posed threshold limit value for benzene. Appl. Occup. Environ.
Hyg., 7: 253-262 (1992).
13. Schwartz, E. S. Proportionate mortality ratio analysis of auto-
mobile mechanics and gasoline service station workers in New
Hampshire. Am. J. Ind. Med. 12: 91-99 (1987).
14. Infante, P. F., Schwartz, E., and Cahill, R. Benzene in petrol: a
continuing hazard. Lancet ii: 814-815 (1990).
15. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Occupational
Exposure to Formaldehyde: Final Rule. Fed. Reg. 52: 46168-
46312 (1987).
16. Infante, P. F., Wagoner, J. K., and Sprince, N. L. Mortality pat-
terns from lung cancer and non-neoplastic respiratory disease
among white males in the Beryllium Case Registry. Environ.
Res. 21: 35-43 (1980).
17. Wagoner, J. K., Infante, P. F., and Bayliss, D. L. Beryllium: an
etiologic agent in the induction of lung cancer, non-neoplastic
respiratory disease and heart disease among industrially
exposed workers. Environ. Res. 21: 15-34 (1980).
18. Elinder, C. G., Kjellstrom, T., Hogstedt, C., Andersson, K., and
Spang, G. Cancer mortality of cadmium workers. Br. J. Ind.
Med. 42: 651-655 (9185).
19. Fayerweather, W. E., Karns, M. E., Nuwayhid, I. A., Nelson,
T. J., Cohen, J. J., MacDonald, B. S., and Gilby, P. G. An
Epidemiologic Study of Cancer Risk following Exposure to
Organic Lead among the DuPont Company's Chambers Works
Employees. DuPont Company, Wilmington, DE [Document sub-
mitted to EPA under the Toxic Substances Control Act 8(e)
Provision], 1991.
20. Doll, R., and Peto, R. The causes of cancer: Quantitative esti-
mates of avoidable risk of cancer in the United States today. J.
Natl. Cancer Inst. 66:1191-1308 (1981).
21. Ames, B. N. Shigenaga, M. K., and Gold, L. S. DNA lesions,
inducible DNA repair, and cell division: three key factors in
mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 101
(Suppl. 5): 35-44 (1993).
22. Stallones, R. A., and Downs, T. A Critical Review of Estimates
of the Fraction of Cancer in the United States Related to
Occupational Factors. Prepared by Research Statistics, Inc.
under contract from the American Industrial Health Council,
Houston, TX, and B. F. Goodrich Company, 1978.
23. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Identification,
148 P. F. INFANTE
classification and regulation of potential occupational
Carcinogens. Fed. Reg. 45: 5002-5296 (1980).
24. Tomatis, L., Antero, A., Wilbourn, J., and Shuker, L. Human
carcinogens so far identified. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 80: 795-807
(1989).
25. Huff, J., and Rall, D. Relevance to humans of carcinogenesis
results from laboratory animal toxicology studies. In: Maxcy-
Rosenau-Last's Public Health and Preventive Medicine, 13th ed.
(J. M. Last and R. B. Wallace, Eds.) Appleton and Lange,
Norwalk, CT, 1992, pp. 433-440; 453-457.
26. Allen, A. C., Crump, K. S., and Shipp, A. M. Correlation
between carcinogenic potency of chemicals in animals and
humans. Risk Anal. 8: 531-547 (1988).
27. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Occupational
exposure to benzene: final rule. Fed. Reg. 52: 34460-34578
(1987).
28. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Occupational
exposure to ethylene oxide: final rule. Fed. Reg. 49: 25734-25809
(1984).
29. OSHA. Occupational exposure to cadmium; final rule. Fed. Reg.
57:42102-42463 (1992).
30. Infante, P. F., and Pohl, G. K. Living in a chemical world:
Actions and reactions to industrial carcinogens. Teratog.
Carcinog. Mutagen. 8:225-249 (1988).
31. Abelson, P. H. Diet and cancer in humans and rodents. Science
255:141 (1992).
32. Infante, P. F. Prevention versus chemophobia: a defence of
rodent carcinogenicity tests. Lancet ii: 538-540 (1991).
33. Melnick, R. L., Barrett, J. C., Huff, J., Maronnpot, R. R., Lucier,
G., Popp, J. A., and Portier, C. J. Cell proliferation and chemical
carcinogenesis: Symposium overview. Environ. Health Per-
spect. 101 (Suppl. 5): 3-8 (1993).
34. Bailar, J.C., III, Crouch, E. A. C., Shaikh, R., and Spiegelman,
D. One-hit models of carcinogenesis: conservative or not? Risk
Anal. 8:485-497 (1988).
35. Takenaka, S., Oldiges, H., Konig, H., Hochrainer, D., and
Oerdorster, G. Carcinogenicity of cadmium chloride aerosols in
W rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 70: 367-371 (1983).
36. White, M. C., Infante, P. F., and Chu, K. C. A quantitative esti-
mate of leukemia mortality associated with occupational expo-
sure to benzene. Risk Anal. 2: 199-203 (1982).
37. Bingham, E., Neimeier, R. W., and Reid, J. B. Multiple factors in
carcinogenesis. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 271: 14-21 (1976).
38. Tomatis, L. The value of long-term testing for the implementa-
tion of primary prevention. In: Origins of Human Cancer, Vol. 4
(H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. Winston, Eds.), Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp.
1339-1357.
39. Saffiotti, U. Identifying and defining chemical carcinogens. In:
Origins of Human Cancer, Vol. 4 (H. H. Hyatt, J. D. Watson, and
J. A. Winston, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp. 1311-1326.
