Metabolism of Trichloroethylene
Lawrence H. Lash,1 Jeffrey W. Fisher,2 John C. Lipscomb,3 and Jean C. Parker4
'Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan USA; 2Toxicology Division, Armstrong
Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio USA; 3National Center for Environmental Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, Ohio USA; 4National Center for Environmental Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC USA
A major focus in the study of metabolism and disposition of trichloroethylene (TCE) is to identify
metabolites that can be used reliably to assess flux through the various pathways of TCE
metabolism and to identify those metabolites that are causally associated with toxic responses.
Another important issue involves delineation of sex- and species-dependent differences in
biotransformation pathways. Defining these differences can play an important role in the utility of
laboratory animal data for understanding the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of TCE in
humans. Sex-, species-, and strain-dependent differences in absorption and distribution of TCE may
play some role in explaining differences in metabolism and susceptibility to toxicity from TCE
exposure. The majority of differences in susceptibility, however, are likely due to sex-, species-, and
strain-dependent differences in activities of the various enzymes that can metabolize TCE and its
subsequent metabolites. An additional factor that plays a role in human health risk assessment for
TCE is the high degree of variability in the activity of certain enzymes. TCE undergoes metabolism
by two major pathways, cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent oxidation and conjugation with
glutathione (GSH). Key P450-derived metabolites of TCE that have been associated with specific
target organs, such as the liver and lungs, include chloral hydrate, trichloroacetate, and
dichloroacetate. Metabolites derived from the GSH conjugate of TCE, in contrast, have been
associated with the kidney as a target organ. Specifically, metabolism of the cysteine conjugate of
TCE by the cysteine conjugate ,B Iyase generates a reactive metabolite that is nephrotoxic and may
be nephrocarcinogenic. Although the P450 pathway is a higher activity and higher affinity pathway
than the GSH conjugation pathway, one should not automatically conclude that the latter pathway is
only important at very high doses. A synthesis of this information is then presented to assess how
experimental data, from either animals or from in vitro studies, can be extrapolated to humans for
risk assessment. Key words: conjugate beta-lyase, cysteine glutathione, cytochrome P450,
glutathione S-transferases, metabolism, sex dependence, species dependence, tissue dependence,
trichloroethylene. - Environ Health Perspect 1 08(suppi 2):177-200 (2000).
http.//ehpnetl.niehs.nih.gov/docs/2000/suppl-2/1 77-2001ash/abstract.html
An understanding of the importance of each
pathway of trichloroethylene (TCE) metabo-
lism is critical for determining susceptibility,
target organ specificity, and extrapolation of
animal data to humans. Both a qualitative
and a quantitative understanding of sex and
species differences in metabolism should
allow more accurate physiologically based
pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to be
done and, hence, more accurate risk assess-
ments to be made. Of course, the ability to
obtain some metabolism data from human
tissue enables comparison of modeling data
with actual data and assessment of the accu-
racy ofthe PBPK models. The final section of
the review highlights some of the principal
remaining questions and research needs relat-
ing to metabolism ofTCE.
A scheme summarizing the major meta-
bolic pathways for TCE is shown (Figure 1).
As described below and in other reviews in this
monograph, the metabolic flux through the
oxidative and glutathione (GSH)-dependent
pathways differ in each tissue. Hence, modes
of action for each target organ, which are
largely dependent on the chemical species
generated, will differ. Most of the focus on
the oxidative pathway has been on the liver,
which has the highest activities of any tissue
of the various isoforms of cytochrome P450
(P450). P450-derived metabolites have been
directly associated with liver injury. The
lungs are additional target organs for which
P450-derived metabolites have been linked to
toxic and pathologic processes. Although
P450 activity is present in the kidneys, to
date the nephrotoxic and potential nephro-
carcinogenic effects of TCE have only been
associated with metabolites derived from the
GSH conjugation pathway. As described in
subsequent sections of this review, the reac-
tions of the GSH conjugation pathway, with
the exception of the initial conjugation step,
which occurs predominantly in the liver but
can also occur in extrahepatic tissues, occur in
the kidneys. This is caused by tissue-selective
localization of transport processes and bioac-
tivation steps (i.e., the cysteine conjugate
3-lyase [,-lyase]) in epithelial cells of the
renal proximal tubules.
For the ultimate purpose of human
health risk assessment, it is important to put
the metabolism data in the context of actual,
potential exposures. Hence, for most
environmental exposures to TCE, such as
those that may occur with contaminated
drinking water, rates of metabolism in
humans may be extremely small because of
high Km and low V. values relative to those
found in rodents. At higher occupational
exposures to TCE, however, many of these
metabolic pathways may be quantitatively sig-
nificant in humans as well. A discussion of
exposure levels in the human population is
beyond the scope of this review. Readers are
referred to the review by Wu et al. (1) on
TCE exposure assessment and the review on
PBPK modeling by Clewell et al. (2) in this
monograph for more detailed discussions of
exposures that are relevant to humans.
In Vivo Absorption and
Distribution of TCE
As a result of its chemical properties (e.g.,
volatility, lipophilicity), TCE is readily
absorbed across biological membranes. For
human exposures, TCE is considered to be an
eye and skin irritant. There are essentially
three types of exposures to consider for
humans or laboratory animals: inhalation,
dermal, and oral. Exposure is usually either
from TCE vapor or from TCE liquid. In
either form, TCE is rapidly and extensively
absorbed through the lungs or gastrointestinal
tract, respectively. Absorbed TCE is then sub-
sequently distributed to different target
organs (e.g., lungs, liver, kidneys, nervous sys-
tem) via the circulatory system.
After inhalation exposure, TCE is rapidly
and extensively absorbed through the alveolar
endothelium due to a high blood/gas parti-
tion coefficient. Although absorption is high
in all cases, blood/gas partition coefficients
vary significantly among species (Table 1).
Since the blood/gas partition coefficient in
humans is approximately 1.5- and 2.5-fold
lower than that in mice and rats, respectively,
This article is part of the monograph on Trichloroethylene
Toxicity.
Address correspondence to L.H. Lash, Dept. of
Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, 540 East Canfield Ave., Detroit, Ml 48201.
Telephone: (313) 577-0475. Fax: (313) 577-6739.
E-mail: l.h.lash@wayne.edu
The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or
policies of the U.S. government agencies.
Received 20 October 1999; accepted 21 January
2000.
177Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
LASH ET AL.
this suggests that delivery of TCE to the
circulatory system for translocation to target
organs may be significantly less efficient in
humans than in rodents and is a factor that
may need to be taken into account when
using animal data in a risk assessment analysis
for TCE.
Dermal absorption from exposure to TCE
vapor is negligible, although direct skin con-
tact with TCE liquid may lead to significant
absorption. Since a large proportion of the
TCE that is absorbed dermally in humans is
excreted unchanged through the lungs and
this is not the usual route of exposure to
TCE, dermal absorption is not considered to
be a major factor in the risk assessment analy-
sis (3). These data have been reviewed by
Davidson and Beliles (4). It should be noted,
however, that a study ofdermal absorption of
dilute, aqueous solutions ofTCE and similar
organic solvents in hairless guinea pigs indi-
cated that significant absorption occurs (5).
This type of exposure mimics that of the
human population to drinking water contam-
inated with TCE. Hence, dermal absorption
should be considered in risk assessment analyses
for this type ofexposure.
GST/
Cl SG
H>=<Cl
H H
Cla= (D
j3-Lyase
ICl S
H>=<Cl j
4
Cytotoxicity
Mutagenicity
e.
HN~
Ci :0aC .~~~~~~~~~~~
cl cI
H CI
1
Besides inhalation, oral absorption is a
major factor in exposure to TCE. Since TCE
is uncharged, nonpolar, and highly lipophilic,
gastrointestinal absorption is extensive and
occurs by passive diffusion. One would
expect, therefore, that oral absorption would
be a nonvarying element in the pharmaco-
kinetics ofTCE. However, differences in oral
absorption of TCE are evident when TCE is
administered either in water or corn oil. For
example, Withey et al. (6) demonstrated that
peak blood concentrations of TCE in rats
given an intragastric dose (18 mg/kg) in water
was nearly 15-fold higher than those in rats
given the same dose in the same volume of
corn oil (14.7 vs 1.0 pg/mL). Hence, the
authors concluded that gastrointestinal
absorption of TCE can be limited by the
absorption ofthe vehicle. The vehicle used in
exposures in animal studies, therefore, needs
to be taken into account when extrapolating
animal exposure data for human health risk
assessment.
As a consequence of differences in blood
flow and overall metabolic rate, species differ-
ences exist in the fraction of administered
dose of TCE that is available for conversion
P-450
[TCE-Oxide
?- or
6 TCE-O-P-4
C12CH- C,
('
0
OH.CH2-C,
NH-(CH220H
/ 7*
50 /
HO OH
0
_
OH
C13C-C s C13C-CH"
\H 'OH
2b
C13C CCC13CCH20H
\OH 1*I
C12CH -C\OH
10Q * Ci3CCH20-gluc
CICH
4H HO OH
14*
Figure 1. Scheme of metabolism of TCE. Metabolites marked with an asterisk are known urinary metabolites.
Metabolites: 1 = TCE; 2 = DCVG; 3 = DCVC; 4 = 1,2-dichlorovinylthiol; 5 = NAcDCVC; 6 = TCE-P450 or TCE-oxide inter-
mediate; 7 = N-(hydroxyacetyl)-aminoethanol; 8 = oxalic acid; 9a = chloral; 9b, chloral hydrate; 10 = dichloroacetic
acid; 11 = trichloroacetic acid; 12 = trichloroethanol; 13 = trichloroethanol glucuronide; 14, monochloroacetic acid.
to toxic metabolites in the target organs. For
example, Prout et al. (7) compared blood
concentrations of TCE, chloral hydrate
(CH), trichloroethanol (TCOH), and
trichloroacetate (TCA) over time after admin-
istration of a 1,000 mg/kg oral dose ofTCE
to male Osborne-Mendel rats and male
B6C3F1 mice. They observed that blood con-
centrations for the three metabolites of TCE
were markedly higher in mice than in rats at
most time points, whereas those for TCE
were higher in rats than in mice, indicating
more rapid metabolism and elimination of
TCE in the mice (Table 2). Furthermore, the
area under the curve (AUC) was severalfold
higher for CH, TCOH, and TCA in mice
than in rats. Fisher et al. (8) also observed
approximately 5-fold higher peak blood con-
centrations of TCE in male and female rats
compared with male and female mice and
Table 1. Reported blood/gas coefficient for TCE in rats,
mice, and humans.
Species Blood/gas coefficient Reference
Rat
F344, male 25.8 (163)
SD, male 21.9 (8)
F344, male 21.9 (7)
F344, female 15.0 (7)
Mouse
B6C3F1, male 13.4 (7)
B6C3F1, female 14.3 (7)
Human, both male 9.92 (163)
9.2 (164)
SD, Sprague-Dawley.
Table 2. Blood concentrations of TCE and selected
metabolites in male Osborne-Mendel rats and male
B6C3F1 mice after an oral dose of TCE.a
Peak blood Time after
concentration exposure AUC
(pg/mL) of peak (hr) (mice:rats)
TCE
Rats 61.4 3.0
Mice 18.2 0.5
7.9
CH
Rats 0.86 9.0
Mice 1.77 3.0
1.0
TCOH
Rats 8.0 10.0
Mice 33.5 2.0
3.9
TCA
Rats 50 14.0
Mice 263 14.0
288 30.0
6.3
Rats and mice were given TCE (1,000 mg/kg) per os in corn oil.
Blood samples were taken by cardiac puncture and were ana-
lyzed by gas chromatography. AUC were determined graphically
up to the final time point taken (TCE: 7.5 hr in rats, 11 hr in mice;
CH: 15 hr in rats, 10 hr in mice; TCOH: 18 hr in rats, 8 hr in mice;
TCA: 40 hr in rats, 44 hr in mice). For TCA in mice, two major
peaks of blood concentration were observed. Data originally
reported in Prout et al. (7).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000178
METABOLISM OF TCE
similarly higher peak plasma concentrations
of TCA in male and female mice compared
with male and female rats. These observations
have important implications for species differ-
ences in susceptibility to toxicity. As discussed
in the review on mode of action in the liver
(9), TCA is believed to be the primary TCE
metabolite responsible for liver injury and
proliferation. The markedly higher blood
concentrations of TCA in mice compared
with rats indicate that more TCA will get to
the target organ in mice and are consistent
with the male mouse as the sex and species
that is the most susceptible to liver injury and
carcinogenesis.
In analyzing the distribution ofTCE into
various tissues, three major compartmental
tissue groups can be identified: richly per-
fused (e.g., liver, kidneys, lung), poorly per-
fused (e.g., muscle), and adipose tissue. TCE
readily equilibrates from the circulation into
richly perfused tissues, with reported partition
coefficients for liver:blood or richly perfused
tissue:blood for male rats of approximately
1.2 (8,10). Partition coefficients for female
rats (1.46) and for male and female mice
(2.03 and 1.62, respectively) are modestly
higher than those in male rats (8), but these
modest differences are not likely to be major
factors in the sex- and species-dependent dif-
ferences in TCE-induced toxicity.
Muscle:blood partition coefficients for TCE
have been reported to be less than 0.5 for
male and female rats and female mice and
1.00 for male mice (8,10). Hence, muscle is
neither a major site ofstorage nor a major site
of metabolism of TCE and does not signifi-
cantly influence TCE pharmacokinetics or
pharmacodynamics.
Although the adipose tissue:blood parti-
tion coefficient does not differ greatly among
male and female rats and mice, with reported
values ranging between 25 and 41 (8), the
fact that it is so high indicates that sequestra-
tion of TCE in fat may have a major influ-
ence on the pharmacokinetics of TCE. In
fact, the half-life of TCE in adipose tissue is
estimated to be 3.5-5 hr, whereas that in
both the richly and poorly perfused compart-
ments is estimated to be 2-4 min (4). Hence,
slow release of TCE from fat several hours
after initial exposures to TCE can lead to
continued delivery of TCE to target organs.
Fat may also be a site of metabolism ofTCE,
as cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) is present
in adipose tissue microsomes (11).
Pharmacokinetics of TCE
and Its Major Oxidative
Metabolites
As described above, orally administered TCE
is rapidly and extensively absorbed into the
systemic circulation. Daniel (12) dosed rats
by stomach tube (60 mg/kg) with labeled
TCE and reported that 90-95% of the radio-
label was recovered in expired air and urine.
Dekant et al. (13) gavage-dosed mice and rats
with 200 mg/kg of labeled TCE in corn oil
and recovered 93-98% of the radiolabel.
Prout et al. (7) administered several doses of
labeled TCE (10-2,000 mg/kg) to rats and
mice and recovered 93-98% of the radiolabel
and reported that peak blood levels occurred
in 1 hr in mice and 3 hr in rats. D'Souza et
al. (14), using classical pharmacokinetic
analysis, reported that oral and intravenous
bioavailability of TCE was 60-90% in non-
fasted rats and greater than 90% in fasted
rats. Peak blood levels occurred between 6-10
min and blood concentrations were 2-3
times higher in the fasted rats compared with
the nonfasted rats. Lee et al. (15) empirically
demonstrated that presystemic elimination
(metabolism) of low dose rates of TCE was
inversely related to dose and was nonlinear,
leading these authors to suggest that trace
amounts of TCE in the drinking water may
not enter the systemic circulation.
No controlled oral ingestion studies in
human have been reported in the literature
for TCE. Evidence for oral uptake ofTCE in
humans is inferred from case studies that
report poisonings. Accidental or intentional
ingestion of large amounts of TCE has
occurred, resulting in death (16). A more
recent study of an attempted suicide of a 17-
year old who ingested 70 mL of TCE also
shows rapid systemic uptake and tissue distri-
bution, with peak blood concentrations of
TCE being obtained 13 hr after ingestion
(17).
Inhalation of TCE results in very rapid
uptake of TCE into the systemic circulation
in animals (8) and humans (18), although
the time required to reach peak blood con-
centrations differs across species. Peak blood
concentrations of TCE are achieved within
1-2 hr in mice exposed to 100-750 ppm-
TCE vapors, in 4-6 hr in rats exposed to
500-600 ppm TCE vapors, and in 8-12 hr
in humans exposed to 100 ppm TCE.
Once TCE is in the systemic circulation,
TCE is oxidized (metabolized) rapidly. Using
PBPK models, estimates of metabolic capac-
ity have been determined in rodents and
humans, and are summarized in Table 3. It is
clear that rodents have a much high capacity
to metabolize TCE than humans. Estimated
values for Michaelis-Menten affinity con-
stants (Ki) were estimated to be low for
rodents and humans (0.25-1.5 mg/L),
reflecting a high substrate (TCE) affinity.
Although several metabolic products
derived from the GSH and P450 metabolic
pathways have been identified for TCE, only
a few of the major metabolites have been
characterized pharmacokinetically in rodents
and humans. The plasma half-life ofTCA in
humans ranges from 86 to 99 hr after inhala-
tion of either 50 or 100 ppm TCE, 6 hr/day
for either 5 or 10 days (19). Oral administra-
tion of either TCOH (10 mg/kg) or CH (15
mg/kg) in humans resulted in a 63- to 65-hr
plasma half-life for the metabolite, TCA.
Administration of TCA alone (3 mg/kg)
resulted in a plasma half-life for TCA of 51
hr (19).
The plasma half-life values for TCA are
much shorter in rodents than in humans. In
rats given intravenous administration ofTCA
(5-6 mg/kg), the TCA plasma half-lives were
12 and 7 hr in males and females, respectively
(8). In mice given intraperitoneal doses of
TCA (5-10 mg/kg), the plasma half-lives for
TCA were 7 and 3 hr for males and females,
respectively (8). In mice exposed to TCE
vapors (42-889 ppm) for 4 hr, the estimated
plasma half-life values for TCA were 16 and 7
hr for males and females, respectively (8). In
male and female rats exposed to TCE vapors
(500-600 ppm), the estimated half-life value
for TCA in plasma was 15 hr (20).
The residence time for free TCOH in
blood is less than the residence time in
plasma for TCA in rodents and humans. The
half-life of free TCOH in blood is about 12
hr in humans exposed to 50 ppm TCE
vapors 6 hr per day for 5 days (21) and is 3
hr in mice administered 1,200 mg/kg TCE
via oral bolus intubation (22). Two other
oxidative end products readily found in blood
of mice administered TCE that are not read-
ily measured in human blood are chloral
hydrate and trichloroethanol glucuronide.
CH and TCOH glucuronide (TCOG) were
not measured in humans exposed to 100 ppm
TCE for 4 hr (19). In mice gavage-dosed
with 1,200 mg/kg ofTCE, the blood half-life
values for CH and TCOG were 3 and 5 hr,
respectively (22).
Oxidative Pathways of TCE
Metabolism
This section describes each step of the oxida-
tive pathway ofTCE metabolism and identi-
fies key metabolites that are thought to be
important for development of toxicity or car-
cinogenesis. Although many of the enzymes
Table 3. Species-dependent differences in metabolic
capacity for TCE.a
Species Metabolic capacity (VmaxCJ Reference
Humans 14.9 (15)
4-5 (16)
Female mice 23.1 (6,17)
Male mice 32.7 (6,17)
Male and 11-11.5 (6,17)
female rats
&Metabolic capacity ( VmaXC) is defined as the maximal rate of
metabolism, with units of milligram substrate metabolized per
kilogram body weight per hour.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 179
LASH ET AL.
that catalyze the specific steps ofthis pathway
are distributed fairly ubiquitously, a range of
activity levels of specific isozymes is found in
the different target tissues or in a given tissue
in males and females from various species,
which can markedly alter the distribution of
metabolites that are formed. This, in turn,
may have mechanistic implications as tissue-
and/or sex- and/or species-specific accumu-
lation ofcertain metabolites can produce toxic
responses that are not otherwise observed.
Descrption ofOxidative Pathways
ofTCE Metabolism
Role offormation ofTCE-epoxide in oxida-
tive metabolism ofTCE. Although TCE is a
chemically simple compound, its metabolism
is rather complex. The initial step in TCE
metabolism, as described above (Figure 1), is
either conjugation with GSH (discussed
below) or oxidation by P450. The oxidative
pathway is quantitatively by far the major
pathway for TCE metabolism and the liver is
the primary tissue where this step takes place,
although P450 isoforms are present in most
tissues in varying forms and amounts. The
initial step in the oxidative metabolism of
many halogenated alkenes is epoxidation
(23). Hence, the biotransformation of TCE
to a reactive epoxide intermediate (2,2,3-
trichlorooxirane) was proposed many years
ago (24,25). The finding ofCH as a metabo-
lite ofTCE was seen as being consistent with
the transient formation of a reactive epoxide
intermediate. Epoxides can readily form acyl
chlorides, which are subsequently hydrolyzed
to the corresponding acids, or they can form
aldehydes that are subsequently oxidized to
carboxylic acids or reduced to alcohols. The
existence of CH, TCOH, and TCA as major
metabolites ofTCE is in accordance with this
scenario. Several years ago, controversy
existed over whether TCE oxidation goes
through an epoxide intermediate. The signifi-
cance of this is in the identification of the
electrophilic intermediate(s) that can cause
cellular injury or mutations. An understand-
ing of the chemical bioactivation mechanism
is necessary for elucidating the mode of
action of TCE in producing acute cellular
toxicity and carcinogenesis.
In spite ofthe evidence in favor ofepoxide
formation, Miller and Guengerich (26,27)
concluded that TCE epoxide is not an oblig-
ate intermediate in the formation of CH and
that TCE epoxide cannot be the intermediate
responsible for irreversible binding to protein
and DNA. Although the P450 heme is
destroyed during the oxidative metabolism of
TCE, the epoxide does not destroy the heme
(27). Green and Prout (28) also concluded
that there was little evidence to support the
intermediate formation of an epoxide in the
oxidative metabolism ofTCE in rat or mouse
liver microsomes. Furthermore, an epoxide
intermediate should yield CO, CO2,
dichloroacetate (DCA), and monochloroacetic
acid (CAA) as predominant metabolites from
TCE; in contrast to this, CH, TCA, and
TCOH are the major oxidative metabolites
that are recovered in both in vivo and in vitro
studies (28). Miller and Guengerich (27)
concluded that the species that irreversibly
binds to protein and DNA during TCE
metabolism must have, unlike an epoxide, a
reasonable degree ofchemical stability. Hence,
the current dogma is that the majority ofTCE
is believed to undergo chlorine migration in
an oxygenated TCE-P450 transition state
leading to CH formation. However, Forkert
and co-workers (29-32) have provided sub-
stantial evidence that 1,1-dichloroethylene,
which is very similar to TCE, is metabolized
by P450 to an epoxide intermediate. These
findings suggest that the role ofthe epoxide in
TCE metabolism should be revisited (see dis-
cussion under "Questions and Research
Needs" below).
The previous conclusion in the last U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency risk assess-
ment for TCE (33) that an epoxide interme-
diate is involved in the initial step of the
oxidative metabolism of TCE may be erro-
neous but requires further study. In spite of
this, a recent review on TCE metabolism and
toxicity (34) showed TCE being converted
by P450 to CH through an epoxide interme-
diate and did not consider the oxygenated
transition state and chlorine migration.
Uncertainty about the significance of an
epoxide intermediate still exists, therefore,
and needs to be unambiguously resolved.
Metabolism of TCE to chloral hydrate
and trichloroethanol Four different P450 iso-
forms have been identified as playing a role in
TCE metabolism: CYPlAl /2, CYP2B1/2,
CYP2C1 1/6, and CYP2E1 (35-42). Ofthese
isoforms, CYP2E1 appears to be the major
form with the highest affinity for TCE
(35,36,39), although considerable variability
can exist in the relative roles of different iso-
forms, depending on physiological state and
on the presence of other drugs or inducing
agents. Furthermore, as discussed below, most
of the work on oxidative metabolism ofTCE
has been done in the liver. Consequently, it is
not known if isoform specificity for TCE is
the same in other tissues. Additionally, P450
isoform specificity in different animal species
has not been thoroughly investigated.
Differences among animal species in isoform
content and specificity may, and likely does,
play a role in the observed differences in
metabolism and toxicity.
Lipscomb et al. (11) examined the oxida-
tive metabolism ofTCE in mouse, rat, and
human liver microsomes and showed that
TCE alters the metabolism ofseveral chemicals
that are characteristic substrates of CYP2E1 in
all three species (N-dimethylnitrosamine-N-
demethylase and p-nitrophenol hydroxylase),
of CYP3A (benzoxyresorufin Odeethylase) in
mice and rats, of CYPIA1/2 (ethoxyresorufin
Odeethylase and phenacetin O-deethylase) in
all three species, but had no effect on CYP2A
(coumarin hydroxylase) activity. The effect of
TCE was inhibitory for CYP2E1 and CYP3A
and stimulatory for CYPIA1/2. These data
confirmed earlier studies by Nakajima et al.
(40) that CYP2E1 is the major hepatic
isoform ofP450 involved in TCE oxidation.
The broad range of halogenated hydro-
carbons and other small organic molecules
that undergo oxidation by CYP2E1 and the
existence ofseveral drugs and physiological or
pathological conditions that may lead to
induction of CYP2E1 indicate that certain
conditions or prior or concurrent exposure to
other chemicals, in particular ethanol, are
important factors that must be taken into
account in a risk assessment, since these may
markedly alter the capacity for TCE metabo-
lism by this pathway.
After formation of the TCE-oxygen-P450
(TCE-O-P450) or epoxide intermediate, CH
(in equilibrium with chloral) is the major
metabolite produced. In the liver, only small
amounts of CH can be recovered as it is
rapidly converted to other compounds.
Hence, CH is not likely to be a major consid-
eration for hepatotoxicity or hepatocarcino-
genicity. In the lungs of male CD-1 mice,
however, TCE produces Clara cell injury
(43,44), and this has been attributed to the
accumulation of CH, which occurs because
the subsequent steps in the metabolism of
CH are much slower than the conversion of
TCE to CH (45). Besides having a slow rate
ofsubsequent metabolism of CH, the rate of
formation of CH in mouse lung is markedly
higher than that in either rat or human lung
(44). CH may be mutagenic, causing DNA
damage, and is clastrogenic, producing aneu-
ploidy. Although CH has been shown to be
genotoxic (45), lung tumors resulting from
CH are primarily benign, which is more con-
sistent with a nongenotoxic, cell-proliferative
mechanism. The cytotoxicity that can occur
from the accumulation of CH, with subse-
quent repair mechanisms, may enhance cell
proliferation leading to tumor formation. It
should be noted, however, that the cytotoxic-
ity of CH requires high concentrations to be
accumulated, suggesting that the mouse lung
is a specialized case and that this mode of
action is probably not very relevant to that of
TCE in other tissues or to other species.
In addition to CH, oxalic acid (OX), N-
(hydroxyacetyl)aminoethanol, and DCA
(through formation of an acyl chloride inter-
mediate) may be formed from the TCE-O-
P450 or TCE-epoxide intermediate (Figure
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000180
METABOLISM OF TCE
1). All four metabolites have been recovered
in the urine of both laboratory animals and
humans exposed to TCE. Subsequent metab-
olism is more complicated, involving multiple
steps and other oxidative and reductive
enzymes besides P450. With the exception of
DCA, which is also formed by other mecha-
nisms (see below), the other two metabolites
are not likely to be of interest for understand-
ing modes of action or risk assessment. CH is
further metabolized to either TCOH or TCA,
both of which can be further oxidized to
DCA. A pharmacokinetic analysis of CH
metabolism in B6C3F1 mice provided evi-
dence that was consistent with some forma-
tion of DCA directly from TCA (46).
TCOH also undergoes glucuronidation, and
TCOG has been recovered in the urine ofani-
mals and humans exposed to TCE. TCOG
may also undergo enterohepatic recirculation
and regenerate TCOH (see below).
CH reduction to TCOH has been
reported to be inhibited by ethanol, and it
was suggested that this reaction is, therefore,
catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase (47,48).
A recent study in mouse liver microsomes
(49), however, found that pretreatment of
mice with pyrazole, which induces CYP2E1,
enhanced lipid peroxidation due to CH,
whereas addition of a general P450 inhibitor
reduced CH-induced lipid peroxidation. This
suggested that metabolism of CH to TCOH
and TCA is catalyzed primarily by CYP2E1.
Furthermore, a human lymphoblastoid cell
line expressing CYP2E1 metabolized CH to
mutagenic metabolites, proposed to be
derived from TCA and TCOH, whereas the
parent cell line, which lacks CYP2E1, was
inactive in CH metabolism (50). The pro-
posed pathway offormation ofthe mutagenic
metabolites in the transfected human
lymphoblastoid cell line appeared to be simi-
lar to that in mouse liver microsomes. Since
ethanol is metabolized in liver by both alco-
hol dehydrogenase and CYP2E1 and Larson
and Bull (47) showed a dependence of the
reaction on NAD+, it is likely that both
enzymes can be involved. The precise role of
each enzyme in the reduction of CH to
TCOH, however, remains to be determined.
Schultz and Weiner (50) found that the
formation of TCOH from CH is stimulated
in vitro by inclusion ofethanol in the reaction
mixture. This, coupled with the in vivo data
ofSellers et al. (51), supports the role ofalco-
hol dehydrogenase in the formation of
TCOH. The redox shuttling of cofactor-
enzyme complex in the sequential reduction
of CH and the oxidation of ethanol is
enabled by the rate-limiting release of cofac-
tor. The apparent contradiction with studies
that have shown inhibition of alcohol dehy-
drogenase by CH may be explained by the
substrate concentrations used. Data from
Lipscomb et al. (52) imply that more than
one enzyme is involved in TCOH formation
in mouse liver. The increase in reaction rate is
not observed at substrate concentrations
above 0.5 mM (concentrations not likely to
be observed in vivo). Analysis of kinetics data
led Lipscomb et al. (52) to conclude that at
higher substrate concentrations, a second,
lower affinity enzyme becomes largely respon-
sible for CH reduction. Similar kinetics, how-
ever, could not be demonstrated in rat or
human liver cytosol.
Formation of trichloroacetate and
dichloroacetate. TCA is produced by oxidation
of either CH or TCOH. Oxidation of CH is
believed to be catalyzed by an aldehyde oxi-
dase, whereas oxidation of TCOH is cat-
alyzed by P450, with CYP2E1 likely being
the predominant isoform involved (49). As
mentioned above, metabolism of CH to
TCOH or TCA is slow in mouse lung, lead-
ing to accumulation of CH within the Clara
cells. Overall, however, the lung plays a quan-
titatively minor role in CH metabolism. The
subsequent reactions ofCH are rapid in liver,
leading to production of TCOH and TCA.
Kinetics and time course studies in mice, rats,
and dogs of TCE metabolism to CH, TCA,
and TCOH are consistent with TCA being
derived from oxidation of both CH and
TCOH (28,53-55).
Lipscomb et al. (52) reported marked dif-
ferences in CH metabolism to TCOH and
TCA in liver and blood of rats, mice, and
humans. Determination of kinetic parameters
at physiologically obtainable concentrations of
CH (i.e., in the range of 50 gM) showed that
CH is cleared from human blood through
hepatic metabolism at approximately 60% of
the rate as in rodents. Hence, these data sug-
gest that higher amounts of CH will be pre-
sent in human blood and tissues than in those
ofrodents after a given exposure to TCE.
There has been considerable controversy
and uncertainty about the sources and
amounts of DCA formation, particularly in
humans. Bull and colleagues (54,56,57)
reported detection of DCA in urine of both
rats and mice treated with TCA and in blood
of mice treated with TCE. However, prob-
lems were reported with analytical methodolo-
gies that led to artifactual overestimations of
DCA formation (58). The AUC for DCA fol-
lowing TCE administration to mice exceeded
that predicted from the formation of TCA
from TCE. Although other pathways for
DCA formation have been proposed and may
occur, it appears that in the presence ofstrong
acids, some ofthe TCA that is in whole blood
can undergo nonenzymatic conversion to
DCA, thus leading to overestimation of DCA
formation. In a subsequent study, Bull and
colleagues (55) reassessed formation of
metabolites ofTCE in blood from rats, mice,
and dogs, and found measurable levels of
DCA only in blood from mice. Similarly, it is
unclear whether DCA is produced in humans
under normal circumstances. Henderson et al.
(59) identified DCA, in addition to TCA,
TCOH, and TCOG, as a metabolite of CH
in children, for whom CH is still used thera-
peutically as a sedative-hypnotic agent.
Nonetheless, more DCA is formed in mice
than in other species. It is difficult, therefore,
to develop parameters for DCA formation
that can be used in PBPK models for human
health risk assessment. Since both DCA and
TCA produce hepatomegaly and cytomegaly
that may lead to hepatocarcinogenesis (54,56)
and DCA is derived from both TCA and
TCOH, assumptions need to be made until a
more definitive verdict on the formation of
DCA in humans is made. However, both
DCA and TCA are unequivocally hepatocar-
cinogenic, irrespective of their mechanism or
mode ofaction (54).
An errata was published based on the
studies of Templin et al. (57) and Abbas et
al. (46) concerning artifacts in the determi-
nation of DCA. The bottom line is that the
probable DCA concentrations in biological
fluids are lower than those reported because
ofdifficulties in analysis.
Formation ofother oxidative endproducts.
An additional problem with detection ofDCA
in biological samples, particularly tissue from
liver, is the subsequent metabolism of DCA to
other species, such as OX, CAA, glycolic acid,
and glyoxylic acid (GLX). DCA has a much
shorter half-life than TCA in rats and mice
(56), consistent with rapid metabolism or
excretion. Lipscomb et al. (60) described
metabolism of DCA in liver cytosol from male
B6C3F, mice and Fischer 344 (F344) rats that
was dependent on reduced pyridine
nucleotides and GSH but was oxygen inde-
pendent. Stacpoole and colleagues (61)
showed that liver cytosol from both rats and
humans catalyzes the GSH-dependent conver-
sion of DCA to GLX. The reaction is
NAD(P)H-independent and exhibits a Km for
GSH of only 75 iM. It is unclear whether a
GSH S-transferase (GST) isozyme is involved
in the reaction.
Liver microsomes and mitochondria
exhibit insignificant activity of DCA degrada-
tion (60). Hence, although dehalogenation of
DCA to CAA may occur by P450-mediated
catalysis, the major pathway(s) for hepatic
DCA degradation appears to be P450-inde-
pendent. In fact, Anders and Tong (62)
recently showed that a newly described isoform
of GST, GST4, is involved in the GSH-
dependent oxygenation ofDCA to form GLX.
The significance of these metabolites of
DCA in TCE-induced toxicity and carcino-
genesis is unclear, but their role is likely to be
quantitatively minor. Little or trace amounts
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 181
LASH ET AL.
above background of OX, CAA, glycolate,
and GLX are detected in in vivo exposures to
TCE or in in vitro incubations with TCE.
OX is poorly soluble in water, leading to pre-
cipitates. Hence, extensive formation of OX
might be expected to lead to formation of
stones in the urinary tract.
Tissue Distribution ofOxidative
Metabolism ofTCE
Relative rates of oxidative metabolism of
TCE in key target organs are important in
understanding how these tissue-dependent
differences affect toxicity. Besides P450,
which catalyzes the initial step of TCE
metabolism, tissue-dependent differences in
secondary enzymes that act on metabolites of
TCE, such as alcohol dehydrogenase and
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, may be impor-
tant in that differences in these activities rela-
tive to P450 may alter the distribution of
metabolites so that one or more metabolites
may accumulate, leading to a pattern oftoxic-
ity that does not occur in tissues that have a
different distribution ofthese activities.
Quantitatively, the liver is the most
important site of oxidative metabolism of
TCE due to the first-pass effect. Regardless of
the route of administration (i.e., dermal,
inhalation, oral), most of the TCE is rapidly
absorbed into the circulation and goes to the
liver. Only in specialized circumstances does
the liver not play a key role or at least some
role in determining overall metabolism and
toxicity.
A situation where differential activities of
the enzymes ofthe oxidative pathway ofTCE
metabolism markedly affect the distribution
of metabolites and the toxicity is that of CH
accumulation in mouse lungs (44,45). Clara
cells ofmouse lungs have relatively high P450
activity but have low activities of alcohol
dehydrogenase and UDP-glucuronosyltrans-
ferase. Hence, the enzymes that metabolize
CH and TCOH are believed to be present in
low amounts relative to P450, leading to an
accumulation of CH in the cells. Since
TCOH is recovered in significantly greater
amounts and as a higher fraction of total
TCE metabolites in mice than in other
species, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase may be
present at relatively low levels compared to
the other enzymes involved in oxidative
metabolism of TCE, not only in the mouse
lung, but in other mouse tissues as well,
including the liver.
Besides the liver, the kidneys may be
directly exposed to TCE or some of its
metabolites, since they receive 25% of the
cardiac output. While the kidneys contain
P450 activities, induding CYP2E1 (at least in
rodents), most ofit is in the proximal tubules
and the total activity in the tissue as a whole
is markedly lower than that in the liver.
Nonetheless, renal oxidative metabolism of
TCE occurs, albeit at rates that are 3- to 10-
fold lower than those in the liver (63), and
may play some role in either nephrotoxicity/
nephrocarcinogenicity or, via renal-hepatic
circulation, in liver injury.
Interorgan metabolism, which includes
enterohepatic and renal-hepatic circulations
of both the parent compound and several of
the major oxidative metabolites, is another
major issue in the development of models of
TCE pharmacokinetics. Interorgan metabo-
lism can also enhance the further biotransfor-
mation of TCE metabolites and has
implications for target organ toxicity. For
example, TCOG that is formed in the liver is
excreted into bile, but little fecal excretion is
observed due to extensive enterohepatic circu-
lation. Once TCOG returns to the liver, it
may be hydrolyzed back to TCOH and be
metabolized further to TCA or DCA. In fact,
TCA is the major circulating metabolite of
TCE, likely due to its high affinity for bind-
ing to plasma proteins. A biphasic pattern of
TCA concentrations is found in blood in the
mouse (Table 2), consistent with enterohep-
atic circulation of TCOH. Thus, enterohep-
atic circulation plays a major role in the
disposition of TCOH and TCOG. For the
oxidative pathway of TCE metabolism, the
major role for renal-hepatic circulation is in
the excretion of metabolites in the urine. The
major metabolites of TCE that are recovered
in urine include TCA and TCOH/TCOG.
Sex- and Species-Dependent
Heterogeneity in Oxidative
Metabolism ofTCE
As described in the reviews on mode of action
in the various target organs, marked differences
in susceptibility to TCE-induced toxicity are
seen in males and females of each species and
between species ofa given sex. Since toxicity is
directly associated with specific metabolites,
the likely explanation for these differences in
susceptibility are sex- and/or species-dependent
differences in either overall rates ofmetabolism
or distribution of metabolites among specific
pathways. An understanding ofthe factors that
determine these susceptibilities is essential for
being able to extrapolate animal data to
humans. An additional point, however, is that
these sex- and species-dependent differences
are often dose dependent in that markedly dif-
ferent types of effects may be seen at high
versus low doses.
Overall rates of TCE metabolism vary
considerably between the various experimental
species that are used in laboratory investiga-
tions (i.e., rats, mice, rabbits) and between
these species and humans (64). In practical
terms, more complete documentation and
understanding of sex- and species-dependent
differences in metabolism will enable
refinements in risk assessment and definitions
of acceptable exposure levels. To extrapolate
metabolic data between species in the develop-
ment ofpharmacokinetic models, default allo-
metric scaling procedures are often used.
These involve scaling fluid flows (e.g., blood,
bile, urine) by body weight to the 3/4 power
and scaling rate constants by body weight to
the 1/4 power. Additional uncertainty factors
are applied when there is uncertainty regard-
ing intraspecies sensitivities or when there are
uncertainties in extrapolating from one species
to another. Again, these factors are intended
to account for many processes, not just
metabolism or pharmacokinetics. Whether
these default assumptions are representative of
the actual physiological state is an open ques-
tion. For example, the activity of various
P450s in humans can vary by up to a factor of
10 among individuals (35,64,65), so that
default assumptions can be significantly differ-
ent than the actual situation in humans.
However, the observed variations are often
beyond allometric expectations, suggesting
that more complex metabolic and other
differences exist between species.
As described earlier, studies by Prout et al.
(7) showed that blood levels of the TCE
metabolites TCOH, CH, and TCA were
severalfold higher in B6C3F1 mice than in
Osborne-Mendel rats after a single oral dose
of TCE. Larson and Bull (54) similarly
showed that the initial rates ofTCE metabo-
lism to TCA were much higher in mice than
in rats, leading to higher TCA concentrations
in blood. Nakajima et al. (42) also showed
that rates of oxidative metabolism ofTCE in
liver microsomes of male B6C3F1 mice were
2- to 3-fold higher, depending on dose, than
those from male Wistar rats. Furthermore,
overall content of P450 (nmol P450/mg
microsomal protein) did not differ in the two
species. Rather, the higher rate of TCE
metabolism was due specifically to higher lev-
els of CYP2E1 in mouse liver microsomes. In
general, metabolic rates for most chemicals
are significantly higher in mice than in rats or
other larger animals, including humans.
A comparison of kinetic parameters for
overall P450-catalyzed metabolism ofTCE in
liver microsomes from male B6C3F1 mice,
F344 rats, and humans is shown in Table 4.
Several species-dependent differences are
immediately apparent. First, kinetics were
clearly biphasic in liver microsomes from rat
and human but were monophasic in liver
microsomes from mouse. Rates of TCE
oxidative metabolism for the high-affinity
processes were approximately 2- to 2.5-fold
faster than those for the low-affinity processes
in rats and humans. Finally, the ratio of V,,
to Km values, which is a measure of catalytic
efficiency, shows that although rates are lower
than in the other species, the activity in
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000182
METABOLISM OF TCE
humans exhibits similar efficiency to that in
rats and mice.
This similarity between rats and humans
regarding P450-dependent metabolism of
TCE may extend to other aspects of the
metabolic process. Both the rat and human
2E family contain only one gene and expres-
sion of CYP2E1 in both species is regulated
both transcriptionally and posttranscription-
ally (65). In contrast, the rabbit 2E subfamily
comprises two genes. Although rabbit
CYP2E1 appears to be very similar to human
and rat CYP2E1 with respect to substrate
specificity and regulation ofexpression, rabbit
CYP2E2 is not coordinately controlled with
CYP2E1 and developmental expression ofthe
two forms differs. Thus, Wrighton and
Stevens (65) and Lipscomb et al. (66) con-
cluded that the rat is a better model than the
rabbit for study of human CYP2E1 expres-
sion. The data summarized above, comparing
P450-dependent metabolism ofTCE in rats,
mice, and humans, support this conclusion
and indicate further that the rat is a better
model than the mouse for study of oxidative
metabolism ofTCE in humans.
Although sex-dependent differences have
been clearly observed in the susceptibility to
TCE-induced toxicity and carcinogenicity,
few studies ofsex dependence ofTCE metab-
olism have been conducted. Nakajima et al.
(41) studied sex-, age-, and pregnancy-
induced effects on the expression and regula-
tion of CYP2E1 and CYP2C1 1 with regard
to TCE and toluene metabolism in Wistar
rats. They observed no sex-dependent differ-
ences in TCE metabolism. The only differ-
ences in rates ofTCE metabolism to CH that
were observed were an approximately 3-fold
decrease from 3 weeks of age (puberty) to 18
weeks of age (maturity) in both sexes and a
nearly 2-fold decrease in rates in females dur-
ing pregnancy.
Variations among Humans
Lipscomb et al. (64) observed considerable
variability in the P450-catalyzed oxidation of
TCE in 23 samples of human liver micro-
somes. Km values for TCE (28.3 ± 12.9 pM;
mean ± SD, n = 23) varied over a more than a
fourfold concentration range (range =
12.6-55.7 pM) and were not normally dis-
tributed. Vmax values for CH formation
(1,589 ± 840 pmol/min/mg; mean ± SD, n =
23) also showed considerable variability, with
samples from individual human livers exhibit-
ing a 7-fold range of values (range =
490-3,455 pmol/min/mg). In their analysis
of the kinetics of TCE metabolism, individ-
ual samples seemed to cluster into three
groups, having Km values (pM TCE, mean ±
SD) of 16.7 ± 2.5 (n = 10), 30.9 ± 3.3 (n=
9), and 51.1 ± 3.8 (n = 4). Within each
group, there were no patterns with regard to
the ethnic group or sex of the donor from
whom the livers were isolated, and Vm,, val-
ues in each group exhibited the same degree
ofvariability and span of values as the entire
sample pool. The Km value in females (21.9 ±
3.5 pM; n = 10) were significantly lower than
that in males (33.1 ± 3.5 pM; n = 13).
Analysis of the activity of three specific
P450 isoforms that are known to catalyze
TCE metabolism in human liver microsome
samples from the three groups revealed some
patterns (Table 5). CYP1A2 activity was sig-
nificantly lower in the low-Km group than in
the other two groups, and CYP2E1 activity
Table 4. Apparent kinetic constants for total oxidative metabolite formation from TCE.8
Vmax
Species (nmol/mg per min) Km (mM) Vmam/Km n
Mouse
Male 8.60 ± 4.50 0.38 ± 0.41 42.0 ± 28.5 5
Female 26.1 ± 7.3 0.16 ± 0.03 163 ± 37 3
Rat
Male
(High affinity) 0.96 ± 0.65 0.072 ± 0.082 23.8 ± 20.6 5
(Low affinity) 2.48 ± 0.97 0.482 ± 0.104 5.3 ± 2.2
Female
(High affinity) 2.91 ± 0.71 0.042 ± 0.021 80.0 ± 33.9 3
(Low affinity) 4.31 ± 0.31 0.111 ± 0.027 40.1 ± 7.1
Human
Male
(High affinity) 0.52 ± 0.17 0.012 ± 0.003 48.0 ± 23.1 3
(Low affinity) 0.93 ± 0.17 0.093 ± 0.026 10.7 ± 3.9
Female
(High affinity) 0.33 ± 0.15 0.026 ± 0.017 15.3 ± 10.1 3
(Low affinity) 0.72 ± 0.60 0.160 ± 0.162 6.8 ± 5.6
aOxidative metabolism of TCE was measured by incubation of microsomes with 10 pIM-2 mM TCE in the presence of 2 mM NADPH
for 10 min at 37°C and pH 7.4. The following metabolites (assay limits of detection in parentheses) were measured after derivatization
with pentafluorobenzyl bromide and gas chromatography with electron capture detection: TCA (1 ppm), DCA 10.025 ppm), CM (0.025
ppm), OX (10 ppm). TCOH (0.001 ppm) was detected without any derivatization by gas chromatography with electron capture detec-
tion. CH (0.75 ppm) and GLX (0.1 ppm) were detected by HPLC after derivatization with 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine. Data are means ±
SD of measurements from the indicated number of experiments and were reported in Elfarra et al. (70).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
was significantly higher in the high-Km group
than in the two other groups, but no differ-
ences were observed for CYP3A4 activity
among the three groups.
Lipscomb et al. (64) also found that
CYP2E1 was the primary isoform responsible
for TCE metabolism, accounting for > 60%
of total microsomal metabolism. These results
indicate that the capacity of humans to
metabolize TCE will vary considerably and
that factors that alter P450 activity, in particu-
lar CYP2E1 activity, can alter TCE metabo-
lism and hence, susceptibility to TCE-induced
toxicity. Nakajima et al. (41) also observed
significant variation in oxidative metabolism
of TCE as a function of physiological state
(see above).
Comparative in Vitro
Evaluation of Cytochrome
P450-Dependent
Metabolism of TCE
This section illustrates an integrated in vitro
approach to evaluation of TCE metabolism
by the P450 pathway with the goal of eluci-
dation of the kinetics of metabolism of TCE
to CH, TCOH, TCA, and DCA in the rat,
mouse, and human. These data are based on
a series ofstudies conducted at the Armstrong
Laboratory (Toxicology Division at Wright-
Patterson AFB, Ohio) (11,52,60,64,67,68).
Data indicate a) that human hepatic micro-
somes possess less activity toward TCE than
either rat or mouse hepatic microsomes, b)
that TCOH formation proceeds at higher
rates than TCA formation at low CH con-
centrations in all three species, and c) that
appreciable levels of TCOH and TCA are
formed from CH in the blood of all three
species in vitro. The formation of DCA has
been questioned for years, and no mechanism
for its formation has been fully validated.
DCA has not been identified in liver prepara-
tions (i.e., microsomes, homogenates, tissue
slices) from mice or humans exposed to TCE,
CH, or TCOH in vitro. Cultured gut
microflora from mouse cecum produce DCA
from TCA in a dose- and time-dependent
Table 5. Evaluation of form-selective cytochrome P450
metabolism in human liver microsomes expressing dif-
ferent Km values for TCE metabolism.a
CYP form
Group CYP1A2 CYP2E1 CYP3A4
Low-Km 241 ± 186 520 ± 295 2.65 ± 2.661
Mid-Km 545 ± 200 820 ± 372 2.92 ± 2.78b
High-Km 806 ± 442 1,317 ± 592 1.78 ± 1.08b
&Activities of CYP1A2, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4 were measured
with phenacetin, chlorzoxazone, and testosterone as substrates,
respectively. Data are means ± SD of values from 10, 9, and 4
samples for the low-, mid-, and high-Km group, respectively.
Data within each isozyme assay with the same letter are not
significantly different from one another (p< 0.05) by the Kruskal-
Wallis one-way ANOVA.
183
LASH ET AL.
manner. The transport of TCA from liver
into blood or bile may influence net DCA
formation; TCA in blood may be cleared into
the urine, whereas TCA in bile enters the
small intestine and may drive TCA produc-
tion in the gut. However, in mice treated
with antibiotics to eliminate gut microbes,
plasma DCA concentrations following TCE
treatment were only minimally affected, sug-
gesting that non-gut mechanisms of DCA
formation also exist. In summary, these in
vitro studies indicate a lower rate of TCE
metabolism and hence, a lower rate of TCA,
TCOH, and DCA formation in the human
as compared with the mouse and rat.
Chloral Hydate Formation
Concentrations ofTCE reported here, includ-
ing Km values, represent the concentration of
TCE in the liquid phase ofthe incubation sys-
tem. Gas chromatographic quantitation of
CH and TCOH in the incubation mixture
was accomplished by analysis of the ethyl
acetate extract using modifications of the
method ofMaiorino et al. (69). Neither TCA
nor DCA was detected (detection limit = 1.5
nmol/mL) under these conditions. Because
CH is further metabolized to TCOH, CH
and TCOH that were quantitated in microso-
mal incubations dosed with TCE were com-
bined to give an estimate ofTCE metabolism.
Significant differences between the three
species were found in the Michaelis-Menten
kinetic parameters evaluated for CH forma-
tion from TCE. Overall kinetic parameters
for TCE metabolism in rat, mouse, and
pooled human liver microsomes (Table 6)
demonstrate a lower rate in the human than
either the rat (1:3.3) or the mouse (1:3.8).
Evaluation of these kinetic data over a wide
range ofTCE concentrations by construction
of Eadie-Hofstee plots allowed for separation
of data from rat liver microsomes into three
kinetically distinct components, consistent
with Nakajima et al. (39). The three compo-
nents had Km values (1iM TCE) of 17, 114,
and 909 pM and V,,, values (pmol/min/mg)
of 818, 1,275, and 2,797. A similar analysis
ofdata from mouse liver microsomes revealed
homogeneity, with only one kinetically dis-
tinct component. These results agree with
those described above from Elfarra et al. (70).
Table 6. Overall kinetics of TCE metabolism to CH and
TCOH.a
Species Km (pM TCE) Vmax(pmol/min/mg)
Rat 55 4,826
Mouse 35 5,425
Human 25 1,440
'Metabolism of TCE to CH and TCOH was measured in rat,
mouse, and human liver microsomes by gas chromatography.
Microsomes were pooled from 5 rodent and 7 human liver sam-
ples and were incubated with from 7.5 to 1,000 pM TCE for
either 10 (rodent) or 30 (human) min.
As described above, evaluation of the data
from individual human liver samples revealed
considerable variation, with Km values rang-
ing from 16 to 56 luM and V,. values rang-
ing from 490 to 3,455 pmol/min/mg,
although there was no correlation between
Km and Vnvalues among individuals.
TCE was an effective inhibitor of
CYP2E1, as measured by p-nitrophenol
hydroxylase activity (data not shown). Three
individual samples of human liver micro-
somes, representing individuals from the low-
mid-, and high-Km groups (see above), exhib-
ited concentration-dependent inhibition of
CYP2E1 activity. The degree of inhibition
appeared to parallel the Km ofthe microsomes
for TCE metabolism, suggesting that
CYP2E1 makes a larger contribution to TCE
metabolism in the high-Km sample than in
either of the other two samples. Kinetic
analysis of the inhibition ofp-nitrophenol
hydroxylase activity by TCE in mouse liver
microsomes showed the inhibition to be com-
petitive (data not shown), as would be
expected ifCYP2E1 metabolizes TCE.
To determine the extent to which
CYP2E1 metabolized TCE in humans,
experiments were designed using equivalent
content of human CYP2E1, whether derived
from human CYP2E1 gene transfected and
expressed in a lymphoblastoid cell line or
authentic human hepatic microsomes. The
results (Figure 2) demonstrate that human
CYP2E1 expressed in a lymphoblastoid cell
line metabolizes approximately 75% as much
TCE as an equivalent amount of authentic
human liver microsomes. These data indicate
that CYP2E1 is the major enzyme responsi-
ble for the microsomal oxidation of low
[.01
I
0.001
16pMTCE IN1 MTCE
MS-UW "
X
=I:~ 1A2
MS-HI KMi IAI 3A4
Figure 2. Metabolism of TCE by human liver microsomes
and genetically-expressed P450 forms. Assays contained
1.0 mg liver microsomal protein/mL [which has been
shown to contain 22 pmol of CYP2E1/mg protein (73)1 or
22 pmol/mL of CYP2E1, 42 pmol/mL of CYP1A, or 96
pmol/mL of CYP3A4 expressed in microsomes from
genetically engineered lymphoblastoid cells. Samples
were incubated with 16 or 100 pM TCE and CH formation
was measured after 30 min by gas chromatography.
concentrations of TCE in the human. To
determine whether CYP2E1 was the pre-
dominant P450 form responsible for TCE
metabolism in a sample of27 human hepatic
microsomes, the activity of a known sub-
strate for CYP2E1, chlorzoxazone (CZX)
(71,72), was compared with TCE metabolic
activity (data not shown). Results indicate
that TCE metabolism is significantly corre-
lated (r2 = 0.51, p < 0.05) with CYP2E1
activity in humans (11). These data provide
further support for the involvement of
CYP2E1 in TCE metabolism in the human.
The high degree of conservation of
CYP2E1 across mammalian species and the
high degree to which it is expressed in rodent
liver, compared to human liver, make the
determination of inherent CYP2E1 activity
and the assessment of factors that modify
CYP2E1 expression in the human important
considerations in population risk assessments.
To determine the variability of CYP2E1 and
gain an indication of the potential variability
of TCE metabolism in the human, microso-
mal metabolism of CZX and the degree of
expression of total P450 content was exam-
ined in 54 human hepatic microsome samples
(Figure 3). Data indicate that there is an
approximate 5-fold variability in the expres-
sion of CYP2E1-dependent CZX metabolism
in this population. Because of the degree of
correlation of TCE metabolism with
CYP2E1-dependent activity, it may be rea-
sonably predicted that this degree ofvariabil-
ity in TCE metabolism will be seen in the
human population. Such variation and fac-
tors that induce the activity of CYP2E1 may
define segments of the population that may
be at a higher risk than would be otherwise
anticipated (73).
The data also indicate that other enzymes
may metabolize TCE in the human. Because
a high fraction of P450 is accounted for by
I4
Figure 3. Distribution of CZX metabolism in a sample
population of human liver microsomes. Histogram
depicting the frequency distribution of metabolism of
CZX, a marker substrate for CYP2E1, in individual human
liver microsome samples. The results reveal a popula-
tion with a normal distribution.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000184
METABOLISM OF TCE
CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 (72), the effect on
TCE metabolism of known substrates for
these forms was evaluated. a-Napthoflavone
(a CYPIA substrate) and ketoconazole (a
CYP3A substrate) did not inhibit TCE
metabolism when assessed at TCE concentra-
tions near the Km value (64) but reduced
Vmax values by 30 and 18%, respectively,
when evaluated at TCE concentrations 4-fold
above the Km value. These data indicate that
CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 also metabolize TCE
in the human but that their contribution to
overall TCE metabolism is low compared to
that ofCYP2E1.
Trichloroethanol andTrichloroacetic
Acid Formation
TCOH is derived from CH. Species-depen-
dent differences in the metabolism of CH
were evaluated in a clarified liver homogenate
(52). This preparation was used because vari-
ous enzymatic activities capable of metaboliz-
ing CH are distributed in several subcellular
compartments (74). NADH is the best
nicotinamide cofactor for the stimulation of
TCOH production in vitro in all three
species. However, in human liver, NADPH
also significantly stimulated TCOH produc-
tion. For each of the cofactors tested, the
addition of cofactor resulted in more TCOH
production than in controls with no cofactor.
The final evaluation of CH metabolism in
the liver involved the determination ofcofac-
tor kinetics in the formation ofTCOH. Data
revealed that Km* values (the concentration of
cofactor that produced half-maximal meta-
bolic rates) for these reactions in rodent liver
approximated the levels of pyridine
nucleotide cofactors reported for rodent liver
(75). Km* values (mM NADH) for TCOH
formation were 0.91 and 0.36 mM for the rat
and mouse, respectively.
An evaluation of clearance (VmJKj) of
CH to TCA and TCOH was done to com-
pare the net conversion of CH to these
metabolites. The results in Table 7 indicate
that clearance of CH to TCOH is much
higher (10- to 200-fold) than clearance of
CH to TCA in these three species. Clearance
of CH to TCOH by the mouse high-affinity
enzyme was highest, but this enzyme becomes
inhibited at CH concentrations above 0.5
mM. Clearance of CH to TCOH in the
human was approximately half that observed
in rats and approximately twice that observed
with the mouse low-affinity enzyme.
Clearance of CH to TCA in the mouse and
human were similar, whereas it was approxi-
mately 10-fold lower in the rat. These data
indicate that TCOH formation will predomi-
nate over TCA formation in the liver ofthese
three species. The kinetic evaluation of
TCOH production also revealed that the
mouse may have two separate enzymes
Table 7. Kinetics of TCOH and TCA formation from CH.a
TCOH TCA
Km Vmax VmayIKm Km Vmax VmaVKm
Rat 0.52 24.3 46.7 16.4 4.0 0.24
Mouse 3.5 10.6 3.03
High affinity 0.12 6.3 52.5
Low affinity 0.51 6.1 12.0
Human 1.34 34.7 25.9 23.9 65.2 2.73
aHomogenate from the liver of 4 individuals from each species was centrifuged at 700xg and the supernatants obtained were pooled.
Km is presented as mM CH in solution that contained 0.9 mM NADH and 0.9 mM NAD+ for experiments for TCOH and TCA formation,
respectively. Vmax is reported as nmol/min/mg 700xg supernatant protein. The mouse high-affinity enzyme responsible for TCOH for-
mation was inhibited at CH concentrations > 0.57 mM.
responsible for formation of TCOH from
CH in liver, whereas the rat and human
apparently possess a single enzyme. The high-
affinity form in the mouse is inhibited at CH
concentrations above 0.5 mM (the nature of
the inhibition is unknown), and the low-
affinity form becomes saturated at concentra-
tions of CH above 1.0 mM. This
bifunctional metabolism is also seen in mouse
hepatic cytosol (76). These results indicate
that at least one mouse cytosolic enzyme
responsible for TCOH formation becomes
inhibited at high CH concentrations.
TCA production from CH by mouse, rat
and human liver supernatant was best stimu-
lated by NAD+. Of the reduced cofactors,
only NADPH stimulated TCA production
above that of control, and this occurred only
in the mouse. These results (particularly the
degree to which mouse liver TCA production
is stimulated by both NAD+ and NADP+)
indicate that there are species-related differ-
ences in hepatic TCA formation. The appar-
ent kinetic constants for the formation of
TCA from CH in the rat, mouse and human
in the presence of NAD+ indicate a much
lower Km value in the mouse, indicating that
under equivalent CH concentrations, TCA
formation will proceed at a more rapid rate in
mouse liver (Table 7). It is doubtful whether
CH will attain concentrations in human liver
to drive metabolism near the theoretical max-
imal value. Km values (CH) for TCA are
much higher than those required for TCOH
production, indicating that low concentra-
tions of CH will favor the production of
TCOH. Km* values (mM NAD+) for TCA
production were 0.13 and 0.14 mM for the
rat and mouse, respectively.
The kinetic parameters indicate that at
low hepatic concentrations of CH (below 0.5
mM), TCOH will be the preferred hepatic
metabolite. As shown in Table 8, the pre-
dicted ratio of TCOH:TCA is 10 to 20,
depending on species. These predictions agree
well with the observed urinary elimination of
TCOH and TCA in mice and rats exposed to
200 mg TCE/kg (53,54) and with initial
(0-1 hr) plasma levels of metabolites observed
in CH-exposed humans, where the levels of
TCOH were slightly higher than plasma levels
Table 8. Predicted rates of hepatic metabolite formation
at 50 pM chloral hydrate.a
Metabolite
Species TCOH TCA
Rat 2.13 0.012
Mouse 2.35 0.149
Human 1.25 0.136
'Metabolite (TCOH, TCA) formation is presented as nmol/min/mg
700 x g supernatant from liver homogenates of the indicated
species. Metabolic rates were calculated from the Michaelis-
Menten equation using the parameters obtained in Table 7.
of TCA (51,77). There is also evidence for
the oxidation of TCOH to TCA (77,78). If
TCOH is an obligate intermediate in the for-
mation of TCA from CH, the accumulation
of TCOH in blood and liver exposed to CH
in vitro implies that the initial conversion of
CH to TCOH is not rate limiting in the
formation ofTCA from CH.
Chioral Hydrate Metabolism by Blood
The conversion of CH to TCA and TCOH
was examined in blood of the rat, mouse, and
human to confirm and extend the findings of
an earlier report (51), which demonstrated
that significant amounts of TCOH and lim-
ited amounts of TCA were formed by blood
in vitro. Results from experiments with lysed
whole blood (no exogenous cofactor added)
indicate that much more TCOH than TCA is
produced (Table 9). Human blood produced
less TCOH (on a milliliter-for-milliliter basis)
than did either rat or mouse blood. However,
TCA production in lysed human blood was
significantly greater than TCA production by
rat blood but only slightly higher than that by
mouse blood. The further examination of
lysed erythrocytes and plasma of the human
indicate that erythrocytes were the sole site of
blood TCA production (best stimulated by
NADP+). Plasma formed 4- to 5-fold as much
TCOH from CH as did an equal quantity of
packed erythrocytes, indicating that plasma is
the primary site of TCOH production (best
stimulated by NAD+) by blood. These data
underscore the need to evaluate the organ-spe-
cific, presystemic, extrahepatic formation and
metabolism ofCH derived from a TCE expo-
sure and to fully describe CH metabolism in
the blood compartment. Evaluation of the
distribution of CH from portals of entry into
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 185
LASH ET AL.
Table 9. Metabolism of CH to TCOH and TCA by lysed,
whole blood.a
Rat Mouse Human
TCOH 45.4 ± 4.9b 46.7 ± 1.0b 20.5 ± 0.7c
TCA 0.135 ± 0.020d 0.208 ± 0.030e 0.269 ± 0.030
aResults are presented as nmol product formed in a 400-pL
lysate (containing 360 pl whole blood + 100 pL CH) over 30 min
and are means ± SD of measurements from 3 experiments.
Means with the same superscript letter are not significantly dif-
ferent from one another at p< 0.05.
blood and a kinetic examination of blood-
catalyzed CH metabolism will further the
success of species-dependent examination of
CH metabolism in vivo and can be used to
refine the PBPK models for both TCE and
CH. Kinetic data would verify the impor-
tance of hepatic CH metabolism in the over-
all disposition oftoxicologically relevant TCE
metabolites.
DichloroaceticAcid Formation
firom Trichoroacetic Acid
DCA is a TCE metabolite that is readily
identified in rodents but is generally not iden-
tifiable in humans. DCA has not been
detected under either aerobic or anaerobic
incubations of hepatic fractions with TCE.
While it has been impossible to demonstrate
the hepatic formation of DCA from TCE in
vitro, it has been demonstrated that the
dechlorination of TCA to DCA is catalyzed
by gut contents (ingested food and bacteria)
of the rat and mouse. Microflora cultured
from the cecum ofthe B6C3F1 mouse dechlo-
rinate TCA to DCA in a dose- and time-
dependent manner (Figure 4) (67). To
confirm these in vitro observations in vivo,
B6C3F1 mice were treated with antibiotics to
virtually deplete the mouse gut of microflora.
Antibiotic treatment resulted in dramatically
increased gut TCA content and concurrently
decreased gut DCA content compared with
animals exposed to TCE without antibiotic.
DCA present in circulating plasma was only
slightly diminished in antibiotic-treated mice
(68). Therefore, the source of DCA in
plasma is still unknown.
DichloroaceticAcid Metabolism
DCA degradation occurs primarily in rat
hepatic cytosol (60). Recent studies have
revealed similarities between kinetic constants
for hepatic cytosolic DCA degradation in the
mouse and rat in vitro and marked differences
between the kinetic constants in the human.
These studies reveal Km values of 350, 280,
and 71 pM and Vmaxvalues of 13.1, 11.6,
and 0.37 nmol/min/mg protein for the
mouse, rat and human, respectively (60).
Evaluation ofclearance values (VmaxKm) indi-
cates that human liver cytosol degrades DCA
less efficiently than either rat or mouse liver
cytosol.
Species-Dependent Differences in
P450-Dependent Metabolism ofTCE:
Interpreation ofFindings for Human
Health RiskAssessment
Several steps of the TCE metabolic pathway
were evaluated in vitro and striking species-
dependent differences were demonstrated.
Kinetic parameters for several of the steps in
the oxidative pathway of TCE metabolism
are summarized in Table 10. All available in
vitro data indicate that the human is less
capable to metabolize TCE and CH than the
rodent. The rate of CH formation in the
human is approximately 20% of that of the
mouse. Furthermore, in vitro kinetic parame-
ters for TCE metabolism were not normally
distributed in a sample of 23 human hepatic
microsome preparations; Km values were
divisible into three statistically distinct
groups. CYP2E1 is the form identified as the
major determinant ofTCE metabolism in the
human, and the form is well conserved across
species but is expressed to a higher extent in
rodents than humans. CYP2E1 exhibits a Km
value for TCE of approximately 20 gM. The
differential expression of CYP2E1 across
species may in part explain the higher TCE
metabolism seen in rodents than in humans
in vitro. The examination ofseveral sets of in
vitro data also indicates that CYPIA and
CYP3A forms metabolize TCE at concentra-
tions above the Km value for CYP2E1. The
Km value for TCE metabolism in microsomes
of female humans is significantly lower than
that in males, but V,", values were not signif-
icantly different (64). Factors that alter the
expression or activity of CYP2E1 in the
human should be incorporated into estimates
of TCE metabolism in vivo. TCOH and
TCA formation by components of mouse,
rat, and human blood was demonstrated and
TCOH was identified as the major blood-
derived CH metabolite. The metabolism of
CH to TCOH and TCA is efficiently cat-
alyzed by liver homogenates from all three
species, and TCOH formation predominated
over TCA formation under all conditions
evaluated in vitro. Km values for TCOH for-
mation are approximately 20-fold lower than
Km values for TCA formation, which drives
the formation ofTCOH at higher rates than
TCA formation at low CH concentrations.
Km values for cofactor involvement in hepatic
CH metabolism were shown to approximate
cofactor concentrations found in vivo. These
data indicate that significant changes in either
cofactor level or redox status of the liver may
impact the extent of CH metabolism and/or
the ratio of TCOR:TCA produced. Such an
impact has been demonstrated in the isolated
perfused rat liver (79,80).
41
l
a
0 200 400 600 800
[TCA], ,M
Figure 4. Time and concentration dependence of DCA
formation by anaerobic mouse gut microflora cultures.
Cultures of bacteria from mouse gut were incubated (108
cells/mL) with the indicated concentrations of TCA for
up to 4 hr.
Table 10. Comparison of metabolic parameters for the oxidative metabolism of TCE determined in vitro.
Metabolic step Mouse Rat Human
TCE to CHa
Km (pM TCE) 35.4 55.5 24.6
Vmax(nmol/min/mg microsomal protein) 5,425 4826 1440
CH to TCOHb
Km (mM CH) 0.12 (low affinity) 0.52 1.34
0.51 (high affinity)
Vmax(nmol/min/mg supernatant protein) 6.3 (low affinity) 24.3 34.7
6.1 (high affinity)
VmaxVKm 52.5 (low affinity) 46.7 25.9
12.0 (high affinity)
CH to TCAb
Km(mM CH) 3.5 16.4 23.9
Vinax(nmol/min/mg supernatant protein) 10.6 4.0 65.2
Vma,/Km 3.03 0.24 2.73
DCA degradation
Km (mM DCA) 0.350c 0.280d 0.071c
Vmax(nmol/min/mg cytosolic protein) 13.1 11.6 0.37
Vmax/Km 37.4 41.4 5.2
'Data reported in Lipscomb et al. (8). hData reported in Lipscomb et al. (52). cData reported in Lipscomb et al. (165). dData reported in
Lipscomb et al. (61).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
2J -
-0- 1-hr
20- -0- 2-hr
-&- 3-hr
15 * 4-hr
10- / /
15
10
186
METABOLISM OF TCE
DCA formation was not demonstrated in
any tissue fraction evaluated in vitro. It was
shown that gut contents of mice and rats
dechlorinate TCA to DCA. Additional studies
in antibiotic-treated mice in vivo revealed only
slight depressions of plasma DCA levels fol-
lowing oral administration ofTCE, indicating
an additional, nongut source of DCA produc-
tion. Because of the absence of DCA in sam-
ples from humans exposed to TCE, the
degradation of DCA in vitro was evaluated.
Human hepatic cytosol was less effective at
degrading DCA than cytosol of rats or mice.
These findings may explain the lack ofdemon-
stration of DCA in human blood following
TCE exposure. Based on the assumption of
equal rates of DCA formation across species,
these results indicate that clearance ofDCA by
liver in the human does not account for the
lack of finding DCA. Because TCA is also
formed by components ofblood, because TCA
is more efficiently bound to plasma constituent
proteins in the mouse than in the human,
because binding of TCA by plasma proteins
influences the distribution ofTCA from blood
to liver, and because TCA is equally well (if
not more efficiently) formed in the liver of the
mouse than of the human, it may follow that
the human liver is less exposed to TCA than
the mouse liver. Ifhepatic TCA concentrations
drive biliary elimination of TCA, and TCA
accumulation in the gut drives DCA forma-
tion, then it may be reasoned that DCA for-
mation in the human is likely to occur at a
much lower rate than in the mouse. However,
gut is not the sole source of DCA formation.
DCA levels in plasma were diminished but not
eradicated in the antibiotic-treated mouse.
These and other data complicate the inclusion
of DCA in human health risk assessments of
CH and TCE. The usefulness of in vitro data
in the evaluation of the toxicity of TCE and
human health risk assessment should be care-
fully weighed. While the traditional strength of
in vitro data lies in mechanistic evaluations and
the conditions employed do not reflect the
total in vivo system, the accurate extrapolation
of these (and other) in vitro data will yield
important results. Precedent has been set for
the use of in vitro data in PBPK models (e.g.,
81). A careful extrapolation of in vitro kinetic
data from rat and mouse liver, the evaluation
of pulmonary metabolism of TCE to CH,
blood-mediated metabolism of CH to TCA,
and plasma-binding characteristics ofTCA will
greatly aid the construction and validation of
these models, lending credibility to the similar
model constructed for the human (11).
Evaluation of model effectiveness can be
accomplished by comparing kinetic predictions
with currently available human data. This in
vitro approach will contribute to a valid,
science-based, and technologically complex
human health risk assessment for TCE.
Glutathione-Dependent
Metabolism of TCE
This section describes the GSH conjugation
(mercapturic acid) pathway for TCE. In clas-
sic drug metabolism textbooks, GSH conjuga-
tion has typically been described as a
detoxication route for reactive electrophiles.
For the majority of chemicals that are conju-
gated with GSH, this is a correct functional
characterization. It became readily apparent
several years ago, however, that GSH conjuga-
tion plays a bioactivation role for several types
of drugs, particularly halogenated alkanes and
alkenes. Although conjugation with GSH is
the initial step in the pathway, the critical step
for formation of a cytotoxic and/or carcino-
genic metabolite occurs after processing to the
cysteine conjugate. A major issue in the study
ofthe conjugation ofTCE with GSH and the
toxicological consequences of this pathway is
how to accurately measure flux through the
pathway so that its importance relative to the
P450 pathway can be assessed.
Desrption ofGSH-Dependent
Pathways ofTCE Metabolism
GSH conjugation of TCE: formation of
S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)glutathione (DCVG). As
shown in Figure 1, the other possible fate of
TCE besides oxidative metabolism is conju-
gation with GSH, which is catalyzed by the
GSTs. GSTs, like P450s, comprise a family
of isoforms. With the exception of the micro-
somal GST isoform, all other isoforms are
cytosolic. The primacy of the liver as the site
of GSH conjugation is highlighted by the
observation that GST protein can comprise as
much as 5% of the total cytosolic protein in
rat or human liver. However, GSTs are pre-
sent in most tissues, including the kidneys, so
that this initial step in the pathway does not
necessarily have to occur in the liver but can
also occur in the target organ.
The cysteine conjugate of TCE, S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (DCVC), was dis-
covered in a biological system nearly 40 years
ago (82,83) when it was observed in soybean
meal that had been extracted with TCE.
DCVC was identified as the etiologic agent
that caused nephrotoxicity and aplastic ane-
mia in cows and only nephrotoxicity in sev-
eral other mammalian species. For many
years, DCVC was seen as a model compound
that arose purely chemically rather than bio-
chemically. An in vivo role for GSH conjuga-
tion in the metabolism of TCE was not
appreciated until Dekant et al. (84) showed
that the mercapturate of TCE, N-acetyl-S-
(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (NAcDCVC),
was recovered in the urine of rats that had
been exposed to TCE and Anders and col-
leagues (85,86) synthesized DCVG and
demonstrated that it was nephrotoxic to rats
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
and that it was metabolized to DCVC before
exerting its toxicity. This suggested that a
portion of TCE underwent GSH conjuga-
tion in vivo with subsequent processing to
the cysteine conjugate followed by N-acetyla-
tion and urinary excretion of the mercap-
turate. Dekant et al. (87) subsequently
showed that TCE was metabolized in rats to
DCVG both in vivo and in isolated liver
microsomes: After administration of TCE in
corn oil by oral gavage, DCVG was recov-
ered in the bile and NAcDCVC was recov-
ered in the urine; DCVG formation was
confirmed in rat liver microsomes incubated
with TCE and GSH.
In a human TCE exposure study (88),
healthy human volunteers (11 males, 10
females) were exposed for 4 hr by inhalation
to either 100 ppm TCE (8 males, 8 females)
or 50 or 60 ppm TCE (3 males, 2 females),
and blood and urine samples were obtained
at various time points both before and after
exposure for up to several days. With respect
to the current discussion of GSH-dependent
metabolism of TCE, the most significant
finding of these studies was that DCVG was
detected in blood within 30 min of the end
of the 4-hr TCE exposure period and its
presence persisted for up to 12 hr. Both
dose- and sex-dependent differences in
DCVG levels in blood were detected and are
summarized in Table 11. DCVG formation
was clearly higher in males at both the
higher and lower doses of TCE, consistent
with the greater susceptibility of males to
renal tumors from TCE [see review on
"Mode ofAction for Kidney Tumorigenesis"
in this monograph (89)]. These data, there-
fore, demonstrate the function of the GSH
conjugation pathway in humans. As dis-
cussed below, this is only the initial step in
the generation of nephrotoxic species and
does not directly correlate with it because
subsequent detoxication reactions, such as
mercapturate formation, can still occur.
GSH conjugation of TCE occurs at rates
that are generally severalfold slower than the
P450-catalyzed oxidation reactions. As men-
tioned above and discussed below in the sec-
tion on the relative roles of the oxidative and
GSH conjugation pathways in TCE-induced
toxicity and carcinogenesis, there are several
unresolved issues related to the importance
of GSH conjugation in risk assessment for
TCE. Rates of GSH conjugation ofTCE are
discussed below in more detail in the sections
on tissue distribution and sex and species
dependence.
Metabolism of DCVG to DCVC.
DCVG, like other GSH conjugates, is
processed by y-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
to the cysteinylglycine conjugate S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteinylglycine (DCVCG)
and then by various membrane-bound
187
Table 11. Formation of DCVG in blood from human volunteers exposed to TCE.a
Maximal DCVG recovered (time after exposure)
Males Females
50/60 ppm TCE
nmol DCVG/ml blood 16.2 ± 8.1 (0.5 hr) 2.13 (1 hr)
pmol DCVG/mg protein 102 ± 81 (3 hr) 16.5 (1 hr)
100 ppm TCE
nmol DCVG/ml blood 46.1 ± 14.2(2 hr) 13.4 ± 6.6 (4 hr)
pmol DCVG/mg protein 517 ± 250 (3 hr) 138 ± 70 (4 hr)
"Healthy human volunteers (11 males, 10 females) were exposed by inhalation for 4 hr to either 50/60 ppm TCE (3 males, 2 females)
or 100 ppm TCE (8 males, 8 females), and blood was collected at various times both before and after the exposure period. For analysis
of DCVG, blood was deproteinated with acid and acid-soluble extracts were derivatized with iodoacetate and 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitroben-
zene for analysis of N-dinitrophenyl-DCVG by ion-exchange HPLC using an amine column, a methanol-acetate solvent system with
gradient elution, and detection at 365 nm. Maximal concentrations of DCVG recovered in whole blood, with the time after exposure
indicated in parentheses, are shown below. Data were reported in (88). Results are the means ± SE of 3 sets of samples for males at
50/60 ppm TCE, means ± SE for 8 sets of samples for males or females at 100 ppm TCE, and the average of 2 sets of samples for
females at 50/60 ppm TCE.
dipeptidases to DCVC (90). As will be
discussed below, DCVC is the critical
branch point in the metabolism of TCE by
the GSH conjugation pathway. By this, it is
meant that DCVC can be metabolized fur-
ther by multiple enzymes to yield both
detoxication products that are excreted and
reactive species that have been associated
with nephrotoxicity and are believed to be
associated with nephrocarcinogenicity.
One strategy to validate the function of
the GSH conjugation pathway in bioactiva-
tion and toxicity has been to use either co-
substrates that are specific for particular steps
to potentiate activity or toxicity or to use spe-
cific inhibitors of enzymatic steps to inhibit
pathway flux or toxicity. Ifthe GSH conjuga-
tion pathway is responsible for bioactivation
and toxicity, then cosubstrates should
enhance toxicity and specific inhibitors
should diminish toxicity. As summarized in
Figure 5, this strategy has been applied to
DCVG and its metabolites in both in vivo
experiments (85) and in vitro studies with sus-
pensions of isolated rat kidney cells (91).
Hence, requirements for hydrolysis ofDCVG
by GGT was demonstrated with L-(aS,5S)-a-
amino-3-chloro-4,5-dihydro-5-isoxazoleacetic
acid (acivicin), a potent and irreversible
inhibitor of GGT, and with a cosubstrate of
the enzyme. Similarly, inhibitors ofdipeptidase
activity and of the I-lyase all prevented or
greatly diminished cytotoxicity in vitro or
nephrotoxicity in vivo of chemicals that occur
before the inhibited step.
Metabolism ofDCVC to NAcDCVC. In
the classic view ofthe GSH conjugation path-
way, cysteine conjugates undergo N-acetyla-
tion to yield mercapturates which, because of
their polarity, are readily excreted in the
urine. The N-acetylation reaction is catalyzed
by a cysteine S-conjugate N-acetyltransferase
found in the endoplasmic reticulum (92).
This N-acetyltransferase is distinct from the
cytosolic enzymes that are polymorphic in
humans (e.g., isoniazid polymorphism). The
mercapturate can also be deacetylated
intracellularly, thus regenerating the cysteine
conjugate. Hence, administration of
NAcDCVC can also produce nephrotoxicity
(93,94), and the relative rates ofN-acetylation
and deacetylation are important in determin-
ing the fraction of the mercapturate that can
produce toxic metabolites.
Zhang and Stevens (94) compared the
intracellular disposition and metabolic fate of
DCVC and NAcDCVC in suspensions of rat
renal proximal tubules. DCVC was rapidly
transported into the tubules and was rapidly
converted to NAcDCVC or was converted to
reactive species that covalently bound to cellu-
lar proteins. Comparison of the amount of
radiolabel covalently bound to cellular pro-
teins with 35S-DCVC and 35S-NAcDCVC
showed that a much higher proportion of
radiolabel was bound from DCVC than from
NAcDCVC. These data suggested that
deacetylation ofNAcDCVC is relatively slow.
As described below, a significant portion of
the DCVG that is formed in the liver is
excreted into the bile and is converted there
and in the intestines to DCVC. After entero-
hepatic circulation, some of this DCVC is
converted to NAcDCVC in the liver and then
excreted into the plasma and translocated to
the kidneys. Hence, the relative amounts of
DCVC and NAcDCVC that are released
from the liver for translocation to the kidneys
will modulate the amount of nephrotoxic and
nephrocarcinogenic metabolites that are
ultimately generated within the kidneys.
The NAcDCVC that is secreted into the
tubular lumen of the kidneys or that arrives
there by glomerular filtration and is not trans-
ported back into the renal epithelial cell for
deacetylation is excreted into the urine.
Indeed, NAcDCVC has been recovered in the
urine of rats (54,95,96), mice (97), and
humans (17,96,97) after exposure to TCE.
This demonstrates that the GSH conjugation
pathway for TCE occurs in vivo. Urinary
NAcDCVC has been considered as a marker
for flux ofTCE through the GSH conjugation
pathway, mostly for lack ofa better alternative.
DCVG
) -- Acivicin
y-Glutamyltransferase
DCVCG
Dipeptidase | (3 _ 1,10-Pher
Dipeptidase
PheGly
DCVC
-AOAACysteine Conjugate
)i-lyase 0 ---- 2-Keto a
nanthroline
acids
[DCVSH]
Nephrotoxicity
Nephrocarcinooenicity
Figure 5. Validation of GSH conjugation and ,B-Iyase pathway
for bioactivation of DCVG. Abbreviations: GlyGly, glycylglycine;
PheGly, phenylalanylglycine; AOAA, aminooxyacetic acid.
As described in the next and subsequent
sections of this review, it is likely that urinary
NAcDCVC represents only a small fraction of
the total flux. Hence, although NAcDCVC
may be reliably used to assess exposure to
TCE, it will not be a very sensitive indicator
owing to the small amounts recovered. More
important for risk assessment, NAcDCVC has
also been specifically considered as a marker of
flux through the pathway that produces the
nephrotoxic and nephrocarcinogenic metabo-
lites ofTCE. As described above, NAcDCVC
is a detoxication product, whereas other
metabolites of DCVC are the ones that are
directly associated with renal injury. These
considerations will be discussed further later in
this review in relation to flux through the
oxidative pathway of TCE metabolism and
sex- and species-dependent differences in
metabolism ofTCE.
DCVCmetabolism by P3-lyase. Early studies
with DCVC described its enzymatic break-
down by a C-S lyase in liver and kidney to
pyruvate, ammonia, and an unidentified sulfur-
containing fragment that formed covalent
adducts with GSH and protein (98). Studies
over the next three decades showed that the
enzymatic activity, the J3-lyase, is a family of
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-containing enzymes
that are found in several tissues besides the kid-
neys, induding rat and human liver (99-103),
intestinal microflora (104,105), and rat brain
(106,107). However, many ofthese various P3-
lyase activities are catalyzed by distinct enzymes
with varying substrate specificities or are not
exposed to cysteine conjugates in the normal
pathways ofinterorgan metabolism.
Although the DCVG that is formed in the
liver and excreted into the bile can be degraded
to DCVC and should then be available for
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
LASH ET AL.
188
METABOLISM OF TCE
,B-lyase-mediated catalysis by the intestinal
microflora, these enzymes are not thought to
play a significant role in DCVC metabolism
and no intestinal toxicity is seen with adminis-
tration of DCVC. As discussed below in the
section on tissue distribution of I-lyase activ-
ity, the hepatic P-lyase activity is associated
with kynureninase (100) and is distinct from
the renal I-lyase activities (108), whereas the
renal 13-lyase activity is a catalytic property of
glutamine transaminase K (109-116).
Alberati-Giani et al. (106) reported that rat
liver also expresses the mRNA for the renal
glutamine transaminase K but that the levels of
the mRNA in the liver are much lower than
those in the kidneys. Due to the patterns of
interorgan metabolism and the tissue speci-
ficity of enzymes that process GSH conjugates
and related metabolites, hepatic kynureninase
does not appear to play a role in DCVC
metabolism and no liver pathology is observed
after treatment of rats with DCVG or DCVC
(85,86,99). Hence, it is the renal P-lyase activ-
ities that are critical for DCVC bioactivation.
The initial 3-lyase activities that were puri-
fied from rat (115) and human (113) kidney
cytosol were identified as catalytic activities of
glutamine transaminase K with reported mole-
cular weights of85-100 kDa. Multiple P-lyase
activities appear to be present in renal cortical
mitochondria, a soluble form present in the
matrix and identified with glutamine transami-
nase K (116) and a membrane-bound form
that is distinct from glutamine transaminase K
(112). Recent studies from Cooper and col-
leagues (117,118) have identified an addi-
tional, high-molecular-weight form of renal
[-lyase with apparent molecular weight of330
kDa. The high-molecular-weight form, like
the low-molecular-weight form, is localized to
the cytosol and mitochondrial matrix but is
immunologically distinct from glutamine
transaminase K and has no similarities to other
known PLP-containing enzymes. Biochemical
properties of the various renal B-lyase activities
are summarized in Table 12. The apparent
regulation of ,-lyase activity by 2-keto acids
(110), particularly in renal mitochondria,
suggests that metabolic state may alter activity
in vivo, thereby influencing toxicity. Keto
acids stimulate renal ,-lyase activity and
potentiate DCVC-induced cytotoxicity in
freshly isolated rat kidney cells because the 1B-
lyase catalyzes both ,8-elimination and
transamination reactions: During transamina-
tion, the PLP cofactor can become "trapped"
in an inactive pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP)
form in the absence of suitable keto acid
acceptors; addition of exogenous keto acids
converts to PLP, thereby restoring activity to
the 3-lyase (110,115).
As illustrated in Figures 1 and 5, DCVC is
metabolized by the 3-lyase to a reactive thiol,
S-(1 ,2-dichlorovinyl)thiol (DCVSH). This
thiol is chemically unstable and rearranges to
reactive species that alkylate cellular nucleo-
philes (Figure 6). Trapping experiments were
necessary to demonstrate formation of these
metabolites due to their reactive and chemi-
cally unstable nature (119). Similar
approaches have been used to trap and iden-
tify chemical structures of reactive intermedi-
ates from several other haloalkyl and
haloalkenyl cysteine S-conjugates (119-121).
DCVC metabolites generated by the
catalytic action of the 1-lyase form covalent
adducts with cellular nucleophiles, including
proteins. Bull and colleagues (122,123) sug-
gested that measurement of the acid-labile
adducts could be used as an index of flux
through the ,B-lyase pathway. While this
would seem to make sense, as it is the quan-
tity of the reactive species that is formed that
can produce cellular injury and not, as dis-
cussed below, the quantity of stable end-
products that are excreted into the urine (e.g.,
mercapturates), the methodology is poten-
tially complicated by artifacts due to chemical
instability of the molecules being quantified.
Additionally, Eyre et al. (122,123) found
that apparent net activation of TCE by the
1-lyase pathway and apparent acid-labile
adduct formation were greater in mice than
in rats, which does not correspond to the
higher susceptibility of rats to renal toxicity
and carcinogenesis, although adduct forma-
tion did correspond to increased cell replica-
tion rates. Hence, the relationship between
adduct formation and effects on cellular
function and homeostasis are very complex
and require further study.
MacFarlane et al. (124) showed that pre-
treatment of rats with a single, subtoxic dose
of the mercapturate of a nephrotoxic halo-
genated hydrocarbon produced a 1.5- to 3-
fold increase in renal 1-lyase activity and an
increase in the cognate mRNA. These results
suggest that prior or continuous exposures to
low, subtoxic doses of certain cysteine or N-
acetylcysteine conjugates may enhance the
capability to generate reactive species by the
P-lyase after subsequent exposures to toxic
doses of these conjugates or their precursors.
Although little is currently known about the
genetic regulation of the 1-lyase, these data
suggest that differential expression of the 13-
lyase may need to be taken into account in a
risk assessment for chemicals whose nephro-
toxicity is mediated by this enzyme.
Direct demonstration of the function of
the 1-lyase in vivo in either experimental ani-
mals or humans has not been possible with
DCVC because of the reactive nature of the
metabolite. However, Iyer et al. (125) recently
reported the identification of a metabolite of
compound A (2-[fluoromethoxy]-1, 1,3,3,3-
pentafluoro-1-propene) that could only have
arisen by ,B-lyase-dependent metabolism.
Hence, this is the first study to directly show
function ofthe 1-lyase in vivo in humans.
DCVC metabolism by other enzymes.
Although the 1-lyase is considered to be the
major bioactivation enzyme for DCVC, other
bioactivation enzyme activities have been
described, and some of these may have rele-
vance to risk assessment. One of these other
enzymes is the renal L-a-hydroxy (L-amino)
acid oxidase (HAO), which can catalyze for-
mation of the keto acid analogue of DCVC
through an iminium ion intermediate, and
this then decomposes to release DCVSH
(126,127). This route of metabolism for
DCVC has been estimated to account for as
much as 35% of bioactivation in male F344
rats. HAO, however, is present only in rat
kidney and is absent from human kidney.
Thus, this pathway is irrelevant for human
health risk assessment.
Table 12. Biochemical properties of mammalian renal cysteine conjugate P-lyase activities.
Property
Subcellular localization
Intrarenal localization
Molecular weight and
subunit composition
Cofactor
Substrate specificity
Cosubstrate specificity
Reaction mechanism
Inhibitor
Description
Cytosol and mitochondria (matrix and outer membrane)
Predominantly S3 segment of proximal tubule; also in S, and S2
Low-molecular-weight form: homodimer of 45-50 kDa each; aggregate M,
reported of 85-100 kDa; identical to glutamine transaminase K
High-molecular-weight form: 330 kDa; at least two subunits of M,70 and 50
kDa; distinct from glutamine transaminase K
Pyridoxal phosphate
Both forms: good leaving group on beta carbon; haloalkyl or haloalkenyl
cysteine S-conjugates are substrates.
Low-molecular-weight form: nonhalogenated, alkyl-substituted conjugates are
not substrates.
High-molecular-weight form: leukotriene E4 as a substrate.
Both forms: 2-keto acids with relatively hydrophobic substituents on beta
carbon (e.g., 2-keto-4-methiolbutyrate, phenylpyruvate).
High-molecular-weight form: also activated by polar 2-keto acids (e.g.,
2-ketoglutarate and pyruvate).
Beta-elimination or transamination followed by reverse Michael elimination
Aminooxyacetic acid
189
VrnviTonmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
Cl
H~ ~~~3
\/ \COS
coo-
Cl
I
cls
H,0
1, DCVC
2, DCVSH
HNEt.,
4b
Nu
Cl'
Figure 6. Scheme of formation of reactive metabolites from DCVC. Abbreviations: HNEt2, diethylamine; Nu, cellular
nucleophile. Metabolites: 1, DCVC; 2, DCVSH; 3a, chlorothioketene; 3b, chlorothionoacetyl chloride; 4a, N,N-
diethylchlorothioacetamide; 4b, covalent adduct with cellular nucleophile; 5a, chlorothionacetic acid; 5b, CAA.
Metabolite 4a is formed by trapping reactive metabolites 3a/3b with HNEt2. Metabolites 5a and 5b are stable end
products that are formed by hydrolysis. Modified from Dekant et al. (119).
Sulfoxides are known metabolites of
cysteine conjugates that can be recovered in
the urine as stable end products. Elfarra and
colleagues (128,129) identified and subse-
quently purified an enzymatic activity from rat
liver and kidney microsomes that metabolizes
DCVC to its sulfoxide. This enzyme was sub-
sequently shown to be a flavin-containing
monooxygenase (FMO), initially thought to
be related to FMOIA1 (129), but more recent
data suggest that FMO3 is the isoform respon-
sible for DCVC oxidation (130). Unlike other
cysteine conjugate sulfoxides, DCVC sulfoxide
is unstable and reacts with cellular nucle-
ophiles, including GSH (131). The potential
significance of this activity for overall TCE or
DCVC bioactivation and for human health
risk assessment is undear, but DCVC sulfox-
ide was shown to be markedly more nephro-
toxic to rats and more cytotoxic in freshly
isolated rat renal cells than DCVC (132). This
finding warrants further investigation.
Werner et al. (133) recently showed that
sulfoxides can arise by a different pathway. In
their studies, they found that NAcDCVC and
the mercapturate of perchloroethylene (PER)
were metabolized by rat liver microsomes to
the corresponding sulfoxides by CYP3A and
not by an FMO. These investigators also
found that the N-acetylcysteine conjugate sul-
foxides were markedly more cytotoxic in
freshly isolated rat renal cortical cells than the
corresponding mercapturates, similar to the
situation with cysteine conjugate sulfoxides.
This report adds an additional dimension to
known bioactivation mechanisms of DCVC.
Due to the efficient processing of mercap-
turates by the liver, which leads to their deliv-
ery to the kidneys, and the much lower
activity ofCYP3A in the kidneys as compared
with the liver, this pathway is not likely to be
quantitatively important overall or even in
comparison to the P-lyase pathway.
An additional although minor fate of the
reactive DCVSH generated by the ,-lyase and
other enzymes is methylation, which occurs by
a thiomethyltransferase in the intestinal
microflora (134). The thiomethyltransferase
uses S-adenosylmethionine to transfer a methyl
group to the thiol, forming the methylthio
derivative, which is subsequently oxidized to
the methylsulfinyl (CH3SO-) and methyl-
sulfonyl (CH3SO2-) analogs. The methylthio
derivatives are nonpolar and are generally
excreted into the feces. Quantitatively, this
pathway is probably minor for TCE, account-
ing for no more than 0.05-0.1% of the total
excreted metabolites ofTCE.
Membrane transport of GSH-derived
metabolites of TCE. Membrane transport
processes play an important role in the tissue
distribution of the various GSH conjugates
and related metabolites [(89); also see discus-
sion below on interorgan metabolism). There
are three GSH-derived metabolites of TCE
whose membrane transport is important for
understanding tissue distribution: DCVG,
DCVC, and NAcDCVC. For DCVG, both
efflux from the hepatocyte and membrane
transport processes in renal proximal tubular
cells are toxicologically important. For both
DCVC and NAcDCVC, uptake into renal
proximal tubular cells is the relevant process.
As discussed above, there are two primary
sources or sites of formation of DCVG-the
liver and the kidneys. For DCVG that is gen-
erated by renal GSTs, further processing
occurs by efflux of intracellular DCVG by
transport across the brush-border membrane
into the lumen, where it can then be metabo-
lized by GGT and dipeptidases to generate
DCVC. Efflux ofGSH and GSH S-conjugates
into the lumen by transport across the brush-
border membrane is viewed as an essential step
in the turnover of these compounds because
the active site ofGGT is extracellular (135). In
fact, inhibition of GGT in vivo produces
marked glutathionuria in mice (135).
Presumably, a marked increase in urinary
excretion ofGSH conjugates would also occur
under similar conditions. Although this trans-
port step has not been specifically quantitated
for DCVG, Inoue and Morino (136) deter-
mined the mechanism and kinetics of trans-
port for GSH in renal brush-border
membrane vesicles. GSH uptake was depen-
dent on the membrane potential and exhib-
ited a Km for GSH of0.21 mM and a V,, of
1.15 nmol/min per mg protein. It can be
expected that brush-border membrane DCVG
transport will likely exhibit similar kinetics.
For DCVG that is generated in the liver,
there are two additional steps, efflux across the
canalicular membrane into the bile or across
the sinusoidal membrane into the plasma, and
extraction by the kidneys. Hepatic GSH con-
jugates are transported primarily into bile by
the canalicular multispecific organic anion
transporter (cMOAT), which is an ATPase
that mediates efflux of various GSH conju-
gates and organic anions (137-140). Again,
transport of DCVG by this carrier has not
been specifically studied. However, kinetics
for transport of the model GSH conjugate
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
LASH ET AL
190
METABOLISM OF TCE
S-(2,4-dinitrophenyl)glutathione (DNPSG)
have been characterized. Km (pM DNPSG)
and Vm,, (nmol translocated/min per mg pro-
tein) values of 71 and 0.34, respectively, were
reported by Akerboom et al. (137), whereas
Niinuma et al. (140) reported values of 18
and 1.15, respectively. Comparisons with
other model GSH conjugates reveal some
variability in rates of transport (up to a 5-fold
range), suggesting that these values for
DNPSG should only be used as a rough esti-
mate for the transport of DCVG from the
hepatocyte into the bile. Although data in
normal human liver are not available, Olive
and Board (141) characterized efflux of
DNPSG from eight different cultured human
liver cell lines, including Jurkat, HL-60,
HepG2, and HeLa cells. A 10-fold range of
transport rates was observed. These cells also
exhibited a 6-fold range of intracellular GSH
contents and a 5-fold range of GST activities.
However, there was no correlation between
transport activity and either GSH content or
GST activity. Hence, although transport data
from normal human liver is unavailable, these
studies in cell lines suggest that considerable
variations in transport capacity may exist.
Besides the luminal transport of DCVG,
plasma DCVG that does not undergo
glomerular filtration may gain access to the
renal proximal tubular cell by transport across
the basolateral plasma membrane (142). This
transport occurs by the Na+-coupled system
described for GSH (143,144). Transport of
both GSH and GSH S-conjugates is inhib-
ited by probenecid and p-aminohippurate,
suggesting that the organic anion carrier may
be involved in the transport. Another study
on renal plasma membrane GSH transport
(145) indicates the additional involvement of
plasma membrane dicarboxylate carriers.
Rates of DCVG transport into membrane
vesicles were extremely rapid (22 nmol/min/
per mg protein with 5 mM DCVG) and
transport was inhibited by GSH and
y-glutamyl amino acids, but not by DCVC
(142). Once inside the renal proximal tubu-
lar cell, DCVG will be translocated to the
brush-border membrane for efflux into the
lumen and metabolism as described above.
Once DCVG is secreted into the bile, a
significant portion of it will be metabolized
by either biliary or intestinal GGT and
dipeptidases to form DCVC. The transport
processes relevant for DCVC include uptake
into the hepatocytes (enterohepatic circula-
tion) and uptake into the renal proximal
tubular cell. Again, little data are available on
rates of DCVC transport into the liver, with
the exception of one in vitro study. Simmons
et al. (146) characterized DCVC uptake by
isolated canalicular membrane vesicles from
rat liver. DCVC uptake was Na+ independent
and exhibited Km and Vm,, values of 155 ,uM
and 4.7 nmol/min per mg protein, respectively.
This step thus appears to have a greater capac-
ity than any ofthe steps for DCVG transport.
Renal extraction of plasma DCVC can
occur by either glomerular filtration and
uptake across the brush-border membrane or
by uptake across the basolateral membrane.
Transport across the brush-border membrane
from rat kidney cortex was reported to be Na+
dependent and exhibited Km and V, values
of225 pM and 3.1 nmol/min per mg protein,
respectively (147). In contrast, Wright et al.
(148) found that DCVC uptake in brush-bor-
der membrane vesides from rabbit renal cortex
was Na+-independent and exhibited Km and
V, values of0.45 mM and 60 nmol/min per
mg protein. Brush-border membrane transport
of DCVC was unaffected by NAcDCVC or
several other organic anions but appears to
occur by the same carrier that transports neu-
tral amino acids such as phenylalanine. In con-
trast to this, basolateral transport of DCVC
occurs by both Na+-dependent and Na+-inde-
pendent mechanisms and the Na+-dependent
process interacts with the transport of
NAcDCVC and organic anions (149,150).
Rates ofDCVC uptake by isolated renal proxi-
mal tubular cells, which reflect primarily trans-
port processes occurring at the basolateral
membrane, were approximately 2-fold higher
for DCVC than for DCVG (142,150). Thus,
as with canalicular membrane transport, renal
transport of DCVC appears to be significantly
faster than that ofDCVG.
After release from the hepatocyte, DCVG
will undergo interorgan translocation and/or
metabolism. In its translocation to the kid-
neys, a portion of it will first be returned to
the liver before efflux into plasma (renal-
hepatic circulation). Some of the DCVG will
be metabolized extrahepatically to DCVC
and some of this will be N-acetylated, either
extrahepatically or in the liver to form
NAcDCVC. Hence, the mercapturate is also
a form to which the kidneys are exposed.
Transport of NAcDCVC into renal proximal
tubular cells occurs readily and presumably
by the organic anion carrier (93,94). Kinetic
parameters for transport at specific membrane
sites are unavailable, but estimates appear to
be similar to those for DCVC. Transport of
NAcDCVC is not believed to be limiting for
nephrotoxicity, as described above. Rather,
the intracellular deacetylation reaction likely
determines the extent of regeneration of
DCVC and the degree ofcytotoxicity.
Tissue Distribution and Sex- and
Species-Dependent Heterogeneity
ofGSH-Dependent Metabolism ofTCE
The selective tissue distribution ofthe various
enzymes of the GSH-dependent metabolism
of TCE plays a critical role in determining
the target organ specificity of DCVC and the
reactive species that are derived from its
further metabolism. Hence, a precise knowl-
edge of the relative activities of each of the
major enzymes of the pathway is important,
to help both in understanding how toxicity
occurs and in assessing the relevance of the
GSH conjugation pathway relative to the
oxidative pathway in TCE-induced toxicity.
The liver and kidneys are the major sites of
GSH-dependent metabolism of TCE,
although biliary and intestinal metabolism
also play significant roles.
Although most cell types express some
GST activity, the liver is by far the predomi-
nant site of GSH conjugation. Table 13 sum-
marizes measurements of GST activity with
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene as substrate in
cytosolic fractions from male and female F344
rat and B6C3F, mouse liver and kidney. With
the exception of the female rat, specific activi-
ties (normalized to protein) are slightly to
modestly lower in kidney cytosol than in
those from liver cytosol. However, total activ-
ity in the liver will be much higher than in the
kidneys due to the larger tissue size.
For chemicals such as TCE that undergo
GSH conjugation and eventually are trans-
located to the kidneys for further metabolism,
it has generally been assumed that most ifnot
all of the GSH conjugation occurs in the
liver. However, Lash et al. (151) showed that
TCE is conjugated with GSH in freshly iso-
lated kidney cells from male F344 rats,
although at rates that are only 5 to 10% of
those in isolated hepatocytes (Figure 7). Koob
and Dekant (152) also demonstrated that
hexafluoropropene, a nephrotoxic fluo-
roalkene, can undergo GSH conjugation in
the kidney as well as in the liver. Thus, the
entire GSH conjugation pathway can occur
within the target tissue. Although the major-
ity of the flux involves interorgan processes
(see below), with the liver catalyzing the
majority of the initial step in the pathway,
this intraorgan process should be taken into
account in refinements of PBPK models and
risk assessments for TCE.
A summary of measurements of DCVG
formation from TCE in liver and kidney
cytosol and microsomes from male and
female F344 rats and B6C3F, mice
(153,154) is given in Table 14. The results
show some dramatic sex- and species-depen-
dent differences in GSH conjugation ofTCE.
Although overall GSH conjugation in male
rats is clearly higher than that in female rats,
no detectable DCVG formation was observed
in male rat liver microsomes, whereas DCVG
formation in female rat liver microsomes
occurred at approximately twice the rate as in
the cytosol. Rates of metabolism in mice in
both kidney and liver fractions were also gen-
erally faster in males than in females and were
markedly higher than corresponding rates in
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 191
LASH ET AL.
rats. This last point brings up an interesting
correlation with the covalent adduct forma-
tion reported by Bull and colleagues (93,94).
As summarized above, 2-fold higher rates of
covalent adduct formation from 35S-labeled
DCVC were found in mouse kidney com-
pared to those in rat kidney. Hence, both
higher rates of adduct formation and GSH
conjugation of TCE occur in the mouse kid-
ney, although the rat is the species in whom
renal tumors are observed.
Kinetics of GSH conjugation of TCE in
subcellular fractions from pooled human
liver and kidney samples are summarized in
Table 15. Although analysis could only
detect a single, kinetically distinct process for
DCVG formation in kidney fractions, GSH
conjugation ofTCE in both liver cytosol and
Table 13. Measurements of GST activity in liver and
kidney cytosol from male and female F344 rats and
B6C3F, mice.a
Activity
Sex Species Tissue (mU/mg protein)
Male Mouse Liver cytosol 0.78 ± 0.28
Male Mouse Kidney cytosol 0.70 ± 0.09
Female Mouse Liver cytosol 0.49 ± 0.03
Female Mouse Kidney cytosol 0.34 ± 0.04
Male Rat Liver cytosol 1.10 ± 0.44
Male Rat Kidney cytosol 0.55 ± 0.10
Female Rat Liver cytosol 0.28 ± 0.06
Female Rat Kidney cytosol 0.34 ± 0.08
'GST activity was measured spectrophotometrically with 1 mM
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene as substrate by determining forma-
tion of 2,4-dinitrophenylglutathione at 340 nm. Results are the
means ± SE of measurements from 6 experiments for rats and 4
experiments for mice. Data reported in ( 153).
15-
-( I:I Hepatocytes
o1 Kidney Cells
10-
0
2 mM TCE 1 mM TCE
Figure 7. GSH conjugation of TCE in suspensions of
freshly isolated hepatocytes and renal cortical cells from
male F344 rats. Isolated hepatocytes (2 x 106 cells/ml)
or renal cortical cells (8 x 106 cells/mL) were incubated
with 1 or 2 mM TCE in the presence of 5 mM GSH at
30°C for 60 min. DCVG formation was measured by ion-
exchange, reversed-phase high-performance liquid chro-
matography after derivatization with iodoacetate and
1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, and was detected by
absorbance at 365 nm. Results are the means ± SE of 3
experiments. See (1501 for other details.
microsomes were resolved into two kinetically
distinct processes. Maximal rates of DCVG
formation in human liver and kidney were
only modestly lower than those in rat liver
and kidney but were approximately 5-fold
lower than those in the mouse. Hence, it
appears that any limitation in the generation
of reactive metabolites of TCE from this
pathway does not exist at the initial step
where DCVG formation occurs. Rates of
GSH conjugation of TCE in human liver
and kidney subcellular fractions reported
here are up to an order of magnitude greater
than those reported by Green et al. (154). In
incubations with 1.9 mM TCE and 5 mM
GSH, Green and colleagues found rates of
DCVG formation of 2.5, 1.6, and 0.19
pmol/min per mg protein in liver cytosols of
male mice, rats, and humans, respectively. In
contrast, in incubations with 2 mM TCE
and 5 mM GSH, Lash and colleagues
(151,153,155) reported rates of DCVG for-
mation of 408, 122, and 5,770 pmol/min
per mg protein in liver cytosols ofmale mice,
rats, and humans, respectively. Similarly,
Green et al. (154) were unable to detect net,
enzymatic formation of DCVG in incuba-
tions with rat kidney subcellular fractions. In
contrast, Lash and colleagues (151,153)
reported a rate of DCVG formation in incu-
bations of male rat kidney cytosol with 2
mM TCE and 5 mM GSH of 7.5 pmol/min
per mg protein and a rate of 0.7 nmol/min
per mg protein in pooled human kidney
cytosol (154).
The controversy between these results has
not been resolved. Differences in analytical
methods (radiolabeled substrate with high per-
formance liquid chromatography (HPLC) sep-
aration versus derivatization and HPLC
Table 14. Summary of metabolism of TCE by GSH con-
jugation in kidney and liver subcellular fractions from
male and female F344 rats and B6C3F, mice.a
Subcellular fractions
Rat kidney cells
Rat hepatocytes
Rat kidney cytosol
Rat kidney microsomes
Rat liver cytosol
Rat liver microsomes
Mouse kidney cytosol
Mouse kidney microsomes
Mouse liver cytosol
Mouse liver microsomes
DCVG formation
(nmol/mg protein or
106 cells per 60 min)
Male Female
0.48±0.02 0.65±0.15
9.70 ± 0.29 2.67 ± 0.69
0.45 ± 0.22 0.32 ± 0.02
ND 0.61 ± 0.06
7.30 ± 2.80 4.86 ± 0.14
10.3 ± 2.8 7.24 ± 0.24
5.60 ± 0.24 3.70 ± 0.48
5.47± 1.41 16.7 ± 4.7
24.5±2.4 21.7±0.9
40.0±3.1 25.6±0.8
ND, not detectable; limit of detection was 0.05 nmol/mg protein
or 106 cells. &Results are means ± SE of measurements from 3
separate cell or tissue preparations and are for 2 mM TCE incu-
bated with 5 mM GSH for 60 min. DCVG formation was mea-
sured after derivatization of acid extracts with iodoacetate and
1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, separation by ion-exchange, gradi-
ent HPLC on an amine column using a methanol-acetate mobile
phase and detection of N-dinitrophenyl DCVG at 365 nm. Data
reported in ( 151,153).
separation) may contribute to the discrepancies
in measured rates. Beyond this, no other
explanations are available to explain the dis-
crepancies. Green and colleagues (154) also
reported that formation of DCVG was linear
with respect to incubation time for at least 60
min, whereas Lash et al. (151,153) showed
the expected saturation kinetics and maxi-
mization versus incubation time of an
enzyme-catalyzed process.
Measurements of GGT activity in liver
and kidney subcellular fractions from male
and female rats and mice and pooled human
liver and kidney samples show clearly that at
least in rodents, insignificant GGT activity is
present in the liver (Table 16). Human liver
exhibits relatively low activity of GGT
(approximately 3% of that in the kidneys).
Only modest sex-dependent differences were
observed in GGT activity. Rats exhibited the
highest activity of GGT, with humans
exhibiting approximately 50% of that in rats
and mice exhibiting only 20% of that in rats.
Higher GGT activity provides more substrate
for the P-lyase reaction, which would gener-
ate higher amounts ofreactive species. Hence,
these differences may contribute to species-
dependent differences in overall flux of TCE
through the GSH conjugation pathway.
Hinchman and Ballatori (156) com-
pared renal and hepatic GGT activity in sev-
eral mammalian species. Although the
kidneys contain the highest levels of GGT
activity in all species examined, including
humans, specific activities (i.e., mU/mg pro-
tein) can vary up to 10-fold or more
between species. Furthermore, although
adult liver contains relatively low levels of
GGT activity, specific activities can also vary
up to 10-fold or more. Hence, while the
ratio of GGT specific activity in kidney to
that in liver was reported as 875 in rats and
413 in mice, it was only 100 in rabbits and
19 in pigs. Humans exhibit tissue distribu-
tions similar to rabbits. Use of rats to model
Table 15. Kinetics of GSH conjugation of TCE in human
kidney and liver subcellular fractions.a
Vmax(nmol DCVG/ Km
Tissue/subcellular fraction min/mg protein) (pM TCE)
Kidney
Cytosol 0.81 26.3
Microsomes 6.29 167
liver
Cytosol: low affinity 8.77 333
Cytosol: high affinity 4.27 22.7
Microsomes: low affinity 3.10 250
Microsomes: high affinity 1.42 29.4
'Activity of GSH conjugation of TCE was measured in cytosol
and microsomes from pooled human liver and kidney samples.
Fractions (1 mg protein/ml) were incubated with 7.8 pM-1 mM
TCE and 5 mM GSH at 37T; DCVG formation was quantitated
by HPLC analysis after derivatization. Kinetic parameters were
calculated from Eadie-Hofstee plots and are derived from mea-
surements from 3 separate incubations. Results were reported
in ( 155).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 ' May 2000192
METABOLISM OF TCE
interorgan GSH and GSH S-conjugate
metabolism thus overestimates the role of
these pathways in turnover. This is not to
say, however, that the interorgan pathways
do not play a significant role even in
humans, since total renal activity is still sev-
eralfold higher than that of total hepatic
activity.
A scheme summarizing the interorgan
processes involved in GSH conjugation and
subsequent metabolism of TCE is shown in
Figure 8. Processes occurring in the liver,
small intestine, kidneys, bile, and plasma are
highlighted. Although most studies that were
performed in the development of this model
have used the rat, the interorgan metabolism
model is valid in humans, although fluxes and
distributions of metabolites in the various
compartments (i.e., plasma, bile) will vary.
TCE is shown as having two fates: being
taken up by the liver where it is conjugated
with GSH or being taken up by the kidney
where it may also be conjugated with GSH.
The two principal interorgan pathways are the
enterohepatic and renal-hepatic circulations.
The determining factors in these pathways are
the following: a) high activity of GST in the
liver; b) efficient transport systems in liver cells
for efflux of GSH conjugates into bile or
plasma; c) relatively high activity of GGT on
renal brush-border membranes and relatively
low activity of GGT in liver; and d) selective
presence of a transport system for uptake of
Table 16. Measurements of GGT activity in liver and
kidney from male and female F344 rats and B6C3F, mice
and pooled human liver and kidney samples.a
Activity
Sex Species Tissue Fraction (mU/mg)
Male Mouse Liver Cytosol 0.07 ± 0.04
Microsomes 0.05 ± 0.04
Kidney Cytosol 1.63 ± 0.85
Microsomes 92.6 ± 15.6
Female Mouse Liver Cytosol 0.10 ± 0.10
Microsomes 0.03 ± 0.03
Kidney Cytosol 0.79 ± 0.79
Microsomes 69.3 ± 14.0
Male Rat Liver Cytosol < 0.02
Microsomes < 0.02
Kidney Cytosol < 0.02
Microsomes 1,570 ± 100
Female Rat Liver Cytosol < 0.02
Microsomes < 0.02
Kidney Cytosol < 0.02
Microsomes 1,840 ± 40
Male Human Liver Cytosol 8.89 ± 3.58
Microsomes 29
Kidney Cytosol 13.2 ± 1.0
Microsomes 960 ± 77
'GGT activity was measured spectrophotometrically with 1 mM
y-glutamyl-p-nitroanilide and glycylglycine as substrates by
determining formation of p-nitroanilide at 410 nm. Results are
the means ± SE of measurements from 6 experiments for rats, 4
experiments for mice, and 3-9 measurements from humans,
except for human kidney microsomes, which is the average of 2
measurements. Data reported in (153,155).
GSH conjugates on renal basolateral
membranes and the absence of an uptake sys-
tem in liver cell plasma membranes.
GSH conjugation of TCE was demon-
strated in isolated human hepatocytes
(Figure 9). Rates of DCVG formation,
although lower than those in rat hepatocytes
by approximately 2- to 3-fold, were not so
low or difficult to detect that one would con-
clude that flux through the GSH conjugation
pathway is too low to account for a measur-
able and possibly significant portion of total
TCE metabolism. Of course, this is only the
initial step in the pathway with subsequent
branches leading to excretion of nontoxic
products in addition to the branches that
produce toxic metabolites. Hence, it is criti-
cal to quantitate formation ofthe metabolites
that directly produce cellular injury.
As emphasized above, the key step in the
bioactivation of TCE by the GSH conjuga-
tion pathway is the ,-lyase step. Reports of
,-lyase activity in the literature show a fair
amount of variability, depending in part on
the cysteine conjugate substrate used, the
assay method used, and even the laboratory
reporting the data. Table 17 summarizes
activity data or, when available, kinetic para-
meters, for ,B-lyase activity in kidney cytosol
or homogenates from rats, mice, and
humans. Km values for cysteine conjugates
are, with the exception of two reports, > 1
mM, indicating that the 1-lyase is a rela-
tively low-affinity pathway. Activities vary
considerably among substrates. In the one
study (157) where 3-lyase activity in kidney
cytosol from male and female rats, mice and
humans was measured together; the results
showed that Km values for S-(1,2,2-
trichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (TCVC) were
markedly higher and Vmax values were
markedly lower for mice and humans as
compared to rats. This species difference is
consistent with the higher susceptibility of
TCE
BILE
DCVG
DCVC-
LIVER
SMALL
INTESTINE
DCVC
NAcDCVC -
PLASMA
NAcDCVC DCVG
KIDNEY
TCEl
_ * DCVG
Nephrotoxicity
Nephrocarcinogenicity
+DCVSH
DCVC
1A
_ *NAcDCVC
PLASMA
GLOMERULAR
FILTRATION
* DCVG
DCVC
NAcDCVC
417
URINE
Figure 8. Scheme for interorgan processing and metabolism of TCE by the GSH conjugation pathway.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
TCE
DCVG
-* NAcDCVCDCVC
AF4-
m
1
193
LASH ETAL.
0.25
' 0.20
i0.15
0.10
n 0.05
0.00
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
TCE (ppm)
Figure 9. GSH conjugation of TCE in isolated human
hepatocytes. Isolated hepatocytes (2.0 x 106 cells/mL)
were isolated from livers of human donors and were
incubated in sealed flasks with the indicated concentra-
tion of TCE in the headspace for 120 min. DCVG forma-
tion was assayed in perchloric acid extracts of aliquots
of cells by ion-exchange, reversed-phase high-perfor-
mance liquid chromatography after derivatization with
iodoacetate and 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene. Derivatives
were detected spectrophotometrically at 365 nm and
were quantified with respect to authentic standards.
Data reported in (155).
rats to kidney toxicity and cancer than other
species. Km and Vmax values for male rats
were also lower and higher, respectively,
than those for female rats, which is consistent
with male rats being more susceptible than
female rats. The central questions for risk
assessment, therefore, are: a) Can studies in
male rats be extrapolated to humans? and b)
Is P-lyase activity in human kidney high
enough to generate sufficient amounts of
reactive metabolites to produce nephrotoxic-
ity and kidney cancer? Additional studies are
clearly necessary to accurately determine flux
through this pathway.
Elfarra and Hwang (158) used the model
cysteine conjugate S-(2-benzothiazolyl)-L-cys-
teine (BTC) as an in vivo marker of flux
through the 3-lyase pathway. BTC was origi-
nally synthesized as a convenient assay sub-
strate for the P-lyase (99) because it is
converted to a stable thiol metabolite, 2-mer-
captobenzothiazole (MBT), which can be
readily measured spectrophotometrically.
They administered BTC to male and female
rats and male mice, rats, hamsters, and guinea
pigs. BTC is metabolized by the P-lyase and is
recovered in the urine as either MBT or MBT
glucuronide, both of which are chemically
stable and readily measured. Male rats released
more metabolite into the urine than female
rats and of the four species compared; mice,
hamster, and rats excreted comparable levels
of total metabolites, whereas the guinea pig
excreted more than twice the amount of
metabolites as the other species. For the
guinea pig, however, the higher excretion rate
was not attributable to higher P-lyase activity.
Rather, the guinea pig is unique in having
extremely low N-acetylation activity and
extremely high deacetylation activity (159),
which leads to more BTC being available for
P-lyase-mediated metabolism. Hence, mea-
surements of MBT plus MBT glucuronide
plus the mercapturate ofMBT may provide a
useful means of accurately determining flux
through the ,B-lyase pathway.
The importance of N-acetylation versus
N-deacetylation in determining cysteine
conjugate nephrotoxicity was highlighted in
a recent study by Lau et al. (159), in which
they determined rates of the forward and
reverse reactions for mercapturate formation
from S-(2,5-dihydroxyphenyl)-L-cysteine,
which is a cysteine conjugate derived from
Table 17. Compilation of selected data on cysteine conjugate f-lyase activity from rat, mouse, and human kidney cytosol or homogenates reported in the literature.
Specific activity Vmax
Species Tissue Substrate (nU/mg protein) (mU/mg protein) Km(mM) Reference
M SD rat Kidney homogenate BTC (2 mM) 6.2 ± 1.0 (99)
M SD rat Kidney cytosol DCVC (1 mM) 3.1 ± 0.2 (108)
BTC(1 mM) 0.9±0.1
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol BTC (0.5 mM) 20.5 (86)
M SD rat Kidney cytosol DCVC (1 mM; + 0.1 mM KMB) 0.02 (115)
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol CTFC (4 mM) 22.5 ± 2.5 (166)
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol BTC 74.8 ± 6.5 1.66 ± 0.19 (112)
CTFC 11.6 ± 1.6 1.78 ± 0.17
DCVC 38.3 ± 1.4 1.36± 0.05
M SD rat Kidney homogenate DCVC (1 mM; + 0.5 mM KMB) 3.05 ± 0.27 (111)
M Wistar rat Kidney cytosol DCVC (5 mM) 1.24 (167)
TFEC (5 mM) 2.64
BTC (1 mM) (+ 0.1 mM KMB) 0.70
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol (purified enzyme) DCVC 2.2 0.26 (127)
Kidney homogenate DCVC (1 mM) 4.0 ± 1.0
PCBC (1 mM) 4.5 ± 0.3
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol TCVC 4.00± 0.11 0.68 ± 0.06 (157)
F F344 rat Kidney cytosol TCVC 3.64 ± 0.41 1.26 ± 0.21 (157)
M B6C3F1 mouse Kidney cytosol TCVC 1.15± 0.31 5.69 ± 2.22 (157)
F B6C3F1 mouse Kidney cytosol TCVC 1.66 ± 0.27 4.43 ± 1.42 (157)
M human Kidney cytosol TCVC 0.49 ± 0.07 2.53 ± 0.09 (157)
F human Kidney cytosol TCVC 0.64± 0.54 2.67 ± 2.11 (157)
M human Kidney cytosol BTC (2 mM) 0.7 (113)
M F344 rat Kidney cytosol BTC (2 mM) 6.5
M Wistar rat Kidney cytosol TCVC (0.3 mM) 5.2 ± 0.7 (168)
M Wistar rat Kidney cytosol DCVC (5 mM; + keto acids) 2.56 (118)
Abbreviations: CTFC, S-(2-chloro-1,1,2-trifluoroethyll-i-cysteine; F, female; M, male; PCBC, S-(1,2,3,4,4-pentachlorobutadienyl)-L-cysteine; TFEC, S-(1,1,2,2-trifluoroethyl)-L-cysteine. Note: Where means ±
SE values are shown, data are from 3-7 separate experiments. Where single values are shown, they are from steps during enzyme purification. 1 mU = nmol product formed/min. BTC is a synthetic cys-
teine conjugate that was developed to assay the ,-lyase because it forms a chemically stable thiol metabolite, 2-mercaptobenzothiazole, which can readily be measured spectrophotometrically 199).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000194
METABOLISM OF TCE
GSH conjugation of 1,4-benzoquinone, and
subsequent metabolism, in several mam-
malian species. The ratios of N-deacetylase
to N-acetylase activity in these species
showed striking differences: F344 and
Sprague-Dawley rats exhibited ratios of 0.03
and 0.02, respectively; golden Syrian ham-
ster exhibited a ratio of 0.04, which is simi-
lar to that in rats; two mouse strains
(BALB/c and B6C3F1) exhibited modestly
higher ratios of 0.16 and 0.14, respectively;
in contrast to the rat and mouse strains,
guinea pigs exhibited a ratio of 4.57.
Susceptibility to renal injury at higher doses
of the quinone correlated with the ratios in
that guinea pigs were the most and rats the
least susceptible. At lower doses, however,
rats were the most susceptible due to their
exceptionally high GGT activity.
Birner et al. (97) also assessed deacetylation
activity in cytosol from human, Wistar and
F344 rat and NMRI mouse kidney using
NAcDCVC as the substrate. The rates of
deacetylation varied by less than 3-fold across
species, varying from 0.35 nmol DCVC
formed/min per mg protein in the Wistar rat
to values of 0.41, 0.61, and 0.94 in human,
F344 rat, and NMRI mouse. They concluded
that species-dependent differences in deacety-
lation activity will influence the amounts of
mercapturates recovered in urine.
Varations among Humans
There is much more knowledge about genetic
polymorphisms and variations in P450 reac-
tions in humans than there is for GSTs.
However, increasing attention is being placed
on these potential differences and their toxi-
cological consequences. Analysis of rates of
GSH conjugation of TCE in cytosol and
microsomes from 20 individual human liver
donors has revealed that considerable varia-
tion exists (76). Overall, rates ofGSH conju-
gation varied 3.4-fold in liver cytosol,
exhibiting a range of rates of28.3-94.9 nmol
DCVG formed/20 min per mg protein. The
donor pool comprised 9 males and 11
females. There were no significant sex-depen-
dent differences. The liver microsome donors,
which comprised 5 males and 15 females,
exhibited an overall variation in activity of
8.5-fold, with a range of values from 8.06 to
69.2 nmol DCVG formed per 20 min per
mg protein. As with the cytosol donors, there
were no significant sex-dependent difference
in the mean activity values, although the
degree of variation was greater in the females
(7.4-fold) than in the males (4.1-fold).
Hence, although the degree of variation in
GST activity (3- to 8-fold) is significantly less
than that observed with P450 activity (10- to
20-fold), this may be another important fac-
tor to account for in a human health risk
assessment for TCE.
Extrapolation of Experimental
Data for Human Health Risk
Assessment
Extrapolation from Animals to Humans
A major issue in the extrapolation of experi-
mental metabolism data from animals to
humans involves the concentrations of
toxicants used. Animal studies often use rela-
tively high concentrations of chemicals that
are severalfold to several orders of magnitude
higher than those to which humans may be
exposed either occupationally or environmen-
tally. This, ofcourse, brings into question the
relevance ofsuch data. Examples of a number
of species-dependent differences in TCE
metabolism have been cited above.
Lipscomb et al. (66) recently addressed
this specific issue by characterizing the kinetics
and P450 isoform specificity ofTCE metabo-
lism to CH in liver microsomes from rats,
mice, and humans using a full range of con-
centrations of TCE, including those that are
estimated to occur in the livers of some occu-
pationally exposed humans. Analysis of the
kinetics of TCE metabolism to CH showed
that rats metabolized TCE very differently
than either mice or humans: Rat liver micro-
somes exhibited at least three kinetically dis-
tinct processes for TCE metabolism, whereas
mouse and human liver exhibited only a single
process. Human liver microsomes exhibited
similar overall Km values for TCE as those
from rats or mice but had markedly (3- to 8-
fold) lower Vmax values. Hence, different
kinetic behavior among experimental animal
species and humans must be considered when
extrapolating animal data.
Extrapolation from in Vitro to in Vivo
The other most common type of extrapo-
lation performed is from in vitro data to the
in vivo situation. This is particularly impor-
tant for humans as most of our data come
from biopsy tissue samples, cell lines, or tissue
obtained from hospitals where the tissue can-
not be used for transplant. One simple issue
is how to use data from liver microsomes or
isolated hepatocytes to quantitate metabolism
at the level of the entire organ or organism.
This process uses what have been called scal-
ing factors, and data from two studies are
summarized (Table 18).
Lipscomb et al. (11) calculated parameters
that enable one to extrapolate to whole liver
in humans from measurements made in iso-
lated hepatocytes or suspensions of micro-
somes. The parameters express the number of
hepatocytes per gram of liver, the amount of
microsomal protein per gram ofliver, and the
amount of microsomal protein in a suspen-
sion of hepatocytes. Carlile et al. (160) made
similar use of scaling factors in studies with
rats to relate rates of drug metabolism in
various in vitro systems to rates in whole liver.
Kedderis (161) raised an important caveat
in the extrapolation of in vitro data to the in
vivo situation. Using enzyme induction as a
model, Kedderis showed that pretreatment
with inducers may significantly increase rates
of drug metabolism in vitro but that physio-
logical constraints may dampen these effects
in vivo. He cites the example of furan
metabolism, which is catalyzed by CYP2E1.
Severalfold variations were observed in the
bioactivation of the hepatotoxicant furan by
isolated human hepatocytes owing to varia-
tions in this P450 isoform in the human pop-
ulation. Extrapolation of these data to the in
vivo situation showed that furan metabolism
is limited by hepatic blood flow. Because of
this limitation, variations in CYP2E1 content
among individual liver donors and increases
in Vmax due to inducers will be markedly
dampened in vivo.
Relative Roles of Oxidative
and GSH Conjugation
Pathways in TCE Metabolism
A principal issue in understanding the rela-
tive roles of the two major pathways of TCE
metabolism is that of pathway affinity. Based
on known kinetic parameters ofTCE metab-
olism, relative rates of oxidative metabolism
and GSH conjugation under different expo-
sure conditions (i.e., acute or chronic high
Table 18. Parameters used to extrapolate from microsomes and isolated hepatocytes to whole liver in humans.
Parameter Value
Human livera
Hepatocyte density 1 16 x 106 cells/g liver
Microsomal protein density: whole liver 20.88 mg microsomal protein/g liver
Microsomal protein density: isolated cells 179 pg microsomal protein/i 06 cells
Rat liverb
DNA content of liver 2.6-2.7 mg DNA/g liver
DNA content of hepatocytes 21.5-26.8 pg DNA/106 cells
Hepatocyte density (based on DNA data) 73-94 x 106 cells/g liver
Proteinc content of liver 163-176 mg/g liver
Proteinc content of cells 1.4-1.5 mg protein/106 cells
Hepatocyte density (based on protein data) 109-125 x 106 cells/g liver
aData are from (11). bData are from Carlile et al. (160) and involve animals that have been treated with inducers of various P450s.
CTotal cellular protein, not just microsomal protein.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 195
LASH ET AL.
doses versus chronic low doses, such as those
found as environmental contaminants) can
be determined. From this information, the
predominance ofdifferent metabolites at var-
ious doses can be discerned. Moreover,
knowledge of which metabolic pathway pre-
dominates at specific doses can help deter-
mine target organ specificity and mode of
action at those doses. Additionally, the two
major pathways of TCE metabolism are
known to have markedly different kinetics,
so that they saturate at different doses.
Hence, the relative proportion of metabolites
formed will likely vary markedly at low ver-
sus high doses. Specifically, CYP2E1 satu-
rates at significantly lower doses ofTCE than
do the GSTs, suggesting that flux of TCE
through the GSH conjugation pathway may
only be quantitatively important at higher
doses of TCE. As mentioned earlier, how-
ever, the GSH conjugation pathway, and
specifically the i-lyase reaction, generates
chemically reactive metabolites; formation of
even a small amount ofa reactive species may
be sufficient to produce alterations in cellular
function whereas formation ofrelatively large
amounts of a non-reactive metabolite may
not produce any cellular dysfunction.
Hence, although one may conclude by
intuition that a low-affinity pathway may
only be of toxicological importance at high
doses and/or when the high-affinity pathway
is saturated, this is not necessarily correct for
a pathway such as that catalyzed by the ,1-
lyase that generates chemically unstable and
reactive metabolites. It has been argued that
the ,B-lyase pathway is not quantitatively
important for humans, based on the follow-
ing points: a) Kinetic parameters (i.e., affinity
and capacity) ofthe I-lyase in human kidney,
as compared to those for P450 oxidation in
human liver, are such that P-lyase activity will
only become quantitatively significant at
extremely high exposure levels; b) TCE expo-
sure studies comparing excretion of mercap-
turate to that ofTCA and TCOH show that
the P450-derived metabolites are recovered in
urine at levels that are two to three orders of
magnitude higher than the GSH-derived
metabolite; and c) questions have arisen about
the relevance of reports of kidney tumors in
human populations exposed to TCE. I will
discuss the first two points below. The third
point will be only briefly discussed, as this is
dealt with in greater detail in the kidney
mode ofaction review (89).
Concerning the first point about the
relative kinetic parameters of the oxidative
and GSH conjugation pathways, there is no
doubt that flux through the P450 pathway is
much faster and that the total capacity is
much greater than for the GSH conjugation
and P-lyase reactions. There are two major
differences between the nature of the
metabolites formed by the two pathways.
First, the various enzymes of the GSH con-
jugation pathway and the membrane trans-
porters for GSH and cysteine conjugates and
mercapturates exhibit significant tissue het-
erogeneity so that metabolites are directed to
the kidneys for intracellular accumulation
and metabolism to reactive species. Second,
the metabolites from the GSH conjugation
pathway that are believed to be responsible
for effects in the kidneys are chemically
unstable and highly reactive whereas those
derived from the oxidative pathway are rela-
tively stable. Because ofthe nature ofreactive
metabolites, it is likely that relatively small
amounts of these compounds can produce
significant biochemical and functional
changes in renal cells. One cannot, therefore,
directly extrapolate from amount of metabo-
lite formed or pathway flux to toxicity.
Concerning the second point about
recovery of mercapturates compared to the
recovery of TCA and TCOH in the urine,
two types of exposures were conducted by
Henschler's group (96,97) that show the
variability in recovery of excreted metabolites
with exposure route (Table 19). However,
even in the studies that show lower ratios of
oxidative metabolites (TCA or TCA +
TCOH) to NAcDCVC, it has been argued
that ratios as little as 10:1 indicate that the
flux through the GSH conjugation pathway
is at least an order of magnitude slower than
that through P450. It must be emphasized,
however, that measurement of urinary mer-
capturate provides only an indication of a
portion of the GSH-dependent pathway and
that this portion is not related to that which
is associated with nephrotoxicity and nephro-
carcinogenicity. Measurement of urinary
mercapturates, therefore, can give an indica-
tion of exposure and that some flux through
the GSH conjugation pathway has occurred.
It cannot, however, give an indication oftotal
flux through the GSH conjugation pathway
or through that portion of the pathway that
leads to effects on renal function. Moreover,
formation of even a small amount of reactive
species may be sufficient to produce toxic
effects or changes in intracellular regulatory
mechanisms.
Concerning the third point about the
occurrence of kidney tumors being much
lower than those in the other target organs
and this relating to a small flux through the
GSH conjugation and P-lyase pathways, the
following points should be noted: a) the
background rate of kidney tumors is
extremely small in humans and most animal
species studied (although some strains of rats
show a relatively high background rate); b)
the kidneys are particularly susceptible to
cytotoxic injury from even brief, low-dose
exposures to nephrotoxicants; and c) proximal
tubular epithelial cells can undergo a program
of apoptosis and regeneration after exposures
to sublethal doses, or even necrotic doses, of
nephrotoxicants. These points should high-
light the difficulties in assessment of factors
involved in induction ofrenal carcinogenesis.
Although species- and sex-dependent dif-
ferences are found in various steps of TCE
metabolism, it is important to also consider
the entire pathway as a whole and not just
individual reactions. Although the rate of a
specific step may be relevant to a consid-
eration of toxicity if the toxicity is solely
dependent on the formation of a specific
metabolite, the balance between metabolite
formation and subsequent metabolic steps
and species differences in the ratio of these
steps are often ofmore importance.
In summary, it is clear that the oxidative
pathway is quantitatively the more impor-
tant of the two major pathways of TCE
metabolism. However, the interorgan pat-
terns of the GSH-dependent pathway and
the chemical nature of the critical metabo-
lites generated by the two pathways greatly
alters the importance of simple comparisons
of quantitation. Furthermore, we do not
really have an accurate method to assess flux
through all branches of the GSH-dependent
pathway because chemically reactive species
are generated.
Table 19. Summary of studies on mercapturate and
oxidative metabolite excretion in urine of rats, mice, and
humans exposed to TCE.
Study l: Exposure of Wistar rats and NMRI mice to TCE
22 hr after exposure (50 mg/kg by oral gavage) (97)
Sex/species TCA/NAcDCVC in urine
Male rat
Female rat
Male mouse
Female mouse
22.0
39.4
15.3
72.5
Study Il: Exposure of workers to TCE by inhalation or
dermal contact (97).
Worker number TCA/NAcDCVC in urine
1 18.5
5
6
8
17.9
3.1
32.8
Study Ill: Exposure of humans and male and female
Wistar rats to TCE (6-hr inhalation). Cumulative
excretion of metabolites measured over 48 hr post-
exposure (96).
[TCE] in exposure (TCA + TCOH)/
Species chamber NAcDCVC
Human 40 ppm 3,292
80 ppm 4,797
160 ppm 7,163
Rat 40 ppm 986
80 ppm 1,300
160 ppm 2,562
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 200096
METABOLISM OF TCE
Questions and Research Needs
This section briefly discusses some key
research needs in the area of TCE metabo-
lism. Although study of these questions is
not, in most cases, essential to completion of
an updated human health risk assessment for
TCE, research on these questions will answer
important questions and address uncertain-
ties that will improve our understanding of
TCE metabolism.
Role ofan Epoxide Intermediate
in TCE Metabolism
The question of whether TCE, like many
other halogenated solvents that undergo
P450-dependent metabolism, does so
through intermediate formation of an epox-
ide is still uncertain and should be resolved by
careful chemical studies.
Enzymology ofDCA Formation
Two issues regarding amounts of and
sources of DCA formation are still incom-
pletely resolved. The first issue relates to the
recovery of DCA in biological incubations
with TCE, as questions remain about the
recovery of DCA in tissue incubations and
biological fluids such as plasma and urine.
The second issue relates to the sources of
and specific enzymes involved in DCA for-
mation. It is unclear what factors determine
how much of DCA is derived from TCA,
TCOH, or CH and what the specific
involvement is of enzymes such as P450s or
aldehyde dehydrogenase.
P450 Isoforn Activity Distribution
Although CYP2E1 has been identified as the
most active P450 isoform responsible for
oxidative metabolism of TCE, questions
remain about the potential activities of other
isoforms, both in uninduced and in induced
individuals. Expression of many P450 iso-
forms exhibits sex and species differences.
These differences, specifically in relation to
TCE metabolism, need to be more com-
pletely assessed as various physiological or
pathological changes in P450 isoform activity
distribution can alter metabolism and suscep-
tibility to toxicity. Unequivocal identification
ofthe role ofspecific isoforms will require the
use of inhibitory antibodies and studies with
expressed and purified enzymes.
Role ofRenal P450 in TCE Metabolism
and Bioactivation
Little investigation of renal P450 activities in
comparison to hepatic P450s has been under-
taken. Although many of the same isoforms
as are found in the liver have been identified
in the kidneys, their regulation may be differ-
ent in the two organs. For example, many of
the known inducers of hepatic CYP2E1 do
not have the same qualitative or quantitative
effects on renal CYP2E1. Based on the
knowledge that CYP2E1 is active in TCE
oxidation, this differential regulation should
impact on oxidative metabolism of TCE in
the kidneys.
Almost all of the focus of TCE metabo-
lism in the kidneys has been on the GSH-
dependent pathway. Although there is no
direct evidence to suggest that intrarenal for-
mation of metabolites such as TCA or DCA
is involved in the renal effects of TCE, this
issue has not been investigated fully so we
should not a priori rule it out.
GST Isozyme Distribution
andVariation
Recent work has revealed that the various
GSTs exist in isozymic forms and that sex-,
species-, and tissue-dependent differences
often exist. The substrate specificity of these
isozymes and specifically the activity of each
isozyme toward TCE is unknown at present.
Briining et al. (162) have recently shown that
genetic polymorphisms exist in two GSTs,
GSTM1 and GSTT1, and that differences in
expression of these isozymes may have toxico-
logical significance for TCE bioactivation by
this pathway. Hence, work is needed to
define the isozyme composition in various
species, including humans, and in various tis-
sues in each species, and to define the activity
ofeach isozyme towards TCE.
Quantitative Importance ofDCVC
Metabolism in Humans
The difficulties in assessing the quantitative
importance of flux through the GSH conju-
gation pathway, and through the ,-lyase reac-
tion specifically, have been discussed above in
some detail. Three key issues are
* Improved measurements ofoverall flux of
TCE through the GSH conjugation
pathway and the f-lyase as compared to
that through the oxidative pathway by
more complete determinations of rates of
metabolism and kinetic parameters in tis-
sues from various species, particularly
humans.
* Development of more accurate, noninva-
sive means of measuring flux through the
3-lyase pathway in humans. Urinary mer-
capturates only provide information on
stable end products and these do not nec-
essarily correlate with formation ofreactive
metabolites that produce nephrotoxicity
and/or nephrocarcinogenicity.
* Data on formation ofcovalent adducts of
DCVC with DNA and protein have been
difficult to interpret and may not directly
correspond to cytotoxic or tumorigenic
events. Hence, additional studies on the
functional significance of covalent bind-
ing to cellular macromolecules are
warranted.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Wu C, Becker J, Schaum J. Major findings of the exposure
assessment of trichloroethylene and related compounds.
Environ Health Perspect 108(supp 2):359-358 (2000).
2. Clewell HJ Ill, Gentry PR, Covington TR, Gearhart JM.
Development of a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model
of trichloroethylene and its metabolites for use in risk assess-
ment. Environ Health Perspect 108(suppl 2):283-305 (2000).
3. Sato A, Nakajima T. Differences following skin or inhalation
exposure in the absorption and excretion kinetics of
trichloroethylene and toluene. Br J Ind Med 35:43-49 (1978).
4. Davidson IWF, Beliles RP. Consideration of the target organ tox-
icity of trichloroethylene in terms of metabolite toxicity and
pharmacokinetics. Drug Metab Rev 23:493-599 (1991).
5. Bogen KT, Coiston BW Jr, Machicao LK. Dermal absorption of
dilute aqueous chloroform, trichloroethylene, and tetra-
chloroethylene in hairless guinea pigs. Fundam AppI Toxicol
18:30-39 (1992).
6. Withey JR, Collins BT, Collins PG. Effect of vehicle on the phar-
macokinetics and uptake of four halogenated hydrocarbons
from the gastrointestinal tract of the rat. J AppI Toxicol
3:249-253 (1983).
7. Prout MS, Provan WM, Green T. Species differences in
response to trichloroethylene. I: Pharmacokinetics in rats and
mice. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 79:389-400 (1985).
8. Fisher JW, Gargas ML, Allen BC, Andersen ME. Physiologically
based pharmacokinetic modeling with trichloroethylene and its
metabolite, trichloroacetic acid, in the rat and mouse. Toxicol
AppI Pharmacol 109:183-195(1991).
9. Bull RJ. Mode of action of liver tumor induction by trichloro-
ethylene. Environ Health Perspect 108(supp 2):241-259(2000).
10. Dallas CE, Gallo JM, Ramanathan R, Muralidhara S, Bruckner JV.
Physiological pharmacokinetic modeling of inhaled trichloroethyl-
ene in rats. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 110:303-314 (1991).
11. lipscomb JC, Fisher JW, Confer PD, Byczkowski JZ. In vitro to
in vivo extrapolation for trichloroethylene metabolism. Toxicol
AppI Pharmacol 152:376-387 (1998).
12. Daniel JW. The metabolism of 36Cl-labeled trichloroethylene
and tetrachloroethylene in the rat. Biochem Pharmacol
12:795-802 (1963).
13. Dekant W, Metzler M, Henschler D. Novel metabolites of
trichloroethylene through dechlorination reactions in rats, mice
and humans. Biochem Pharmacol 33:2021-2027 (1984).
14. D'Souza RW, Bruckner JV, Feldman S. Oral and intravenous
trichloroethylene pharmacokinetics in the rat. J Toxicol Environ
Health 15:587-601 (1985).
15. Lee K, Bruckner JV, Muralidhara S, Gallo JM. Characterization
of presystemic elimination of trichloroethylene and its nonlinear
kinetics in rats. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 139:262-271 (1996).
16. Kleinfeld M, Tabershaw IR. Trichloroethylene toxicity: report of
five fatal cases. Arch Ind Hyg Occup Med 10:134-141 (1954).
17. BrOning T, Vamvakas S, Makropoulos V, Birner G. Acute intoxi-
cation with trichloroethene: clinical symptoms, toxicokinetics,
metabolism, and development of biochemical parameters for
renal damage. Toxicol Sci 41:157-165 (1998).
18. Allen BC, Fisher JW. Modeling of the pharmacokinetics of
trichloroethylene and trichloroacetic acid in humans. Risk Anal
13:71-86 (1993).
19. Fisher JW, Mahle D, Abbas R. A human physiologically-based
pharmacokinetic model for trichloroethylene and its metabo-
lites, trichloroacetic acid and free trichloroethanol. Toxicol Appi
Pharmacol 152:339-359 (1998).
20. Fisher JW, Whittaker TA, Taylor DH, Clewell HJ Ill, Andersen
ME. Physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling of the
pregnant rat: a multiroute exposure model for trichloroethylene
and its metabolite, trichloroacetic acid. Toxicol Appi Pharmacol
99:395-414 (1989).
21. MOller G, Spassovski M, Henschier D. Trichloroethylene expo-
sure and trichloroethylene metabolites in urine and blood. Arch
Toxicol 29:335-340 (1972).
22. Abbas R, Fisher JW. A physiologically-based pharmacokinetic
model for trichloroethylene and its metabolites, chloral hydrate,
trichloroacetate, dichloroacetate, trichloroethanol, and
trichloroethanol glucuronide in B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Appi
Pharmacol 147:15-30(1997).
23. Anders MW, Jakobson I. Biotransformation of halogenated sol-
vents. Scand J Work Environ Health 11(suppl 1):23-32 (1985).
24. Butler TC. Metabolic transformations of trichloroethylene. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 97:84-92 (1949).
25. Powell JF. Trichloroethylene: absorption, elimination and
metabolism. Br J Ind Med 2:142-145){1945).
26. Miller RE, Guengerich FP. Dxidation of trichloroethylene by liver
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 197
LASH ET AL.
microsomal cytochrome P-450: evidence for chlorine migration
in a transition state not involving trichloroethylene oxide.
Biochemistry 21:1090-1097(1982).
27. Miller RE, Guengerich FP. Metabolism of trichloroethylene in
isolated hepatocytes, microsomes, and reconstituted systems
containing cytochrome P-450. Cancer Res 43:1145-1152 (1983).
28. Green T, Prout MS. Species differences in response to
trichloroethylene. II: Biotransformation in rats and mice. Toxicol
AppI Pharmacol 79:401-411 (1985).
29. Dowsley TF, Ulreich JB, Bolton JL, Park SS, Forkert PG. CYP2E1-
dependent bioactivation of 1,1-dichloroethylene in murine lung:
formation of reactive intermediates and glutathione conjugates.
Toxicol Appi Pharmacol 139:42-48 (1996).
30. Forkert PG. In vivo formation and localization of 1,1-dichloroeth-
ylene epoxide in murine liver: identification of its glutathione
conjugate 2-S-glutathionyl acetate. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
290:1299-1306(1999).
31. Forkert PG. 1,1-Dichloroethylene-induced Clara cell damage is
associated with in situ formation of the reactive epoxide.
Immunohistochemical detection of its glutathione conjugate.
Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 20:1310-1318 (1999).
32. Forkert PG, Malkinson AM, Rice P, Moussa M. Diminished
CYP2E1 expression and formation of 2-S-glutathionyl acetate,
a glutathione conjugate derived from 1,1-dichloroethylene
epoxide, in murine lung tumors. Drug Metab Dispos 27:68-73
(1999).
33. U.S. EPA. Health Assessment Document for Trichloroethylene.
Final Report. Office of Health and Environmental Assessment.
EPA/600/8-82-006F, Washington, DC:U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 1985.
34. Goeptar AR, Commandeur JNM, van Ommen B, van Bladeren
PJ, Vermeulen NPE. Metabolism and kinetics of trichloroethyl-
ene in relation to toxicity and carcinogenicity. Relevance of the
mercapturic acid pathway. Chem Res Toxicol 8:3-21 (1995).
35. Guengerich FP. Oxidation of toxic and carcinogenic chemicals
by human cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Chem Res Toxicol
4:391-407(1991).
36. Guengerich FP, Kim D-H, Iwasaki M. Role of human cytochrome
P-450 IIE1 in the oxidation of many low molecular weight
cancer suspects. Chem Res Toxicol 4:168-179 (1991).
37. Koop DR, Crump BL, Nordblom GD, Coon MJ. Immuno-
chemical evidence for induction of the alcohol-oxidizing
cytochrome P-450 of rabbit liver microsomes by diverse
agents: ethanol, imidazole, trichloroethylene, acetone, pyra-
zole, and isoniazid. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 82:4065-4069
(1985).
38. Nakajima T, Okino T, Okuyama S, Kaneko T, Yonekura I, Sato A.
Ethanol-induced enhancement of trichloroethylene metabolism
and hepatotoxicity: difference from the effect of phenobarbital.
Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 94:227-237 (1988).
39. Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Murayama N, Sato A. Three forms of
trichloroethylene-metabolizing enzymes in rat liver induced by
ethanol, phenobarbital, and 3-methylcholanthrene. Toxicol Appi
Pharmacol 102:546-552 (1990).
40. Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Elovaara R, Park SS, Gelboin HV, Vainio
H. A comparative study on the contribution of cytochrome P450
isozymes to metabolism of benzene, toluene and trichloroethyl-
ene in rat liver. Biochem Pharmacol 43:251-257 (1992).
41. Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Katakura Y, Kishi R, Elovaara E, Park
SS, Gelboin HV, Vainio H. Sex-, age- and pregnancy-induced
changes in metabolism of toluene and trichloroethylene in rat
liver in relation to the regulation of cytochrome P45011E1 and
P45011C11 content. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 261:869-874 (1992).
42. Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Elovaara E, Park SS, Gelboin HV, Vainio
H. Cytochrome P450-related differences between rats and mice
in the metabolism of benzene, toluene and trichloroethylene in
liver microsomes. Biochem Pharmacol 45:1079-1085 (1993).
43. Forkert PG, Birch OW. Pulmonary toxicity of trichloroethylene in
mice: covalent binding and morphological manifestations. Drug
Metab Dispos 17:106-113 (1989).
44. Green T, Mainwaring GW, Foster JR. Trichloroethylene-induced
mouse lung tumors: studies of the mode of action and compar-
isons between species. Fundam Appi Toxicol 37:125-130 (1997).
45. Odum J, Foster JR, Green T. A mechanism for the development
of Clara cell lesions in the mouse lung after exposure to
trichloroethylene. Chem-Biol Interact 83:135-153 (1992).
46. Abbas R, Seckel CS, Kidney JK, Fisher JW. Pharmacokinetic
analysis of chloral hydrate and its metabolism in B6C3F1 mice.
Drug Metab Dispos 24:1340-1346 (1996).
47. Larson LJ, Bull RJ. Effect of ethanol on the metabolism of
trichloroethylene. J Toxicol Environ Health 28:395-406 (1989).
48. Muller G, Spassovski M, Henschler D. Metabolism of
trichloroethylene in man. Ill: Interaction of trichloroethylene and
ethanol. Arch Toxicol 33:173-189 (1975).
49. Ni Y-C, Wong T-Y, Lloyd RV, Heinze TM, Shelton S, Casciano D,
Kadlubar FF, Fu PP. Mouse liver microsomal metabolism of chlo-
ral hydrate, trichloroacetic acid, and trichloroethanol leading to
induction of lipid peroxidation via a free radical mechanism.
Drug Metab Dispos 24:81-90(1996).
50. Schultz J, Weiner H. Alteration of the enzymology of chloral
hydrate reduction in the presence of ethanol. Biochem
Pharmacol 28:3379-3384(1979).
51. Sellers EM, Lang M, Koch-Weser J, LeBlanc E, Kalant H.
Interaction of chloral hydrate and ethanol in man. I:
Metabolism. Clin Pharmacol Ther 13:37-49 (1972).
52. Lipscomb JC, Mahle DA, Brashear WT, Garrett CM. A species
comparison of chloral hydrate metabolism in blood and liver.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 227:340-350 (1996).
53. Dekant W, Schulz A, Metzler M, Henschler D. Absorption, elimi-
nation and metabolism of trichloroethylene: a quantitative com-
parison between rats and mice. Xenobiotica 16:143-152 (1986).
54. larson Jl, Bull R.J. Species differences in the metabolism of
trichloroethylene to the carcinogenic metabolites trichloro-
acetate and dichloroacetate. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol
115:278-285 (1992).
55. Templin MV, Stevens DK, Stenner RD, Bonate PL, Tuman 0, Bull
RJ. Factors affecting species differences in the kinetics of
metabolites of trichloroethylene. J Toxicol Environ Health
44:435-447 (1995).
56. Larson JL, Bull RJ. Metabolism and lipoperoxidative activity of
trichloroacetate and dichloroacetate in rats and mice. Toxicol
AppI Pharmacol 115:268-277 (1992).
57. Templin MV, Parker JC, Bull RJ. Relative formation of
dichloroacetate and trichloroacetate from trichloroethylene in
male B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 123:1-8 (1993).
[Erratum published in Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 133:177 (1995)(
58. Ketcha MM, Stevens DK, Warren DA, Bishop CT, Brashear WT.
Conversion of trichloroacetic acid to dichloroacetic acid in bio-
logical samples. J Anal Toxicol 20:236-241 (1996).
59. Henderson GN, Yan Z, James MO, Davydova N, Stacpoole PW.
Kinetics and metabolism of chloral hydrate in children:
Identification of dichloroacetate as a metabolite. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 235:695-698 (1997).
60. Lipscomb JC, Mahle DA, Brashear WT, Barton HA.
Dichloroacetic acid: metabolism in cytosol. Drug Metab Dispos
23:1202-1205 (1995).
61. James MO, Cornett R, Yan Z, Henderson GN, Stacpoole PW.
Glutathione-dependent conversion to glyoxylate, a major path-
way of dichioroacetate biotransformation in hepatic cytosol
from humans and rats, is reduced in dichloroacetate-treated
rats. Drug Metab Dispos 25:1223-1227 (1997).
62. Tong Z, Board P, Anders MW. Glutathione transferase zeta cat-
alyzes the oxygenation of the carcinogen dichloroacetic acid to
glyoxylic acid. Biochem J 331:371-374(1998).
63. Cummings BS, Putt DW, Parker JC, Lash LH. Unpublished data.
64. lipscomb JC, Garrett CM, Snawder JE. Cytochrome P450 depen-
dent metabolism of trichloroethylene: interindividual differences
in humans. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 142:311-319 (1997).
65. Wrighton SA, Stevens JC. The human hepatic cytochromes P450
involved in drug metabolism. CRC Crit Rev Toxicol 22:1-21 (1992).
66. Lipscomb JC, Garrett CM, Snawder JE. Use of kinetic and
mechanistic data in species extrapolation of bioactivation:
cytochrome P-450 dependent trichloroethylene metabolism at
occupationally relevant concentrations. J Occup Health
40:110-117 (1998).
67. Moghaddam AP, Abbas R, Fisher JW, Stavrou S, Lipscomb JC.
Metabolism of trichloroacetic acid to dichloroacetic acid by rat
and mouse gut microflora, an in vitro study. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 228:639-645 (1996).
68. Moghaddam AP, Abbas R, Fisher JW, Lipscomb JC. Role of
mouse intestinal microflora in dichloroacetic acid formation, an
in vivo study. Human Exp Toxicol 16:629-635 (1997).
69. Maiorino RM, Gandolfi AJ, Sipes IG. Gas chromatographic
method for the halothane metabolites, trifluoroacetic acid and
bromide, in biological fluids. Anal Toxicol 4:250-254 (1980).
70. Elfarra AA, Krause RJ, Last LR, Lash LH, Parker JC. Species-
and sex-related differences in metabolism of trichloroethylene
to yield chloral and trichloroethanol in mouse, rat, and human
liver microsomes. Drug Metab Dispos 26:779-785(1998).
71. Peter R, Bocker R, Beaune PH, Iwasaki M, Guengerich FP, Yang
CS. Hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone as a specific probe for human
liver cytochrome P450 IIEl. Chem Res Toxicol 3:566-573 (1990).
72. Shimada T, Yamazaki H, Mimura M, Inui Y, Guengerich FP.
Interindividual variations in human liver cytochrome P450
enzymes involved in the oxidation of drugs, carcinogens, and
toxic chemicals. Studies with liver microsomes of 30
Japanese and 30 Caucasians. J Pharmacol Exp Thur
270:414-423 (1994).
73. Barton HA, Flemming CD, Lipscomb JC. Evaluating human vari-
ability in chemical risk assessment: hazard identification and
dose-response assessment for noncancer oral toxicity of
trichloroethylene. Toxicology 110:271-287 (1996).
74. Lindahl R, Evces S. Comparative subcellular distribution of alde-
hyde dehydrogenase in rat, mouse and rabbit liver. Biochem
Pharmacol 33:3383-3389 (1984).
75. Badawy AA, Aliyu SU. Antagonism of acute alcohol intoxication
by naloxone. Alcohol 19:199-201 (1984).
76. Lipscomb JC. Unpublished data.
77. Sellers EM, Lang-Sellers M, Koch-Weser J. Comparative
metabolism of chloral hydrate and trichlofos. J Clin Pharmacol
18:457-461 (1978).
78. Pravecek TL, Channel SR, Schmidt WJ, Kidney JK. Cytotoxicity
and metabolism of dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid in
B6C3F1 mouse liver tissue. In Vitro Toxicology 9:261-269 (1996).
79. Kawamoto T, Hobara T, Aoki T, Kobayashi H, Iwamoto S, Sakai T,
Miyazaki Y, Imamura A, Ogino K. Metabolism of chloral hydrate
in the anoxic perfused liver. Toxicol Lett 40:225-231 (1988).
80. Wang GZ, Takano T, Tomita T, Nakata K, Nakamura K.
Interaction of trichloroethylene and isopropyl alcohol in the per-
fused rat liver. Nippon Eiseigaku Zasshi 48:1000-1005 (1993).
81. Reitz RH, Garagas ML, Mendrala AL, Schumann AM. In vivo and
in vitro studies of perchloroethylene metabolism for physiologi-
cally-based pharmacokinetic modeling in rats, mice and
humans. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 136:289-306 (1996).
82. McKinney LL, Weakley FB, Eldridge AC, Campbell RG, Cowan JC,
Beister HW. S-(Dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine: an agent causing fatal
aplastic anemia in calves. J Am Chem Soc 79:3932-3933 (1957).
83. McKinney LL, Picken JC, Weakley FB, Eldridge AC, Campbell RG,
Cowan JC, Beister HE. Possible toxic factor of trichloroethylene-
extracted soybean oil. J Am Chem Soc 81:909-915 (1959).
84. Dekant W, Metzler M, Henschler D. Identification of S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-N-acetyl-cysteine as a urinary metabolite of
trichloroethylene: a possible explanation for its nephrocar-
cinogenicity in male rats. Biochem Pharmacol 35:2455-2458
(1986).
85. Elfarra AA, Anders MW. Renal processing of glutathione con-
jugates: role in nephrotoxicity. Biochem Pharmacol
33:3729-3732 (1984).
86. Elfarra AA, Jakobson I, Anders MW. Mechanism of S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)glutathione-induced nephrotoxicity. Biochem
Pharmacol 35:283-288 (1986).
87. Dekant W, Koob M, Henschler D. Metabolism of
trichloroethene - In vivo and in vitro evidence for activation by
glutathione conjugation. Chem-Biol Interact 73:89-101 (1990).
88. Lash LH, Putt DA, Brashear WT, Abbas R, Parker JC, Fisher JW.
Identification of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)glutathione in the blood of
human volunteers exposed to trichloroethylene. J Toxicol
Environ Health 56:1-21 (1999).
89. Lash LH, ParkerJC, Scott CS. Modes of action of trichloroethyl-
ene for kidney tumorigenesis. Environ Health Perspect
108(suppl 2):225-240 (2000).
90. Lash LH, Jones DP, Anders MW. Glutathione homeostasis and
glutathione S-conjugate toxicity in kidney. Rev Biochem Toxicol
9:29-67 (1988).
91. Lash LH, Anders MW. Cytotoxicity of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)glu-
tathione and S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine in isolated rat kid-
ney cells. J Biol Chem 261:13076-13081 (1986).
92. Duffel MW, Jakoby WB. Cysteine S-conjugate N-acetyltrans-
ferase from rat kidney microsomes. Mol Pharmacol 21:444-448
(1982).
93. Wolfgang GH, Gandolfi AJ, Stevens JL, Brendel K. N-Acetyl-S-
(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine produces a similar toxicity to S-
(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine in rabbit renal slices: differential
transport and metabolism. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol
101:205-219 (1989).
94. Zhang G, Stevens JL. Transport and activation of S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine and N-acetyl-S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-
cysteine in rat kidney proximal tubules. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol
100:51-61 (1989).
95. Commandeur JNM, Vermeulen NPE. Identification of N-
acetyl(2,2-dichlorovinyl)- and N-acetyl(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-
cysteine as two regioisomeric mercapturic acids of
trichloroethylene in the rat. Chem Res Toxicol 3:212-218 (1990).
96. Bernauer U, Birner G, Dekant W, Henschler D.
Biotransformation of trichloroethene: dose-dependent excretion
of 2,2,2-trichloro-metabolites and mercapturic acids in rats and
humans after inhalation. Arch Toxicol 70:338-346 (1996).
97. Birner G, Vamvakas S, Dekant W, Henschler D. Nephrotoxic and
genotoxic N-acetyl-S-dichlorovinyl-L-cysteine is a urinary
metabolite after occupational 1,1 2-trichloroethene exposure in
humans: implications for the risk of trichloroethene exposure.
Environ Health Perspect 99:281-284(1993).
198 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000
METABOLISM OF TCE
98. Anderson PM, Schultze MO. Cleavage of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-
cysteine by and enzyme of bovine origin. Arch Biochem Biophys
111:593-602(1965).
99. Dohn DR, Anders MW. Assay of cysteine conjugate ,B-lyase
activity with S-(2-benzothiazolyl)cysteine as the substrate. Anal
Biochem 120:379-386 (1982).
100. Stevens JL. Isolation and characterization of a rat liver enzyme
with both cysteine conjugate 3-lyase and kynureninase activity.
J Biol Chem 260:7945-7950(1985).
101. Stevens J, Jakoby WB. Cysteine conjugate )-lyase. Mol
Pharmacol 23:761-765 (1983).
102. Tateishi M, Suzuki S, Shimizu H. Cysteine conjugate ,B-lyase in
rat liver: a novel enzyme catalyzing formation of thiol-contain-
ing metabolites of drugs. J Biol Chem 253:8854-8859 (1978).
103. Tomisawa H, Ichihara S, Fukazawa H, Ichimoto N, Tateishi M,
Yamamoto I. Purification and characterization of human
hepatic cysteine conjugate 3-lyase. Biochem J 235:569-575
(1986).
104. Larsen GL, Stevens JL. Cysteine conjugate )-lyase in the gas-
trointestinal bacterium Eubacterium limosum. Mol Pharmacol
29:97-103 (1986).
105. Tomisawa H, Suzuki S, Ichihara S, Fukazawa H, Tateishi M.
Purification and characterization of C-S lyase from
Fusobacterium varium: A C-S cleavage enzyme of cysteine con-
jugates and some S-containing amino acids. J Biol Chem
259:2588-2593 (1984).
106. Alberati-Giani D, Malherbe P, Kohler C, Lang G, Kiefer V, Lahm
H-W, Cesura AM. Cloning and characterization of a soluble
kynurenine aminotransferase from rat brain: identity with kidney
cysteine conjugate ,-lyase. J Neurochem 64:1448-1455 (1995).
107. Malherbe P, Alberati-Giani D, Kohler C, Cesura AM.
Identification of a mitochondrial form of kynurenine aminotrans-
ferase/glutamine transaminase K from rat brain. FEBS Lett
367:141-144 (1995).
108. Stevens JL. Cysteine conjugate ,-lyase activities in rat kid-
ney cortex: subcellular localization and relationship to the
hepatic enzyme. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 129:499-504
(1985).
109. Abraham DG, Cooper AJL. Glutamine transaminase K and cys-
teine S-conjugate 3-lyase activity stains. Anal Biochem
197:421-427 (1991).
110. Elfarra AA, Lash LH, Anders MW. cx-Ketoacids stimulate rat
renal cysteine conjugate 3-lyase activity and potentiate the
cytotoxicity of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine. Mol Pharmacol
31:208-212 (1987).
111. Jones TW, Qin C, Schaeffer VH, Stevens JL. Immuno-
histochemical localization of glutamine transaminase K, a rat
kidney cysteine conjugate 3-lyase, and the relationship to the
segment specificity of cysteine conjugate nephrotoxicity. Mol
Pharmacol 34:621-627 (1988).
112. Lash LH, Elfarra AA, Anders MW. Renal cysteine conjugate
3-lyase: bioactivation of nephrotoxic cysteine S-conjugates in
mitochondrial outer membrane. J Biol Chem 261:5930-5935
(1986).
113. Lash LH, Nelson RM, Van Dyke RA, Anders MW. Purification
and characterization of human kidney cysteine conjugate )-
lyase activity. Drug Metab Dispos 18:50-54 (1990).
114. Perry SJ, Schofield MA, MacFarlane M, Lock EA, King LJ,
Gibson GG, Goldfarb PS. Isolation and expression of a cDNA
coding for rat kidney cytosolic cysteine conjugate 3-lyase. Mol
Pharmacol 43:660-665 (1993).
115. Stevens JL, Robbins JD, Byrd RA. A purified cysteine conjugate
3-lyase from rat kidney cytosol: requirement for an a-keto acid or
an amino acid oxidase for activity and identity with soluble gluta-
mine transaminase K. J Biol Chem 261:15529-15537 (1986).
116. Stevens JL, Ayoubi N, Robbins JD. The role of mitochondrial
matrix enzymes in the metabolism and toxicity of cysteine con-
jugates. J Biol Chem 263:3395-3401 (1988).
117. Abraham DG, Thomas RJ, Cooper AJL. Glutamine transaminase
K is not a major cysteine S-conjugate 3-lyase of rat kidney
mitochondria: evidence that a high-molecular weight enzyme
fulfills this role. Mol Pharmacol 48:855-860 (1995).
118. Abraham DG, Patel PP, Cooper AJL. Isolation from rat kidney of
a cytosolic high molecular weight cysteine S-conjugate 3-lyase
with activity toward leukotriene E4. J Biol Chem 270:180-188
(1995).
119. Dekant W, Berthold K, Vamvakas S, Henschler D, Anders MW.
Thioacylating intermediates as metabolites of S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine and S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine
formed by cysteine conjugate 3-lyase. Chem Res Toxicol
1:175-178 (1988).
120. Dekant W, Lash LH, Anders MW. Bioactivation of the cytotoxic
and nephrotoxic S-conjugate S-(2-chloro-1.1,2-trifluoroethyl(-i-
cysteine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:7443-7447 (1987).
121. Dekant W, Urban G, Gorsmann C, Anders MW. Thioketene for-
mation from cx-haloalkenyl 2-nitrophenyl disulfides: models for
biological reactive intermediates of cytotoxic cysteine S-conju-
gates. J Am Chem Soc 1 13:5120-5122 (1991).
122. Eyre RJ, Stevens DK, Parker JC, Bull RJ. Renal activation of
trichloroethene and S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine and cell pro-
liferative responses in the kidneys of F344 rats and B6C3F1
mice. J Toxicol Environ Health 46:465-481 (1995).
123. Eyre RJ, Stevens DK, Parker JC, Bull RJ. Acid-labile adducts to
protein can be used as indicators of the cysteine S-conjugate
pathway of trichloroethene metabolism. J Toxicol Environ
Health 46:443-464 (1995).
124. MacFarlane M, Schofield M, Parker N, Roelandt L, David M,
Lock EA, King LJ, Goldfarb PS, Gibson GG. Dose-dependent
induction or depression of cysteine conjugate j-lyase in rat kid-
ney by N-acetyl-S-(1,2,3,4,4-pentachloro-1,3-butadienyl)-i-cys-
teine. Toxicology 77:133-144 (1993).
125. lyer RA, Frink EJ Jr, Ebert TJ, Anders MW. Cysteine conjugate
,-lyase-dependent metabolism of compound A (2-[fluo-
romethoxy]-1,1,3,3,3-pentafluoro-1-propene) in human subjects
anesthetized with sevoflurane and in rats given compound A.
Anesthesiology 88:611-618 (1998).
126. Lash LH, Elfarra AA, Rakiewicz-Nemeth D, Anders MW.
Bioactivation mechanism of cytotoxic homocysteine S-conju-
gates. Arch Biochem Biophys 276:322-330 (1990).
127. Stevens JL, Hatzinger PB, Hayden PJ. Quantitation of multiple
pathways for the metabolism of nephrotoxic cysteine conju-
gates using selective inhibitors of L-a-hydroxy acid oxidase (1-
amino acid oxidase) and cysteine conjugate 3-lyase. Drug
Metab Dispos 17:297-303 (1989).
128. Sausen PJ, Elfarra AA. Cysteine conjugate S-oxidase: charac-
terization of a novel enzymatic activity in rat hepatic and renal
microsomes. J Biol Chem 265:6139-6145 (1990).
129. Sausen PJ, Duescher RJ, Elfarra AA. Further characterization
and purification of the flavin-dependent S-benzyl-i-cysteine S-
oxidase activities of rat liver and kidney microsomes. Mol
Pharmacol 43:388-396 (1993).
130. Ripp SL, Overby LH, Philpot RM, Elfarra AA. Oxidation of cys-
teine S-conjugates by rabbit liver microsomes and cDNA-
expressed flavin-containing monooxygenases: studies with
S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine, S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-i-cys-
teine, S-allyl-i-cysteine, and S-benzyl-i-cysteine. Mol
Pharmacol 51:507-515 (1997).
131. Sausen PJ, Elfarra AA. Reactivity of cysteine S-conjugate sul-
foxides: Formation of S-[1-chloro-2-(S-glutathionyl)vinyl]-i-cys-
teine sulfoxide by the reaction of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl-L-cysteine
sulfoxide with glutathione. Chem Res Toxicol 4:655-660 (1991).
132. Lash LH, Sausen PJ, Duescher RJ, Cooley AJ, Elfarra AA. Role
of cysteine conjugate 3-lyase and S-oxidase in nephrotoxicity:
Studies with S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine and S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine sulfoxide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
269:374-383 (1994).
133. Werner M, Birner G, Dekant W. Sulfoxidation of mercapturic
acids derived from tri- and tetrachloroethene by cytochromes
P450 3A: a bioactivation reaction in addition to deacetylation
and cysteine conjugate 3-lyase mediated cleavage. Chem Res
Toxicol 9:41-49 (1996).
134. Bakke J, Gustafsson J-A. Mercapturic acid pathway metabo-
lites of xenobiotics: generation of potentially toxic metabolites
during enterohepatic circulation. Trends Pharmacol Sci
5:517-521 (1984).
135. Griffith OW, Meister A. Translocation of intracellular glutathione
to membrane-bound y-glutamyl transpeptidase as a discrete
step in the y-glutamyl cycle: glutathionuria after inhibition of
transpeptidase. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 76:268-272 (1979).
136. lnoue M, Morino Y. Direct evidence for the role of the mem-
brane potential in glutathione transport by renal brush-border
membrane vesicles. J Biol Chem 260:326-331 (1985).
137. Akerboom TPM, Narayanaswami V, Kunst M, Sies H. ATP-
dependent S-(2,4-dinitrophenyl)glutathione transport in canalic-
ular plasma membrane vesicles from rat liver. J Biol Chem
266:13147-13152 (1991).
138. lnoue M, Akerboom TPM, Sies H, Kinne R, Thao T, Arias IM.
Biliary transport of glutathione S-conjugate by rat liver canalic-
ular membrane vesicles. J Biol Chem 259:4998-5002 (1984).
139. Kobayashi K, Sogame Y, Hara H, Hayashi K. Mechanism of glu-
tathione S-conjugate transport in canalicular and basolateral rat
liver plasma membranes. J Biol Chem 265:7737-7741 (1990).
140. Niinuma K, Takenaka 0, Horie T, Kobayashi K, Kato Y, Suzuki H,
Sugiyama Y. Kinetic analysis of the primary active transport of
conjugates metabolites across the bile canalicular membrane:
Comparative study of S-(2,4-dinitrophenyl) glutathione and 6-
hydroxy-5,7-dimethyl-2-methylamino-4-(3-pyridylmethyl) benzoth-
iazole glucuronide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 282:866-872 (1997).
141. Olive C, Board P. Glutathione S-conjugate transport by cultured
human cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1224:264-268 (1994).
142. Lash LH, Jones DP. Uptake of the glutathione conjugate S-)1,2-
dichlorovinyl)glutathione by renal basal-lateral membrane vesi-
cles and isolated kidney cells. Mol Pharmacol 28:278-282 (1985).
143. Lash LH, Jones DP. Transport of glutathione by renal basal-
lateral membrane vesicles. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
112:55-60 (1983).
144. Lash LH, Jones DP. Renal glutathione transport: characteristics
of the sodium-dependent system in the basal-lateral mem-
brane. J Biol Chem 259:14508-14514 (1984).
145. Lash LH, Putt DA. Renal cellular transport of exogenous glu-
tathione: heterogeneity at physiological and pharmacological
concentrations. Biochem Pharmacol 58:897-907 (1999).
146. Simmons TW, Anders MW, Ballatori N. L-Cysteine and S-(1,2-
dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine transport in rat liver canalicular mem-
brane vesicles: potential reabsorption mechanisms for biliary
metabolites of glutathione and its S-conjugates. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 262:1182-1188(1992).
147. Schaeffer VH, Stevens JL. Mechanism of transport for toxic cys-
teine conjugates in rat kidney cortex membrane vesicles. Mol
Pharmacol 32:293-298 (1987).
148. Wright SH, Wunz TM, North J, Stevens JL. Na-Dependent trans-
port of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-i-cysteine by renal brush-border
membrane vesicles. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 285:162-169 (1998).
149. Dantzler WH, Evans KK, Wright SH. Kinetics of interactions of
para-aminohippurate, probenecid, cysteine conjugates and N-
acetyl cysteine conjugates with basolateral organic anion trans-
porter in isolated rabbit proximal renal tubules. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 272:663-672 (1998).
150. Lash LH, Anders MW. Uptake of nephrotoxic S-conjugates by
isolated rat renal proximal tubular cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
248:531-537 (1989).
151. Lash LH, Xu Y, Elfarra AA, Duescher RJ, Parker JC. Glutathione-
dependent metabolism of trichloroethylene in isolated liver and
kidney cells of rats and its role in mitochondrial and cellular
toxicity. Drug Metab Dispos 23:846-853 (1995).
152. Koob M, Dekant W. Metabolism of hexafluoropropene: evi-
dence for bioactivation by glutathione conjugate formation in
the kidney. Drug Metab Dispos 18:911-916 (1990).
153. Lash LH, Oian W, Putt DA, Jacobs K, Elfarra AA, Krause RJ,
Parker JC. Glutathione conjugation of trichloroethylene in rats
and mice: sex-, species-, and tissue-dependent differences.
Drug Metab Dispos 26:12-19 (1998).
154. Green T, Dow J, Ellis MK, Foster JR, Odum J. The role of glu-
tathione conjugation in the development of kidney tumours in
rats exposed to trichloroethylene. Chem-Biol Interact
105:99-117 (1997).
155. Lash LH, Lipscomb JC, Putt DA, Parker JC. Glutathione conjuga-
tion of trichloroethylene in human liver and kidney: kinetics and
individual variation. Drug Metab Dispos 27:351-359 (1999).
156. Hinchman CA, Ballatori N. Glutathione-degrading capacities of
liver and kidney in different species. Biochem Pharmacol
40:1131-1135 (1990).
157. Green T, Odum J, Nash JA, Foster JR. Perchloroethylene-
induced rat kidney tumors: an investigation of the mechanisms
involved and their relevance to humans. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol
103:77-89 (1990).
158. Elfarra AA, Hwang IY. In vivo metabolites of S-(2-benzothia-
zolyl)-i-cysteine as markers of in vivo cysteine conjugate
,B-lyase and thiol glucuronosyl transferase activities. Drug
Metab Dispos 18:917-922 (1990).
159. Lau SS, Kleiner HE, Monks TJ. Metabolism as a determinant of
species susceptibility to 2,3,5-(triglutathion-S-yl)hydroquinone-
mediated nephrotoxicity. Drug Metab Dispos 23:1136-1142
(1995).
160. Carlile DJ, Zomorodi K, Houston JB. Scaling factors to relate drug
metabolic clearance in hepatic microsomes, isolated hepato-
cytes, and the intact liver. Drug Metab Dispos 25:903-911 (1997).
161. Kedderis GL. Extrapolation of in vitro enzyme induction data to
humans in vivo. Chem-Biol Interact 107:109-121 (1997).
162. Bruning T, Lammert M, Kempkes M, Their R, Golka K, Bolt HM.
Influence of polymorphisms of GSTM1 and GSTT1 for risk of
renal cell cancer in workers with long-term high occupational
exposure to trichloroethene. Arch Toxicol 71:596-599 (1997).
163. Sato A, Nakajima T, Fujiwara Y, Murayama N. A pharmacoki-
netic model to study the excretion of trichloroethylene and its
metabolites after inhalation exposure. Br J Ind Med 34:55-63
(1977).
164. Clewell HJ Ill, Gentry PR, Gearhart JM, Allen BC, Covington
TR, Andersen ME. Applying mechanistic information,
pharmacokinetic modeling and margin of exposure evaluations
in a novel risk assessment for trichloroethylene and its active
carcinogenic metabolites: chloral hydrate, trichloroacetic acid,
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 * May 2000 199
LASH ET AL.
dichloroacetic acid, and dichlorovinylcysteine. Document
prepared for OSHA Directorate of Health Standards Programs
and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Health and
Environmental Assessment, 1995.
165. Lipscomb JC, Mahle DA, Butler GW, Brashear WT. Unpublished
data.
166. Banki K, Elfarra AA, Lash LH, Anders MW. Metabolism of S-(2-
chloro-1,1,2-trifluoroethyl)-L-cysteine to hydrogen sulfide and
the role of hydrogen sulfide in S-(2-chloro-1,1,2-trifluoroethyl)-i-
cysteine-induced mitochondrial toxicity. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 138:707-713(1985).
167. MacFarlane M, Foster JR, Gibson GG, King LJ, Lock EA.
Cysteine conjugate J-lyase of rat kidney cytosol: characteriza-
tion, immunocytochemical localization, and correlation with
hexachlorobutadiene nephrotoxicity. Toxicol Appi Pharmacol
98:185-197 (1989).
168. Birner G, Richling C, Henschler D, Anders MW, Dekant W.
Metabolism of tetrachloroethene in rats: identification of NW-
(dichloroacetyl)-[-lysine and Ne-(trichloroacetylL-lysine as pro-
tein adducts. Chem Res Toxicol 7:724-732 (1994).
200 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 108, Supplement 2 . May 2000
