Alternative Testing Systems for Evaluating
Noncarcinogenic, Hematologic Toxicity
Ralph E. Parchment
Division of Hematology and Oncology, the Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
Hematopoietic tissues are the targets of numerous xenobiotics. Clinical hematotoxicity is either a
decrease or an increase in peripheral blood cell counts in one or more cell lineages-a cytopenia or
a cytosis, respectively-that carries a risk of an adverse clinical event. The purpose of in vitro
hematotoxicology is the prediction of these adverse hematologic effects from the effects of the
toxicants on human hematopoietic targets under controlled experimental conditions in the
laboratory. Building on its important foundations in experimental hematology and the wealth of
hematotoxicology data found in experimental oncology, this field of alternative toxicology has
developed rapidly during the past decade. Although the colony-forming unit-granulocyte/monocyte
neutrophil progenitor is most frequently evaluated, other defined progenitors and stem cells as
well as cell types found in the marrow stroma can be evaluated in vitro. End points have been
proposed for predicting toxicant exposure levels at the maximum tolerated dose and the no
observable adverse effect level for the neutrophil lineage, and several clinical prediction models for
neutropenia have developed to the point that they are ready for prospective evaluation and
validation in both preclinical species and humans. Known predictive end points are the key to
successful comparisons across species or across chemical structures when in vitro dose-response
curves are nonparallel. Analytical chemistry support is critical for accurate interpretation of in vitro
data and for relating the in vitro pharmacodynamics to the in vivo pharmacokinetics. In contrast to
acute neutropenia, anemia and acute thrombocytopenia, as well as adverse effects from chronic
toxicant exposure, are much more difficult to predict from in vitro data. Pharmacologic principles
critical for clinical predictions from in vitro data very likely will apply to toxicities to other proliferative
tissues, such as mucositis. Environ Health Perspect 106(Suppl 2):541-557 (1998).
http://ehpnetl.niehs.nih.gov/docs/1998/Suppl-2/541-557parchment/abstract.html
Key words: neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, myelosuppression, myelotoxicity, hematotoxic-
ity, hematotoxicology, in vitro assay, stem cells, hematopoiesis, progenitor cells, CFU-GM,
NOAEL, permissible exposure limit, MTD, toxicology, IND, NDA
In Vitro Hematotoxicology in nature (harmful) for the patient. This
as an Alternative Toxicology paper focuses on the prediction of clini-
Clinical toxicology can be defined as the cally significant, adverse perturbations in
study of the clinically significant pertur- peripheral blood cell counts. It addresses
bations, caused by xenobiotic and/or benign lesions in the hematopoietic system
therapeutic exposure, which are adverse but does not consider leukemogenesis.
This paper was prepared as background for the 13th Meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for the
Safety Evaluation of Chemicals (SGOMSEC): Alternative Testing Methodologies held 26-31 January 1997 in
Ispra, Italy. Manuscript received at EHP9 May 1997; accepted 5 November 1997.
Many of the ideas in this paper germinated during very stimulating discussions with C.K. Grieshaber and
J.M. Collins at the U.S. FDA and J.E. Tomaszewski at the U.S. NCI. also thank two key Phase investigators,
L.M. Ghielmini (Lugano) and P.M. LoRusso (Detroit), for their openness in considering this field as an integral part of
Phase clinical development. Finally, gratitude is due for the expert assistance of technicians in Dayton, OH,
Washington, D.C., Detroit, Ml, and elsewhere who have made these data possible. This work supported in part by
U.S. National Institutes of Health grants CA62487, CA46560, CA75283, and a contract Consorzio Milano Richerche.
Address correspondence to Dr. R.E. Parchment, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Wayne State
University, Harper Hospital, 3990 John R. Street, Detroit, Ml. Telephone: (313) 745-9519. Fax: (313) 993-0559.
E-mail: parchmen@med.wayne.edu
Abbreviations used: AUC, area under the plasma concentration versus time curve; AZT, azidothymidine; BFU,
burst-forming unit-erythroid; CFU, colony-forming unit; CFU-f, CFU-fibroblastoid; CFU-GEMM, CFU-granulocyte,
erythroid, megakaryocyte, and monocyte; CFU-GM, CFU-granulocyte/monocyte; CFU-Mk, CFU-megakaryocyte;
CYP450, cytochrome P450; ECVAM, European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods; HPP-CFC, high
proliferating protential-colony-forming cell; IC, inhibition concentration (number in subscript indicates percent of
inhibition produced); IL, interleukin; LTC-IC, long-term culture-initiating cell; MTC, maximum tolerated concentra-
tion; MTD, maximum tolerated dose; NOAEC, no observable adverse effect concentration; NOAEL, no observable
adverse effect level; PEL, permissible exposure limit; TGF-p, transforming growth factor beta.
The field of hematotoxicology includes
the study of adverse effects of toxicants on
mature blood cells and also the precursor
cells in the hematopoietic (blood forming)
tissues. There are established techniques for
assessing adverse effects of xenobiotics on
mature blood cells. More recently, the
availability of recombinant hematopoietic
growth factors makes possible the evalua-
tion of adverse effects against the blood-
forming precursor cells as well. Thus, it is
now possible to study human hematotoxi-
cology in the preclinical setting. Because it
is possible to study the effects of a toxicant
on its actual target cell, it seems reasonable
to expect in vitro hematotoxicology to be
highly predictive.
Fundamentally, toxicology has two
goals: identification of the tissues that are
susceptible to the toxic effects of the xeno-
biotic and determination of the level of
acute and chronic exposures (doses) that
these tissues can tolerate without clinical
consequences. The first goal is qualitative;
it necessarily involves comparative toxicol-
ogy in multiple tissues. This comparison is
most efficiently completed in vivo where all
organs can be exposed simultaneously. A
similar evaluation performed ex vivo neces-
sarily requires the assay of multiple human
tissues under identical conditions, which at
the present time is not technically possible.
The estimation of the acceptable level of
human exposure from in vitro hematotoxi-
cology data assumes that the toxicant's
most potent effects are toward the bone
marrow, i.e., hematopoietic tissue is the
most sensitive ofthe human tissues to toxi-
city. By its nature, hematotoxicology com-
plements, refines, and actually improves
standard toxicology testing (usually in
vivo), which still is required to identify
hematopoiesis as the most likely tissue tar-
get of the toxicant in humans. The second
goal is quantitative and estimates the level
of toxicant exposure that can be tolerated
by the target tissue. This is critical for
accurate risk assessment and establishment
ofreasonable regulatory limits on exposure.
In this case, ex vivo evaluation must involve
evaluation of toxicity to only the target tis-
sue or cells derived from it and in vitro
hematotoxicology meets this second goal.
The laboratory techniques for evaluat-
ing the effects of a toxicant on human
hematopoietic tissue are relatively straight-
forward, and there is a wealth ofdata on the
toxic effects ofxenobiotics on hematopoietic
target cells. Most laboratories have the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 541
R.E. PARCHMENT
capability of performing all of the ex vivo
tests described here. In contrast, the inter-
pretation of the data and the quantitative
prediction of the acceptable level of clinical
exposure from the data are much more diffi-
cult. It is this latter arena in which we have
specialized. We have investigated prediction
models that translate the data into predicted
hematologic perturbations as a function of
toxicant exposure levels. The goal in the reg-
ulatory setting usually emphasizes the pre-
diction oftwo levels ofexposure: the highest
dose that will not cause a dinically adverse
effect and the dose that causes maximally
tolerated, reversible perturbations in periph-
eral blood counts. The former is often
termed the no observable adverse effect level
(NOAEL), whereas the latter is termed the
maximum tolerated dose (MTD). Human
exposure at the MTD is undesirable except
for anticancer agents; with this exception,
permissible exposure limits (PELs) are set
for all regulated products from the NOAEL.
Substantial pharmacologic issues arise
during the prediction of clinical outcomes
from in vitro data. Ex vivo assays determine
the concentration and exposure duration
that cause toxicity. In contrast, the regula-
tion of human exposure requires that deci-
sions be based on units of dose or dose
intensity (i.e., mg/m2 or mg/kg per unit of
time). The prediction of a dose that pro-
duces the in vitro concentration-time-effect
relationship in vivo involves pharmacokinet-
ics-the disposition ofxenobiotic through-
out the body. By analogy to animal and
clinical toxicology, in vitro hematotoxicol-
ogy aims to determine the no observable
adverse effect concentration (NOAEC) and
the maximum tolerated concentration
(MTC) oftoxicant under a specific schedule
of exposure. The pharmacokineticist can
then calculate the NOAEL and MTD doses
that produce these NOAECs and MTCs.
The NOAEC and the MTC are two end
points useful in regulatory science sought
during in vitro hematotoxicology studies.
The success to date lies primarily in the
identification of the in vitro inhibition
concentration value that is the MTC. An
international validation study sponsored by
the European Centre for the Validation of
Alternative Methods (ECVAM) is under-
way to evaluate the predictive value of this
putative MTC for clinical neutropenia (1).
Results from this formal evaluation of in
vitro hematotoxicology can be expected by
January 1999. Because a wealth of detailed
preclinical and clinical pharmacokinetic
and hematotoxicity data exists for anti-
neoplastic agents, these compounds serve
as prototype hematotoxicants to elucidate
the principles of predicting the NOAEC
and the MTC. Once the prediction mod-
els are developed with antineoplastics, it is
expected that they will generally be
applicable to all other xenobiotics.
The Hematopoietic System
as a Prototype for in Vivo
and in Vitro Toxicology
Circulating Blood Cells
and the in VivoEnd Point
The blood of mammals contains a variety
of differentiated cell types with specific
functions. Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
deliver oxygen; platelets contribute to clot
formation; and lymphocytes, monocytes,
and granulocytes provide resistance to
infectious organisms and foreign materials.
The granulocytes and platelets have a half-
life in the circulation of only a few hours
and a few days, respectively, whereas ery-
throcytes have a much longer half-life of
several months. The proportion of white
blood cells that are lymphocytes or granu-
locytes differs across mammalian species,
and this must be kept in mind when inter-
preting toxicologic data. For example,
rodents exhibit a lymphocyte:granulocyte
ratio of about 4:1 whereas humans and
dogs show a 1:4 ratio. A toxicant that
causes severe neutropenia in the absence of
lymphocytopenia will only be detected
during rodent toxicology studies if differ-
ential counts are made on the leukocyte
population. Otherwise, the maximum
adverse effect will be a 20% reduction in
white blood cell counts, which is likely to
be considered unremarkable. Furthermore,
it is important that validation studies of
laboratory end points correlate the in vitro
data to the correct in vivo end point. Assays
to predict neutropenia need to be corre-
lated with neutrophil counts, not with
leukocyte counts.
Hematopoietic Cells as Producers
ofNew Blood Cells
New blood cells must constantly be
produced to maintain the peripheral blood
cell counts, and under healthy physiologic
conditions there is a balance between new
cell production and cell loss that leads to
the constancy ofblood cell counts observed
clinically. The hematopoietic tissues that
produce new blood cells are primarily
located in the bone marrow in humans but
in both bone marrow and spleen in rodents
and sometimes dogs. Hematopoietic tissue
contains a continuum of increasingly
differentiated elements within all blood cell
lineages. Developing myeloid, erythroid,
megakaryocytic, and lymphoid cells can be
distinguished cytologically by the trained
eye or with histochemistry for lineage-
restricted features. The highly undifferenti-
ated cells are progenitors of the immature
blood cells. There are also hematopoietic
stem cells in this undifferentiated popula-
tion. Fixed stromal cells (both fibroblastic
and histiocytic) and T lymphocytes in
these tissues may exert some regulation
over hematopoiesis.
The progenitors of the hematologic
lineages will generate donal colonies in vitro
in semisolid media in response to specific
cytokine combinations (2-4), hence the
name colony-forming units (CFUs). The
myeloid lineage contains the CFU-granulo-
cyte/monocyte (CFU-GM) and the more
mature progenitors, CFU-granulocyte and
CFU-monocyte, which produce pure granu-
locyte or monocyte colonies, respectively
(5-7). This lineage also contains progenitors
for CFU-eosinophils or CFU-basophils. The
erythroid lineage contains the CFU-ery-
throid, which forms hemoglobinized
colonies in response to erythropoietin
(8-10), and the burst-forming unit-ery-
throid (BFU-E), which produces large, mul-
tifocal colonies of hemoglobinized cells in
response to erythropoietin plus cytokines
with burst-promoting activity (9,11-19).
The megakaryocytic lineage contains the
CFU-megakaryocyte (CFU-Mk) (also called
CFU-Meg) (20-22), which responds to
many cytokines, including the c-mplligand
(23-30). By analogy to BFU-E, several labo-
ratories report a BFU-megakaryocyte, which
forms large, multifocal colonies (31,32). The
lymphoid lineages also contain progenitors
that form clonal colonies of B or T cells
when stimulated with interleukin(IL)-7 and
IL-2, respectively (33-35).
In addition to these lineage-restricted
progenitors, hematopoietic tissue contains
immature progenitors that form colonies
containing multiple myeloid lineages
(3642). One such progenitor is CFU-gran-
ulocyte, erythroid, megakaryocyte, and
monocyte (CFU-GEMM). As the name
implies, colonies formed by this pluripotent
progenitor are distinguished by the presence
ofcellular elements from all ofthese lineages.
Several CFUs lie close to the hema-
topoietic stem cell developmentally. The
high proliferative potential-colony-form-
ing cell (HPP-CFC) produces a very large
colony that contains primarily cells with
a blastlike cytology, a small proportion of
which will reform a clonal colony after
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998542
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
recloning (43-50). The long-term
culture-initiating cell (LTC-IC) is a cell
with multilineage potential found at low fre-
quency in the marrow, probably positioned
prior to the HPP-CFC in myelopoiesis
(51-54). LTC-IC cells exhibit several char-
acteristics of stem cells, including some
capability of self-renewal, maintenance
of both lymphopoiesis and myelopoiesis,
and long-term reconstitution of a lethally
irradiated host (55-64).
Bone Marrow Stroma
In contrast to the proliferation and
expansion of tissue mass by hematopoietic
cells, the primary function of the stroma is
the nurture and support of developing
blood cells (52,65-67). However, there is
a stromal colony-forming unit called CFU-
fibroblastoid (CFU-f), which produces a
colony composed of adherent cells exhibit-
ing morphologic features of fibroblasts,
adipocytes, and other stromal elements
(65,68). Although proliferating CFU-f is
highly sensitive to many bone marrow toxi-
cants in vitro, it is unclear whether the
CFU-f is an in vivo target cell of toxicants
that affect replicating cell types.
Interactive Cultures of
Hematopoietic and Stromal Cells
Cultures of hematopoietic cells combined
with stromal support cells can be maintained
for several months in the absence of exoge-
nously added cytokines by adhering to pre-
scribed methodology (69-72). These
so-called Dexter cultures sustain myelopoiesis
at nearly steady-state levels for several weeks,
after which time myeloid cell output begins
to dedine. It is possible to quantitate the out-
put of progenitors or mature myeloid cells
over time in these cultures. Likewise, long-
term marrow cultures called Whidock-Witte
cultures sustain lymphopoiesis (73-76).
Modifications of cell culture conditions can
switch the cultures between lympho- and
myelopoiesis, making it possible to evaluate
both lympho- and myelopoiesis from the
same cell culture (56,77). Because cytokines
are not added to these cultures, they are
thought to model closely the steady-state
hematopoiesis that occurs in vivo. However,
the progressive dedine in mature cell output
indicates the need to develop culture
methodology for maintaining hematopoietic
tissues in a homeostatic state.
Multidisciplinary Application
of in Vitro Hematotoxicology
A great variety of toxicologic problems
have been investigated using in vitro assays
of hematopoiesis. The following examples
have been selected to illustrate the wide-
ranging usefulness of in vitro hematotoxi-
cology. For more detailed discussions about
study design and interpretation, see several
recent reviews (1,78-93).
Toxicity to the Mature
Blood Cell Compartment
Toxicity affecting primarily the mature,
differentiated compartment usually mani-
fests clinically as rapid-onset cytopenia. An
example ofthis toxicity is phenylhydrazine-
induced anemia caused by direct hemolysis
of erythrocytes (10). However, hemato-
logic toxicity following xenobiotic exposure
can also manifest clinically as leukocytosis.
Eosinophilia associated with exposure to
IL-2, lithium, or a contaminant in over-
the-counter preparations of L-tryptophan
is due to toxicant-induced secretion of
hematopoietic growth factors from mature
blood cells (94-101). Xenobiotic-induced
leukocytosis can also be due to abnormally
high neutrophil or lymphocyte counts
(102-105). CFU assays usually do not play
a critical role in investigating this type of
xenobiotic toxicity unless it cannot be
explained by increased cytokine secretion.
Toxicity to the Progenitor
Compartment
The mechanism of hematotoxicity most
frequently and thoroughly studied in vitro
is the acute effects of toxicant on marrow
progenitors like CFU-GM (referred to as
CFC-c in the older literature) and CFU-
Mk. Toxicity is quantified from the num-
ber ofsurviving progenitors as a function of
exposure level under maximally stimulatory
cytokine concentrations.
Substances such as antineoplastics,
biologic toxins, and ionizing radiation
(106-116) destroy the rapidly dividing mar-
row progenitors, and a single exposure can
result in an acute yet reversible neutropenia
or thrombocytopenia 4 to 20 days later. A
rapid repopulation of the progenitor com-
partment precedes recovery of peripheral
counts by several days (106,117-124). The
assumption of in vitro investigations oftoxic-
ity is accurate recapitulation of the in vivo
toxicity in the in vitro model. In fact, in vivo
toxicity to progenitors can be reproduced in
vitro after direct exposure to pharmacologi-
cally relevant exposure levels of toxicants
(78,81,83,84,106,125-136). Clinically
achievable concentrations of myelosuppres-
sive anti-human immunodeficiency virus
nucleosides like azidothymidine (AZT)
inhibit erythroid and myeloid progenitors
(137-143) but the dideoxypurines, which
do not cause anemia or neutropenia, do
not (144,145). Clonogenic assays have
also distinguished the relative contribu-
tion of each component of a multidrug
regimen to therapy-related agranulocytosis
(131,132,146,147).
Drug exposure levels that inhibit colony
formation by approximately 50% do not
cause neutropenia clinically (129,148). It is
likely that the in vitro and in vivo data fail to
correlate at these mildly toxic levels ofexpo-
sure because the hyperplastic response ofthe
marrow can compensate for this magnitude
of progenitor loss. For example, there may
not be any hematologic consequence from a
2-fold reduction in the frequency of CFU-
GM ifbalanced by a 2-fold increase in mar-
row cellularity (no net gain in total
CFU-GM). A direct correlation may exist
between the decreases in donogenic survival
and absolute neutrophil counts only when
toxicant levels cause such a severe lesion in
the progenitor population that marrow
hyperplasia cannot compensate.
In vitro assays can also be used to
investigate cytopenias caused by noncyto-
toxic xenobiotics. For example, substances
that reduce the number of differentiated
blood cells produced per progenitor would
be expected to decrease the size ofthe donal
colonies (the number of cells per colony),
but not the number of colonies. Colonies
that resemble CFU-GM colonies but are
too small are named clusters. Thus, reduced
CFU-GM colony formation accompanied
by a shift in the distribution of colony size
toward dusters argues against destruction of
the progenitor. Trichothecene mycotoxins
appear to shift the balance between prolifer-
ation and differentiation toward the latter
(113-115). Interferons, the transforming
growth factor beta (TBF-P) family, and
tumor necrosis factors inhibit colony
formation by CFU-GM, CFU-GEMM,
and HPP-CFC (149-156). Experiments
with TGF-Ps indicate how subtle yet spe-
cific these effects on progenitors can be
(149-151,154-156). The principles of pre-
dicting the parameters of neutropenia from
in vitro data have not yet been established
for this category oftoxicants.
There is considerable confusion
regarding a quantitative relationship between
progenitor toxicity and acute anemia or
thrombocytopenia. Megakaryocytopoiesis
involves not only mitosis but also endorepli-
cation, and it is unclear whether cell-cycle
dependent toxicants are also endoreplication
toxicants. For CFU-Mk assays, spontaneous
colony formation occurs in vitro without
Environmental Health Perspectives . Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 543
R.E. PARCHMENT
exogenously added cytokines; and colony
formation is quantified based on a A value,
i.e., the net increase in colony number due
to cytokine stimulation. A cytokine-free
control is included to quantify the number
of colonies that form independently of
added cytokine.
Toxicant-induced anemia is also difficult
to predict from erythroid progenitor assays.
Because erythrocytes circulate with a rela-
tively long half-life, an acute toxicant-
induced disruption of erythropoiesis is
probably insufficient to cause anemia. For
example, dipyrone inhibited not only
CFU-GEMM and CFU-GM but also
BFU-E in the presence of serum from a
patient with drug-induced agranulocytosis
and thrombocytopenia but not anemia
(157). Also, ceftazidime is an equally
potent inhibitor of BFU-E and CFU-GM,
although it is clinically associated with
agranulocytosis (158).
The most difficult hematotoxicity to
predict with in vitro assays is the progres-
sive loss of one or more blood cell lineages
during chronic exposure to a toxicant:
agranulocytosis, pancytopenia, and aplastic
anemia. In some cases the toxicity leaves a
permanent dysfunction, while in other
cases the toxicity resolves after identifica-
tion and removal of the toxicant. The dis-
tinction between irreversible aplasias like
aplastic anemia and the progressive yet
usually reversible aplasias like agranulocy-
tosis is important for proper application of
in vitro assays. In practice, toxicity may
not be definable as reversible or irreversible
if the toxic insult cannot be identified or if
the degree ofpermanent damage is insuffi-
cient to cause permanent symptoms. In
the cases of irreversible marrow damage
after multiple toxicant exposures, it is often
impossible to know whether toxicity would
have occurred after a single exposure.
Progressive yet reversible xenobiotic-
induced cytopenia generally indicates a
direct effect of toxicant or metabolite on
hematopoietic cell types. CFU-GM levels
in patients with drug-induced agranulocy-
tosis are depressed relative to controls
(91,159-164), and inhibition of myeloid
and erythroid progenitors is a likely
mechanism for beta-lactam-induced
agranulocytosis (158) and contributes to
phenylhydrazine-induced anemia (10). In
these cases the in vitro progenitor assays
correctly identified the mechanism of
myelosuppression. Hypersensitivity of
progenitors from susceptible individuals
to the toxicant or a toxic metabolite can
be demonstrated with progenitor assays
(161,165-171). However, other xenobiotics
(chlorpropamide, phenytoin, methimazole,
valproate, disopyramide, and phenacetin)
not only inhibit progenitors directly but
also induce both cellular and soluble
immune mechanisms, which inhibit
hematopoiesis (161,163,172-176). Because
immune constituents can contribute to
hematotoxicity, it is important to eliminate
effector cells when trying to prove a direct
toxicity of xenobiotic to progenitors in
vitro (168). Otherwise, the effects of
inhibitory cytokines released by mature T
cells and monocytes in response to toxicant
may be measured instead, which would be
a toxicity to the mature blood cell com-
partment rather than the progenitor com-
partment. Unfortunately, in many cases
when the immune system contributes to
hematotoxicity, in vitro studies using mar-
row from normal donors are not informa-
tive and in fact are usually inconclusive
(167,170,177).
It is encouraging that several laboratories
arrived independently at similar assay condi-
tions for quantifying toxicity to hematopoi-
etic progenitors (1,81-85,178,179).
Microculture techniques for progenitors are
also available when xenobiotic is in short
supply (180).
Toxicityto Bone MarowStroma
The microenvironment is a target for
toxicant injury (90), and assays of stromal
function have been used to investigate the
effects of toxicant exposure. Bone marrow
stroma is more sensitive than hematopoi-
etic progenitors to the toxicity of acute
neutron irradiation but less sensitive to
X rays, and hematopoietic stem cell and
stromal cell repopulation, but not progeni-
tor survival, are dependent on dose rate
(109,112,124,181-184). Long-term bone
marrow cultures based on Dexter's method
(69) have been used to investigate the
agranulocytosis associated with ceftazidime
and other agents (82,158). In addition,
the CFU-f is potentially a dose-limiting
cell type for radiation and some quinones
of benzo[a]pyrene (183-185). CFU-f is
the most sensitive progenitor to AZT toxi-
city, and AZT causes perturbations in
parameters of long-term bone marrow
assays at clinically relevant concentrations
(186). Both conventional and high-dose
cancer chemotherapies cause permanent
damage to the marrow microenvironment
(111,148,187-192). However, clinical
hematology parameters can recover and even
normalize in spite of continuing in vitro
measurements of impaired marrow function
(148,182, 189-195), casting doubt on the
power of these in vitro assays to predict
clinical outcome after chronic exposure.
Conceptual
Framework for in Vitro
Hematotoxicology Studies
Alternative hematotoxicology has benefited
tremendously from the progress in experi-
mental hematology over the past 40 years.
Recombinant cytokines are available, and
consequently a number of hematopoietic
cell types can be assayed. In vitro hemato-
toxicology differs significantly from other
alternative toxicologies in that the actual
target cell of the toxicant can be studied in
the laboratory. In addition, human expo-
sure-hematotoxicity relationships are avail-
able from clinical trials in oncology for
quantitative correlation with in vitro data.
Finally, there appears to be little disagree-
ment over the standardized conditions to
use for quantitative assays and several labo-
ratories in this field have reached similar
conclusions about experimental variables via
independent studies (1,81,84,85,178,179).
What Should Be Predicted?
Clinical hematotoxicity resulting from
xenobiotic exposure can be described by
four parameters (Figure 1): severity of the
change in blood cell counts (cytopenia or
cytosis), time from exposure to the most
severe toxicity, duration of the nadir, and
time required for recovery from the toxic-
ity (degree of reversibility). These para-
meters completely describe the clinical
course and nature of xenobiotic-induced
cytosis and cytopenia (88). These toxico-
logic parameters have several important
characteristics. They are not linked to any
assumptions about molecular mechanism;
they are clinical end points measured in
patients and therefore they constitute the
in vivo data that in vitro end points must
predict, and they provide a quantifiable
description ofxenobiotic effects on human
blood cell counts.
Because regulatory agencies must make
decisions about human PELs even for
compounds with unknown mechanisms of
action, it is preferable to have mechanism-
naive assays, i.e., assays predictive across
broad mechanistic classes. Molecular mech-
anism is not trivialized by this approach;
rather it is admitted that this information is
not required to regulate the product or treat
the intoxicated patient. For example, any
compound that caused reversible thrombo-
cytopenia of 10 days' duration will be treated
similarly, whether the xenobiotic disrupted
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998544
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
Parameter 4, time required for recovery
1-
Parameter 2, time to nadir
t.c
CD
am
CO
---
/
assume that the dose-limiting cell compart-
ment in vivo is the cell type most sensitive
to the toxicant in vitro.
It is possible that by identifying the
dose-limiting progenitor, we may predict
the time to nadir. For the neutrophil lin-
eage, this hypothesis postulates that neu-
.- tropenia due to a lesion in an immature
neutrophil progenitor population will take
longer to appear than a lesion in a relative
late-stage neutrophil progenitor pool. This
has yet to be proven, however.
In Vitro Pharmacology
The in vitro assays are relatively simple to
_* - *> Parameter 3, duration of cytopena perform and a wealth of data can be gener-
ated in a short period. In general, the results
ofthe test will be expressed as the change in
1 6 11 16 21 26 31 an in vitro end point (Y axis) as a function
of the level of toxicant exposure (X axis,
Four independent parameters describe acute hematologic toxicity in vivo. In leukocytosis, the parameters usually in concentration units) using a clin-
ied to the maximum increase in leukocyte counts, time to the maximum, duration of the maximum, and time ically relevant duration of exposure (Figure
ry. In vitro hematotoxicology can be focused on the prediction of these four parameters in the human prior to 2A). The next step is to translate this in
31 human exposure. Initial efforts have focused on validation of in vitro systems for predicting the severity of vitro data into cinical language and predict
ophil nadir after acute (preferably single dose) exposure. ** indicates the time of acute toxicant exposure. the clinical consequences of toxicant expo-
sure. However, the way this goal has been
ransduction or destroyed progenitors. toxicity to all of the cell types in the lineage phrased implies a subtle distinction from
w mechanism-independent toxicol- but only the in vitro end point from the the conventional purpose of toxicology
generally useful and advantageous assay of the actual target cell population studies. Traditionally, the question is one of
ecause it prevents assay proliferation will be the most likely predictor of clinical classification: Is this compound a hemato-
me, in which a new assay must be cre- toxicity. Given data from assays of mature toxicant? However, it seems reasonable to
r each mechanistic dass that must be blood cell lysis and dysfunction, progenitor assume that any toxicant will be a hemato-
ed, and because it can contribute to survival and function, and stem cell and toxicant if the other tissues of the body can
ulation of new products with poorly stromal cell function, how does one predict tolerate high enough exposure levels.
tood mechanisms ofaction. what will be the clinical manifestation of Certainly there will be compounds that
e goal of in vitro hematotoxicology is toxicant exposure? inhibit CFU-GM in vitro but do not cause
diction of these four parameters (in It is a well-established principle of in neutropenia, because exposure levels never
Id points) from end points obtained vivo toxicology that the adverse effects of reach a high enough level: for example, the
ssays of human hematopoietic func- exposure are determined by the most sensi- nonmyelosuppressive nucleoside analog
ter in vitro exposure to the toxicant tive of the exposed tissues. The most sensi- dideoxycytidine is in fact toxic to CFU-Mk
). Different in vitro end points, and tive tissue is called the dose-limiting tissue, and CFU-GEMM in vitro (116,144,145).
ps even different hematopoietic and in vitro toxicology must predict the Because toxicologic experience lends credi-
may be required to predict each in ramifications of exposure in this tissue to bility to this assumption, the practice of
trameter. Most studies focus on the predict clinical toxicity. By analogy, the classifying chemicals as hematotoxicants
:ion ofthe severity ofthe nadir. manifestations of toxicant exposure in the should be abandoned.
the Concept
dose-limiting tissue must be determined by If classification is to be abandoned,
ling the Conc4~ept its most sensitive cell compartment, which what prediction should replace it? We have
se-Lmiting Tissue we have called the dose-limiting cell type attempted to answer this question during
tose-I.fltflg Celi Type (88). This analogy is helpful in the inter- the past 7 years. The PELs for most regu-
any hematologic lineage there are a pretation of in vitro data when a toxicant is lated products are based on the NOAEL
r ofpotential target cells for the toxi- evaluated on the entire spectrum of cell dose, whereas antineoplastics are regulated
he mature cell compartment in the types that constitute a hematopoietic lin- based on the MTD. We have come to
tream, the progenitors in the marrow eage. For example, the nature of the neu- understand that the most useful in vitro end
lake these blood cells, and the sup- tropenia caused by a toxicant will be points are those that predict the level ofsys-
g cells in the hematopoietic tissues determined in large part by whether temic exposure to toxicants at these two
gulate blood cell production. Most of mature neutrophils, immature neutrophils, doses of regulatory significance. Hence, the
-an be assessed for toxicity in vitro myeloid progenitors, stem cells, or purpose of in vitro hematotoxicology is to
is important to determine which is myelopoietic support cells are the in vivo predict the toxicant exposure levels associ-
ual target cell of the toxicant in vivo. target of the xenobiotic. Until more is ated with the MTD and the NOAEL doses.
especially important because many understood from attempts at in vitro-in We have termed the predictive in vitro end
its may show some degree of in vitro vivo correlations, it seems reasonable to points for these two exposure levels the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998
175-
150-
o 125
x
C 75
p
C.Rco
~00
-0 50
-° 25-a
Figure 1.
are modif
to recover
any actua
the neutrn
signal ti
We vie
ogy as
both b
syndror
ated foi
regulatu
the reg
underst
The
the pre
vivo en
from aw
tion af
(84,88
perhaf
assays,
vivo pa
predict
Extens
ofDos
to a D
Within
numbe
cant: tl
bloodsi
that m
portini
that ref
these c
and it
the act
This is
toxican
545
R.E. PARCHMENT
A
100-
75-
50-
251
u
Log toxicant exposure
B
0
C.h
0
g 50o-
C.)
go, 75~
cc
E
°- 25-
0
0 0
C-)
Plasma AUC at NOAEL M???)
Plag
rather we should assume that they could,
and determine the AUC at the NOAEL
Shortexposuretime and MTD for the neutrophil lineage
(Figure 2B).
This understanding clarified how to
determine if the CFU-GM assay could be
validated for predicting neutropenia and
Long exposure time used in the regulatory setting (88). We con-
centrated exclusively on this hematotoxicity
2 because the relationship between progenitor
e.g.AUC numbers and peripheral blood cell counts ise.g., simpler for neutropenia than for anemia or
thrombocytopenia. Furthermore, to identify
the principles and concepts to include in
dinical prediction models, we restricted our
initial studies to the simplest oftoxicity, the
reversible neutropenia caused by an acute
toxicant exposure. This rationale also
focused the ECVAM validation study in
hematotoxicology on the prediction of
neutropenia (1).
sma AUC at MTD
1 2
Log toxicant exposure, e.g., AUC
Figure 2. (A) Typical in vitro hematotoxicology data
relating the decrease in a hematopoietic end point as a
function of toxicant exposure in units of concentration,
AUC, or whatever pharmacologic parameter of exposure
is most closely linked to inhibition. The data shown here
reflect the differential toxicity between a brief and long
duration of exposure commonly observed with cell cycle-
dependent toxicants. (B) In vitro toxicology attempts to
relate a cell culture end point to a regulatory end point
such as the NOAEL or the MTD. In vitro systems relate
changes in end points to concentration-based measure-
ments, and the estimation of dose relies on estimates of
pharmacokinetic parameters. Several lines of evidence
point to the AUC that inhibits CFU-GM by 90% (e.g., the
AUC at IC90) as the predictive end point for the plasma
AUC that will cause grade 4 neutropenia at the MTD
(Table 1). The in vitro end point that predicts the AUC at
the NOAEL has not been determined.
MTC and NOAEC, respectively. This is
analogous to the determination of the no
effect and maximum tolerated doses in vivo,
except that in vitro systems use concentration
units instead.
For many hematotoxic compounds the
severity oftoxicity is related to a pharmaco-
logic measure of exposure called the area
under the plasma concentration versus time
curve (AUC). Thus, the hypothesis of in
vitro hematotoxicology is that the in vitro
AUCs at the MTC and the NOAEC are
identical to the plasma AUCs at the MTD
and the NOAEL, respectively. This strategy
shifts the emphasis of the in vitro study to
end points that lie on the X axis, not the Y
axis. We should not try to predict whether
compounds inhibit neutrophil production:
Pedicting Toxicant Exposure
(PlasmadAUC)at te MTD
from in Vitro Data
Because of our interest in the clinical
development of antineoplastic agents and
its regulation, most of our in vitro-in vivo
correlation studies have focused on the
identification of the in vitro end point that
is the MTC (Table 1). A quantitative study
of pyrazoloacridine found close correlation
between inhibition of in vitro colony for-
mation and the grade of neutropenia in
vivo (129). In this study, the AUC that
caused grade 3 to 4 neutropenia in humans
inhibited in vitro colony formation of
human CFU-GM by 90%. The result sug-
gested that the 90% inhibition concentra-
tion (IC90) from the human CFU-GM
assay was the MTC when this progenitor
is dose limiting. This conclusion was con-
firmed and extended in the mouse by
showing that the AUC at the IC90 from
the murine CFU-GM assay was associated
with a 90% reduction not only in absolute
neutrophil count but also marrow CFU-
GM (R Parchment, unpublished data).
Subsequently, the IC90 was the in vitro
end point that predicted the differential
between human and mouse MTD for the
topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan,
whereas other IC end points failed to pre-
dict the MTD differential from the
nonparallel human and mouse concentra-
tion-toxicity curves. Preliminary results
show that the IC90 ratio correlates to the
MTD ratio for seven of seven tested drugs.
Current studies are examining whether the
IC90 is the MTC for other progenitor
compartments and for antineoplastic
agents with other mechanisms of action. It
is possible that a 90% reduction in content
might not be tolerated in other progenitor
compartments, while confirmation of this
putative MTC for CFU-GM and addi-
tional toxicants will help clarify prediction
models and gain regulatory acceptance.
Based in part on these studies, the ECVAM
validation study of the CFU-GM assay will
attempt to validate the IC90 as the MTC
from which the plasma AUC at MTD can
be predicted for xenobiotics associated with
dose-limiting neutropenia (1).
PrdictingToxicant Exposure (AUC)
at the NOAEL from in VitroData
Although the NOAEL is used much more
frequently than the MTD as the basis for
setting PELs for regulated products, there is
a lack ofunderstanding about the maximum
degree of loss of progenitors that does not
result in clinical neutropenia. This issue
directly relates to our understanding of the
resilience of hematopoietic tissue to toxic
insult and the compensatory mechanisms,
such as marrow hyperplasia, that can over-
come mild reductions in progenitor survival.
For example, a 50% reduction in CFU-GM
survival coupled to a 2-fold increase in mar-
row cellularity would not result in any net
loss ofneutrophil progenitors. During our in
vitro-in vivo correlation study in the Phase I
trial of 9-methoxypyrazoloacridine (129),
the greatest plasma AUC that did not cause
neutropenia inhibited human CFU-GM by
35%. Although circumstantial, these results
suggest that the IC35 may be the NOAEC,
i.e., the end point from which the AUC at
NOAEL can be predicted. Unfortunately,
the minimum number of progenitors
required to maintain normal peripheral
blood cell counts in vivo has not yet been
determined for any myeloid lineage in any
species. Until the IC35 is established as the in
vitro NOAEC, the ICo or perhaps IC05
should be used to estimate the NOAEL in
vivo (1). Obviously, there is a pressing
research need to determine the exact rela-
tionship between progenitor numbers and
peripheral blood cell counts in each of the
myeloid lineages and then identify the most
predictive IC value to use for each level of
myelosuppression in vivo. We are currently
examining other compounds to determine if
the IC35 consistently predicts the AUC at
the NOAEL.
The Critical Importance ofIdentifying
the MTC and the NOAEC
Knowing the NOAEC and the MTC
simplifies what otherwise would be very
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998
0
C.)
0
cc
E
0
cD
0
C-,
n
1
546
7.
-
/ .& -1
K_
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
Table 1. Identification of the IC90 as the MTC in CFU-GM assays.
Toxicant Species Evidence Reference
9-Methoxypyrazoloacidine Human In vitro-in vivo correlation with ANC Parchment et al. ( 129)
Mouse Intentional exposure at IAUC90 produced Parchment et al. (129)
85% reduction in ANC
Topotecan Human and mouse Nine-fold differential for both MTD and IC90, Erickson-Miller et al. (219)
but not for IC50
Flavopiridol Human and rat Rat more sensitive than human at IC90, J Tomaszewski (unpublished data)
but more resistant at IC50, and rat MTD
lower than human MTD
Fludarabine, fazarabine, Multiple species IC90 ratios and MTD ratios correlate J Tomaszewski (unpublished data)
camptothecins, amonafide
Abbreviations: ANC, absolute neutrophil count; IAUC90, AUC at the IC90. The toxicants are antineoplastic agents that cause myelosuppression; these are useful test com-
pounds because neutropenia is an acceptable risk of human exposure.
complicated data interpretation (87,88).
For example, it is common practice to
compare a new compound with a reference
compound of known hematotoxicity in
vitro. Suppose one obtains data from such a
study that shows a crossing of the concen-
tration-response curves and it cannot be
explained by differential chemical stability
(Figure 3). From these data, can one pre-
dict whether humans can tolerate higher,
the same, or lower levels of the investiga-
tional compound than the reference com-
pound? In other words, should the PEL be
higher or lower than the reference com-
pound? If one knows that the IC90 is the
MTC and that grade 3 to 4 neutropenia is
an acceptable risk of human exposure (e.g.,
a cancer drug), then clearly the tolerated
AUC is higher for the investigational prod-
uct than for the reference compound.
Assuming equivalent pharmacokinetics, the
PEL can then be set higher for the new
product than for the reference product. In
contrast, if the IC35 is the NOAEC and
neutropenia is not an acceptable conse-
quence of exposure to this product, the
opposite conclusion would be reached. The
PEL for the investigational product should
be set lower than the reference product
because its IC35 is lower. This theoretical
example illustrates how the interpretation
ofthe in vitro data depends on the intended
use of the product. For one use the PEL
can be higher, whereas for another use it
must be lower. This example also suggests
how to choose a least hematotoxic analog
from in vitro data when the analogs do not
exhibit parallel curves. The least toxic ana-
log is that with the least inhibition in an
appropriate in vitro assay at the end point
most relevant to the product's intended use.
Such data would be impossible to interpret
without these X-axis concepts.
The identical issue arises when using in
vitro hematotoxicology to directly compare
human toxicant sensitivity to that of the
preclinical animal species in which the
product is tested in vivo. In this case, the
question is whether the preclinical toxicol-
ogy species under- or overestimates human
PELs for myelosuppressive compounds. If
the direct comparison results in parallel
curves (Figure 4A) then this question is eas-
ily answered. The human:animal ratio at
any IC value will provide an estimate ofthe
difference in tolerance of the compound;
and, because the IC50 is the most accurately
determined point on these curves, the IC50
ratios should be used. However, consider
the more typical case of nonparallel curves
across species (Figure 4B). Without know-
ing which IC values to compare, it would
be difficult to interpret these data and pre-
dict human tolerance. However, a compari-
son of the IC90 end point across species
shows that humans can tolerate more than
100
=
0
ci
0L)
._
a,
=c
Co
E
0
c
0
C-
-1
dogs but less than rodents. Assuming there
are no pharmacokinetic differences across
species, the MTD differential will be pro-
portional to the IC9o differential. In con-
trast, if neutropenia is an unacceptable risk
of exposure, the NOAEC will be used for
comparison. Assuming the IC35 is the
NOAEC, one would predict that the
human PEL could be set higher than the
rodent PEL by an amount proportional to
the in vitro differential in the NOAECs.
Clinical Prediction Models
for Prospective Evaluation
andValidation Trials
Several prediction models have been
developed that use the MTC and the
NOAEC as predictive in vitro end points
for the plasma AUC at the MTD and the
NOAEL, respectively. From this estimate
and knowledge ofhuman pharmacokinetics
- - U- -- Investigational product
0 Reference toxicant
1 2
Log, exposure parameter
3 4
Figure 3. Differences between the test article and the reference compound depend on the level of inhibition at
which the comparison is made. Knowing which in vitro end points are the NOAEC and the MTC makes it possible
to interpret such in vitro hematotoxicology results. Note that the NOAEC is lower for the new product than the ref-
erence toxicant; in contrast, its MTC is higher. This interpretation assumes neutropenia is the dose limiting toxicity
for both compounds.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 547
R.E. PARCHMENT
1 2
Log, exposure parameter
0 1 2 3
Log, exposure parameter
Figure 4. (A) In the ideal situation, comparative toxicology data across species will map to parallel curves so that dif-
ferentials in toxicant tolerance can be based on the IC50 values for two reasons: the ratio of any IC value will be the
same and the IC50 is the most accurate point using conventional curve fitting methods. (B) In many cases data from
multiple species must be compared across nonparallel curves that may even cross each other over the tested concen-
tration range. In this case, knowing which in vitro end points are the NOAEC and the MTC is critical for data interpre-
tation and clinical prediction. For example, these data predict that the MTD will be higher in rats, humans, and then
dogs, assuming neutropenia is the dose-limiting toxicity and the IC90 is the MTC. In contrast, the data predict that the
NOAEL will be highest in humans, followed by dogs and then rats, assuming the IC35 is the NOAEC.
and plasma protein drug binding, the doses
that achieve these AUCs in the plasma of
exposed humans can be determined.
However, the models can only be applied
to compounds that are expected to show
dose-limiting neutropenia. This is a critical
assumption for in vitro hematotoxicology,
and in vivo toxicology studies must indicate
that neutrophil precursors are the dose-lim-
iting target. If the dose-limiting toxicity of
the investigational product was e.g., car-
diotoxicity, determination of AUC at the
MTC for CFU-GM would overestimate
human tolerance and jeopardize patient
safety. Some studies have used the 1C70
instead of the 1C90 as the MTC, and these
two end points will be compared during
some of the ongoing studies. The IC70 may
be more appropriate when estimating PELs
for products that will be used in patients
with impaired marrow function.
Prospective evaluation of these models will
be critical in gaining acceptance, and Phase
I clinical trials (dose-escalation trials) of
antineoplastic agents provide an excellent
opportunity for such an evaluation. The
following models focus on the prediction of
MTD; prediction of the NOAEL would
simply substitute the IC35 or other
NOAEC end point for the 1C90.
Prediction Model 1 is the simplist
model. It can be used if human pharmaco-
kinetic parameters are unknown or cannot
be determined. Model 1 has the greatest
level of uncertainty because it incorporates
only pharmacodynamics. It is based on the
idea that neutrophil progenitors can serve as
a sentinel tissue for interspecies compar-
isons. Large interspecies differences in toxi-
cant disposition (AUC as a function of
dose) could lead to significant errors in the
predicted MTD. Step 1: determine the
MTD in an animal model; step 2: deter-
mine the toxicity differential between the
animal and human dose-limiting progenitor
based on IC90 values; step 3: adjust the ani-
mal MTD for the IC90 differential; and step
4: adjust the MTD again for differences in
free drug concentration between the animal
and human (e.g., protein binding).
Prediction Model 2 can be used when
the AUC cannot be measured at the IC90
for the human progenitor but human phar-
macokinetic parameters are known or can
be predicted. This model assumes the mar-
row toxicant causes an AUC-dependent
cytotoxicity. The model adjusts the plasma
AUC at the MTD in the animal studies for
species differentials in drug tolerance and
plasma protein drug binding. Step 1: deter-
mine the plasma AUC at the MTD in an
animal model; step 2: determine the toxic-
ity differential between the animal and
human dose-limiting progenitor based on
IC90 values; step 3: adjust the animal-
derived plasma AUC by the 1C90 differen-
tial; step 4: adjust the plasma AUC for
differences in free drug concentration
between species; and step 5: using human
pharmacokinetic parameters or estimated
parameters, calculate the dose that gives the
predicted AUC.
Prediction Model 3 aims to predict the
actual human MTD for the neutrophil
lineage. It should be the most accurate
prediction model because it incorporates
both human pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics. Step 1: identify the
most sensitive neutrophil progenitor in
human bone marrow; step 2: determine
the IC90 for the dose-limiting human
progenitor; step 3: derive the in vitro AUC
at the IC90 by integrating the Cx t curve;
step 4: translate the in vitro AUC into in
vivo terms by adjusting for differences in
free concentration under the two condi-
tions of exposure (e.g., protein binding);
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998
A
a,
E
4-,
a,
0
aJ
cc
E
0
0
-
W
C.)
J,
s
0-
0
L)
B
548
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
and step 5: using human pharmacokinetic
parameters or estimated parameters, calcu-
late the dose that gives the predicted AUC.
Summary
Although our knowledge of how to use
in vitro hematotoxicity data is in its
infancy, these examples illustrate the
progress that has been made by assessing
exactly what end point is needed, i.e., what
clinical end point should be predicted. The
realization that X-axis rather than Y-axis
end points are required for prediction was
in a sense a breakthrough that has made it
possible to propose clinical prediction
models for prospective evaluation and vali-
dation (1,88,129). A second important
breakthrough was our realization that pre-
dicting neutropenia actually involves the
prediction of four independent parameters
that, when taken together, describe clinical
neutropenia: severity at nadir, time to
nadir, duration ofnadir, and time to recov-
ery (84,88). Progress to date has been
exclusively in the prediction of the severity
ofneutropenia (88,129). We are not aware
that any progress that has been made in
predicting the other parameters from in
vitro data. Therefore, assays for CFU-GM
and other granulocyte progenitors can be
considered useful for investigating the cel-
lular mechanism underlying the severity of
reversible neutropenia and for determining
the level of toxicant exposure that will be
associated with grade 3 to 4 neutropenia.
The investigation of the other parameters
of neutropenia with in vitro assays should
be considered exploratory research rather
than established testing methodology.
Detailed Planning of in Vitro
Hematotoxicology Studies
This section briefly covers some of the
details that must be addressed when plan-
ning an in vitro hematotoxicology study
(84,87,88).
Analytical Chemistry
There is substantial variability in the
stability of different products under the
conditions of the in vitro bone marrow
assay, and subtle changes in the culture
conditions can dramatically alter in vitro
bioavailability. For example, many camp-
tothecins show large differences in stabil-
ity as a function ofthe species from which
the culture medium serum or albumin is
derived (196-200). These data show that
one cannot assume that chemically related
compounds have identical protein bind-
ing or stability in vitro and in vivo
(84,88). In addition, some toxicants bind
extensively to the cell culture containers
(201). Therefore, the absolute Cxt curve
of a test substance at the MTC and the
NOAEC under the conditions of the
bone marrow assay must be determined
chemically to determine the AUC.
Chemical analysis also provides dose con-
firmation. Highly misleading results can
be obtained when comparing two com-
pounds, one of which is chemically stable
and the other unstable, or one that is
highly soluble versus one that is partially
soluble. Unstable compounds and poorly
soluble compounds will appear less toxic
than equally potent stable or soluble com-
pounds simply because the former have
lower in vitro bioavailability than the lat-
ter. Concluding from in vitro data that a
compound is relatively nontoxic, when in
fact the data reflect an artifactual rapid
decomposition of compound in the cul-
ture medium, could cause serious under-
estimation of clinical hematotoxicity.
Thus, colony inhibition data must be
accompanied by sound analytical data
before one can make clinical predictions,
and analyte quantitation is an important
aspect of the ECVAM validation study of
the CFU-GM assay (1).
Duraton ofExposure
In vitro data should be obtained not only
for relevant concentrations but also for rel-
evant durations of exposure. The duration
of in vitro exposure to each test substance
should mimic as closely as possible the
duration of in vivo exposure. For example,
if in vivo exposure is multiday, brief in
vitro exposures are unnecessary. Likewise, if
the substance rapidly decomposes in vitro
then only brief in vitro exposures should be
used. In fact, prolonged in vitro exposures
to unstable compounds expose the cells to
potentially myelotoxic breakdown products
that may not be present in vivo. The effects
of decomposition on perceived toxicity
become magnified as the time of com-
pound exposure becomes much larger than
the time ofdecomposition.
When toxicant exposure is brief, it must
be decided whether to preexpose the
hematopoietic cells to cytokine, stimulating
their entry into the cell cycle, or to expose
the hematopoietic cells immediately after
isolation from the human tissue source.
Toxicants that show cell cycle-dependent
toxicity would be expected to show signifi-
cant differences in toxicity between the two
conditions. This is an important question of
experimental design that needs exploration.
Endogenous (Naturally Occurrin)
Antagonists and Protein Binding
ofToxicants
For maximized correlation between in vitro
and in vivo data, the in vitro assays must
take into account physiologic levels of
endogenous biochemicals that influence the
toxicity of the test compound. Obvious
examples ofendogenous antagonists include
pyrimidines and purines and their nucleo-
sides for toxicants that target nucleoside
and nucleic acid metabolism, and glu-
tathione and other nucleophiles for alkylat-
ing agents. There are also cotoxicants such
as molecular oxygen for free-radical gener-
ating compounds. The concentrations of
both antagonist and cotoxicants must be as
close as possible to in vivo levels.
The plasma proteins that bind
xenobiotics (albumin, a1-acid glycoprotein)
are another class of substances endogenous
to both the in vitro and in vivo testing envi-
ronments that introduce another source of
error during interpretation of in vitro data.
One cannot assume that a particular com-
pound will behave identically in plasma
from different species (such as from humans
in vivo but from bovine or equine sources
for in vitro assays), and the problem is espe-
cially significant for compounds that circu-
late tightly bound to carrier proteins. The
levels of these proteins in the culture
medium can dramatically affect the appar-
ent potency ofthe test substance via changes
in free (unbound) concentration of the
actual toxicant (84,88,196-203). However,
it is not necessary to add specific plasma
proteins to the culture medium for in vitro
hematotoxicity assays because results can be
corrected for plasma protein binding mea-
sured in other simpler in vitro systems (1).
It is best to compare several toxicants under
identical culture conditions to learn about
intrinsic differences in end-organ sensitivity
and then correct the in vitro data for differ-
ences in protein binding determined in
other assays. To facilitate in vivo extrapola-
tion of in vitro data, the concentration-inhi-
bition curve from bone marrow assays
should express percent of inhibition as a
function of free concentration ofxenobiotic
in the medium rather than total concentra-
tion. From these curves plus measurements
of free versus total concentrations in human
or animal plasma, it is possible to make
in vivo predictions from in vitro data.
Protoxicants and Metabolic
Activation
Although many toxicants are inactivated
by metabolism, some compounds are
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 549
R.E. PARCHMENT
metabolized to toxic species. Human bone
marrow stroma contains cytochrome P450s
(CYP450s) that can bioactivate several tox-
icants, including polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, benzene, and cyclophos-
phamide (92,204-210). However, the
metabolic capacity ofthe marrow stroma is
small compared to liver, and it cannot pro-
duce sufficient levels of metabolite to reli-
ably detect toxicity in the in vitro assays
(1,92). Several in vitro systems are available
for producing human CYP450 metabo-
lites: liver microsomes, liver slices, hepato-
cytes, and transgenic cell lines expressing
particular CYP450 isozymes. Hepatocytes
or transgenic cell lines expressing specific
CYP450s can be cocultured in the in vitro
assays as a physically separate cell layer
(92). Alternatively, stable metabolites can
be isolated and evaluated individually in
the in vitro assays.
The ECVAM validation study addresses
several issues related to the selection of
metabolizing systems and the in vitro study
of protoxicants (1). S-9 fractions, dog liver
microsomes, and rat liver microsomes are
commonly used to produce metabolites.
However, analysis of putative hematotoxic
metabolites should use species-specific
sources of metabolizing enzymes, i.e.,
human microsomes on human bone mar-
row or rat microsomes on rat marrow,
because of the potential for interspecies dif-
ferences in bioactivation (e.g., iododoxoru-
bicin (211)]. Xenogeneic combinations are
sometimes warranted to prove the species-
specific nature of certain toxicology prob-
lems or the lack of relevance of animal
toxicology findings to humans. In addition,
to exclude any contribution of metabolites
to hematotoxicity, they should be tested by
coexposure with the parent compound to
identify any synergism or antagonism that
might affect hematotoxicity.
Sources ofHuman
Hematopoietic Cells
Mononuclear cells and subpopulations like
CD34+ cells can be isolated from various
sources: remnant marrow from femur or
rib after surgeries, iliac crest aspirates from
volunteers, umbilical cord blood, and
peripheral blood leukocyte preparations
(31,32,39,48,53,64,70,117,150,155,178,
179,212-216). Bone marrow-derived prog-
enitors might be the most applicable to
human toxicology, but cord blood-derived
cells are more readily available for research
in many countries. Pharmacologic differ-
ences, if they exist, between hematopoietic
cells in adults versus cord blood may be
most pronounced after exposure to cell
cycle-dependent toxicants because these
populations of cells show substantial differ-
ences in cell cycle status after isolation
(217). One study that directly compared
the chemosensitivity ofhuman marrow and
cord blood CFU-GM did not find any dif-
ferences (218). In contrast, there are differ-
ences between marrow and cord blood
progenitors and between mobilized and sta-
tionary progenitors in terms of autocrine
cytokine stimulation, cell cycle status, and
susceptibility to cytomegalovirus toxicity
(150,217). Differences in cell cycle status
between cord blood and bone marrow
hematopoietic cells accentuate the need to
determine whether preexposure to cytokines
to stimulate entry into the cell cycle affects
the predictive accuracy of in vitro models
that use short duration ofexposure.
Thoughts on the Immediate
Future of in Vitro
Hematotoxicology
Staying Currentwith
Experimental Hematology
Experimental hematology is identifying
hematopoietic cell types faster than toxicol-
ogists can determine if they are targets of
toxicants. It cannot be assumed a priori
that any progenitor is a target of hemato-
toxicants, but one cannot afford to assume
that newly identified cell types are not tar-
gets and then be wrong. An efficient strat-
egy to determine which of these cell types
are targets is simply to determine which
ones show altered levels in toxicant-
exposed animals or patients with a time
course that is consistent with a direct toxi-
cant effect. Furthermore, a new progenitor
population in a preclinical species that is a
bona fide toxicant target but is not found
in human marrow would create a serious
toxicologic problem.
If mechanism-naive assays are
advantageous in regulatory science, it is
important to work toward the replacement
of clonogenic assays with new assays that
measure the rate of production of mature
blood cells by hematopoietic tissues rather
than by survival of progenitors. Kinetic
measurements of cell output by toxicant-
exposed progenitors would offer some
advantages over clonogenic assays. First, the
capability of the marrow to compensate for
the loss of up to 30 to 40% of its progeni-
tors via a hyperplastic response would be
detectable. Second, initial rates of mature
cell output by the exposed progenitor pop-
ulation could be analyzed sooner than
colony formation (3-4 days vs 14 days), so
efficiency and through-put would be
increased. Third, assays that could quantify
toxicant effects on the kinetics of mature
cell production have the capability of
detecting myelosuppression regardless of
whether it is caused by cytotoxicity. Such
an effect would be hard to detect and
quantify using clonogenic assays (smaller
colonies but no reduction in their number).
Nuanca in Daa Interpretaion
Colony-forming assays contain additional
information to colony size. One ofthese was
discussed above: the toxicant that causes
smaller colonies but does not decrease their
number. Consider this question: Ifthe result
of compound exposure is to inhibit the
development of the erythroid component in
CFU-GEMM colonies, should this be
scored as inhibition ofCFU-GEMM (which
it probably is not) or as inhibition ofan early
erythroid progenitor generated by the CFU-
GEMM? If the latter, would percent inhibi-
tion of BFU-E give the same estimate of
myelotoxicity as the percent reduction in the
CFU-GEMM that contains erythroid ele-
ments? In the design of studies to evaluate
these toxicants, it may be important to limit
the duration ofexposure to only a few hours
so that lineage-restricted progeny generated
by surviving CFU-GEMM are not exposed
to toxicant. Prolonged exposures would con-
fuse toxicity to CFU-GEMM with toxicity
to the progeny ofCFU-GEMM.
Predicting the NOAEL raises the issue
of the definition of NOAEL. Should the
NOAEL be defined only by a lack of
clinical symptoms and pathologic changes
or should it indicate a lack of cellular and
molecular changes as well? Defining the
NOAEL with ever more sensitive end
points, from tissue to cell to molecular
levels, does not account for the compen-
satory mechanisms that may provide for
continued health in spite of constant
exposure to xenobiotics. Should PELs for
a xenobiotic be based on altered gene
expression in the absence of any adverse
clinical effects? Rather, should it be con-
cluded that the indicator gene, although a
marker of exposure, must have some
threshold yet to be exceeded and that the
change does not indicate risk? The defini-
tion ofNOAEL is important in regulatory
science, especially as technology becomes
more sensitive at detecting minute changes
and more facile at expedited quests for
effects. These issues must be integrated
into validation studies of the NOAEC for
predicting the human NOAEL.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998550
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
Recommendations
for Research Support
Federal agencies can take the lead in
accomplishing the following goals that will
promote the validation, clinical accep-
tance, and regulatory usefulness of in vitro
hematotoxicology:
* After the ECVAM study (1) validates
the human CFU-GM assay for predict-
ing the toxicant exposure level that
causes grade 3 to 4 neutropenia, exam-
ine assays for the differentiated spectrum
of myeloid progenitors in the marrow
for predicting time to neutrophil nadir.
* Fund an evaluation of possible in vitro
assays and end points to predict the
duration of the neutrophil nadir and/or
the time to neutrophil recovery.
Currently, it is much easier to investigate
marrow toxicity than marrow recovery.
For example, there are no in vitro assays
for predicting the clinical efficacy of
cytokines used to stimulate hematopoi-
etic recovery. Research is needed to
know how to predict time to recovery,
which is likely related to predicting
irreversible hematotoxicity as well.
* Coordinate regulatory- and industry-
based surveys of human bone marrow
and cord blood uses and needs for in
vitro hematotoxicology and propose
solutions to obstacles that currently
limit the use ofhuman bone marrow in
these assays, which is the actual human
target tissue.
* Identify the NOAEC end point in the
CFU-GM assay and prove that CFU-
GM but not neutrophil counts
decrease by this amount in vivo at this
exposure level.
* Fund veterinary and clinical research to
identify what progenitor stage(s) in the
platelet and red blood cell lineages fluc-
tuates in concert with peripheral blood
platelet and erythrocyte levels.
* Fund an evaluation of all newly identi-
fied hematopoietic cell types defined by
in vitro assays and determine ifacute in
vivo exposure to hematotoxic xenobi-
otics causes a decrease in their bone
marrow levels, i.e., whether these newly
identified cell populations are frequent
targets for xenobiotics or not.
* Fund research into the replacement of
clonogenic assays with new in vitro assays
that quantify the rate of production of
mature blood cells by toxicant-exposed
hematopoietic cells.
Significance ofin Vitro
Hematotoxicology for Other
Alternative Toxicologies
There are substantial ethical, political,
financial, and regulatory pressures to
replace and refine animal toxicology with
alternative assays. Studies of the toxicant
on its actual human target tissues would
seem to be the best alternative. In vitro
hematotoxicology does this, and as a result
shows much promise for predicting clinical
hematotoxicity, especially neutropenia
caused by acute exposures. It provides an
opportunity to obtain human toxicology
and pharmacology information in the labo-
ratory setting and an experimental basis for
selecting an animal model for investigating
clinical hematotoxicity.
The in vitro assays ofxenobiotic effects
on human hematopoiesis can be viewed as
prototypes of future in vitro toxicology
assays that will reveal concepts and princi-
ples ofclinical prediction. The hierarchical
structure of stem cells and progenitors in
the hematopoietic system likely reflects
similar hierarchies in other renewing tis-
sues of the body, such as the gastrointesti-
nal mucosa. The emerging principles for
prediction described in this paper will be
applicable to toxicity in these other renew-
ing tissues once clonogenic assays for
epithelial progenitors are developed and
the colony-stimulating factors are avail-
able. However, it seems unlikely that what
is learned in predicting hematologic toxic-
ity will be ofmuch help in predicting toxi-
city to nonproliferative tissues such as the
nervous system; other end points and prin-
ciples of clinical prediction will be needed
for these more troublesome toxicities.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Gribaldo L, Bueren J, Deldar A, Hokland P, Meredith C,
Moneta D, Monesso P, Parchment R, Parent-Massin D,
Pessina A et al. The use of in vitro systems for evaluating hema-
totoxicity. ATLA 24:211-231 (1996).
2. Wu AM, Siminovitch L, Till JE, McCulloch EA. Evidence for
a relationship between mouse hemopoietic stem cells and cells
forming colonies in culture. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA
59:1209-1215 (1968).
3. Dexter TM, Allen TD, Lajtha LG. Conditions controlling the
proliferation of haemopoietic stem cells in vitro. J Cell Physiol
91:335-344 (1977).
4. Till JE, Price GB, Mak TW, McCulloch EA. Regulation of
blood cell differentiation. Fed Proc 34:2279-2284 (1975).
5. Pluznik DH, Sachs L. The cloning of normal "mast" cells in
tissue culture. J Cell Comp Physiol 66:319-324 (1965).
6. Bradley TR, Metcalf D. The growth of mouse bone marrow
cells in vitro. Aust J Exp Biol Med Sci 44:287-299 (1966).
7. Ichikawa Y, Pluznik DH, Sachs L. In vitro control of the devel-
opment of macrophage and granulocyte colonies. Proc NatI
Acad Sci USA 56:488-495 (1966).
8. Stephenson JR, Axelrad AA, McLeod DI, Schreeve MM.
Induction of colonies of hemoglobin-synthesizing cells by
erythropoietin in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 68:1542-1546
(1971).
9. Iscove NN, Sieber F. Erythroid progenitors in mouse bone mar-
row detected by macroscopic colony formation in culture. Exp
Hematol 3:32-43 (1975).
10. Hara H, Ogawa M. Erthropoietic precursors in mice with
phenylhydrazine-induced anemia. Am J Hematol 1:453-458
(1975).
11. Gregory CJ, Eaves AC. Human marrow cells capable of erythro-
poietic differentiation in vitro: definition ofthree erythroid colony
responses. Blood 49:855-864 (1977).
12. Clarke BJ, Housman D. Characterization ofan erythroid precursor
cell of high proliferative capacity in normal human peripheral
blood. Proc Nad Acad Sci USA 74:1105-1109 (1977).
13. Johnson GR, Metcalf D. Nature of cells forming erythroid
colonies in agar after stimulation by spleen conditioned medium.
J Cell PhysioT 94:243-252 (1978).
14. Koury MJ, Kost TA, Hankins WD, Krantz SB. Response of ery-
throid day 3 burst-forming units to endotoxin and erythropoietin.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 162:275-280 (1979).
15. Eliason JF, Van Zant G, Goldwasser E. The relationship of
hemoglobin synthesis to erythroid colony and burst formation.
Blood 53:935-945 (1979).
16. Wagemaker G, Peters MF, Bol SJ. Induction of erythropoietin
responsiveness in vitro by a distinct population ofbone marrow
cells. Cell Tissue Kinet 12:521-537 (1979).
17. Meytes D, Ortega JA, Shore NA, Dukes PP. Human erythroid
burst-promoting activity produced by phytohemagglutinin-
stimulated, radioresistant peripheral b ood mononuc ear cells.
Blood 54:1050-1057 (1979).
18. Nathan DG, Chess L, Hillman DG, Clarke B, Breard J, Merler
E, Housman DE. Human erythroid burst-forming unit: T-cell
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 551
R.E. PARCHMENT
requirement for proliferation in vitro. J Exp Med 147:324-339
(1978).
19. Sonoda Y, Maekawa T, Kuzuyama Y, Clark SC, Abe T.
Human interleukin-9 supports formation ofa subpopulation of
erythroid bursts that are responsive to interleukin-3. Am J
Hematol 41:84-91 (1992).
20. Metcalf D, MacDonald HR, Odartchenko N, Sordat B.
Growth of mouse megakaryocyte colonies in vitro. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 72:1744-1748 (1975).
21. NakeffA, Daniels-McQueen S. In vitro colony assay for a new
class of megakaryocyte precursor: colony-forming unit
megakaryocyte (CFU-M). Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 151:587-590
(1976).
22. Vainchenker W, Bouguet J, Guichard J, Breton-Gorius J.
Megakaryocyte colony formation from human bone marrow
precursors. Blood 54:940-945 (1979).
23. Williams N, Jackson H, Sheridan AP, Murphy MJ Jr, Elste A,
Moore MA. Regulation of megakaryopoiesis in long-term
murine bone marrow cultures. Blood 51:245-255 (1978).
24. Mei RL, Burstein SA. Megakaryocytic maturation in murine
long-term bone marrow culture: role of interleukin-6. Blood
78:1438-1447 (1991).
25. Erickson-Miller CL, Ji H, Parchment RE, Murphy MJ Jr.
Megakaryocyte colony-stimulating factor (Meg-CSF) is a
unique cytokine specific for the megakaryocyte lineage. Br J
Haematol 84:197-203 (1993).
26. Ogata K, Erickson-Miller CL, Nomura T, Abe K, Zhang Z,
Murphy MJ Jr. Effects of recombinant cytokines on murine
megakaryocyte colony formation in a serum-free fibrin clot cul-
ture system. Pathobiology 60:143-148 (1992).
27. Kaushansky K, Lok S, Holly RD, Broudy VC, Lin N, Bailey
MC, Forstrom JW, Buddle MM, Oort PJ, Hagen FS et al.
Promotion ofmegakaryocyte progenitor expansion and differenti-
ation by the c-mplligand thrombopoietin. Nature 369:568-571
(1994).
28. Kaushansky K. The mpl ligand: molecular and cellular biology
of the critical regulator of megakaryocyte development. Stem
Cells (Dayt) 12(Suppl 1):91-96 (1994).
29. Broudy VC, Lin NL, Kaushansky K. Thrombopoietin (c-mpl
ligand) acts synergistically with erythropoietin, stem cell factor,
and interleukin- 11 to enhance murine megakaryocyte colony
growth and increases megakaryocyte ploidy in vitro. Blood
85:1719-1726 (1995).
30. Methia N, Louache F, Vainchenker W, Wendling F.
Oligodeoxynucleotides antisense to the proto-oncogene c-mpl
specifically inhibit in vitro megakaryocytopoiesis. Blood
82:1395-1401 (1993).
31. Nishihira H, Toyoda Y, Miyazaki H, Kigasawa H, Ohsaki E.
Growth of macroscopic human megakaryocyte colonies from
cord blood in culture with recombinant human thrombopoi-
etin (c-mpl ligand) and the effects of gestational age on fre-
quency ofcolonies. Br J Haematol 92:23-28 (1996).
32. Zauli G, Vitale L, Brunelli MA, Bagnara GP. Prevalence of the
primitive megakaryocyte progenitors (BFU-meg) in adult
human peripheral blood. Exp Hematol 20:850-854 (1992).
33. Choi KW, Bloom AD. Cloning human lymphocytes in vitro.
Nature 227:171-173 (1970).
34. Klein AK, Dyck JA, Shimizu JA, Stitzel KA, Wilson FD, Cain
GR. Effect of continuous, whole-body gamma irradiation upon
canine lymphohematopoietic (CFU-GM, CFU-L) progenitors
and a possible hematopoietic regulatory population. Radiat Res
101:332-350 (1985).
35. Dorshkind K, Johnson A, Harrison Y, Landreth KS. A colony
assay system that detects B cell progenitors in fresh and cul-
tured bone marrow. J Immunol Methods 123:93-101 (1989).
36. Johnson GR, Metcalf D. Pure and mixed erythroid colony for-
mation in vitro stimulated by spleen conditioned medium with
no detectable erythropoietin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
74:3879-3882 (1997).
37. Metcalf D, Johnson GR, Mandel TE. Colony formation in
agar by multipotential hemopoietic cells. J Cell Physiol
98:401-420 (1979).
38. Williams N, Jackson H, Meyers P. Isolation of pluripotent
hemopoietic stem cells and clonable precursor cells of erythro-
cytes, granulocytes, macrophages and megakaryocytes from
mouse bone marrow. Exp Hematol 7:524-534 (1979).
39. Johnson GR. Colony formation in agar by adult bone marrow
multipotential hemopoietic cells. J Cell Physiol 103:371-383
(1980).
40. Nishi N, Nakahata T, Koike K, Takagi M, Naganuma K,
Akabane T. Induction ofmixed erythroid-megakaryocyte colonies
and bipotential blast cell colonies by recombinant human erythro-
poietin in serum-free culture. Blood 76:1330-1335 (1990).
41. Hara H, Ogawa M. Murine hemopoietic colonies in culture
containing normoblasts, macrophages, and megakaryocytes.
Am J Hematol 4:23-34 (1978).
42. Fauser AA, Messner HA. Identification of megakaryocytes,
macrophages, and eosinophils in colonies of human bone mar-
row containing neutrophilic granulocytes and erythroblasts.
Blood 53:1023-1027 (1979).
43. Bradley TR, Hodgson GS. Detection of primitive macrophage
progenitor cells in mouse bone marrow. Blood 54:1446-1450
(1979).
44. Baines P, Bol S, Rosendaal M. Characterization of a develop-
mentally early macrophage progenitor found in normal mouse
marrow. Br J Haematol 48:147-153 (1981).
45. Baines P, Lajmanovich A, Hollard D. Enrichment of high pro-
liferation potential colony forming cells from mouse marrow by
selecting low-density cells expressing receptors for wheat germ
agglutinin. Leuk Res 8:853-861 (1984).
46. Hodgson GS, Bradley TR, Radley JM. The organization of
hemopoietic tissue as inferred from the effects of 5-fluorouracil.
Exp Hematol 10:26-35 (1982).
47. Boswell HS, Wade PM Jr, Quesenberry PJ. Thy-1 antigen
expression by murine high-proliferative capacity hematopoietic
progenitor cells. I: Relation between sensitivity to depletion by
Thy-1 antibody and stem cell generation potential. J Immunol
133:2940-2949 (1984).
48. Leary AG, Ogawa M. Blast cell colony assay for umbilical cord
blood and adult bone marrow progenitors. Blood 69:953-956
(1987).
49. McNiece IK, Stewart FM, Deacon DM, Temeles DS, Zsebo
KM, Clark SC, Quesenberry PJ. Detection of a human CFC
with a high proliferative potential. Blood 74:609-612 (1989).
50. McNiece IK, Bertoncello I, Kriegler AB, Quesenberry PJ.
Colony-forming cells with high proliferative potential (HPP-
CFC). IntJ CellCloning 8:146-160 (1990).
51. Ploemacher RE, van der Sluijs JP, Voerman JS, Brons NH. An
in vitro limiting-dilution assay of long-term repopulating
hematopoietic stem cells in the mouse. Blood 74:2755-2763
(1989).
52. Sutherland HJ, Lansdorp PM, Henkelman DH, Eaves AC,
Eaves CJ. Functional characterization of individual human
hematopoietic stem cells cultured at limiting dilution on sup-
portive marrow stromal layers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
87:3584-3588 (1990).
53. Pettengell R, Luft T, Henschler R, Hows JM, Dexter TM,
Ryder D, Testa NG. Direct comparison by limiting dilution
analysis of long-term culture-initiatin cells in human bone
marrow, umbilical cord blood, and bfood stem cells. Blood
84:3653-3659 (1994).
54. Breems DA, Blokland EA, Neben S, Ploemacher RE.
Frequency analysis of human primitive haematopoietic stem
cell subsets using a cobblestone area forming cell assay.
Leukemia 8:1095-1104 (1994).
55. Eaves CJ, Sutherland HJ, Udomsakdi C, Lansdorp PM,
Szilvassy SJ, Fraser CC, Humphries RK, Barnett MJ, Phillips
GL, Eaves AC. The human hematopoietic stem cell in vitro
and in vivo. Blood Cells 18:301-307 (1992).
56. Lemieux ME, Rebel VI, Lansdorp PM, Eaves CJ.
Characterization and purification of a primitive hematopoietic
cell type in adult mouse marrow capable oflymphomyeloid dif-
ferentiation in long-term marrow switch cultures. Blood
86:1339-1347 (1995).
552 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
57. Ploemacher RE, Brons RH. Separation of CFU-S from primi-
tive cells responsible for reconstitution of the bone marrow
hemopoietic stem cell compartment following irradiation: evi-
dence for a pre-CFU-S cell. Exp Hematol 17:263-266 (1989).
58. Murray L, DiGiusto D, Chen B, Chen S, Combs J, Conti A,
Galy A, Negrin R, Tricot G, Tsukamoto A. Analysis of human
hematopoietic stem cell populations. Blood Cells 20:364-369
(1994).
59. Orlic D, Fischer R, Nishikawa S, Nienhuis AW, Bodine DM.
Purification and characterization of heterogeneous pluripotent
hematopoietic stem cell populations expressing high levels ofc-
kitreceptor. Blood 82:762-770 (1993).
60. Orlic D, Anderson S, Bodine DM. Biological properties ofsub-
populations ofpluripotent hematopoietic stem cells enriched by
elutriation and flow cytometry. Blood Cells 20:107-117 (1994).
61. Watt SM, Visser JW. Recent advances in the growth and isola-
tion of primitive human haemopoietic progenitor cells. Cell
Prolif25:263-297 (1992).
62. Zijlmans JM, Visser JW, Kleiverda K, Kluin PM, Willemze R,
Fibbe WE. Modification of rhodamine staining allows identifi-
cation of hematopoietic stem cells with preferential short-term
or long-term bone marrow-repopulating ability. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 92:8901-8905 (1995).
63. Berardi AC, Wang A, Levine JD, Lopez P, Scadden DT.
Functional isolation and characterization ofhuman hematopoi-
etic stem cells. Science 267:104-108 (1995).
64. Bungart B, Loeffler M, Goris H, Dontje B, Diehl V, NijhofW.
Differential effects of recombinant human colony stimulating
factor (rh G-CSF) on stem cells in marrow, spleen and periph-
eral blood in mice. BrJ Haematol 76:174-179 (1990).
65. Friedenstein AJ, Chailakhyan RK, Latsinik NV, Panasyuk AF,
Keiliss-Borok IV. Stromal cells responsible for transferring the
microenvironment of the hemopoietic tissues. Cloning in vitro
and retransplantation in vivo. Transplantation 17:331-340
(1974).
66. Van Den Heuvel R, Schoeters G, Leppens H, Vanderborght 0.
Stromal cells in long-term cultures of liver, spleen, and bone
marrow at different developmental ages have different capaci-
ties to maintain GM-CFC proliferation. Exp Hematol
19:115-121 (1991).
67. Aizawa S, Yaguchi M, Nakano M, Toyama K, Inokuchi S, Imai
T, Yasuda M, Nabeshima R, Handa H. Hematopoietic sup-
portive function of human bone marrow stromal cell lines
established by a recombinant SV40-adenovirus vector. Exp
Hematol 22:482-487 (1994).
68. Friedenstein AJ, Deriglasova UF, Kulagina NN, Panasuk AF,
Rudakowa SF, Luria EA, Ruadkow IA. Precursors for fibroblasts
in different populations ofhematopoietic cells as detected by the
in vitro colony assay method. Exp Hematol 2:83-92 (1974).
69. Dexter TM. Haemopoiesis in long-term bone marrow cultures.
A review. Acta Haematol 62:299-305 (1979).
70. Gartner S, Kaplan HS. Long-term culture ofhuman bone mar-
row cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77:4756-4759 (1980).
71. Johnson A, Dorshkind K. Stromal cells in myeloid and lym-
phoid long-term bone marrow cultures can support multiple
emopoietic lineages and modulate their production of hemo-
poietic growth factors. Blood 68:1348-1354 (1986).
72. Wang TY, Brennan JK, Wu JH. Multilineal hematopoiesis in a
three-dimensional murine long-term bone marrow culture. Exp
Hematol 23:26-32 (1995).
73. Whitlock CA, Witte ON. Long-term culture ofB lymphocytes
and their precursors from murine bone marrow. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 79:3608-3612 (1982).
74. Nagasawa R, Kanagawa 0, Tittle TV, Chiller JM. In vivo mat-
uration of pre-B cells derived from long-term cultured bone
marrow. J Immunol 135:965-972 (1985).
75. Whitlock CA, Witte ON. Long-term culture of murine bone
marrow precursors of B lymphocytes. Methods Enzymol
150:275-286 (1987).
76. Dorshkind K. In vitro differentiation of B lymphocytes from
primitive hemopoietic precursors present in long-term bone
marrow cultures. J Immunol 136:422-429 (1986).
77. Collins LS, Dorshkind K. A stromal cell line from myeloid
long-term bone marrow cultures can support myelopoiesis and
B lymphopoiesis. J Immunol 138:1082-1087 (1987).
78. Greenberg PL, Schrier SL. Clinical utility of in vitro evaluation
ofgranulopoiesis. Annu Rev Med 25:269-278 (1974).
79. Marsh JC. Chemical toxicity of the granulocyte. Environ
Health Perspect 39:71-78 (1981).
80. Boorman GA, Luster MI, Dean JH, Campbell ML. Assessment
of myelotoxicity caused by environmental chemicals. Environ
Health Perspect 43:129-135 (1982).
81. Deldar A, Lewis H, Bloom J, Weiss L. Reproducible cloning
assays for in vitro growth of canine hematopoietic progenitor
cells and their potential applications in investigative hematotox-
icity. AmJ Vet Res 49:1393-1401 (1988).
82. Naughton BA, Sibanda B, Azar L, San Roman J. Differential
effects of drugs upon hematopoiesis can be assessed in long-
term bone marrow cultures established on nylon screens. Proc
Soc Exp Biol Med 199:481-490 (1992).
83. Noble C, Sina JF. Usefulness of the in vitro bone marrow
colony-forming assay in cellular toxicology. In Vitro Toxicol
6:187-195 (1993).
84. Parchment RE, Huang M, Erickson-Miller CL. Roles for in
vitro myelotoxicity tests in preclinical drug development and
clinical trial planning. Toxicol Pathol 21:241-250 (1993).
85. Deldar A, Stevens CE. Development and application of in vitro
models of hematopoiesis to drug development. Toxicol Pathol
21:231-240 (1993).
86. Deldar A. Drug-induced blood disorders: review of patho-
genetic mechanisms and utilisation ofbone marrow cell culture
technology as an investigative approach. Curr Top Vet Res
1:83-101 (1994).
87. Deldar A, Parchment RE. Preclinical risk assessment for hema-
totoxicity: animal models and in vitro systems. In:
Comprehensive Toxicology (Sipes GI, McQueen CA, Gandolfi
AJ, eds). Vol 4: Toxicology of the Hematopoietic System
(Bloom JC, ed). New York:Pergamon, 1997;303-320.
88. Parchment RE, Murphy MJ Jr. Human hematopoietic stem
cells: laboratory assessment and response to toxic injury. In:
Comprehensive Toxicology (Sipes GI, McQueen CA, Gandolfi
AJ, eds). Vol 4: Toxicology of the Hematopoietic System
(Bloom JC, ed). New York:Pergamon, 1997;335-362.
89. Treleaven J, Barrett J. Drugs and the bone marrow. Br J Hosp
Med 44:245-250 (1990).
90. Greenberger JS. Toxic effects on the hematopoietic microenvi-
ronment. Exp Hematol 19:1101-1109 (1991).
91. Young GA, Croaker G, Vincent PC, Forrest P, Morris TC.
The CFU-C assay in patients with neutropenia and, in particu-
lar, drug associated neutropenia. Clin Lab Haematol
9:245-253 (1987).
92. Naughton BA, San Roman J, Sibanda B, Weintraub JP, Kamali
V. Stereotypic culture systems for liver and bone marrow: evi-
dence for the development ofcuntional tissue in vitro and follow-
ing implantation in vivo. Biotechnol Bioeng 43:810-825 (1994).
93. B oom JC. Introduction to hematotoxicology. In:
Comprehensive Toxicology (Sipes GI, McQueen CA, Gandolfi
AJ, eds). Vol 4: Toxicology of the Hematopoietic System
(Bloom JC, ed). New York:Pergamon, 1997;1-10.
94. Levitt LJ, Quesenberry PJ. The effect of lithium on murine
hematopoiesis in a liquid culture system. N Engl J Med
302:713-719 (1980).
95. Chatelain C, Burstein SA, Harker LA. Lithium enhancement
of megakaryocytopoiesis in culture: mediation via accessory
marrow cells. Blood 62:172-176 (1983).
96. Boggs DR, Joyce RA. The hematopoietic effects of lithium.
Semin Hematol 20:129-138 (1983).
97. Silberstein DS, Austen KF, Owen WF Jr. Hemopoietins for
eosinophils. Glycoprotein hormones that regulate the develop-
ment of inflammation in eosinophilia-associated disease.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 3:511-533 (1989).
98. Owen WF Jr, Petersen J, Sheff DM, Folkerth RD, Anderson
RJ, Corson JM, Sheffer AL, Austen KF. Hypodense eosinophils
and interleukin 5 activity in the blood of patients with the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 553
R.E. PARCHMENT
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
87:8647-8651 (1990).
99. Yamaoka KA, Miyasaka N, Inuo G, Saito I, Kolb JP, Fujita K,
Kashiwazaki S. 1,1 '-Ethylidenebis(tryptophan) (Peak E)
induces functional activation of human eosinophils and inter-
leukin 5 production from T lymphocytes: association of
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome with a L-tryptophan contami-
nant. J Clin Immunol 14:50-60 (1994).
100. Gallamini A, Carbone A, Lista P, Cavallero G, Reato G,
Fruttero A, Novero D, Asnaghi G, di Celle PF, Foa R. Intestinal
T-cell lymphoma with massive tissue and blood eosinophilia
mediated by IL-5. Leuk Lymphoma 17:155-161 (1995).
101. Macdonald D, Gordon AA, Kajitani H, Enokihara H, Barrett
AJ. Interleukin-2 treatment-associated eosinophilia is mediated
by interleukin-5 production. Br J Haematol 76:168-173
(1990).
102. Dale DC, Fauci AS, Guerry D IV, Wolff SM. Comparison of
agents producing a neutrophilic leukocytosis in man: hydrocor-
tisone, prednisone, endotoxin, and etiocholanolone. J Clin
Invest 56:808-813 (1975).
103. Grillot-Courvalin C, Vinci G, Tsapis A, Dokhelar MC,
Vainchenker W, Brouet JC. The syndrome of T8 hyperlym-
phocytosis: variation in phenotype and cytotoxic activities of
granular cells and evaluation of their role in associated neu-
tropenia. Blood 69:1204-1210 (1987).
104. van der Veen JP, Goldschmeding R, Miedema F, Smit JW,
Melief CJ, von dem Borne AE. K-cell lymphocytosis/neutrope-
nia syndrome: the neutropenia is not caused by autoimmunity.
BrJ Haematol 64:777-787 (1986).
105. Smith JG, Smith MA, James I, Blundell E, Maddison PJ.
Inhibition of CFU-GM by prostaglandins in a case of chronic
T-cell lymphocytosis and neutropenia. Br J Haematol
73:148-151 (1989).
106. Greenberg P, Bax I, Mara B, Schrier S. Alterations of granu-
lopoiesis following chemotherapy. Blood 44:375-383 (1974).
107. Bruce WR, Meeker BE, Valeriote FA. Comparison ofthe sensi-
tivity of normal hematopoietic and transplanted lymphoma
colony-forming cells to chemotherapeutic agents administered
in vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 37:233-245 (1966).
108. Valeriote F, van Putten L. Proliferation-dependent cytotoxicity
of anticancer agents: a review. Cancer Res 35:2619-2630
(1975).
109. Gallini R, Hendry JH, Molineux G, Testa NG. The effect of
low dose rate on recovery ofhemopoietic and stromal progeni-
tor cells in gamma-irradiated mouse bone marrow. Radiat Res
115:481-487 (1988).
110. Horikoshi A, Murphy MJ Jr. Comparative effects of
chemotherapeutic drugs on human and murine hematopoietic
progenitors in vitro. Chemotherapy 28:480-501 (1982).
111. Qi DY, Hendry JH, Testa NG. Interactions in recovery and in
residual injury from sequential treatments of mouse haemopoi-
etic and stromal marrow cell populations, using X-rays,
cyclophosphamide and busulphan. Radiother Oncol 20:46-52
(1991).
112. Seed TM, Kaspar LV. Changing patterns of radiosensitivity of
hematopoietic progenitors from chronically irradiated dogs
prone either to aplastic anemia or to myeloproliferative disease.
Leuk Res 14:299-307 (1990).
113. Pessina A, Neri MG, Muschiato A, Raimondi A. Inhibition of
granulocytic-macrophagic precursor cells (CFU-C) by heat-
labile enterotoxin (LT) produced by Escherichia coli. Biomed
Pharmacother 37:447-452 (1983).
114. Parent-Massin D, Thouvenot D. In vitro study of pesticide
hematotoxicity in human and rat progenitors. J Pharmacol
Toxicol Methods 30:203-207 (1993).
115. Parent-Massin D, Fuselier R, Thouvenot D. In vitro toxicity of
trichothecenes on human haematopoietic progenitors. Food
Addit Contam 11:441-447 (1994).
116. Inoue T, Tsushita K, Itoh T, Ogura M, Hotta T, Saneyoshi M,
Yoshida S, Saitoh H, Tomoda Y, Nagai Y. In vitro bone marrow
toxicity ofnucleoside analogs against human immunodeficiency
virus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33:57-579 (1989).
117. Fink FM, Maurer-Dengg K, Fritsch G, Mann G, Zoubek A,
Falk M, Gadner H. Recombinant human granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor in septic neutropenic
pediatric cancer patients: detection ofcirculating hematopoietic
precursor cells correlates with rapid granulocyte recovery. Med
Pediatr Oncol 25:365-371 (1995).
118. Wittels B. Bone marrow biopsy changes following chemother-
apy for acute leukemia. Am J Surg Pathol 4:35-142 (1980).
119. Schurig JE, Schlein A, Florczyk AP, Farwell AR, Bradner WT.
Animal models for evaluating the myelosuppressive effects of
cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Exp Hematol 13(Suppl
16):101-105 (1985).
120. Ventura GJ, Reading CL, Hester JP, Vadhan-Raj S.
Circulating myeloid progenitor cell kinetics during hematologic
recovery from chemotherapy and subsequent recombinant
human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
administration. Acta Haematol 84:175-181 (1990).
121. Ema H, Suda T, Sakamoto S, Tomonaga T, Tsunoda J, Muroi
K, Komatsu N, Miwa A, Ohsaka A, Yoshida M et al. Effects of
the in vivo administration of recombinant human granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor following cytotoxic chemotherapy on
granulocytic precursors in patients with malignant lymphoma.
Jpn J Cancer Res 80:577-582 (1989).
122. Ponassi A, Morra L, Mela GS, Caristo G, Parodi GB, Sacchetti
C. Correlation between blood granulocyte progenitor cells and
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. A tentative pathophysiological
subgrouping of neutropenic and neutrophilic patients. Biomed
Pharmacother 37:293-297 (1983).
123. Mukai J, Shimizu E, Ogura T. Granulocyte-colony-stimulating
factor enhances the circulating hematopoietic progenitors in
lung cancer patients treated wit cisplatin-containing regimens.
Jpn J Cancer Res 83:746-753 (1992).
124. Neelis KJ, Dubbelman YD, Luo QL, Thomas GR, Eaton DL,
Wagemaker G. Simultaneous administration of TPO and G-
CSF after cytoreductive treatment of rhesus monkeys prevents
thrombocytopenia, accelerates platelet and red cell reconstitu-
tion, alleviates neutropenia, and promotes the recovery of
immature bone marrow cells. Exp Hematol 25:1084-1093
(1997).
125. Du DL, Volpe DA, Grieshaber CK, Murphy MJ Jr. Comparative
toxicity of fostriecin, hepsulfam and pyrazine diazohydroxide to
human and murine hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro. Invest
New Drugs 9:149-157 (1991).
126. Hendricks CB, Grochow LB, Rowinsky EK, Forastiere AA,
McGuire WP, Ettinger DS, Sartorius S, Lubejko B, Donehower
RC. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of hepsulfam (NSC
329680). Cancer Res 51:5781-5785 (1991).
127. Volpe DA, Du DL, Zurlo MG, Mongelli N, Murphy MJ Jr.
Comparative in vitro myelotoxicity of FCE 24517, a
distamycin derivative, to human, canine and murine
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Invest New Drugs 10:255-261
(1992).
128. Volpe DA, Du DL, Grieshaber CK, Murphy MJ Jr. In vitro
characterization of the myelotoxicity of cyclopentenyl cytosine.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 34:103-108 (1994).
129. Parchment RE, Volpe DA, LoRusso PM, Erickson-Miller CL,
Murphy MJ Jr, Grieshaber CK. In vivo-in vitro correlation of
myelotoxicity of 9-methoxypyrazoloacridine (NSC-366 140,
PD1 15934) to myeloid and erythroid hematopoietic progeni-
tors from human, murine, and canine marrow. J Nati Cancer
Inst 86:273-280 (1994).
130. Volpe DA, Cole K, Sandeen MA, Kohn EC. In vitro and in
vivo myelotoxicity ofCAI to human and murine hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Am J Hematol 50:277-282 (1995).
131. Du DL, Volpe DA, Grieshaber CK, Murphy MJ Jr. Effects of
L-phenylalanine mustard and L-buthionine sulfoximine on
murine and human hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro.
Cancer Res 50:4038-4043 (1990).
132. Smith AC, Liao JT, Page JG, Wientjes MG, Grieshaber CK.
Pharmacokinetics of buthionine sulfoximine (NSC 326231)
and its effect on melphalan-induced toxicity in mice. Cancer
Res 49:5385-5391 (1989).
554 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 - April 1998
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
133. Pressacco J, Erlichman C. Combination studies with 3'-azido-
3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) plus ICI D1694. Cytotoxic and bio-
chemical effects. Biochem Pharmacol 46:1989-1997 (1993).
134. Pressacco J, Hedley DW, Erlichman C. ICI D1694 and idox-
uridine: a synergistic antitumor combination. Cancer Res
54:3772-3778 (1994).
135. Kalechman Y, Sotnik-Barkai I, Albeck M, Sredni B. Protection
of bone marrow stromal cells from the toxic effects of
cyclophosphamide in vivo and ofASTA-Z 7557 and etoposide
in vitro by ammonium trichloro(dioxyethylene-aO')tellurate
(AS101). Cancer Res 53:1838-1844 (1993).
136. Kalechman Y, Rushkin G, Nerubay J, Albeck M, Sredni B.
Effect of the immunomodulator AS101 on chemotherapy-
induced multilineage myelosuppression, thrombocytopenia,
and anemia in mice. Exp Hematol 23:1358-1366 (1995).
137. Walker RE, Parker RI, Kovacs JA, Masur H, Lane HC,
Carleton S, Kirk LE, Gralnick HR, Fauci AS. Anemia and ery-
thropoiesis in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and Kaposi sarcoma treated with zidovudine.
Ann Intern Med 108:372-376 (1988).
138. Richman DD, Fischl MA, Grieco MH, Gottlieb MS, Volberding
PA, Laskin OL, Leedom JM, Groopman JE, Mildvan D, Hirsch
MS et al. The toxicity ofazidothymidine (AZT) in the treatment
of patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex. A double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. N Engl J Med 317:192-197
(1987).
139. Dainiak N, Worthington M, Riordan MA, Kreczko S,
Goldman L. 3'-Azido-3 -deoxythymidine (AZT) inhibits pro-
liferation in vitro ofhuman haematopoietic progenitor cells. Br
J Haematol 69:299-304 (1988).
140. Morse GD, Olson J, Portmore A, Taylor C, Plank C,
Reichman RC. Pharmacokinetics of orally administered
zidovudine among patients with hemophilia and asymptomatic
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Antiviral Res
11:57-65 (1989).
141. Bhalla K, Birkhofer M, Grant S, Graham G. The effect of
recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulat-
ing factor (rGM-CSF) on 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT)-
mediated biochemical and cytotoxic effects on normal human
myeloid progenitor cells. Exp Hematol 17:17-20 (1989).
142. Balis FM, Pizzo PA, Eddy J, Wilfert C, McKinney R, Scott G,
Murphy RF, Jarosinski PF, Falloon J, Poplack DG.
Pharmacokinetics of zidovudine administered intravenously
and orally in children with human immunodeficiency virus
infection. J Pediatr 114:880-884 (1989).
143. Collins JM, Unadkat JD. Clinical pharmacokinetics of zidovu-
dine. An overview ofcurrent data. Clin Pharmacokinet 17:1-9
(1989).
144. Ganser A, Greher J, Volkers B, Staszewski S, Hoelzer D.
Inhibitory effect of azidothymidine, 2'-3'-dideoxyadenosine,
and 2'-3'-dideoxycytidine on in vitro growth of hematopoietic
progenitor cells from normal persons and from patients with
AIDS. Exp Hematol 17:321-325 (1989).
145. Du DL, Volpe DA, Grieshaber CK, Murphy MJ Jr. In vitro
myelotoxicity of 2',3'-dideoxynucleosides on human hematopoi-
etic progenitor cells. Exp Hematol 18:832-836 (1990).
146. Irvine AE, Morris TC, Kelly GJ, McCracken N. Ticarcillin-
induced neutropenia corroborated by in vitro CFU-C toxicity.
Acta Haematol 70:364-368 (1983).
147. Volpe DA, Du DL, Verhoef V, Murphy MJ Jr. Myelotoxicity
ofrifabutin and 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine, alone and in com-
bination, to human hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro.
Pathobiology 61:77-82 (1993).
148. Haworth C, Morris-Jones PH, Testa NG. Long-term bone-
marrow damage in children treated for ALL: evidence from in
vitro colony assays (GM-CFC and CFUF). Br J Cancer
46:918-923 (1982).
149. Jacobsen SE, Keller JR, Ruscetti FW, Kondaiah P, Roberts AB,
Falk L.A. Bidirectional effects of transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) on colony-stimulating factor-induced human
myelopoiesis in vitro: differential effects of distinct TGF-beta
isoforms. Blood 78:2239-2247 (1991).
150. Piacibello W, Ferrero D, Sanavio F, Badoni R, Stacchini A,
Severino A, Aglietta M. Responsiveness of highly enriched CFU-
GM subpopulations from bone marrow, peripheral blood, and
cord blood to hemopoietic growth inhibitors. Exp Hematol
19:1084-1089 (1991).
151. Ruscetti FW, Dubois C, Falk LA, Jacobsen SE, Sing G, Longo
DL, Wiltrout RH, Keller JR. In vivo and in vitro effects ofTGF-
beta 1 on normal and neoplastic haemopoiesis. Ciba Found Symp
157:212-227 (1991).
152. Caux C, Moreau I, Saeland S, Banchereau J. Interferon-gamma
enhances factor-dependent myeloid proliferation of human
CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells. Blood 79:2628-2635
(1992).
153. Broxmeyer HE, Lu L, Platzer E, Juliano L, Rubin BY.
Comparative analysis ofthe influences ofhuman gamma, alpha
and beta interferons on human multipotential (CFU-GEMM),
erythroid (BFU-E) and granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM)
progenitor cells. J Immunol 131:1300-1305 (1983).
154. Cashman JD, Eaves AC, Raines EW, Ross R, Eaves CJ.
Mechanisms that regulate the cell cycle status of very primitive
hematopoietic cells in long-term human marrow cultures. I:
Stimulatory role ofa variety ofmesenchymal cell activators and
inhibitory role ofTGF-beta. Blood 75:96-101 (1990).
155. Strife A, Lambek C, Perez A, Darzynkiewicz Z, Skierski J, Gulati
S, HaleyJD, ten Dijke P, Iwata KK, Clarkson BD. The effects of
transforming growth factor beta 3 on the growth of highly
enriched hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from normal
human bone marrow and peripheral blood. Cancer Res
51:4828-4836 (1991).
156. Bursuker I, Neddermann KM, Petty BA, Schacter B, Spitalny
GL, Tepper MA, Pasternak RD. In vivo regulation of hemo-
poiesis by transforming growth factor beta 1: stimulation ofGM-
CSF- and M-CSF-dependent murine bone marrow precursors.
Exp Hematol 20:431-435 (1992).
157. Hargis JB, La Russa VF, Redmond J, Kessler SW, Wright DG.
Agranulocytosis associated with Mexican aspirin (dipyrone): evi-
dence for an autoimmune mechanism affecting multipotential
hematopoietic progenitors. Am J Hematol 31:213-215 (1989).
158. Hauser SP, Udupa KB, Lipschitz DA. Effects of ceftazidime, a
betalactam antibiotic, on murine haemopoiesis in vitro. Br J
Haematol 86:733-739 (1994).
159. Stojanovic N, Ruvidic R, Jovcic G, Mijovic A. Drug-induced
agranulocytosis: bone marrow granulocytic progenitor cells.
Biomed Pharmacother 44:181-184 (1990).
160. Parmentier C, Tchernia G, Subtil E, Diakhate L, Morardet N. In
vitro medullary granulocytic progenitor (CFUc) cultures from 6
cases ofgranulocytopenias. ScandJ Haematol 21:19-23 (1978).
161. Pisciotta AV, Konings SA, Ciesemier LL, Cronkite CE,
Lieberman JA. Cytotoxic activity in serum ofpatients with cloza-
pine-induced agranulocytosis. J Lab Clin Med 119:254-266
(1992).
162. Pisciotta AV, Konings SA, Ciesemier LL, Cronkite CE,
Lieberman JA On the possible mechanisms and predictability of
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis. Drug Saf 7(Suppl 1):33-44
(1992).
163. Levitt LJ. Chlorpropamide-induced pure white cell aplasia. Blood
69:394-400 (1987).
164. Parent-Massin DM, Sensebe L, Leglise MC, Guern G, Berthou
C, Riche C, Abgrall JF. Relevance of in vitro studies of drug-
induced agranulocytosis. Report of 14 cases. Drug Saf9:463-469
(1993).
165. Gerson SL, Arce C, Meltzer HY. N-desmethylclozapine: a clozap-
ine metabolite that.suppresses haemopoiesis. Br J Haematol
86:555-561 (1994). 3
166. Aymard JP, Rouveix B, Ferry R, Janot C, May T, Legras B, Streiff
F. Amodiaquine-induced agranulocytosis: report ofa case with in
vitro studies of granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cells. Acta
Haematol 82:40-42 (1989).
167. Aymard JP, Wioland C, Ferry R, Netter P, Streiff F. The in vitro
effect of amodiaquine on bone marrow granulocyte-macrophage
progenitor cells Wrom normal subjects. Fundam Clin Pharmacol
6:1-4 (1992).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 555
R.E. PARCHMENT
168. Ono K, Kurohara K, Yoshihara M, Shimamoto Y, Yamaguchi
M. Agranulocytosis caused by ticlopidine and its mechanism.
Am J Hematol 37:239-242 (1991).
169. Humphrey CA, French A, Morris TC. Prospective in vitro test-
ing for drug-induced neutropenia in a patient requiring anti-
malarial prophylaxis: confirmation of findings on exposure of
patient to drug. Clin Lab Haematol 12:31-36 (1990).
170. Schreml W, Lohrmann HP. No effects of levamisole on cyto-
toxic drug-induced changes of human granulopoiesis. Blut
38:331-336 (1979).
171. Sperner-Unterweger B, Gaggl S, Fleischhacker WW, Barnas
C, Herold M, Geissler D. Effects of clozapine on
hematopoiesis and the cytokine system. Biol Psychiatry
34:536-543 (1993).
172. Fibbe WE, Claas FH, Van der Star-Dijkstra W, Schaafsma
MR, Meyboom RH, Falkenburg JH. Agranulocytosis induced
by propylthiouracil: evidence of a drug dependent antibody
reacting with granulocytes, monocytes and haematopoietic
progenitor cells. Br J Haematol 64:363-373 (1986).
173. Bloom JC, Thiem PA, Sellers TS, Deldar A, Lewis HB.
Cephalosporin-induced immune cytopenia in the dog: demon-
stration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil-, and platelet-associated
IgG following treatment with cefazedone. Am J Hematol
28:71-78 (1988).
174. Kobashi H, Adachi T, Tsubota T, Asano K, Fukai M, Namba
J, Izumi K, Hoshijima T, Miura H, Sezaki T. The role ofdrugs
and lymphocytes in granulocyte-macrophage colony formation
in patients with drug induced agranu ocytosis [in Japanese].
Rinsho Ketsueki 30:282-288 (1989).
175. Matsuzaki M, Tokioka T, Suga K, Sueoka E, Ono K, Sano M,
Shimamoto Y, Yamaguchi M. Phenytoin induced agranulocy-
tosis: direct and T cell-mediated mechanisms [in Japanese].
Rinsho Ketsueki 31:474-478 (1990).
176. Douer D, Eisenstein Z. Methimazole-induced agranulocytosis:
growth inhibition of myeloid progenitor cells by the patient's
serum. EurJ Haematol 40:91-94 (1988).
177. Pessina A, Neri MG, Muschiato A, Mineo E, Cocuzza G. Effect
offluoroquinolones on the in-vitro proliferation ofmyeloid pre-
cursor cells. J Antimicrob Chemother 24:203-208 (1989).
178. Deldar A, House RV, Wierda D. Bone marrow colony-forming
assays. Methods Immunotoxicol 1:227-250 (1995).
179. Volpe DA, Du DL, Pohl KP, Campbell JP, Murphy MJ Jr.
Utility ofhuman bone marrow obtained incidental to orthope-
dic surgery for hematopoietic clonal assays. Pathobiology
59:53-56 (1991).
180. Du DL, Volpe DA, Murphy MJ Jr. Microcapillary clonogenic
assays for human marrow hematopoietic progenitor cells. Int J
Cell Cloning 7:303-313 (1989).
181. Meijne EI, Ploemacher RE, Vos 0, Huiskamp R The effects of
graded doses of 1 MeV fission neutrons or X rays on the murine
hematopoietic stroma. Radiat Res 131:302-308 (1992).
182. Xu CX, Hendry JH, Testa NG. The response of stromal prog-
enitor cells in mouse marrow to graded repeated doses ofX rays
or neutrons. Radiat Res 96:82-89 (1983).
183. Klein AK, Rosenblatt LS, Stitzel KA, Greenberg B, Woo L. In
vitro radiation response studies on bone marrow fibroblasts
(CFU-F) obtained from normal and chronically irradiated
dogs. Leuk Res 8:473-481 (1984).
184. Hendry JH, Wang SB, Testa NG. Greater sparing of stromal
progenitor cells than ofhaemopoietic stemce- s in gamma-irra-
diated mouse marrow using low dose-rates. Biomed
Pharmacother 38:356-358 (1984).
185. Zhu H, Li Y, Trush MA. Charactprization of benzo[a]pyrene
quinone-induced toxicity to primary cultured bone marrow
stromal cells from DBA/2 mice: potential role ofmitochondrial
dysfunction. Toxicol AppI Pharmacol 130:108-120 (1995).
186. Abraham NG, Bucher D, Niranjan U, Brown AC, Lutton JD,
Distenfeld A, Ahmed T, Levere RD. Microenvironmental toxi-
city of azidothymidine: partial sparing with hemin. Blood
74:139-144 (1989).
187. Ben-Ishay Z, Prindull G, Sharon S, Borenstein A. Effects of
chemotherapy on bone marrow stroma in mice with acute
myelogenous leukemia. Correlation with CFU-C and CFU-D.
Leuk Res 9:1059-1067 (1985).
188. Gidali J, Istvan E, Feher I. Long-term perturbation of hemo-
poiesis after moderate damage to stem cells. Exp Hematol
13:647-651 (1985).
189. Domenech J, Gihana E, Dayan A, Truglio D, Linassier C,
Desbois I, Lamagnere JP, Colombat P, Binet C. Haemopoiesis
of transplanted patients with autologous marrows assessed by
long-term marrow culture. Br J Haematol 88:488-496 (1994).
190. Betticher DC, Huxol H, Muller R, Speck B, Nissen C. Colony
growth in cultures from bone marrow and peripheral blood
after curative treatment for leukemia and severe aplastic ane-
mia. Exp Hematol 21:1517-1521 (1993).
191. Chang J, Geary CG, Testa NG. Long-term bone marrow dam-
age after chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia does not
improve with time. Br J Haematol 75:68-72 (1990).
192. Radford JA, Testa NG, Crowther D. The long-term effects of
MVPP chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease on bone marrow
function. Br J Cancer 62:127-132 (1990).
193. Grande T, Gaitan S, Tejero C, Bueren JA. Residual
haematopoietic damage in adult and 8-day-old mice exposed to
7 Gy ofX-rays. Int J Radiat Biol 63:59-67 (1993).
194. Grande T, Bueren JA. Involvement ofthe bone marrow stroma
in the residual hematopoietic damage induced by irradiation of
adult and young mice. Exp Hematol 22:1283-1287 (1994).
195. Grande T, Bueren JA. Analysis ofhematopoiesis in mice irradi-
ated with 500 mGy of X rays at different stages of develop-
ment. Radiat Res 143:327-333 (1995).
196. Burke TG, Mi Z. Preferential binding of the carboxylate form
of camptothecin by human serum albumin. Anal Biochem
212:285-287 (1993).
197. Burke TG, Mi Z. The structural basis ofcamptothecin interac-
tions with human serum albumin: impact on drug stability. J
Med Chem 37:40-46 (1994).
198. Mi Z, Burke TG. Differential interactions ofcamptothecin lac-
tone and carboxylate forms with human blood components.
Biochemistry 33:10325-10336 (1994).
199. Mi Z, Burke TG. Marked interspecies variations concerning
the interactions of camptothecin with serum albumins: a fre-
quency-domain fluorescence spectroscopic study. Biochemistry
33:12540-12545 (1994).
200. Burke TG, Munshi CB, Mi Z, Jiang Y. The important role of
albumin in determining the relative human blood stabilities of
the camptothecin anticancer drugs [letter]. J Pharm Sci
84:518-519 (1995).
201. Song D, Hsu LF, Au JL. Binding of taxol to plastic and glass
containers and protein under in vitro conditions. J Pharm Sci
85:29-31 (1996).
202. Lopez RL, Peters GJ, van Loenen AC, Pizao PE, van Rijswijk
REN, WagstaffJ, Pinedo HM. The effect of schedule, protein
binding and growth factors on the activity of suramin. Int J
Cancer 51:921-926 (1992).
203. Miller VA, Rigas JR, Tong WP, Reid JR, Pisters KMW, Grant
SC, Heelan RT, Kris MG. Phase II trial of chloroquinoxaline
sulfonamide (CQS) in patients with stage III and IV non-
small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
40:415-418 (1997).
204. Myers SR, Flesher JW. Metabolism of the carcinogen 3-
methylcholanthrene in human bone marrow preparations.
Drug Metab Dispos 18:664-669 (1990).
205. Twerdok LE, Trush MA. Differences in quinone reductase
activity in primary bone marrow stromal cells derived from
C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. Res Commun Chem Pathol
Pharmacol 67:375-386 (1990).
206. Thomas DJ, Sadler A, Subrahmanyam VV, Siegel D, Reasor
MJ, Wierda D, Ross D. Bone marrow stromal cell bioactiva-
tion and detoxification of the benzene metabolite hydro-
quinone: comparison of macrophages and fibroblastoid cells.
Mol Pharmacol 37:255-262 (1990).
207. Twerdok LE, Trush MA. Studies on biochemical determinants
of quinone-induced toxicity in primary murine bone marrow
stromal cells. Adv Exp Med Biol 283:843-846 (1991).
556 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998
PREDICTING HEMATOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF XENOBIOTIC EXPOSURES
208. Twerdok LE, Mosebrook DR, Trush MA. Comparison ofoxi-
dant-generation and BP-diol activation by bone marrow cells
from C57B116 and DBA/2 mice: implications for risk of bone
marrow toxicity induced by polycycdic hydrocarbons. Toxicol
Appi Pharmacol 112:266-272 (1992).
209. Twerdok LE, Rembish SJ, Trush MA. Induction of quinone
reductase and glutathione in bone marrow cells by 1,2-dithi-
ole-3-thione: effect on hydroquinone-induced cytotoxicity.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 112:273-281 (1992).
210. Ganousis LG, Goon D, Zyglewska T, Wu KK, Ross D. Cell-
specific metabolism in mouse bone marrow stroma: studies of
activation and detoxification of benzene metabolites. Mol
Pharmacol 42:1118-1125 (1992).
211. Gianni L, Vigano L, Surbone A, Ballinari D, Casali P, Tarella
C, Collins JM, Bonadonna G. Pharmacology and clinical toxi-
city of 4'-iodo-4'-deoxydoxorubicin: an example of successful
application of pharmacokinetics to dose escalation in phase I
trials. J Natl Cancer Inst 82:469-477 (1990).
212. Deldar A, Stevens CE, Beineke PJ. Comparative distribution
of marrow CFU-e and CFU-gm progenitors in different
anatomic sites in the dog. Int J Cell Cloning 8:196-208
(1990).
213. Deldar A, Stevens CE, Rodocker KB. Canine BFU-e progeni-
tors: adaptation ofa reproducible assay and anatomical distribu-
tion. IntJ Cell Cloning 9:579-593 (1991).
214. Demirer T, Rowley S, Buckner CD, Appelbaum FR, Lilleby K,
Storb R, Schiffman K, Bensinger WI. Peripheral-blood stem-cell
collections after paclitaxel, cyclophosphamide, and recombinant
human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in patients with
breast and ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 13:1714-1719 (1995).
215. BenderJG, Lum L, Unverzagt KL, Lee W, Van Epps D, George
S, Coon J, Ghalie R, McLeod B, Kaizer H et al. Correlation of
colony-forming cells, long-term culture initiating cells and
CD34+ cells in apheresis products from patients mobilized for
peripheral blood progenitors with different regimens. Bone
Marrow Transplant 13:479-485 (1994).
216. Urashima M, Uchiyama H, Hoshi Y, Deguchi Y, Kamijou M,
Katou Y, Fujisawa K, Akatsuka J, Maekawa K. Prediction of
engraftment after peripheral blood stem cell transplantation by
CD34-positive cells in grafts. Acta Paediatr Jpn 35:325-331
(1993).
217. Holberg-Petersen M, Rollag H, Beck S, 0verli I, Tj0nnfjord G,
Abrahamsen TG, Degrd M, Hestdal K. Direct growth suppres-
sion of myeloid bone marrow progenitor cel[s but not cord
blood progenitors by human cytomegalovirus in vitro. Blood
88:2510-2516 (1996).
218. Leglise MC, de Tailly PD, Vi not JL, LeBot MA, LeRoux AM,
Riche C. A celrular model for drug interactions on
hematopoiesis: the use of human umbilical cord blood progeni-
tors as a model for the study of drug-related myelosuppression
ofnormal hematopoiesis. Cell Biol Toxicol 12:39-53 (1996).
219. Erickson-Miller CL, May RD, Tomaszewski J, Osborn B,
Murphy MJ, Page JG, Parchment RE. Differential toxicity of
camptothecin, topotecan and 9-aminocamptothecin to human,
canine, and murine myeloid progenitors (CFU-GM) in vitro.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 39:467-472 (1997).
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 557
