Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 25, pp. 111-118, 1978
The Role of Hypersensitivity and the
Immune Response in Influencing
Susceptibility to Metal Toxicity
by George Kazantzis*
The immune status of the individual is an additional variable which has to be taken into account in any
consideration of factors which influence the metabolism and toxicity of metals. The commonly occurring
phenomena are described resulting from increased cellular reactivity to platinum, mercury, gold, nickel,
chromium, and beryllium, and an attempt has been made to classify these into the four types of immune
response. The clinical effects can be very varied, giving rise to conjunctivitis, rhinitis, asthma, urticaria,
contact dermatitis, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome or blood dyscrasia. Of these effects, cutaneous
hypersensitivity is the most common, affecting both industrial and general population groups. Metal
compounds used in therapeutics and metals used in prostheses have also been responsible for hypersensi-
tive reactions.
In any consideration of factors influencing sus-
ceptibility to metal toxicity, the reactivity of the
host has to be taken into account. Host reactivity
influences both dose-effect and dose-response re-
lationships. An effect may appear idiosyncratic,
that is, untoward, or one not usually associated with
the exposure. Alternatively, the usually associated
effect may appear at a much lower dose level than
that seen in the population, thus influencing the
dose-response relationship. Such idiosyncratic
phenomena may result from a variety of causes,
such as for example, a variation in bioavailability
which may be due to genetically determined en-
zyme deficiency. Idiosyncrasy may also result from
allergy, a state of altered reactivity dependent on
prior exposure. This term was originally used to
denote both antibody-mediated immunity and also
increased reactivity or hypersensitivity, and is now
used mainly in the latter sense. Terminology re-
mains confused, however, for hypersensitivity can
be used, as here, to describe the increased reactiv-
ity resulting from the immune response or in a more
general way to denote an untoward response from
whatever cause. Substances capable of provoking
an immune response are complex molecules. A
* Department of Community Medicine, Middlesex Hospital
Medical School, Horace Joules Hall, Central Middlesex Hospi-
tal, London N. W. 10 7NS, England.
simple molecule, such as a metal, requires com-
plexing with protein, nucleic acid or polysaccharide
in order to develop antigenic properties, i.e., to be-
come capable of stimulating an immune response.
This involves the formation of covalent bonds to
form a hapten-carrier conjugate. Clinical observa-
tion has shown an individual predisposition to a
hypersensitive reaction following exposure to a
potential allergen. Animal experimental studies
provide some evidence that the ability to become
sensitized is genetically controlled, and inheritance
as a single mendelian dominant has been demon-
strated with mercury, beryllium, and chromium.
Of two inbred strains of guinea pig, 80%o of one
strain could be sensitized to mercuric chloride,
while sensitization to potassium dichromate or be-
ryllium fluoride did not occur. On the other hand,
the second strain could not be sensitized to mer-
cury, but over 70%o could be sensitized to the other
two metal salts (1). Thus the ability to become sen-
sitized with these metals differs from strain to
strain, and also within each strain.
Immune Responses
Immune responses which may be harmful to the
tissues have been classified by Coombs and Gell (2)
into four basic types. Essentially they can be con-
sidered as mediated either by the action of humoral
August 1978 ill
antibodies or by specifically sensitized lympho-
cytes.
Type I: Anaphylactic or Immediate
Hypersensitivity
The antibody, which is an IgE or reaginic im-
munoglobulin, reacts with the antigen on the sur-
face of mast cells releasing vasoactive amines.
Clinical reactions are varied, consisting of
rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, asthma, urticaria, or
systemic anaphylaxis. Hypersensitivity can be
transferred from a sensitive to a normal subject by
means of serum, which contains the humoral anti-
body. The cutaneous, mucosal, and brochial reac-
tions to platinum have been attributed to type I
hypersensitivity although type III reactions may
also be involved.
Type II: Cytotoxic Hypersensitivity
The hujnoral antibody, which is an IgG im-
munoglobulin, reacts with antigen or hapten bound
to the cell surface and fixes complement to produce
cell death. The thrombocytopenia produced by or-
ganic gold compounds is likely to be brought about
in this way.
Type III: Immune Complex Hypersensitivity
The antibody combines with soluble antigen and
the complex deposits in tissues, fixing complement
and giving rise to a polymorphonuclear inflamma-
tory response. The outcome is dependent on the
relative proportions of antigen and antibody. With
antibody excess, the complexes are rapidly pre-
cipitated, usually close to the site of origin of the
antigen, to give rise to an Arthus reaction. With
antigen excess, complexes are deposited in vessel
walls by a filtering process. Granular or "lumpy"
antigen-antibody complexes are deposited on the
epithelial surface of the glomerular basement mem-
brane in this way. This immune complex reaction is
also responsible for the systemic reaction known as
serum sickness.
Type IV: Cell-Mediated Hypersensitivity
The reaction, also known as delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity, is mediated by thymus-dependent lym-
phocytes, taking 24-48 hr to develop in the sen-
sitized individual compared with 15-30 min for
anaphylactic and 4-8 hr for Arthus reactions. The
type IV reaction consists histologically of a
mononuclear response and is essentially similar to
the Mantoux reaction. Delayed hypersensitivity can
be transferred by the small number of specifically
sensitized small lymphocytes present in a lympho-
cyte suspension. It is responsible for contact der-
matitis following exposure to nickel and chromium.
It has been suggested by Turk (3) that granuloma
formation following exposure to zirconium and to
beryllium may be a special type of cell mediated
immune response.
Only certain metals have been shown to provoke
an immune response, but the hypersensitive states
to which they can give rise are important and in
some cases very common. Mercury, gold, beryl-
lium, platinum, nickel, and chromium have been
chosen here to illustrate the variety of hypersensi-
tive reactions which can be produced, but neither
the metals nor the reactions described are exhaus-
tive.
Platinum
Exposure to the complex salts of platinum such
as ammonium tetrachloroplatinate or hexachloro-
platinate give rise to an allergic reaction involving
the skin, mucosae, or the respiratory tract in per-
sons with no atopic tendency. The duration of ex-
posure before sensitization occurs has been vari-
able, ranging from a few months to many years,
with a large proportion of exposed persons eventu-
ally developing symptoms.
Sensitized individuals present with conjunctivitis,
rhinitis, asthma, urticaria, or contact dermatitis or
with a combination of these. Anaphylactic reactions
have also been reported following the administra-
tion of complex platinum salts as chemotherapeutic
agents (4). Typical type I skin, nasal, and bronchial
reactions have been elicited with platinum halide
complexes, indicating the presence of mast cell sen-
sitizing antibodies (5). The Prausnitz-Kustner reac-
tion has also been demonstrated with passive
transfer of sensitivity with the serum of a sensitized
platinum worker (6).
Immediate, late and dual bronchial reactions
were demonstrated by Pepys (7) in sensitized sub-
jects exposed to dusts of complex salts of platinum
mixed with lactose. The bronchial reactions, as
measured by a fall in forced expiratory volume,
could be inhibited by disodium cromoglycate. An
Arthus type III reaction indicative of the additional
presence of precipitating antibody has been demon-
strated by Levene and Calnan (8). Levene (9) also
postulated the formation of IgG antibody but was
unable to demonstrate this, and further attempts to
demonstrate the presence of IgE antibodies have
not so far been successful (10). Cleare et al. (10)
showed that the allergic response, as shown by skin
tests with various platinum halide complexes, is
Environmental Health Perspectives
confined to a small group of charged compounds
containing reactive ligand systems such as chlorine
and to a lesser extent bromine, and is related both to
their charge and their overall reactivity towards
protein. Neutral complexes and those containing
more strongly bound ligands were found to be inac-
tive.
Mercury
Allergic reactions following exposure to inorganic
or organic mercurials involve the kidney or the skin
and are not uncommon.
Both proteinuria and the nephrotic syndrome
have followed occupational and therapeutic expo-
sure to mercury (11). Joselow and Goldwater (12)
found an increased prevalence of proteinuria in
mercury workers compared with a control group
with a significant correlation between urinary mer-
cury excretion and protein concentration.
Kazantzis et al. (11) reported three cases of the
nephrotic syndrome in a group of mercury workers,
describing this as an idiosyncratic reaction, as the
condition was not associated with other evidence of
mercurialism or with urinary mercury concentra-
tion. Renal biopsy in two of their cases showed
minimal lesions on light microscopy. Becker et al.
(13), Cameron and Trounce (14), and Strunge (15)
all found evidence of membranous glomerulone-
phritis on light microscopy. Using electron micros-
copy, Mandema et al. (16) demonstrated material
laid down between epithelial cells and basement
membrane proper, in one case without definite ab-
normality on light microscopy. Hilton, Jones, and
Tighe (17) using electron microscopy also found
widespread basement membrane thickening, and
partial fusion of epithelial cell foot processes where
light microscopy showed normal glomeruli.
Of 60 adult Africans with the nephrotic syn-
drome, 53% were using skin lightening creams
containing mercury (18). In this series, exposure to
mercury was associated with a minimal change
glomerular lesion, present in half of the 34 patients
subjected to renal biopsy, an unusually high pro-
portion. However, 14 of these 17 patients gave a
history of exposure to mercury. A few membranous
and proliferative lesions were also seen in associa-
tion with mercury exposure. In one case reported
by Kibukamusoke, Davies, and Hutt (19) electron
microscopy showed widespread foot process fusion
with subepithelial and intramembranous deposits.
Immunofluorescence showed finely granular IgG,
IgM, and C3 complement deposits, indicative of a
membranous glomerulonephritis with a likely im-
mune complex pathogenesis. IgG and C3 comple-
ment deposits were reported by Lindqvist et al. (20)
in eight cases where skin lightening cream had been
used.
In the reported series of mercury-induced ne-
phrotic syndrome, remissions occurred in a high
proportion of the cases. However in two cases re-
ported by Morel-Maroger and Verroust (21), clinical
features persisted after cessation of exposure. The
finding of electron dense deposits and of immuno-
globulins in a few cases of mercurial induced ne-
phrotic syndrome suggests that the lesions may be
caused by the deposition of antigen-antibody com-
plexes. More such studies need to be performed.
The meeting on Maximum Allowable Concentra-
tions of Mercury Compounds (22) referred to the
nephrotic syndrome as occurring in rare cases, but
the condition appears to be less uncommon than
previously believed.
Contact dermatitis has been reported as occurring
"sometimes" (22). However thiomersal and am-
moniated mercury have been found to be common
sensitizers in a survey performed on the Epidemiol-
ogy of Contact Dermatitis (23), thiomersal being the
third commonest sensitizer after nickel and
chromium. Skin sensitization to mercury in amal-
gam dental fillings has been reported (24), and both
aryl and alkyl mercurial seed dressings have been
shown to be potent skin sensitizers. Cutaneous
hypersensitivity to mercury as demonstrated by a
standard patch test technique has been investigated
in a large group of dental students (25). An increase
in hypersensitivity was shown with length of expo-
sure. Thus positive reactions were obtained in 2%
of new entrants but in 18.8% of senior students, the
increase through the years being statistically signifi-
cant. No relationship was found between positive
reactors and a history of previous skin allergy.
Gold
As with mercury, both proteinuria and the ne-
phrotic syndrome have followed exposure to gold
compounds, but in contrast, the reaction has only
been seen following therapeutic administration of
gold in organic form. While transient proteinuria is
common, the nephrotic syndrome appears to be
rare, only 18 cases having been reported up to 1970
(26). Inadequate documentation ofearlier cases cast
doubt on the causal role ofgold given in rheumatoid
arthritis, which itself may provoke the nephrotic
,syndrome in certain circumstances. However, re-
cently carefully documented human cases and ani-
mal studies leave little doubt that gold can give rise
to the nephrotic syndrome and that this is likely to
be mediated through the immune response. In one
series, proteinuria developed in five of 75
rheumatoid arthritics treated with gold and pro-
August 1978 113
gressed to the nephrotic syndrome in two, although
blood and urinary gold levels were similar to those
found in 25 other patients without renal involve-
ment (27). No difference was found in site or degree
of gold deposition in tubular cells, interstitial tissue
and glomerular tufts in cases with and without a
nephrotic syndrome. Electron microscopy showed
deposits on the epithelial aspect of the glomerular
basement membrane as in membranous glo-
merulonephritis. Similar appearances have been
noted by others (28, 29).
Renal biopsies from ten rheumatoid patients who
developed proteinuria on gold therapy showed
changes in seven of these characteristic of membra-
nous glomerulonephritis (30). The ultrastructural
features, together with the immunofluorescent ap-
pearances, indicated that complexes of immuno-
globulin and of complement were involved. The ap-
pearances were identical with changes induced in
rats following the injection of gold salts (31). In
electron microscopic and immunfluorescent studies
in two cases, one showed a typical membranous
glomerulonephritis, while the other showed only
minimal glomerular changes, but with substantial
tubular degeneration. In the first case, electron mi-
croscopy revealed diffuse fusion of the foot pro-
cesses of the glomerular visceral epithelial cells and
subepithelial deposits. Immunfluoresence revealed
deposits of IgG and IgM along the glomerular
capillary walls. An immunological mechanism re-
sponsible for glomerular injury was postulated in
the first, and a direct toxic effect in the second case
(32). Further evidence in support of an immune
complex disorder in gold nephropathy comes from
serological tests on one patient (33). Tissue an-
tibodies, circulating immune complexes and antim-
munoglobulins were found which disappeared with
the onset of the nephrotic syndrome, suggesting de-
position in the glomeruli as immune complexes.
Most reports agree that the renal lesion regresses
once gold therapy is discontinued. Morel-Maroger
and Verroust (21) reported regression in four of
their five cases. No difference from so-called
idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis was
demonstrable by histology or immunofluorescence.
Gold is believed to give rise to nephropathy in one
of two ways. It may damage the glomerular base-
ment membrane releasing or altering material with
the formation of antiglomerular basement mem-
brane antibodies. Alternatively, gold may act as a
hapten, combining with protein to form an antigen
which then reacts with specific antibody immuno-
globulins with subsequent deposition of these com-
plexes on the basement membrane.
Gold also produces bone marrow depression with
consequent abnormalities of the blood picture
which have included thrombocytopenia,
granulocytopenia and aplastic anemia. The absence
of a correlation between the dose of gold and the
degree of marrow depression suggests that a hyper-
sensitivity reaction is involved. Evidence to this
effect has been presented by Denman and Denman
(34), who demonstrated lymphocyte transformation
to blast cells following in vitro challenge with Myo-
crisin in six patients with bone marrow depression
following gold therapy. Deren et al. (35) were un-
able to demonstrate an immunologic basis for gold
induced thrombocytopenia with the lymphocyte
transformation test or with a humoral antibody pro-
duction test, although they, too, concluded that the
disorder must be immunologically determined. In
four of their six cases the thrombocytopenia was
preceded by a skin rash, a sequence observed by
others too.
Pulmonary fibrosis sometimes occurs as a com-
plication of rheumatoid arthritis. However, more
cases of pulmonary fibrosis have been reported
among gold-treated rheumatoid patients than in
those who have not had gold treatment. It has been
suggested by Geddes and Brostoff (36) that in some
cases this might be due to a hypersensitivity reac-
tion to chrysotherapy. In the case reported by these
authors, fibrosing alveolitis developed during a four
month course of sodium aurothiomalate treatment,
with remission and exacerbation of symptoms re-
lated to periods of gold therapy. Lymphocyte
transformation was demonstrated, but there was no
eosinophilia and serum lgE was normal. Winter-
bauer, Wilske, and Wheelis (37) described two
cases of pulmonary fibrosis following gold therapy,
both of which had eosinophilia, raised lgE levels
and negative lymphocyte transformation.
Contact dermatitis may occur from metallic gold,
but much more common is allergic dermatitis fol-
lowing organogold therapy. In one such series, the
rash was preceded by eosinophilia and raised cir-
culating lgE levels, which were also found in a pro-
portion of treated patients without a skin reaction
(38).
The evidence presented above shows that gold is
likely to give rise, under appropriate circumstances,
to types I, III, or IV hypersensitivity reactions.
Nickel
Nickel was found to be the most common skin
sensitizer in patch testing studies performed on
subjects suspected of having contact sensitivity (23,
39). Both occupational and general environmental
exposure is common. There is at present no evi-
dence that nickel hypersensitivity is responsible for
damage to any tissue or organ other than the skin.
Environmental Health Perspectives114
The type of immune reaction involved, as with most
other forms of contact dermatitis, is type IV, T-
cell-mediated or delayed hypersensitivity.
Nickel has been shown to act as a specific stimu-
lant in patients showing nickel hypersensitivity
when they are examined by the lymphocyte trans-
formation test. Increased lymphocyte transforma-
tion occurs specifically in cells from nickel-sensitive
subjects, but neither the sulfate nor the acetate was
found to act in a nonspecific stimulating capacity
(40-42). Forman and Alexander (41) also found that
during the lymphocyte transformation process,
lymphokines were liberated which temporarily in-
hibited the migration of macrophages. Leukocyte
migration inhibition was demonstrated in both patch
test positive and negative subjects with a history of
nickel dermatitis (43). Significant inhibition was
found only with nickel sulfate-albumin conjugate
but not with the unconjugated form. Conflicting re-
sults have been obtained with the leukocyte migra-
tion inhibition test. Macleod, Hutchinson, and Raf-
fle (44) found no statistical difference between the
migration indices of nickel-sensitive and control
subjects, contrasting with the positive results ob-
tained in the same subjects with the lymphocyte
transformation test. Jordan and Dvorak (45), using
nickel sulfate without prior coupling to a carrier
protein were able to distinguish subjects with nickel
dermatitis from controls by inhibition of migration
of polymorphonuclear leukocyte. They gave details
on the technical requirements for the test. These
authors refer to the complex nature of delayed
hypersensitivity and point out that the various in
vitro assays would only be expected to show a good
correlation in an intact cell mediated immune sys-
tem.
Hutchinson, Macleod, and Raffle (46) investi-
gated the nature of the protein-hapten conjugate
which could effect lymphocyte transformation.
Radiochromatography identified binding to a
number of amino acids, in particular to lysine, while
autoradiography showed direct binding to the lym-
phocyte cell surface in both nickel sensitive and
control subjects. They reasoned that the antigenic
triggering of lymphocytes sensitized to nickel could
result from (a) a conjugate formed with amino acids
or serum proteins; (b) direct binding to lympho-
cytes, or (c) reaction with a serum component to
produce an unknown factor which is the sensitizer.
Katz et al. (47) estimated the nickel content of hair,
but did not find this to be significantly different in
nickel-sensitive subjects as compared to nonsensi-
tive controls and concluded that hair could not be
used as an indicator of sensitivity.
Chromium
Hypersensitivity to chromium as shown by the
patch test with potassium dichromate was found to
be second only to hypersensitivity to nickel as the
most common form of skin sensitization in the
studies quoted above, both occupational and gen-
eral environmental exposures being responsible. It
is likely to be the most frequently occurring occu-
pational dermatosis. The evidence suggests that the
hypersensitivity to chromium concerns chromium
in its role as a hapten conjugated to protein rather
than any specific chromium compound. The results
of skin tests have shown that the hypersensitive
state is dependent more on the solubility and pene-
tration of the chromium compound than on its val-
ency, threshold concentrations for hexavalent
chromium being lower than for the trivalent form
(48). Hexavalent chromium, while showing good
skin penetration, is taken up by erythrocytes and
has poor protein-binding capacity, but trivalent
chromium binds strongly and in a stable form to
plasma proteins. The hypothesis that hexavalent
chromium is converted to the trivalent form by
sulfur-containing amino acids in the skin, followed
by conjugation with protein to produce the full anti-
gen, is explored by Polak, Turk, and Frey (49). All
chromium compounds tested give a positive re-
sponse in the macrophage migration inhibition test.
The skin reactive factor has been demonstrated
following the incubation of sensitized guinea pig
lymphocytes with chromium guinea pig serum con-
jugate, and it is this factor which is likely to be the
mediator of the delayed type IV hypersensitivity
reaction associated with exposure to chromium
(49). Permanent desensitization in chromium-
sensitized guinea pigs can be produced by intrave-
nous injection of potassium dichromate followed by
cutaneous application of a minimal amount. Fur-
thermore, if the hapten is injected simultaneously or
a short time before the sensitization procedure,
permanent immunological tolerance can be in-
duced. These phenomena can be explained by as-
suming that all specific antigen sensitive lympho-
cytes, both in the circulation and in the lymph
nodes, have been inactivated or destroyed, toler-
ance therefore being acquired according to the
clonal selection theory of Burnet (50). The desen-
sitization process in guinea pigs may be accom-
panied by a "flare up" reaction consisting of an
inflammatory response in sites where this had oc-
curred previously. The experimental evidence
suggests that this reaction is not dependent on cell
mediated immunity but on other factors, possibly
August 1978 115
related to the production of antichromium humoral
antibodies, with similarities to the Arthus
phenomenon. The theoretical implications of de-
sensitization, tolerance, and the flare up reaction
are discussed by Polak, Turk, and Frey (49).
An increased incidence of cutaneous hypersen-
sitivity to chromium, and also to cobalt and to
nickel, has been observed in patients with metallic
orthopedic prostheses. Failure of the prosthesis due
to loosening has been found to occur more fre-
quently in such metal and particularly in chromium
sensitive patients. It has been suggested that parti-
cles released from metal-metal prostheses are re-
sponsible for sensitization (51, 52).
Beryllium
Exposure can give rise to acute tracheobron-
chitis, pneumonitis, contact dermatitis, or to
chronic beryllium disease. The latter is usually a
multisystem disorder principally affecting the lungs.
A dose-effect relationship between exposure and
development of the chronic disease has not been
demonstrated and the evidence suggests that this is
an autoimmune disorder (53). Contact dermatitis
following exposure to beryllium compounds is of
the delayed form and likely to be due to T-cell-
mediated hypersensitivity. Patients with chronic
berylliosis have been shown to have a depressed
sensitivity to. tuberculin when compared with a
matched control group (54). Hypergammaglob-
ulinemia is frequently found (55) due principally to
an increase in IgG levels. Such in increase has also
been found in patients with acute berylliosis, beryl-
lium dermatitis and in beryllium workers with no
evidence of disease. Patients with beryllium der-
matitis usually react positively to a patch test with a
soluble salt, but may in addition develop a
granuloma at the test site. Subcutaneous granuloma
may also develop following patch testing in chronic
beryllium disease (56).
The availability of the beryllium ion determines
the intensity of skin hypersensitivity. Krivanek and
Reeves (57) showed in guinea pigs that beryllium
acts as a hapten, a beryllium albuminate preparation
producing a stronger reaction than the beryllium
ion, suggesting that beryllium guinea pig serum al-
buminate may resemble the true antigen. Passive
transfer of hypersensitivity has been accomplished
in guinea pigs with lymphocytes but not with serum
(58). Both lymphocyte transformation and leuko-
cyte migration inhibition have been demonstrated in
beryllium sensitive subjects and in animal experi-
ments (59, 60). However, the hypersensitive state
may not correlate with the presence of berylliosis.
Reeves (53) found in guinea pigs an apparent im-
munity to pulmonary berylliosis following previous
sensitization with intradermal beryllium sulfate,
and, furthermore, cutaneous hypersensitivity was
suppressed following inhalation exposure. He pos-
tulated that the cellular response following cutane-
ous hypersensitivity may help to destroy an au-
toantigen formed in the lungs. The beryllium-
induced macrophage migration inhibition test was
found to be positive in two patients with chronic
beryllium disease but not in others on steroid treat-
ment. A proportion of beryllium workers also gave
a positive response, while all controls, both normal
and patients with sarcoidosis, were negative (61).
The significance of sensitization in such workers,
with regard to a disease which may first develop
many years after exposure, is unknown.
Alekseeva, Vasil'eva, and Orlova (62), based on
both clinical and rat experimental observations,
postulated that the systemic lesions of chronic be-
rylliosis with marked granuloma formation were
conditioned by an autoimmune process probably
connected with an endogenous factor. Antibodies
were found to lung, liver, heart, DNA and RNA and
these together with hypergammaglobulinemia and
plasma cell proliferation in lymphoid and other or-
gans were similar to the pattern seen in the col-
lagenoses. Furthermore antithyroid antibodies were
found in chronic berylliosis as in systemic lupus
erythamatosus. Chronic berylliosis was seen as an
immunologically determined disease of chemical
etiology resulting from the abolition of natural tol-
erance to autologous proteins.
The noncaseating granuloma consisting of
mononuclear cells together with occasional giant
cells is seen in active chronic beryllium disease, zir-
conium granuloma, sarcoidosis and in the Kveim
reaction. It is believed to be due to a special type of
cell-mediated immune response (3).
REFERENCES
1. Polak, L., Barnes, J. M., and Turk, J. L. The genetic control
of contact sensitization to inorganic metal compounds in
guinea-pigs. Immunology 14: 707 (1968).
2. Coombs, R. R. A., and Gell, P. G. H. Classification of aller-
gic reactions responsible for clinical hypersensitivity and
disease. In: Clinical Aspects of Immunology, 3rd ed.
P. G. H. Gell, R. R. A. Coombs, and P. J. Lachmann, Eds.,
Blackwell, Oxford, 1975, p. 761.
3. Turk, J. L. Immunology in Clinical Medicine, 2nd ed. Wil-
liam Heinemann, London, 1972, p. 187.
4. von Hoff, D. D., Slavik, M., and Muggia, F. M. Allergic
reactions to cis platinum. Lancet 1: 90 (1976).
5. Pepys, J., Pickering, C. A. C., and Hughes, E. G. Asthma
due to inhaled chemical agents-complex salts of platinum.
Clin. Allergy 2: 391 (1972).
6. Freedman, S. O., and Krupey, J. Respiratory allergy caused
by platinum salts. J. Allergy 42: 233 (1968).
116 Environmental Health Perspectives
7. Pepys, J. Immunopathology of allergic lung disease. Clin.
Allergy 3: 1 (1973).
8. Levene, G. M.,.and Calnan, C. D. Platinum sensitivity:
treatment by specific hyposensitization. Clin. Allergy 1:75
(1971).
9. Levene, G. M. Platinum sensitivity. Brit. J. Dermatol. 85:
590 (1971).
10. Cleare, M. J., et al. Immediate (type 1) allergic responses to
platinum compounds. Clin. Allergy 6: 183 (1976).
11. Kazantzis, G., et al. Albuminuria and the nephrotic syn-
drome following exposure to mercury and its compounds.
Quart. J. Med. 31: 403 (1962).
12. Joselow, M. M., and Goldwater, L. J. Absorption and
excretion of mercury in man. XII: Relationship between uri-
nary mercury and proteinuria. Arch. Environ. Health 15: 155
(1967).
13. Becker, C. G., et al. Nephrotic syndrome after contact with
mercury. Arch. Intern. Med. 110: 178 (1962).
14. Cameron, J. S., and Trounce, J. R. Membranous glomerulo-
nephritis and the nephrotic syndrome appearing during mer-
salyl therapy. Guy's Hosp. Rep. 114: 101 (1965).
15. Strunge, P. Nephrotic syndrome caused by a seed disinfec-
tant. J. Occup. Med. 12: 178 (1970).
16. Mandema, E., et al. Mercury and the kidney. Lancet 1: 1266
(1963).
17. Hilton, P. J., Jones, N. F., and Tighe, J. R. Nephrotic syn-
drome with heart disease: a reappraisal. Brit. Med. J. 3: 584
(1968).
18. Barr, R. D., et al. Nephrotic syndrome in adult Africans in
Nairobi. Brit. Med. J. 2: 131 (1972).
19. Kibukamusoke, J. W., Davies, D. R., and Hutt, M. S. R.
Membranous nephropathy due to skin lightening cream.
Brit. Med. J. 2: 646 (1974).
20. Lindqvist, K. J., et al. Immunofluorescence and electron
microscopic studies of kidney biopsies from patients with
nephrotic syndrome, possibly induced by skin lightening
cream containing mercury. East Afr. Med. J. 51: 168 (1974).
21. Morel-Maroger, L. J., and Verroust, P. J. Clinicopathologi-
cal correlations in glomerular diseases. In: Recent Advances
in Renal Disease. N. F. Jones, Ed., Churchill Livingstone,
London, 1975, p. 48.
22. Maximum allowable concentrations of mercury compounds.
Arch. Environ. Health 19: 891 (1969).
23. North American Contact Dermatitis Group. Epidemiology of
contact dermatitis in North America: 1972. Arch. Dermatol.
108: 537 (1973).
24. Feuerman, E. J. Recurrent contact dermatitis caused by
mercury in amalgam dental fillings. Int. J. Dermatol. 14: 657
(1975).
25. White, R. R., and Brandt, R. L. Development of mercury
hypersensitivity among dental students. J. Am. Dent. Assoc.
92: 1204 (1976).
26. Vaamonde, C. A., and Hunt, F. R. The nephrotic syndrome
as a complication of gold therapy. Arthritis Rheum. 13: 826
(1970).
27. Silverberg, D. S., et al. Gold nephropathy-a clinical and
pathologic study. Arthritis Rheum. 13: 812 (1970).
28. Lee, J. C., et al. Renal lesions associated with gold therapy.
Light and electron microscopic studies. Arthritis Rheum. 8:
1 (1965).
29. Strunk, S. W., and Ziff, M. Ultra-structural studies of the
passage of gold thiomalate across the renal glomerular
capillary wall. Arthritis Rheum. 13: 39 (1970).
30. Tornroth, T., and Skrifvars, B. Gold nephropathy prototype
of membranous glomerulonephritis. Am. J. Pathol. 75: 573
(1974).
31. Nagi, A. H., Alexander, F., and Barabas, A. Z. Gold ne-
phropathy in rats: light and electron microscopic studies.
Exp. Mol. Pathol. 15: 354 (1971).
32. Watanabe, I., et al. Gold nephropathy. Ultra-structural,
fluorescence, and microanalytic studies of two patients.
Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 100: 632 (1976).
33. Palosuo, T., Provost, T. T., and Milgrom, F. Gold ne-
phropathy: serological data suggesting an immune complex
disease. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 25: 311 (1976).
34. Denman, J. E., and Denman, A. M. The lymphocyte trans-
formation test and gold hypersensitivity. Ann. Rheum. Dis.
27: 582 (1968).
35. Deren, B., et al. Gold associated thrombocytopenia. Report
of six cases. Arch. Intern. Med. 134: 1012 (1974).
36. Geddes, D. M., and Brostoff, J. Pulmonary fibrosis as-
sociated with hypersensitivity to gold salts. Brit. Med. J. 1:
1444 (1976).
37. Winterbauer, R. H., Wilske, K. R., and Wheelis, R. F. Dif-
fuse pulmonary injury associated with gold treatment. N.
Engl. J. Med. 294: 919 (1976).
38. Davis, P., and Hughes, G. R. V. A serial study of
eosinophilia and raised IgE antibodies during gold therapy.
Ann. Rheum. Dis. 34: 203 (1975).
39. Fregert, S., et al. Epidemiology ofcontact dermatitis. Trans.
St. Johns Hosp. Dermatol. Soc. 55: 17 (1969).
40. Hutchinson, F., Raffle, E. J., and Macleod, T. M. The
specificity of lymphocyte transformation in vitro by nickel
salts in nickel sensitive subjects. J. Invest. Dermatol. 58: 362
(1972).
41. Forman, L., and Alexander, S. Nickel antibodies. Brit. J.
Dermatol. 87: 320 (1972).
42. Gimenez-Camarasa, J. M., et al. Lymphocyte transforma-
tion test in allergic contact dermatitis. Brit. J. Dermatol. 92:
9 (1975).
43. Mirza, A. M., et al. Leukocyte migration inhibition in nickel
dermatitis. Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 49: 782 (1965).
44. Macleod, T. M., Hutchinson, F., and Raffle, E. J. The
leukocyte migration inhibition test in allergic nickel contact
dermatitis. Brit. J. Dermatol. 94: 63 (1976).
45. Jordan, W. P., and Dvorak, J. Leukocyte migration inhibi-
tion assay in nickel contact dermatitis. Arch. Dermatol. 112:
1741 (1976).
46. Hutchinson, F., Macleod, T. M., and Raffle, E. J. Nickel
hypersensitivity. Nickel binding to amino acids and lympho-
cytes. Brit. J. Dermatol. 93: 557 (1975).
47. Katz, S. A., et al. Tissue nickel levels and nickel dermatitis.
1: Nickel in hair. Brit. J. Dermatol. 92: 187 (1975).
48. Zelger, J. Zur Klinik und Pathogenese des Chromat-Ekzems.
Arch. Klin. Exp. Dermatol. 218: 499 (1964).
49. Polak, L., Turk, J. L., and Frey, J. R. Studies on contact
hypersensitivity to chromium compounds. Prog. Allergy 17:
145 (1973).
50. Burnet, F. M. The Clonal Selection Theory and Acquired
Immunity. University Press, Cambridge, 1959.
51. Benson, M. K. D., Goodwin, P. G., and Brostoff, J. Metal
sensitivity in patients with joint replacement arthroplasties.
Brit. Med. J. 4: 374 (1975).
52. Elves, M. W., et al. Incidence ofmetal sensitivity in patients
with total joint replacements. Brit. Med. J. 4: 376 (1975).
53. Reeves, A. L. Berylliosis as an autoimmune disorder. Ann.
Clin. Lab. Sci. 6: 256 (1976).
54. Stoeckle, J. D., Hardy, H. C., and Weber, A. L. Chronic
beryllium disease. Long-term follow-up of sixty cases and
selective review ofthe literature. Am. J. Med. 46: 545 (1969).
55. Resnick, H., Roche, M., and Morgan, W. K. C. Immuno-
globulin concentrations in berylliosis. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis.
101: 504 (1970).
56. Kazantzis, G. Beryllium disease in Britain, with particular
reference to an investigation in a nonferrous foundry. In:
13th International Congress on Occupational Health, New
York, 1960, 1961, p. 290.
57. Krivanek, N., and Reeves, A. L. The effect of chemical
August 1978 117
forms of beryllium on the production of the immunologic
response. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 33: 45 (1972).
58. Alekseeva, 0. G. An enquiry into the ability -of beryllium
compounds to produce allergy of the delayed type. Gig.
Trud. Prof. Zabol. 11: 20 (1965).
59. Hanifm, J. M., Epstein, W. L., and Cline, M. J. In vitro
studies of granulomatous hypersensitivity to beryllium. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 55: 284 (1970).
60. Henderson, W. R., et al. In vitro demonstration of delayed
hypersensitivity in patients with berylliosis. J. Invest. Der-
matol. 58: 5 (1972).
61. Price, C. D., et al. Role ofin vitro and in vivo tests of hyper-
sensitivity in beryllium workers. J. Clin. Pathol. 30: 24
(1977).
62. Alekseeva, 0. G., Vasil'eva, E. V., and Orlova, A. A. Abo-
lition of natural tolerance and the influence of the chemical
allergen beryllium on autoimmune processes. Bull. W.H.O.
51:51 (1974).
118 Environmental Health Perspectives
