Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 75, pp. 11-15, 1987
The Role of the Multichain IL-2 Receptor
Complex in the Control of Normal and
Malignant T-Cell Proliferation
by Thomas A. Waldmann*
Antigen-induced activation of resting T-cells induces the synthesis of interleukin-2 (IL-2), as well as
the expression of specific cell surface receptors for this lymphokine. There are at least two forms of the
cellular receptors for IL-2, one with a very high affinity and the other with a lower affinity. We have
identified two IL-2 binding peptides, a 55-kd peptide reactive with the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody, and
a novel 75-kd non-Tac IL-2 binding peptide. Cell lines bearing either the p55, Tac, or the p75 peptide alone
manifested low-affinity IL-2 binding, whereas cell lines bearing both peptides manifested both high- and
low-affinity receptors. Fusion of cell membranes from low-affinity IL-2 binding cells bearing the Tac
peptide alone with membranes from a cell line bearing the p75 peptide alone generates hybrid membranes
bearing high-affinity receptors. We propose a multichain model for the high-affinity IL-2 receptor in which
both the Tac and the p75 IL-2 binding peptides are associated in a receptor complex.
In contrast to resting T-cells, human T-cell lymphotropic virus I-associated adult T-cell leukemia cells
constitutively express large numbers of IL-2 receptors. Because IL-2 receptors are present on the malignant
T-cells but not on normal resting cells, clinical trials have been initiated in which patients with adult T-
cell leukemia are being treated with either unmodified or toxin-conjugated forms of anti-Tac monoclonal
antibody directed toward this growth factor receptor.
Introduction
The human body defends itself against foreign invad-
ers such as bacteria and viruses by a defense system
that involves antibodies and thymus-derived lympho-
cytes (T-cells). The success of this response requires
that human T-cells change from a resting to an activated
state. Activated T-cells are responsible for the regu-
lation of the immune response, as well as for the elim-
ination of foreign invaders and the rejection of trans-
planted organs. Failure of the T-cells to become acti-
vated and function normally may be associated with
serious disease and death. The sequence of events in-
volved in the activation of human T-cells begins when
resting T-cells circulating in the bloodstream initially
encounter a foreign pathogen. The appropriately pro-
cessed and presented foreign antigen must interact with
a T-cell surface receptor for the specific antigen. This
human T-cell antigen receptor has been shown to be a
90-kd polymorphic heterodimer of a and chains, each
approximately 40 to 50 kd, associated with three or
more 20- to 28-kd nonpolymorphic polypeptide chains
identified by the T3 monoclonal antibody. Following the
interaction of the antigen presented in the context of
products of the major histocompatibility locus and the
*National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Be-
thesda, MD 20892.
macrophage-derived interleukin-1 with the antigen re-
ceptor, T-cells express the gene encoding the lymphok-
ine IL-2 (1,2). To exert its biological effect, IL-2 must
interact with specific high-affinity membrane receptors.
Resting T-cells do not express IL-2 receptors, but re-
ceptors are rapidly expressed on T-cells after activation
with an antigen or mitogen (3,4). Thus, the growth fac-
tor IL-2 and its receptor are absent in resting T-cells,
but after activation the genes for both proteins become
expressed. A failure of the production of either the
growth factor or its receptor results in failure of the T-
cell immune response. Although the interaction of ap-
propriately presented antigen with its specific poly-
morphic receptor complex confers specificity for a given
immune response, the interaction of IL-2 with IL-2 re-
ceptors determines its magnitude and duration. Fur-
thermore, IL-2 is required for the development of the
functional capacities of the T-lymphocyte.
Progress in the analysis of the structure, function,
and expression of the human IL-2 receptor was greatly
facilitated by our production of the anti-Tac monoclonal
antibody that recognizes the human receptor for IL-2
(5,6) and blocks the binding of IL-2 to this receptor.
Using quantitative receptor binding studies employ-
ing radiolabeled anti-Tac and radiolabeled IL-2, it was
shown that activated T-cells and IL-2-dependent T-cell
lines express 5- to 20-fold more binding sites for the Tac
antibody than for IL-2 (7,8). Employing high concen-
T. A. WALDMANN
trations of IL-2, Robb et al. (9) resolved these differ-
ences by demonstrating two affinity classes of IL-2 re-
ceptors. On various cell populations, 5 to 15% ofthe IL-
2 receptors had a binding affinity for IL-2 in the range
of 10'1 to 10-12M, whereas the remaining receptors
bound IL-2 at a much lower affinity, approximately 108
or 10' M. Such low-affinity sites were found whenever
high-affinity sites were found, including murine and hu-
man T- and B-cells of both normal and leukemic origin.
The high-affinity receptors appear to mediate the phys-
iological responses to IL-2, since the magnitude of cell
responses is closely correlated with the occupancy of
these receptors. As outlined below, we have utilized the
anti-Tac monoclonal antibody to: characterize the hu-
man receptor for IL-2; molecularly clone cDNAs for the
human IL-2 receptor; analyze disorders ofIL-2 receptor
expression on leukemic cells; and develop protocols for
the therapy of patients with IL-2 receptor-expressing
adult T-cell leukemia and autoimmune disorders and for
individuals receiving organ allografts.
Chemical Characterization of the
IL-2 Receptor
The IL-2 binding receptor peptide identified by the
anti-Tac monoclonal on phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-ac-
tivated normal lymphocytes was shown to be a 55-kd
glycoprotein (6,10). Leonard and co-workers (6,10) de-
fined the post-translational processing ofthis 55-kd gly-
coprotein by employing a combination of pulse-chase
and tunicamycin experiments. The IL-2 receptor was
shown to be composed of a 33-kd peptide precursor fol-
lowing cleavage of the hydrophobic leader sequence.
This precursor was cotranslationally N-glycosylated to
35- and 37-kd forms. After a 1-hour chase, the 55-kd
mature form of the receptor appeared, suggesting that
0-linked carbohydrate was added to the IL-2 receptor.
Furthermore, the IL-2 receptor was shown to be sul-
fated (11) and phosphorylated on a serine residue (12).
There was a series ofunresolved questions concerning
the IL-2 receptor that were difficult to answer when
only the 55-kd Tac peptide was considered. These ques-
tions include: What is the structural explanation for the
great difference in affinity between high- and low-affin-
ity receptors? How, in light of the short cytoplasmic
tail of 13 amino acids (see below), are the receptor sig-
nals transduced to the nucleus? How do certain Tac-
negative cells (e.g., natural killer cells) make nonpro-
liferative responses to IL-2?
To address these questions, we have investigated the
possibility that the IL-2 receptor is a complex receptor
with multiple peptides in addition to the one identified
by anti-Tac. The MLA-144 Gibbon T-cell line binds IL-
2, yet does not bind four different antibodies (including
anti-Tac and 7G7) that react with the Tac peptide. This
cell line manifests 6800 receptors per cell with an affinity
of 14 nM (13). On the basis of crosslinking studies using
[1251]IL-2, this IL-2-binding receptor peptide was
shown to be larger than the Tac peptide with an ap-
proximate Mr of75,000. When similar crosslinking stud-
ies were performed on the cell line MT-1 that manifests
only low-affinity receptors, the 55-kd Tac peptide was
demonstrated. In contrast, both the 55-kd Tac peptide
and the p75 IL-2 binding peptide were expressed on all
cell lines (e.g., HUT 102) that manifested both high and
low-affinity receptors. Furthermore, fusion ofcell mem-
branes from low-affinity IL-2 binding cell lines bearing
the Tac peptide alone with membranes from a cell line
bearing the p75 peptide alone generated hybrid mem-
branes bearing high-affinity receptors. These studies
support our multichain model for the high-affinity IL-2
receptor in which an independently existing Tac or p75
peptide would represent low-affinityreceptors, whereas
high-affinity receptors would be expressed when both
peptides are present and associated in a receptor com-
plex (13).
Molecular Cloning of cDNAs for the
Human 55-kd Tac IL-2 Receptor
Peptide
Three groups (14-16) have succeeded in cloning
cDNAs for the IL-2 receptor protein. The deduced
amino acid sequence of the IL-2 receptor indicates that
this peptide is composed of 251 amino acids, as well as
a 21-amino acid signal peptide. The receptor contains
two potential N-linked glycosylation sites and multiple,
possible O-linked carbohydrate sites. Finally, there is
a single hydrophobic membrane region of 19 amino acids
and a very short (13 amino acid) cytoplasmic domain.
Potential phosphate acceptor sites (serine and threo-
nine, but not tyrosine) are present within the intracy-
toplasmic domain. However, the cytoplasmic domain of
the IL-2 receptor peptide identified by anti-Tac appears
to be too small for enzymatic function. Thus, this re-
ceptor differs from other known growth factorreceptors
that have large intracytoplasmic domains with tyrosine
kinase activity. The p75 peptide associated with the Tac
peptide may play a critical role in the transduction of
the IL-2 signal to the nucleus. Leonard and co-workers
(17) have demonstrated that the single gene encoding
the IL-2 receptor consists ofeight exons on chromosome
10pl4. However, mRNAs of two different sizes (ap-
proximately 1500 and 3500 bases long) have been iden-
tified. These classes of mRNA differ because of the
utilization of two or more polyadenylation signals (14).
Receptor gene transcription is initiated at two principal
sites in normal activated T-lymphocytes (17). Further-
more, sequence analyses of the cloned DNAs also in-
dicate that alternative mRNA splicingmay delete a 216-
base pair segment in the center of the protein coding
sequence encoded by the fourth exon (14,17). Using
expression studies of cDNAs in COS-1 cells, Leonard
and co-workers (14) demonstrated that the unspliced,
but not the spliced form, of the mRNA was translated
into the cell surface receptor that binds IL-2 and the
anti-Tac monoclonal antibody.
12
T-CELL PROLIFERATION AND THE MULTICHAIN IL-2 COMPLEX
Distribution of IL-2 Receptors
As discussed above, the majority of resting T-cells,
B-cells, or macrophages in the circulation do not display
IL-2 receptors. Specifically, less than 5% of freshly iso-
lated, unstimulated human peripheral blood T-lympho-
cytes react with the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody. The
majority of T-lymphocytes, however, can be induced to
express IL-2 receptors by interaction with lectins,
monoclonal antibodies to the T-cell antigen receptor
complex, or alloantigen stimulation. Furthermore, IL-
2 receptors have also been demonstrated on activated
B-lymphocytes (18) and activated monocytes.
Rubin et al. (19) have demonstrated that, in addition
to cellular IL-2 receptors, activated normal peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and certain lines of T- and B-
cell origin release a soluble form of the IL-2 receptor
into the culture medium. Using an enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay, which employs two monoclonal an-
tibodies that recognize distinct epitopes on the human
IL-2 receptor, it was shown that normal individuals
have measurable amounts of IL-2 receptors in their
plasma and that certain lymphoreticular malignancies
are associated with elevated plasma levels of this re-
ceptor. The release of soluble IL-2 receptors appears
to be a consequence of cellular activation of a variety
of cell types that may play a role in the regulation of
the immune response. Furthermore, the analysis of
plasma levels of IL-2 receptors may provide an impor-
tant new approach to the analysis of lymphocyte acti-
vation in vivo.
Lymphocyte Functions That Are
Regulated by the Interaction of IL-2
with Its Receptor
The anti-Tac monoclonal antibody has been used to
define those lymphocyte functions that require an in-
teraction of IL-2 with its inducible receptor on activated
T- and B-lymphocytes. The addition of anti-Tac to cul-
tures of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in-
hibited a variety of immune reactions. Anti-Tac pro-
foundly inhibited the proliferation of T-lymphocytes
stimulated by soluble antigens and by cell surface an-
tigens (autologous and allogeneic mixed lymphocyte re-
actions). Upon activation, human T-cells acquire surface
structures, which in large measure are growth factor
receptors not easily detectable during their resting
stage (20,21). The addition of anti-Tac at the initiation
of cultures of T-cells stimulated by mitogens, antigens,
or the T3 antibody inhibited the expression of the late-
appearing activation antigens examined, the insulin and
transferrin receptors, and Ia antigens (20,21). Anti-Tac
was also shown to inhibit a series of T-cell functions,
including the generation of both cytotoxic and suppres-
sor T-lymphocytes in allogeneic cell cultures, but anti-
Tac did not inhibit their action once generated. In con-
trast to the action on T-cells, anti-Tac did not inhibit
the activation of natural killer cells by IL-2. In general,
such cells are Tac-antigen negative but express the p75
binding peptide (Tsudo and Waldmann, unpublished ob-
servations).
Disorders of IL-2 Expression in
Adult T-Cell Leukemia
A distinct form ofmature T-cell leukemia was defined
by Takasuki and co-workers (22) and termed adult T-
cell leukemia (ATL). ATL is a malignant proliferation
ofmature T-cells that have a propensity to infiltrate the
skin. Cases of ATL are associated with hypercalcemia
and usually have a very aggressive course. The ATL
cases are clustered within families and geographically,
occurring in the southwest of Japan, the Caribbean
basin, and in certain areas of Africa. HTLV-I has been
shown to be a primary etiologic agent in ATL (23). Ali
the populations ofleukemic cells we have examined from
patients with HTLV-I-associated ATL expressed the
Tac antigen (24). The expression of IL-2 receptors on
ATL cells differs from that of normal T-cells. First,
unlike normal T-cells, ATL celis do not require prior
activation to express IL-2 receptors. Furthermore, us-
ing a 3H-labeled anti-Tac receptor assay, HTLV-I-in-
fected luekemic T-cell lines characteristicaliy expressed
5- to 10-fold more receptors per cell (270,000-1,000,000)
than did maximally PHA-stimulated T-lymphoblasts
(30,000-60,000). In addition, whereas normal human T-
lymphocytes maintained in culture with IL-2 demon-
strate a rapid decline in receptor number, adult ATL
lines do not show a similar decline. It is conceivable that
the constant presence ofhigh numbers ofIL-2 receptors
on ATL cells and/or the aberrancy of these receptors
may play a role in the pathogenesis of uncontrolled
growth of these malignant T-cells.
As noted above, T-cell leukemias caused by HTLV-
I, as well as all T-cell and B-cell lines infected with
HTLV-I, universally express large numbers of IL-2 re-
ceptors. An analysis of this virus and its protein prod-
ucts suggests a potential mechanism for this association
between HTLV-I and IL-2 receptor expression. The
complete sequence of HTLV-I has been determined by
Seiki and colleagues (25). In addition to the presence of
typical long terminal repeats (LTRs), gag, pol, and env
genes, retroviral gene sequences common to other
groups of retroviruses, HTLV-I and -II were shown to
contain an additional genomic region between env and
the 3' LTR referred to as pX or more recently as tat.
Sodroski and colleagues (26) demonstrated that this pX
or tat region encodes a 42-kd protein, now termed the
tat protein, that is essential for viral replication. The
mRNA for this protein is produced by a double splicing
event. These authors demonstrated that the tat protein
acts on a receptor region within the LTR of HTLV-I,
stimulating transcription. This tat protein may also play
a central role in directly or indirectly increasing the
transcription of host genes such as the IL-2 receptor
gene involved in T-cell activation and HTLV-I-mediated
T-cell leukemogenesis.
13
T. A. WALDMANN
The IL-2 Receptor as a Target for
Therapy in Patients with ATL and
Patients with Autoimmune
Disorders and Individuals Receiving
Organ Allografts
The observation that ATL cells constitutively express
large numbers of IL-2 receptors identified by the anti-
Tac monoclonal antibody, whereas normal resting cells
and their precursors do not, provides the scientific basis
for therapeutic trials using agents to eliminate the IL-
2 receptor-expressing cells. Such agents could theoret-
ically eliminate Tac-expressing leukemic cells or acti-
vated T-cells involved in other disease states while re-
taining the mature, normal T-cells and their precursors
that express the full repertoire for T-cell immune re-
sponses. The agents that have been used or are being
prepared include unmodified anti-Tac monoclonal; toxin
(e.g., the A chain of ricin toxin, Pseudomonas toxin)
conjugates ofanti-Tac; and conjugates ofalpha-emitting
isotopes (e.g., bismuth-212) with anti-Tac.
We have initiated a clinical trial to evaluate the ef-
ficacy of administered IV anti-Tac monoclonal antibody
in the treatment ofpatients with ATL (27). None ofthe
seven patients treated suffered any untoward reactions
and none produced antibodies to the mouse immuno-
globulin or to the idiotype of the anti-Tac monoclonal.
Two of the patients had a temporary partial response
or complete remission following anti-Tac therapy. In
one of these patients, therapy was followed by a 5-
month remission, as assessed by routine hematological
tests, immunofluorescence analysis of circulating T-
cells, and molecular genetic analysis of arrangement of
the genes encoding the ,B chain of the T-cell antigen
receptor. Following the 5-month remission, the pa-
tient's disease relapsed, but a new course of anti-Tac
infusions was followed by a virtual disappearance ofskin
lesions and an over 80% reduction in the number of
circulating leukemic cells. Two months subsequently,
leukemic cells were again demonstrable in the circula-
tion. At this time, although the leukemic cells remained
Tac positive and bound anti-Tac in vivo, the leukemia
was no longer responsive to infusions of anti-Tac and
the patient required chemotherapy. This patient may
have had the smouldering form of ATL, wherein the
leukemic T-cells may still require IL-2 for their prolif-
eration. Alternatively, the clinical responses may have
been mediated by host cytotoxic cells reacting with the
tumor cells bearing the anti-Tac mouse immunoglobulin
on their surface by such mechanisms as antibody-de-
pendent cellular cytotoxicity.
These therapeutic studies have been extended in vitro
by examining the efficacy of toxins coupled to anti-Tac to
selectively inhibit protein synthesis and viability of Tac-
positive ATL lines. The addition ofanti-Tac antibody cou-
pled to the A chain of the toxin ricin effectively inhibited
protein synthesis by the HTLV-I-associated, Tac-positive
ATL line HUT 102-B2 (28). In parallel studies performed
in collaboration with FitzGerald et al. (29), Pseudomonas
exotoxin conjugates ofanti-Tac inhibited protein synthesis
by Tac-expressing HUT 102-B2 cells, but not that by the
Tac-negative acute T-cell line MOLT4, which does not
express the Tac antigen.
The action oftoxin conjugates ofmonoclonal antibod-
ies depends on their ability to be internalized by the cell
and released into the cytoplasm. Anti-Tac bound to IL-
2 receptors on leukemic cells is internalized slowly into
coated pits and then endosomic vesicles. Furthermore,
the toxin conjugate does not pass easily from the en-
dosome to the cytosol, as required for its action on elon-
gation factor 2. To circumvent these limitations, an al-
ternative cytotoxic reagent was developed that could
be conjugated to anti-Tac and that was effective when
bound to the surface of leukemic cells. It was shown
that bismuth-212 (212Bi), an alpha-emitting radionucide
conjugated to anti-Tac by use of a bifunctional chelate,
was well suited for this role (30). Activity levels of 0.5
,uCi or the equivalent of 12 rad/mL of alpha radiation
targeted by 2"2Bi-anti-Tac eliminated greater than 98%
of the proliferative capacity of the HUT 102-B2 cells,
with only a modest effect on IL-2 receptor-negative
lines. This specific cytotoxicity as blocked by excess
unlabeled anti-Tac, but not by human IgG. Thus, 212Bi-
anti-Tac is a potentially effective and specific immuno-
cytotoxic agent for the elimination of IL-2 receptor-
positive cells.
In addition to its use in the therapy of patients with
ATL, antibodies to the IL-2 receptors are being eval-
uated as potential therapeutic agents to eliminate ac-
tivated IL-2 receptor-expressing T-cells in other clinical
states, including certain autoimmune disorders and in
protocols involving organ allografts. The rationale for
the use of anti-Tac in patients with the disease aplastic
anemia is derived from the work of Zoumbos and co-
workers (31) who have demonstrated that select pa-
tients with aplastic anemia have increased numbers of
circulating Tac-positive cells. In this group of patients,
the Tac-positive, but not Tac-negative, T-cells were
shown to inhibit hematopoiesis when cocultured with
normal bone marrow cells. Furthermore, we have dem-
onstrated that anti-Tac inhibits the generation of acti-
vated suppressor T-cells (Oh-ishi and Waldmann, un-
published observations). Studies have been initiated to
define the value of anti-Tac in the therapy of patients
with aplastic anemia. The rationale for the use of an
antibody to IL-2 receptors in recipients of renal and
cardiac allografts is that anti-Tac inhibits the prolifer-
ation of T-cells to foreign histocompatibility antigens
expressed on the donor organs and prevents the gen-
eration of cytotoxic T-cells in allogeneic cell cocultures.
Furthermore, in studies by Strom and co-workers (32),
the survival of renal and cardiac allografts was pro-
longed in rodent recipients treated with an anti-IL-2
receptor monoclonal antibody. Thus, the development
of monoclonal antibodies directed toward the IL-2 re-
ceptor expressed on ATL cells, on autoreactive T-cells
of certain patients with autoimmune disorders, and on
host T-cells responding to foreign histocompatibility an-
14
T-CELL PROLIFERATION AND THE MULTICHAIN IL-2 COMPLEX 15
tigens on organ allografts may permit the development
of rational new therapeutic approaches in these clinical
conditions.
REFERENCES
1. Morgan, D. A., Ruscetti, F. W., and Gallo, R. C. Selective in
vitro growth ofT lymphocytes from normal human bone marrows.
Science 193: 1007-1008 (1976).
2. Smith, K. A. T-cell growth factor. Immunol. Rev. 51: 337-357
(1980).
3. Robb, R. J., Munch, A., and Smith, K. A. T-cell growth factors:
Quantification, specificity, and biological relevance. J. Exp. Med.
154: 1455-1474 (1981).
4. Waldmann, T. A. The structure, function, and expression of in-
terleukin-2 receptors on normal and malignant T cells. Science
232: 727-732 (1986).
5. Uchiyama, T., Broder, S., and Waldmann, T. A. A monoclonal
antibody (anti-Tac) reactive with activated and functionally ma-
ture human T cells. J. Immunol. 126: 1393-1397 (1981).
6. Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M., Uchiyama, T., Smith, K. A.,
Waldmann, T. A., and Greene, W. C. A monoclonal antibody that
appears to recognize the receptor for human T cell growth factor:
Partial characterization of the receptor. Nature 300: 267-269
(1982).
7. Depper, J. M., Leonard, W. J., Kr6nke, M., Waldmann, T. A.,
and Greene, W. C. Augmentation ofT-cell growth factor expres-
sion in HTLV-I-infected human leukemic T cells. J. Immunol.
133: 1691-1695 (1984).
8. Depper, J. M., Leonard, W. J., Kronke, M., Noguchi, P., Cun-
ningham, R., Waldmann, T. A., and Greene, W. C. Regulation
of interleukin-2 receptor expression: Effects of phorbol diester,
phospholipase C, and reexposure to lectin and antigen. J. Im-
munol. 133: 3054-3061 (1984).
9. Robb, R. J., Greene, W. C., and Rusk, C. M. Low and high
affinity cellular receptors for interleukin 2: Implications for the
level of Tac antigen. J. Exp. Med. 160: 1126-1146 (1984).
10. Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M., Robb, R. J., Waldmann, T. A.,
Greene, W. C. Characterization of the human receptor for T cell
growth factor. Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 80: 6957-6961 (1983).
11. Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M., Waldmann, T. A., and Greene,
W. C. A monoclonal antibody to the human receptor for T cell
growth factor. In: Receptors and Recognition, Vol. 17 (M.
Greaves, Ed.), Chapman and Hall, London, 1984, pp. 45-66.
12. Shackelford, D. A., and Trowbridge, I. S. Induction ofexpression
and phosphorylation of the human interleukin 2 receptor by a
phorbol diester. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 11706-11712 (1984).
13. Tsudo, M., Kozak, R. W., Goldman, C. K., and Waldmann, T.
A. Demonstration of a new (non-Tac) peptide that binds inter-
leukin-2: A potential participant in a multichain interleukin-2 re-
ceptor complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 83: 9694-9699
(1986).
14. Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M., Crabtree, G. R., Rudikoff, S.,
Pumphrey, J., Robb, R. J., Kronke, M., Svetlik, P. B., Peffer,
N. J., Waldmann, T. A., and Greene, W. C. Molecular cloning
and expression of cDNAs for the human interleukin-2 receptor.
Nature 311: 626-631 (1984).
15. Cosman, D., Cerreti, D. P., Larsen, A., Park, L., March, C.,
Dower, S., Gillis, S., and Vidal, D. Cloning, sequence and expres-
sion ofhuman interleukin-2 receptor. Nature 321: 768-771 (1984).
16. Nikaido, T., Shimizu, N., Ishida, N., Sabe, H., Teshigawara, K.,
Maeda, M., Uchiyama, T., Todor, S., and Honjo, T. Molecular
cloning of cDNA encoding human interleukin-2 receptor. Nature
311: 631-635 (1984).
17. Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M., Kronke, M., Peffer, N. J., Svetlik,
P. B., Sullivan, M., and Greene, W. C. Structure of the human
interleukin-2 gene. Science 230: 633-639 (1985).
18. Waldmann, T. A., Goldman, C. K., Robb, R. J., Depper, J. M.,
Leonard, W. J., Sharrow, S. O., Bongiovanni, K. F., Korsmeyer,
S. J., and Greene, W. C. Expression of interleukin-2 receptors
on activated B cells. J. Exp. Med. 160: 1450-1466 (1984).
19. Rubin, L. A., Kurman, C. C., Biddison, W. E., Goldman, N. D.,
and Nelson, D. L. A monoclonal antibody 7G7/B6 binds to an
epitope on the human interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor that is distinct
from that recognized by IL-2 or anti-Tac. Hybridoma 4: 91-102
(1985).
20. Tsudo, M. T., Uchiyama, K., Takatsuki, K., Uchino, H., and
Yodoi, J. Modulation of Tac antigen on activated human T cells
byanti-Tac monoclonal antibody. J. Immunol. 129:592-595 (1982).
21. Neckers, L. M., and Cossman, J. Transferrin receptor induction
in mitogen-stimulated human T lymphocytes is required for DNA
synthesis and cell division and is regulated by interleukin 2. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 80: 3494-3498 (1983).
22. Takasuki, K., Uchiyama, T., Sagawa, K., and Yodoi, J. Adult T
cell leukemia in Japan. In: Topics in Hematology (S. Seno, F.
Takaku, and S. Irino, Eds.), Excerpta Medica. Amsterdam, 1977,
pp. 73-77.
23. Poiesz, B. J., Ruscetti, F. W., Gazdar, A. F., Bunn, P. A., Minna,
J. D., and Gallo, R. C. Detection and isolation oftype C retrovirus
particles from fresh and cultured lymphocytes of a patient with
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 77:
7415-7419 (1980).
24. Waldmann, T. A., Greene, W. C., Sarin, P. S., Saxinger, C.,
Blayney, W., Blattner, W. A., Goldman, C. K., Bongiovanni, K.,
Sharrow, S., Depper, J. M., Leonard, W., Uchiyama, T., and
Gallo, R. C. Functional and phenotypic comparison of human T
cell leukemia/lymphoma virus negative Sezary leukemia. J. Clin.
Invest. 73: 1711-1718 (1984).
25. Seiki, M., Hattori, S., Hirayama, Y., and Yoshida, M. Human
adult T-cell leukemia virus: Complete nucleotide sequence ofthe
provirus genome integrated in leukemic cell DNA. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 80: 3618-3622 (1983).
26. Sodroski, J. G., Rosen, C. A., and Haseltine, W. A. Grans-acting
transcriptional activation of hte long terminal repeat ofhuman T
lymphotrophic viruses in infected cells. Science 225: 381-385
(1984).
27. Waldmann, T. A., Longo, D. L., Leonard, W. J., Depper, J. M.,
Thompson, C. B., Kronke, M., Goldman, C. K., Sharrow, S.,
Bongiovanni, K., Greene, W. C. Interleukin-2 receptor (Tac an-
tigen) expression in HTLV-I associated adult T-cell leukemia.
Cancer Res. 45: 4559s-4562s (1985).
28. Kronke, M., Depper, J. M., Leonard, W. J., Vitetta, E. S., Wald-
mann, T. A., and Greene, W. C. Anti-Tac-ricin A conjugates
selectively inhibit protein synthesis in human T cell leukemia/
lymphoma virus infected leukemic T cells. Blood 65: 1416-1421
(1985).
29. FitzGerald, D., Waldmann, T. A., Willingham, M. C., and Pastan,
I. Pseudomonas exotoxin-anti-Tac: Cell specific immunotoxin, ac-
tive against cells expressing the T-cell growth factor receptor. J.
Clin. Invest. 74: 966-971 (1984).
30. Kozak, R. W., Atcher, R. W., Gansow, 0. A., Friedman, A. M.,
and Waldmann, T. A. Bismuth-212 labeled anti-Tac monoclonal
antibody: Alpha-particle emitting radionuclides as novel modali-
ties for radioimmunotherapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 83:
474-478 (1986).
31. Zoumbos, N., Gascon, P., Trost, S., Djeu, J., and Young, N.
Circulating activated suppressor T lymphocytes in aplastic ane-
mia. New Engl. J. Med. 312: 257-265 (1985).
32. Strom, T. B., Banet, L. V., Gauiton, G. N., Kelley, V. F., Their,
A. Y., Diamanstein, T., Tilney, N. L., and Kirkman, R. L. Pro-
longation ofcardiac allograft survival in rodent recipients treated
with an anti-interleukin-2 receptor monoclonal antibody. Cancer
Res. 33: 561A (1985).
