Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
101 (Suppl. 6): 105-109 (1993)
State of the Science on the Carcinogenicity of
Gasoline with Particular Reference to Cohort
Mortality Study Results
by Peter E Infante
As a result of the content of benzene in various streams of refinery products, including gasoline, it is not
surprising that over theyears studies and case reports have linked gasoline exposure to lymphopoietic cancers
(LPC), particularly leukemia and multiple myeloma (MM). Of three recently conducted studies of gasoline-
exposed workers, one shows strong associations with leukemia and MM, a second suggests some association
with leukemia and did not analyze data for MM, and the third study is not possible to evaluate because of a
major problem with study design. Other diseases of particular interest in relation to gasoline exposure are
kidney cancer, malignant melanoma, and heart disease. One study suggests an association with kidney cancer,
but the second study did not. There appears to be no association between employment in refineries or gasoline
exposure and heart disease. However, evaluation of risk of kidney cancer and heart disease is somewhat
difficult because investigators did not control for cigarette smoking, even though it is related to these diseases.
This is ofparticular concern when studying gasoline-exposed workers, who because ofthe explosive nature of
gasoline probably smoke less than the general population used for comparison of mortality. Some studies of
refinery workers and gasoline-exposed workers in particular show an excess risk of death from malignant
melanoma. Whether this latter association is the result of benzene/gasoline exposure, sunlight exposure, or a
combination of the two cannot be determined with the data currently available. The National Toxicology
Program benzene cancer bioassay and the Dow Chemical Company epidemiologic study argue in favor of a
benzene etiology; the fact that the workers spend a great amount oftime outdoors argues in favor ofa sunlight
etiology. Finally, the American Petroleum Institute is challenged to apply cancer and blood disease warning
labels and filling instructions to gasoline pumps and containers to prevent the misuse of gasoline and the
subsequent development ofMM, leukemia, and other blood diseases that can be caused by exposure to benzene
and gasoline.
Introduction
Benzene is a contaminant of gasoline. Its volume per-
centin gasoline in the United States has averaged between
1.5 and 2.0% over the past decade (MotorVehicle Manufac-
turers Association Survey results, personnel communica-
tion), but concentrations slightly over 5% have been
measured in gasoline at the pump (1). Thus, it is not
surprising that the literature contains case reports and
epidemiologic studies of blood diseases associated with
gasoline exposure that parallel the sequence of case
reports and epidemiologic findings ofblood diseases asso-
ciated with benzene exposure; however, the information on
gasoline and blood diseases lags the benzene literature by
a few decades. For example, case reports of aplastic ane-
mia (2,3), hemolytic anemia (3), myelofibrosis (3,4,), neu-
tropenia (3,5), thrombocytopenia (3,5), and myeloid
metaplasia (4) associated with gasoline exposure have
Health Standards Program, Occupational Safety and Health Admin-
istration, 200 Constitution Avenue N.W., Washington, DC 20210.
This manuscript was presented at the International Symposium on the
Health Effects of Gasoline held 5-8 November 1991 in Miami, FL.
been followed by case reports ofleukemia (4,6) associated
with exposure to gasoline. These same blood diseases have
all been associated with occupational exposure to benzene.
Epidemiologic analyses have also demonstrated elevated
risks ofleukemia and other blood diseases amongworkers
exposed to gasoline (6-9).
In the early1980s, a studybyThomas et al. (10) provided
the stimulus for a large number of studies that subse-
quently demonstrated increased risks of lymphopoietic
cancers (LPC) among refinery workers. The demonstra-
tion of these excess risks again was not surprising, as
there is potential for benzene exposure among refinery
populations.
Because of the multiple site carcinogenicity of benzene
as demonstrated in experimental animals (11), concern has
been expressed that benzene and products containing
benzene may cause more than lymphopoietic cancer in
humans. This concern became heightened as a result ofthe
toxicologic study demonstrating kidney cancer in male
rats exposed to gasoline vapor and findings in some ofthe
earlier epidemiologic studies of refinery workers showing
an elevation of site-specific cancers not related to the
lymphopoietic system, though the latter findings were
P. F. INFANTE
inconsistent. Because cardiovascular disease is the major
cause ofdeath in industrialized countries, analyses forthis
cause of death were also reviewed. Thus, the more recent
studies ofgasoline-exposed workers have focused particu-
larly on kidney cancer, multiple myeloma (MM) and other
lymphatic cancer, leukemia, malignant melanoma, and
heart disease.
Kidney Cancer
Of the studies presented at the gasoline symposium,
only the Schnatter et al. study (12) provides some evidence
of an association between gasoline exposure and kidney
cancer. The data ofthis studywere internally consistent in
that every measure of increasing exposure showed an
increasing risk of death from kidney cancer. For example,
the standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for kidney cancer
was 135 for the total cohort and 158 for those employees
characterized as experiencing "total hydrocarbon" expo-
sure (12). When the authors analyzed their data by expo-
sure frequency, those workers whowould have had greater
exposure, e.g., categorized as "nonexposed," less than
daily exposed, or daily exposed, the SMRs for kidney
cancer were 91, 99, and 208, respectively. For tank truck
drivers, who were characterized as experiencing the high-
est exposures, the SMR for kidney cancer was 210. This
analysis, however, was based on a small number of obser-
vations. When data for kidney cancer were analyzed using
a Poisson regression model, a relative risk ofabout 4.0 was
observed for those exposed daily as compared to those
exposed less than daily.
The study presented by Rushton (13), which appears to
be in the early stages ofanalysis, shows an SMR for kidney
cancer of 101 in refinery workers and an SMR of 127 for
distribution workers in comparison to expected mortality
based on the general population. The latter SMR was not
significantly elevated. Cigarette smoking, however, is
related to kidney cancer, and ifthese workers smoked less
than the general population because of the danger of
gasoline explosion, use of the general population as a
comparison group may overestimate expected mortality
from kidney cancer and, hence, underestimate the relative
risk of kidney cancer associated with gasoline exposure.
Thus, adjustment for cigarette smoking in the Rushton
study (13), as well as in all studies of gasoline-exposed
workers, needs to be considered in the analyses. In the
absence of this adjustment, it is difficult to evaluate the
findings with regard to kidney cancer.
The Wong and Harris study (14) appears to have been
well conducted, and it has the potential to provide a great
deal of information in the future. Currently, the overall
SMR of 52 for the land-based workers suggests the gen-
eral population used in the study is not an appropriate
comparison population. Thus, it is difficult to make any
meaningful comments about the study results. The same
could be said for the marine cohort. No further comments
will be made about the Wong and Harris study because of
the use of an inappropriate comparison population.
Conclusion
As the data now stand, one study demonstrates an
association between total hydrocarbon exposure from gas-
oline and kidney cancer in humans (12), and the results
were internally consistent. Other studies do not show such
an association. Lack of adjustment for cigarette smoking
in all of the studies, however, may have resulted in an
underestimate of the risk or in an inability to detect an
elevated risk.
Multiple Myeloma
In the Schnatter et al. study (12), multiple myeloma
(MM) showed an increase in risk by every measure of
increasing exposure. The overall SMR in the study was
183, but those who were characterized as occupationally
exposed to hydrocarbons had an SMR of 199. When data
were presented for those nonexposed, exposed less than
daily, or exposed daily, the SMRs for MM were 154, 167,
and 228, respectively. Tank truck drivers (another group
with high potential exposure) had an SMR of201, but this
was based on only one observed death. The Rushton study
(13) did not provide analyses for MM.
Difficulties in identifying associations with MM arise
from the rarity ofthe disease (2-3 x 105) and the fact that
investigators usually have not separated MM from other
forms oflymphoma when presenting cohort study results.
Thus, it is not possible to know the contribution of MM to
the excesses of death reported for a broad category of
death from lymphoma. Nevertheless, in a few studies of
petroleum refinery workers where data were presented
separately for MM, elevated risks have been observed
(10,15-17). Residence in petroleum manufacturing counties
also has been associated with a slightly elevated risk of
MM (18). The most recent update ofthe National Institute
of Occupational Safety and Health study of benzene-
exposed workers demonstrates a statistically signiflcant
excess of death from MM (19). Three of the four workers
who died from MM in the Rinsky et al. study (19) had low
cumulative exposure to benzene and all had a latency of
more than 20 years since initial exposure to benzene.
There is a biologically plausible basis for benzene/
gasoline to cause MM (15,20). Multiple myeloma is a tumor
ofplasma cells within the bone marrow, which are derived
from lymphocytes. The bone marrow is a target organ for
benzene, which causes cytopenia, aplastic anemia, chro-
mosomal damage to lymphocytes (21,22) and leukemia,
including chronic lymphocytic leukemia (23). Thus, the
target organ and cells ofB-lymphocyte lineage are known
to be affected by benzene.
Conclusion
In light of prior evidence of an association between
benzene and MM, the increased risk of MM observed in
the Schnatter et al. study (12) ofgasoline-exposed workers
is meaningful. A few other studies that presented data
separately for MM also suggest elevated risks for MM in
relation to employment in refineries (10,15-17). In my
106
GASOLINE AND CANCER
opinion, the elevated risk ofMM observed amonggasoline-
exposedworkers and refineryworkers in general is consis-
tentwith abenzene etiology. As mentioned above, there is a
biologically plausible basis for this association.
Leukemia
In the Schnatter et al. study (12), leukemia is signifi-
cantly elevated in the group of truck drivers (highest
exposure; SMR = 335). The lack of a dose response for
leukemia by exposure frequency in this studyis probably a
reflection of the small number ofworkers in the study.
In the recent Rushton study (13), leukemia was slightly
lower than expected for refinery workers and slightly
higher than expected for distribution workers. Elevations
in leukemia risk were associated with various jobs. Per-
haps case-control studies could shed some light on these
observations. In the earlier reports of these refinery
workers by Rushton and Alderson (24), an elevated risk of
leukemia was not observed among the entire cohort; how-
ever, when a case-control study was conducted, a signifi-
cantly elevated risk of leukemia was observed among the
workers categorized as having medium or high exposure
to benzene in comparison to those with low benzene expo-
sure when length of service was taken into account (25).
A number of studies of refinery workers have demon-
strated an elevated risk of leukemia (10,15-17,26-29),
though the cohort members in these studies were not
confined to those who only had exposure to gasoline.
Nevertheless, the only ubiquitous leukemogen known to
exist in refineries is benzene, and it seems reasonable to
conclude that benzene exposures from various sources,
including gasoline, is the most likely explanation for this
excess risk. In case-control studies of leukemia among
refinery workers, significant associations were observed
between high- and medium-level exposure to benzene and
leukemia (25) and between cumulative benzene exposure
and leukemia (17).
Conclusion
The elevated risk ofleukemia observed among gasoline-
exposed workers is probably related to the benzene con-
tent of gasoline. The elevated risks of LPC in refinery
workers in general may be related to benzene because it is
the only ubiquitous agent found in refineries that is related
to these diseases.
Malignant Melanoma
The study of Australian refinery workers (17) demon-
strates a significantly elevated standardized incidence
ratio for malignant melanoma. The Schnatter et al. (12)
studyindicates an SMR of263 for melanoma, which was of
borderline statistical significance. Several measures of
increasing exposure were not related to an increase in
disease risk in the latter study. However, the number of
expected deaths in each category was small. The recently
updated Rushton study (13) did not present analyses for
malignant melanoma. It is noteworthy that the study of
Dow chemical workers exposed to benzene (30) demon-
strates a significantly elevated risk of death from skin
cancer. Three of the four deaths from skin cancer in the
latter study were from malignant melanoma. Residence in
petroleum manufacturing counties has been associated
with a significantly elevated risk of death from both
malignant melanoma and nonmelanotic skin cancer in
comparison to residence in counties comparable by geo-
graphic region, population size, and other demographic
indicators (18). In addition, the National Toxicology Pro-
gram (NTP) cancer bioassay demonstrated a significant
increase in tumors of the skin in male rats exposed to
benzene through oral gavage (11).
Conclusion
There is an association between malignant melanoma
and employmentin refineries. Whetherthis elevated risk is
due to chemical exposure, sunlight exposure, or a combina-
tion ofthe two should be the subject offurther evaluation.
The fact that the workers spend considerable time out-
doors argues in favor ofthe sunlight hypothesis. The Dow
study results (30), the NTP bioassay results (11), and the
residence in petroleum manufacturing counties results
(18) argue in favor of a chemical involvement in the skin
cancer.
Heart Disease
In the Schnatter study (12), the SMR for myocardial
infarctionwas 97,while the SMR for aortic aneurysmswas
179. The highest riskwas observed in those nonexposed to
total hydrocarbons (SMR = 280). The tank truck drivers
(highest exposure) did not have an excess of death from
heart disease, though the numbers are small (1 observed
versus 1.5 expected). In the Rushton study (13), there was
onlya slight elevation abovebackground forheart diseases
among refinery workers when the general population was
used for comparison.
Conclusion
The data currently available do not support an associa-
tion between heart disease and exposure to gasolinevapor.
However, analyses for causes of death (such as heart
disease or lung cancer) that are associated with cigarette
smoking need to control for this variable, particularly in
light of comments that these workers smoke less than the
general population.
Challenge to the American Petroleum
Institute on Misuse of Gasoline and
Subsequent Disease
Finally, I would like to challenge the American
Petroleum Institute (API) to develop a program to prevent
the "misuse" of gasoline by workers and by the public in
general. In September of 1990, I published in The Lancet
an estimated relative risk of leukemia among District of
Columbia municipal garage mechanics ranging from 60 to
107
108 R F. INFANTE
300 based on three cases (6). These individuals had fre-
quently siphoned gasoline by mouth. They also cleaned
engine parts by soaking them in a mixture ofgasoline and
oil. In the article, I also mentioned two additional local
garage mechanics who were recently diagnosed with leu-
kemia as well as a roofer who was diagnosed with aplastic
anemia. The latter individual used gasoline to clean seams
before cementing strips of rubberized roofing material.
Other people recently have informed me that they have
used gasoline (taken from their gasoline can for their
power lawn mower) to clean their garage floor and hands
when they work on their cars at home.
In addition, recent studies ofU.S. highway maintenance
workers demonstrate an excess risk of leukemia (31) and
lymphopoietic cancer (32). Bender et al.,who conducted the
Minnesota Department of Transportation study (32), are
in the process ofupdating their cohort and have identified
an additional six cases of leukemia for those with 30-39
years of work experience. In the initial report, seven
deaths were observed versus 1.6 expected (SMR = 425)
for this group. Bender et al. recently interviewed the
highway workers and were told that the workers used
gasoline to clean asphalt and other materials from their
hands (personal communication). The investigators are of
the opinion that the misuse ofgasoline as a solventwas the
most likely explanation for the excess leukemia risk
observed in their study (A.P. Bender and D.L. Parker,
personnel communication).
In response to my letter to The Lancet (6), Fleming (9)
published a letter presenting analyses ofperipheral blood
counts among: adolescent boys and young men in Nigeria
who inhale and swallow petrol while siphoning as "unoffi-
cial vendors" of petrol and heavy oil, motor mechanics
employed in small workshops who use petrol as a solvent,
official petrol pump attendants, and controls who were not
exposed professionally to petroleum. Fleming reported
statistically significant and high rates of anemia, micro-
cytosis, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia among the
unofficial vendors and motor mechanics but not among the
official vendors (9). Thus, the hazards to the blood-forming
organs from the misuse of gasoline are not confined to
people ofthe industrialized countries. Moreover, conversa-
tions with health professionals from the lesser developed
countries suggest that work practices with gasoline are
much worse there as compared to the United States.
The situations mentioned above indicate the disparity
between knowledge of hazards among the scientific com-
munity and education of workers and the public about
those hazards. In an attempt to deal with this problem, I
recommend thatthe API and its member companies volun-
tarily develop a program to label gas pumps as done in
Sweden. The Swedish warning states that gasoline is
poisonous if inhaled; if handled in confined spaces, it can
cause cancer; with normal tank filling, the health risk is
small; it is dangerous to drink; and skin contact should be
avoided. Or, some other language should be adopted that
appropriately conveys the cancer and blood disease haz-
ards if tank filling is not done correctly. This warning
would presumably result in a reduction in the misuse of
gasoline by garage mechanics, other workers, and con-
sumers in general, and at the same time allay fear and
apprehension about appropriate filling procedures.
The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
REFERENCES
1. Cancer at the Pump: Benzene and Aromatics in Gasoline, Part II.
Citizens Fund, Washington, DC, 1990.
2. Askey, J. M. Aplastic anemia due to benzol poisoning. Cal. West. Med.
29: 262-263 (1928).
3. McLean, J. A. Blood dyscrasia after contact with petrol containing
benzol. Med. J. Aust. 47: 845-849 (1960).
4. Van den Berghe, H., Louwagie, A., Broeckaert-Van Orshoven, A., et
al. Chromosome analysis in two unusual malignant blood disorders
presumably induced by benzene. Blood 53: 558-566 (1979).
5. Verwilghen, R. L., Van Dorpe, A., and Veulemans, H. Dangers of
petrol used as solvent. Lancet ii: 1156 (1975).
6. Infante, P. F., Schwartz, E., and Cahill, R. Benzene in petrol: a
continuing hazard. Lancet ii: 814-815 (1990).
7. Brandt, L., Nilsson, P. G., and Mitelman, F. Occupational exposure to
petroleum products in men with acute non-lymphocytic leukemia.
Lancet i: 553 (1978).
8. Schwartz, E. Proportionate mortality analysis of automobile
mechanics and gasoline service station workers in New Hampshire.
Am. J. Ind. Med. 12: 91-99 (1987).
9. Fleming, A. F. Benzene in petrol: a continuing hazard. Lancet ii:
1076-1077 (1990).
10. Thomas, T. L., Waxweiler, R. J., Moure-Eraso, R., Itaya, S., and
Fraumeni, J. F. Mortality patterns among workers in three texas oil
refineries. J. Occup. Med. 24: 135-141 (1982).
11. NTP. Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Benzene (Cas No.
71-43-2) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice (Gavage Studies). NTP
Technical Report No. 289, National Toxicology Program, Research
Triangle Park, NC, 1986.
12. Schnatter, A. R., Katz, A. M., Nicolich, M. J., and Theriault, G. A
retrospective mortality study among Canadian petroleum marketing
and distribution workers. Environ. Health Perspect. 101(Suppl. 6):
85-99 (1993).
13. Rushton, L. A 39-year follow-up ofthe U.K. refinery and distribution
center studies: results for kidney cancer and leukemia. Environ.
Health Perspect. 101(Suppl. 6): 77-84 (1993).
14. Wong, 0, Harris, F., and Smith, T. J. Health effects of gasoline
exposure. II. Mortalitypatterns ofdistribution workers in the United
States. Environ. Health Perspect. 101(Suppl. 6): 63-76 (1993).
15. Decoufle, P, Blattner, W. A., and Blair, A. Mortality among chemical
workers exposed to benzene. Environ. Res. 30: 16-25 (1983).
16. Schottenfeld, D, Warshauser, M. E., Zauber, A. G., Meikle, J. G., and
Hart, B. R. A prospective study of morbidity and mortality in
petroleum industry employees in the United States -a preliminary
report. In: Quantification of Occupational Cancer. Banbury Report
No. 9 (R. Peto and M. Schneiderman, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1981, pp. 247-260.
17. Health Watch, The Australian Petroleum Industry Health Sur-
viellance Programme, Eight Report. Department of Community
Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia,
1990.
18. Blot, W. J. Cancer mortality in U.S. counties with petroleum indus-
tries. Science 198: 51-53 (1977).
19. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young, R. J.,
Okun, A. H., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and leukemia: an epi-
demiologic risk assessment. N. Engl. J. Med. 316: 1044-1050 (1987).
20. Goldstein, B. D. Is exposure to benzene a cause of human multiple
myeloma? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 609: 225-230 (1990).
21. Forni, A. M., Cappellini, E., Pacifico, E., and Vigliani, E. C. Chromo-
some changes and their evolution in subjects with past exposure to
benzene. Arch. Environ. Health 23: 385-391 (1971).
22. Picciano, D. Cytogenetic study of workers exposed to benzene.
Environ. Res. 19: 33-38 (1979).
GASOLINE AND CANCER 109
23. McMichael, A. J., Spirtas, R., Kupper, L. L., and Gamble, J. F. Solvent
exposure and leukemia among rubber workers: an epidemiologic
study. J. Occup. Med. 17: 234-239 (1975).
24. Rushton, L., and Alderson, M. R. An epidemiological study ofeight oil
refineries in Britian. Br. J. Ind. Med. 38: 225-234 (1981).
25. Rushton, L., and Alderson, M. R. A case-control study to investigate
the association between exposure to benzene and deaths from leuka-
emia in oil refinery workers. Br. J. Cancer 43: 77-84 (1981).
26. McCraw, D. S., Joyner, R. E., and Cole, P. Excess leukemia in a
refinery population. J. Occup. Med. 27: 220-222 (1985).
27. Austin, S. G., and Schnatter, A. R. A cohort study of petrochemical
workers. J. Occup. Med. 25: 304-312 (1983).
28. Wen, C. P., Tsai, S. P., McClellan, W. A., and Gibson, R. L. Long-term
mortality study of oil refinery workers, I. Mortality of hourly and
salaried workers. Am. J. Epidemiol. 118: 526-542 (1983).
29. Morgan, R. W., and Wong, 0. An epidemiologic Analysis of the
Mortality Experience of Mobile Oil Corporation Employees at the
Beaumont, Texas Refinery (1984). OSHA Docket H-059B, EXH. 177a,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Washington, DC,
1984.
30. Bond, G. G., McLaren, E. A., Baldwin, C. L., and Cook, R. R. An
update ofmortality among chemical workers exposed to benzene. Br.
J. Ind. Med. 43: 685-691 (1986).
31. Bender, A. P, Parker, D. L, Johnson, R. A, Scharber, W. K, Williams, A.
N, Marbury, M. C., and Mandel, J. S. Minnesota highway maintenance
worker study: cancer mortality. Am. J. Ind. Med. 15: 545-556 (1989).
32. Maizlish, N., Beaumont, J., and Singleton, J. Mortality among Califor-
nia highway workers. Am. J. Ind. Med. 13: 363-379 (1988).
