Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 88, pp. 225-230, 1990
Immune Deficiency As a Risk Factor in
Epstein-Barr Virus-Induced Malignant
Diseases
by David Theodore Purtilo,* Motohiko Okano,* and
Helen L. Grierson*
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a ubiquitous DNA virus that normally infects silently, establishing lifelong
latency. Substantial empirical observations support the view that immunodeficiency is permissive in EBV-
induced lymphoproliferative diseases (LPD). Primary immune deficient patients such as those with X-
linked lymphoproliferative disease and individuals with acquired immune deficiency secondary to im-
munosuppressive drugs for organ transplantation or individuals infected with human immunodeficiency
virus are also at very high risk for lethal LPD. The importance of immunodeficiency and EBV in the
development of head and neck carcinomas and uterine cervical carcinoma is less clear. Methods are
available for detecting immunodeficiency and EBV genome and thus preventive strategies are being de-
veloped to preclude LPD from occurring.
Introduction
Milestones in the discovery of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-induced diseases include description of Burkitt's
lymphoma (BL) by Denis Burkitt in 1958, the discovery
of the EBV 25 years ago by Anthony Epstein, Burt
Achong, and Yvonne Barr, the serological association
ofEBV with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) by Lloyd
Old in 1966, and the discovery that EBV causes infec-
tious mononucleosis (IM) by the Henles in 1968 (1).
Until about the mid-1970s, the two prevailing hy-
potheses regarding the oncogenicity of EBV included
the notion that benign and malignant strains of EBV
prevailed or, alternatively,. that immunodeficiency
played a major role in the development of certain ma-
lignancies (2). Supporting the latter hypothesis was our
discovery in 1975 of the X-linked lymphoproliferative
disease (XLP) (3), wherein affected males develop fatal
IM, malignant lymphoma, or acquired agammaglobuli-
nemia following infection by EBV. Furthermore, XLP
provided clues to the cause of malignant lymphoma
found earlier by Starzl in renal transplant recipients (4),
and Gatti and Good also had found a very high preva-
lence of malignant lymphoma in immune-deficient chil-
dren (5).
*Departments of Pathology and Microbiology, Pediatrics, and the
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Uni-
versity ofNebraska Medical Center, 42nd Street and Dewey Avenue,
Omaha, NE 68105.
Address reprint requests to D. T. Purtilo, Department ofPathology
and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 42nd
Street and Dewey Avenue, Omaha, NE 68105.
Summarized herein are the roles ofimmunodeficiency
in the development of EBV-induced lymphoprolifera-
tive diseases (LPD). The mechanisms responsible for
the evolution of these diseases at cytogenetic and mo-
lecular levels and the findings of EBV-carrying carci-
nomas involving the head and neck and uterine cervix
are described. A brief background including the molec-
ular anatomy of EBV and normal immune responses to
the virus is outlined.
Immunobiology of EBV
EBV is a DNA virus of 172 kb. It gains access to the
human epithelium in the oropharyngeal region through
CR2 receptors. Within the squamous epithelium, the
virus is able to undergo productive infection. Intimate
association of the lymphoid tissues with the oral epi-
thelium permits infection of the human B-cell, which
can be immortalized (6). Most individuals become
asymptomatically infected during childhood, and life-
long latency is established.
The virus is composed of about 100 genes, which are
currently being mapped (Fig. 1). Six different types of
EBV-determined nuclear antigen (EBNA) and two
types of early antigens (EA) have been identified.
EBNA-1 maintains expression of EBV in the immor-
talized cell in the extrachromosomal plasmids. The im-
mortalizing or transforming capacity of EBV resides in
EBNA-2 and possibly in latent membrane protein
(LMP) (7). The LMP acts as an oncogene in two estab-
lished rodent lines. Both EBNA-2 and LMP dramati-
PURTILO, OKANO, AND GRIERSON
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
kb l i I I I l
US IRI UL TR
ORI P
|N C |WwIWH HwlwwHwIwHH| F IQIUIPOIIMISIL_ E IIjIRIIKI B lG I D IIITIV|II | A INJBYRFI
EBNA-2
EBNA S
BLRF3+BERFI
EBNA-3
BKRF I BNLFIa-c
EBNA- I LMP
BERF 2a,2b,3,4
EBNA 4,6
FIGURE 1. The EBV DNA and the coding sequences of the transformation-associated proteins. (Top) relative size in kilobase pairs. (Upper
bar) organization of the genome in short unique sequence (US), internal repeat (IR), long unique sequence (UL), and terminal repeats
(TR). (Lower bar) positions of the Bam HI restriction fragments. (Gene map) size, position, and direction of transcription are given by
arrows. The names of the open reading frames are given above each transcript. For example, BYRFI stands for Bam Y rightward open
reading frame number 1. EBNA, EBV-determined nuclear antigen; LMP, latent membrane protein. From Torsteinsdottir (46).
cally activate expression of adhesion molecules LFA-1,
LFA-3, and ICAM-1 and CD23 FCR11 and transferin
receptor on lymphoblastoid cells (7).
Silently, EBV infects children establishing lifelong
latency; however, when infected primarily, two-thirds
of adolescents develop IM. The clinical and pathological
features of IM are the result ofthe immunological strug-
gle going on between the EBV-infected B-cells and T-
cells, which are both polyclonally stimulated by the in-
fection. Hence, pharyngitis, fever, enlarged lymph
nodes, and hepatosplenomegaly are frequent signs and
symptoms of IM (6).
The atypical lymphocytosis seen during the initial few
weeks of IM are due to a polyclonal expansion of pre-
dominantly CD8-positive T-cells. Also, a modest in-
crease in both CD4 and SIg-positive B-cells is noted
initially during the illness (8). Both EBV-specific and
nonspecific cytotoxic T-cells and natural killer cell ac-
tivity contribute to the elimination of EBV-infected B-
cells. During latency, approximately one in one million
B-cells in peripheral blood contain EBV. Thus, spon-
taneous cell lines can be established from peripheral
blood in vitro.
EBV-specific antibodies sequentially emerge follow-
ing infection including IgM anti-VCA, IgG anti-VCA,
anti-EA, and after approximately 2 months, IgG anti-
EBNA. Congenitally immune-deficient children tend to
show low or absent anti-EBNA response, and depend-
ing on the type ofimmune deficiency, anti-EA and anti-
VCA titers may be abnormally elevated (9). Presence
of EBV can be identified using a variety of techniques
(Table 1).
EBV-Induced LPD in Immune
Deficient Patients
From 1979 to 1981, Purtilo initiated collaborative
studies with groups of investigators in Stockholm, Min-
Table 1. Detection of EBV in patient samples.
Polymerase chain reaction using synthetic oligonucleotide EBNA
primers
Southern blot hybridization using cloned fragments of EBV DNA
In situ hybridization using cloned fragments of EBV DNA
Development of EBV-positive spontaneous lymphoblastoid cell lines
EBNA staining of infected cells
Immunoblotting for presence of EBNA proteins
EBV-specific serology using IF or ELISA techniques
Rapid slide tests
Heterophile antibodies
Immortalization of cord lymphocytes with throat washings
neapolis, and elsewhere to determine whether EBV is
responsible for LPD in organ transplant recipients and
children with primary immunodeficiency. The results of
these collaborative studies were published in a special
edition of Cancer Research in 1981 (10) and in a mon-
ograph (11).
These collaborative studies disclosed the LPD found
in renal transplant recipients is due to EBV. In young
patients, LPD tends to be disseminated but with time
can evolve into a malignant lymphoma (12). This is likely
due to primary infection occurring in the young patients
leading to an IM-like disease. In contrast, elderly in-
dividuals who have latent virus undergo reactivation of
EBV owing to immunosuppression. These patients are
more apt to develop solitary masses in extranodal sites.
Recognition that EBV is the cause of LPD in organ
transplant recipients has permitted development of
strategies to prevent and treat individuals with this
complication. For example, withdrawal of immuno-
suppression can lead to regression of the LPD in cases
where the proliferation is polyclonal (13). Furthermore,
use of acyclovir can be beneficial in some instances (12).
Early diagnosis of LPD can also lead to prevention of
the malignant lymphoma (Table 1).
The use of high-dose cyclosporin and monoclonal an-
Transformation -
associated
prote inS
226
EBV-INDUCED DISEASES IN IMMUNODEFICIENCY
tibody to CD3 renders individuals at very high risk for
malignant lymphoma. Particularly vulnerable are bone
marrow transplant recipients who are treated with
OKT3 (corresponding to CD3) monoclonal antibody to
deplete donor marrow T-cells (14). Methods must be
developed to obviate these deadly consequences of im-
munosuppression.
Individuals infected with human immunodeficiency vi-
rus (HIV) are at high risk for developing EBV-induced
diseases including hairy leukoplakia of the tongue, per-
sistent lymphadenopathy, pulmonary lymphoid inter-
stitial pneumonia (LIP), hyperplasia of the lymphoid
tissue in the colon, and malignant B-cell lymphomas.
An estimated 1,000-fold increase of B-cell lymphomas
occurs in individuals infected with HIV (15). Approxi-
mately one-half of these lymphomas carry EBV gen-
ome. Similarly, the LIP lesion in the lungs of children
with AIDS is due to EBV. It is likely that long-term
survivors with HIV infection will be at increasingly high
risk of developing EBV-driven LPD.
We and others have demonstrated that children with
immunodeficiency diseases have a markedly increased
risk for EBV-driven LPD. This ranges from about 2%
for children with Bruton's agammaglobulinemia to
about 25% for males with XLP (16). Our laboratory
focuses on XLP, and so a summary of the disease will
be provided as a model for studying immunodeficiency
and EBV-induced LPD.
LPD in Patients with XLP
During the two decades that have passed since Purtilo
performed an autopsy on an 8-year-old boy in the Dun-
can family who had succumbed to IM, much has been
learned about XLP. Our international registry of XLP
now contains 60 kindreds who are being studied com-
prehensively and prospectively.
Approximately 240 individuals are enrolled in the re-
gistry. Patients with XLP invariably develop severe or
fatal IM (60% of cases), acquired hypogammaglobuli-
nemia (30% of cases), and/or malignant lymphoma (25%
of cases). Phenotypes may overlap in the same individ-
ual or occur sequentially with time. Approximately 60%
of the boys succumb to IM by 10 years of age, and all
individuals with the XLP genotype die before they are
40 years old (17).
The fatal infectious mononucleosis (FIM) phenotype
is characterized by fulminating uncontrolled polyclonal
T- and B-cell proliferative responses following EBV in-
fection. Numerous EBV-infected B-cells infiltrate liver,
bone marrow, and other organs. Misdirected cytotoxic
T-cells concurrently invade the tissues but fail to elim-
inate the EBV-infected B-cells and thus miss their tar-
get, possibly causing damage to the liver, bone marrow,
and other infiltrated tissues. Consequently, the individ-
uals succumb to liver (18) and/or bone marrow failure
(19). Individuals who survive primary EBV infection
and acute infectious mononucleosis subsequently de-
velop either hypogammaglobulinemia or malignant B-
cell lymphoma. Those with the hypogammaglobulinemia
phenotype often show marked necrosis of lymph nodes,
thymus, and other lymphoid tissues. Although their pe-
ripheral blood B-cells are present in normal numbers,
they fail to secrete adequate amounts of immunoglob-
ulin.
The males who develop malignant lymphoma follow-
ing EBV infection generally have the BL-like type in-
volving the ileocecal region, central nervous system, or
other extranodal sites (20). Survival is often long-term,
especially in those who concurrently exhibit hypogam-
maglobulinemia (17).
Recently we have mapped the XLP locus using DNA
probes in the X chromosome, especially DXS42, DXS37,
and DXS10. These probes have restriction length po-
lymorphisms (RFLP) and link tightly with the XLP
locus (21). We have also identified a family in Omaha
with a deletion involving the XLP locus at Xq25 (22).
These findings allow us to make accurate diagnoses and
to provide genetic counseling and immunoprophylaxis
with IV immunoglobulin containing antibodies to EBV.
Mechanisms of Polyclonal to
Monoclonal B-Cell Conversion
Klein (23) has hypothesized that EBV drives poly-
clonal B-cell proliferation and that breakage and recip-
rocal translocation involving chromosomes 8 (c-myc), 14
(heavy chain), 22 (lambda), and 2 (kappa) are involved
in development of BL. Klein and colleagues have also
demonstrated a similar condition in rats and mice plas-
macytomas. Moreover, a molecular contruct of Ig-myc
when in transgenic mice results in malignant pre-B and
B-cell lymphomas in the mice. These mice are patented
and can be purchased for studies.
That immunodeficiency is permissive ofEBV-induced
malignant lymphoma is attested to by studies demon-
strating immunodeficiency and EBV-containing malig-
nant lymphoma in children infected with malaria and
EBV in the BL belt, organ transplant recipients, AIDS
victims, and immune-deficient children (24). Further-
more, recent studies in the severe combined immuno-
deficiency (SCID) mouse demonstrate that when pe-
ripheral blood mononuclear cells are engrafted from an
EBV seropositive individual, the mice eventually de-
velop lethal LPD (25). The foregoing conditions are all
characterized by T-cell deficiency allowing EBV to drive
B-cell proliferation in a sustained manner.
EBV-Induced Carcinomas
The EBV genome was first found in 1970 by Zur
Hausen (26) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and
subsequently Brichacek has demonstrated the virus in
supraglottic tumors and tonsillar carcinomas (27,28) and
occasional thymomas (29). Our inability to explain how
EBV infection during infancy could be responsible for
NPC in adults has been perplexing. Surely, immuno-
logic and genetic factors play a role in allowing NPC to
develop. The tumor develops primarily in Chinese
males. Males have a relative immune deficiency com-
227
PURTILO, OKANO, AND GRIERSON
Table 2. Expression of EBNAs and LMP in Burkitt's lymphoma
(BL) tissues, lines, and lymphoblastoid cell lines.
Lymphoblastoid
EBNA and LMP BL tissue BL line cell lines
EBNA
1 + + +
2 - -1+ +
3 - -1+ +
4 - -1+ +
5 - -1+ +
6 - -1+ +
LMP - -/+ +
pared to females (30). Cofactors such as nitrosamines
and phorbol esters have been proposed as activators of
EBV leading to the NPC. Supporting the view that
EBV is responsible for the tumor is the finding of mon-
oclonality of the EBV incorporated in the tumors (31).
Recently, investigators in Birmingham, Memphis,
and Omaha have focused attention on EBV as a poten-
tial factor in uterine cervical carcinogenesis. Young and
Sixbey (32) have infected cervical epithelial cells, and
the virus has been isolated from mucus from the en-
docervix. More recently, Luka and others have found
EBNA staining of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and
precursor lesions (J. Luka, personal communication).
Moreover, we have found defects in natural killer cell
activity and abnormally elevated EBV titers in patients
with cervical carcinoma (D. Purtilo et al., unpublished
observations). Few would argue that human papillo-
mavirus (HPV) is important in cervical carcinogenesis
(33). EBV, however, may be a cofactor in the induction
of this malignant neoplasm. This hypothesis is being
tested actively in our laboratories.
Cellular Regulation of Expression of
EBV-Encoded Proteins
Evidence is substantial that tumor cells differentially
express EBV-encoded proteins. EBNA1 is expressed
in all virus genome-carrying cells and is probably re-
sponsible for maintenance of the virus genome in the
episomal state (7). EBNA2 is connected with the trans-
forming capability of the virus, since variant strains
such as P3HR1 that lack this part ofthe genome do not
immortalize B-cells in vitro. The BL lymphoblastoid
cells derived from the same donor are differentially re-
sistant to cytotoxic T-cells. BL cells are probably re-
sistant because they do not express EBNA2-6 and LMP.
At least EBNA2 and LMP may serve as targets for
cytotoxic T-cells after they have been processed to an-
tigen peptides and associated with MHC class I (34).
Moreover, BL cells downregulate certain class I HLA
determinants as compared to the lymphoblastoid cell
lines (35-37). Finally, BL cells express certain cell adhe-
sion molecules at lower levels than the corresponding
lymphoblastoid cells (38). Klein has speculated that
these differences between the BL and the lymphoblas-
toid cells provide immunoselection advantage with re-
sistance to cytotoxic T-cells (Table 2).
Table 3. Spectrum of classical EBV-associated diseases and disorders in immunologically compromised patients.
Classical malignancies Complications of IM (acute, recurrent, or chronic)
BL Hepatitis
NPC (undifferentiated type) Rupture of spleen
Unusual malignancies Virus-associated hemophagocytic syndrome
Tonsil carcinoma Hemolytic anemia
Supraglottic laryngeal carcinoma Aplastic anemia
Thymic carcinoma Agranulocytosis
Salivary gland carcinoma Erythroblastopenia
Chronic myeloproliferative disorder? Thrombocytopenia
Disorders in primary immunodeficiencies Agammaglobulinemia or hypogammaglobulinemia
Malignant B-cell lymphoma or lymphoproliferation (primarily) Neurological disorder (meningoencephalitis, transverse myelitis,
XLPa Guillain-Barre syndrome, Bell's palsy, cerebellar ataxia, and
Ataxia telangiectasia syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion)
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome Arthritis
Severe combined immunodeficiency Myocarditis
Common variable immunodeficiency Pneumonitis
Chediak-Higashi syndrome Nephritis
Selective IgM deficiency Parotiditis
Disorders in transplant recipients (renal, cardiac, lung, liver, bone Complications of chronic active EBV infection
marrow, and thymic epithelium) Lymphadenopathy
Malignant B-cell lymphoma or lymphoproliferation Hepatosplenomegaly
IM Pancytopenia
Allograft rejection Hypogammaglobulinemia
Disorders in AIDS B- or T-cell malignant lymphoma or lymphoproliferation
Hairy leukoplakia Cervical carcinoma
Lymphadenopathy Miscellaneous
Malignant B-cell lymphoma Reactivation in pregnancy
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis Birth defects?
Colonic lymphoid hyperplasia
aPatients with XLP have mainly exhibited severe or fatal IM, acquired hypogammaglobulinemia, and malignant B-cell lymphoma.
228
EBV-INDUCED DISEASES IN IMMUNODEFICIENCY 229
Prevention and Therapy Against
EBV-Induced LPD
Based on the observation that children are protected
from BL up until 6 months of age by EBV-neutralizing
antibodies from their mothers, we have placed sero-
negative patients with XLP on IV immunoglobulin. In
one instance, relatively high titer antibodies failed to
protect against EBV infection with FIM ensuing (D.
Purtilo, unpublished observations). We have also at-
tempted to use interferon gamma (39), and more re-
cently, high-dose immunoglobulin and interferon alpha,
with limited success (40). Shapiro et al. (41) have suc-
cessfully treated immunodeficient children with these
agents.
Development of a vaccine against EBV membrane
antigen (GP340) has resulted in some protection of cot-
ton-topped tamarins against primary EBV infection
(42-45). Logistical considerations seem to preclude ex-
tensive use of a vaccine in southeast Asia and tropical
Africa; however, in congenitally immune-deficient pa-
tients such as those with XLP, vaccination may be of
some benefit. Currently, Epstein is testing a vaccine in
normal healthy volunteers (Anthony Epstein, personal
communication).
Summary
In summary, the ubiquitous EBV usually does not
cause disease in humans. However, in immune incom-
petent individuals, life-threatening lymphoproliferative
diseases can arise. Early diagnosis and recognition of
immune deficiency and EBV-driven LPD can be life
saving. The various EBV-related diseases that we and
others have identified are listed in Table 3. Clearly,
immunodeficiency is a major risk factor in EBV-induced
carcinogenesis. Immunodeficiency to other DNA vi-
ruses such as papilloma virus and hepatitis B virus may
potentially permit squamous cell carcinoma and hepa-
tocellular carcinoma to ensue in certain patients.
The authors thank colleagues working in the X-linked Lymphopro-
liferative Disease Registry and laboratories for their contributions
and Karen Spiegel for typing the manuscript. This work was sup-
ported in part by PHS CA30196 and CA36727, awarded by the Na-
tional Cancer Institute, and the Lymphoproliferative Research Fund.
REFERENCES
1. Purtilo, D. T., Manolov, G., Manolova, Y., Harada, S., Lipscomb,
H., and Tatsumi, E. Role of Epstein-Barr virus in the etiology
of Burkitt's lymphoma. In: Burkitt's Lymphoma: A Human Can-
cer Model (G. Lenoir, G. T. O'Conor, and C. Olweny, Eds.), IARC
Scientific Publications, Geneva, 1985, pp. 231-240.
2. Ziegler, J. L., Magrath, I. T., Gerber, P., and Levine, P. H.
Epstein-Barr virus and human malignancy. Ann. Intern. Med.
86: 323-336 (1977).
3. Purtilo, D. T., Yang, J. P. S., Cassel, C. K., Harper, P., Ste-
phenson, S. R., Landing, B. H., and Vawter, G. F. X-linked
recessive progressive combined variable immunodeficiency (Dun-
can's disease). Lancet i: 935-950 (1975).
4. Starzl, T. E., and Penn, I. Malignancies in renal transplant pa-
tients. Transplant Rev. 7: 112-125 (1971).
5. Gatti, R. A., and Good, R. A. Occurrence of malignancy and
immunodeficiency diseases. Cancer 28: 89-98 (1971).
6. Okano, M., Thiele, G. M., Davis, J. R., Grierson, H. L., and
Purtilo, D. T. Epstein-Barr virus and human disease: recent ad-
vances in diagnosis. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 1: 300-312 (1988).
7. Sugden, B. An intricate route to immortality. Cell 57: 5-7 (1989).
8. Thorley-Lawson, D. A. Basic virological aspects of Epstein-Barr
virus infection. Sem. Hematol. 25: 247-260 (1988).
9. Purtilo, D. T., Tatsumi, E., Manolov, G., Manolova, Y., Harada,
S., Lipscomb, H., and Krueger, G. Epstein-Barr virus as an
etiological agent in the pathogenesis of lymphoproliferative and
aproliferative diseases in immune deficient patients. In: Inter-
national Review of Experimental Pathology, Vol. 27 (G. W. Ri-
chter and M. A. Epstein, Eds.), Academic Press, New York,
1985, pp. 113-183.
10. Purtilo, D. T., and Klein, G. Epstein-Barr virus-induced lym-
phoproliferative diseases in immune deficient patients. Cancer
Res. 41: 4209-4304 (1981).
11. Purtilo, D. T., Ed. Immune Deficiency and Cancer: Epstein-Barr
Virus and Lymphoproliferative Malignancies. Plenum Press,
New York, 1984.
12. Hanto, D. W., Frizzera, G., Gajl-Peczalska, K. J., Sakamoto, K.,
Purtilo, D. T., Balfour, H. H., Simmons, R. L., and Najarian, J.
S. Epstein-Barr virus-induced B-cell lymphoma after renal trans-
plantation: acyclovir therapy and transition from polyclonal to
monoclonal B-cell proliferation. New Engl. J. Med. 306: 913-918
(1982).
13. Starzl, T. E., Nalesnik, M. A., Porter, K. A., Ho, M., Swatsuki,
S., Griffith, B. P., Rosenthal, J. T., Hakala, T. R., Shaw, B. W.
Jr., and Hardesty, R. H. Reversibility of lymphomas and lym-
phoproliferative lesions developing under cyclosporin-steroid
therapy. Lancet i: 583-587 (1984).
14. Davey, D. D., Kamat, D., Lazewski, M., Goeken, J. A., Kemp,
J., Trigg, M. E., Purtilo, D. T., Davis, J., and Dick, F. R. Ep-
stein-Barr virus related lymphoproliferative disorders following
bone marrow transplantation: an immunologic and genotypic
analysis. Modern Pathol. 1: 27-34 (1989).
15. Ernberg, I. The role ofEpstein-Barr virus in lymphomas ofhomo-
sexual males. Prog. Allergy 37: 307-318 (1986).
16. Purtilo, D. T., Linder, J., and Seemayer, T. A. Immunopathology
of inherited and acquired immunodeficiency disorders. In: Diag-
nostic Immunopathology (R. B. Colvin, A. K. Bahn, and R. T.
McCluskey, Eds.), Plenum Press, New York, 1988, pp. 121-149.
17. Grierson, H. L., and Purtilo, D. T. Epstein-Barr virus infections
in males with the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. Ann.
Intern. Med. 106: 538-545 (1987).
18. Markin, R., Mroczek, E., Weisenburger, D. D., Grierson, H.,
Linder, J., Davis, J., Brichacek, B., and Purtilo, D. T. Hepatitis
in infectious mononucleosis. Gastroenterology 93: 1210-1217
(1987).
19. Mroczek, E., Weisenburger, D. D., Grierson, H. L., Markin, R.,
and Purtilo, D. T. Fatal infectious mononucleosis and virus-as-
sociated hemophagocytic syndrome. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 111:
530-535 (1987).
20. Harrington, D. S., Weisenburger, D. D., and Purtilo, D. T. Ma-
lignant lymphomas in the X-linked lymphoproliferative syn-
drome. Cancer 59: 1419-1429 (1987).
21. Skare, J. C., Grierson, H. L., Sullivan, J. O., Nussbaum, R. L.,
Purtilo, D. T., Sylla, B., Lenoir, G., Reilly, D. S., White, B. N.,
and Milunsky, A. Linkage analysis of seven kindreds with the X-
linked lymphoproliferative syndrome confirms that the XLP locus
is near DXS42 and DXS37. Hum. Genet. 82: 354-358 (1989).
22. Sanger, W., Grierson, H. L., Skare, J., Wyandt, H., Pirruccello,
S. J., Fordyce, R., and Purtilo, D. T. Partial Xq25 deletion in a
family with the X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP). Can-
cer Genet. Cytogenet., in press.
23. Klein, G. Lymphoma development in mice and humans: diversity
ofinitiation is followed by convergent cytogenetic evolution. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76: 2442-2446 (1979).
24. Purtilo, D. T. Defective immune surveillance in viral oncogenesis.
Lab. Invest. 51: 373-385 (1984).
25. Mosier, D. E., Gulizia, R. J., Baird, S. M., and Wilson, D. B.
230 PURTILO, OKANO, AND GRIERSON
Transfer of a functional human immune system to mice with se-
vere combined immunodeficiency. Nature 335: 256-259 (1988).
26. Zur Hausen, H., Schulte-Holthauzen, H., Klein, G., Henle, G.,
and Henle, W., Clifford, P., and Santesson, L. EBV DNA in
biopsies of Burkitt's tumours and anaplastic carcinomas of the
nasopharynx. Nature 228: 1056-1058 (1970).
27. Brichacek, B., Hirsch, I., Sibl, O., Vilikusova, E., and Vonka,
V. Association of some supraglottic laryngeal carcinomas with
EB virus. Int. J. Cancer 32: 193-197 (1983).
28. Brichacek, B., Hirsch, I., Sibl, O., Vilikusova, E., and Vonka,
V. Presence of Epstein-Barr virus DNA in carcinomas of the
palatine tonsil. JNCI 72: 809-815 (1984).
29. McGuire, L. J., Huang, D. P., Teoh, R., Arnold, M., Wong, K.,
and Lee, J. C. K. Epstein-Barr virus genome in thymoma and
thymic lymphoid hyperplasia. Am. J. Pathol. 131: 385-390 (1988).
30. Purtilo, D. T., and Sullivan, J. L. Immunological bases for su-
perior survival of females. Am. J. Dis. Child. 133: 1251-1253
(1979).
31. Raab-Traub, N., and Flynn, K. The structure of the termini of
the Epstein-Barr virus as a marker ofclonal cellular proliferation.
Cell 47: 883-889 (1986).
32. Young, L. S., and Sixbey, J. W. Epstein-Barr virus and epithelial
cells: a possible role for the virus in the development of cervical
carcinoma. Cancer Surveys 7: 507-518 (1988).
33. Roman, A., and Fife, K. H. Human papillomaviruses: are we
ready to type? Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2: 166-190 (1989).
34. Townsend, A. R. M., Rotbard, J., Gotch, F. M., Bahadur, G.,
Wraith, D., and McMichael, A. J. The epitopes of influenza nu-
cleoprotein recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes can be defined
with short synthetic peptides. Cell 44: 959-968 (1986).
35. Masucci, M. G., Torsteinsdottir, S., Colombani, J., Brautbar, C.,
Klein, E., and Klein, G. Down regulation ofclass I HLA antigens
and of the Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein
in Burkitt lymphoma lines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 4567-
4571 (1987).
36. Torsteinsdottir, S., Brautbar, C., Klein, G., Klein, E., and Mas-
ucci, M. G. Differential expression of HLA antigens on human
B-cell lines of normal and malignant origin: a consequence of im-
mune surveillance or a phenotypic vestige ofthe progenitor cells?
Int. J. Cancer 41: 913-919 (1988).
37. Masucci, M. G., Stam, N. J., Torsteinsdottir, S., Neefjes, J. J.,
Klein, G., and Ploegh, H. J. Allele specific down-regulation of
MHC class I antigens in Burkitt lymphoma lines. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 84: 4567-4571 (1987).
38. Gregory, C. D., Murray, R. J., Edwards, C. F., and Rickinson,
A. B. Downregulation of cell adhesion molecules LFA-3 and
ICAM-1 in Epstein-Barr virus-positive Burkitt's lymphoma un-
derlies tumour cell escape from virus-specific T cell surveillance.
J. Exp. Med. 187: 1811-1824 (1988).
39. Okano, M., Thiele, G. M., Kobayashi, R. H., Davis, J. R., Syn-
ovec, M. S., Grierson, H. L., Jaffe, H. S., and Purtilo, D. T.
Interferon-gamma in a family with acute Epstein-Barr virus in-
fection. J. Clin. Immunol. 9: 48-54 (1989).
40. Okano, M., Pirruccello, S. J., Grierson, H. L., Johnson, D. R.,
Thiele, G. M., and Purtilo, D. T. Immunovirological studies of
fatal infectious mononucleosis in a patient with X-linked lympho-
proliferative syndrome treated with intravenous immunoglobulin
and interferon alpha. Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 54: in press.
41. Shapiro, R. S., Chauvenet, A., McGuire, W., Pearson, A., Craft,
A. W., McGlave, P., and Filipovich, A. Treatment of B-cell lym-
phoproliferative disorders with interferon alpha and intravenous
gamma globulin. New Engl. J. Med. 318: 1334 (1988).
42. Ulaeto, D., Wallace, L., Morgan, A., Morein, B., and Rickinson,
A. B. In vitro T cell responses to a candidate Epstein-Barr virus
vaccine: human CD4 + T cell clones specific forthe major envelope
glycoprotein gp 340. Eur. J. Immunol. 18: 1689-1697 (1988).
43. Finerty, S., Scullion, F. T., and Morgan, A. J. Demonstration in
vitro of cell mediated immunity to Epstein-Barr virus in cotton-
top tamarins. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 73: 181-185 (1988).
44. Young, L. S., Finerty, S., Brooks, L., Scullion, F., Rickinson,
A. B., and Morgan, A. J. Epstein-Barr virus gene expression in
malignant lymphomas induced by experimental virus infection of
cottontop tamarins. J. Virol. 673: 1967-1974 (1989).
45. Emini, E. A., Schleif, W. A., Silberklang, M., Lehman, D., and
Ellis, R. W. Vero cell-expressed Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
gp350/220 protects marmosets from EBV challenge. J. Med. Vi-
rol. 27: 120-123 (1989).
46. Torsteinsdottir, S. Epstein-Barr virus carrying B-cell lines of
normal and malignant origin. Doctoral dissertation, Department
of Tumor Biology. Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 1988.
