Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 100, pp. 293-306, 1993
The Toxicology of Benzene
by Robert Snyder,' Gisela Witz,' and Bernard D.
Goldstein'
Benzene is metabolized, primarily in the liver, to a series of phenolic and ring-opened products and their conjugates.
The mechanism ofbenzene-induced aplastic anemia appears to involve the concerted action ofseveral metabolites acting
together on early stem and progenitor ceUs, as well as on early blast cells, such as pronormoblasts and normoblasts to inhibit
maturation and amplification. Benzene metabolites also inhibit the function ofmicroenvironmental stromal cells necessary
to support the growth ofdifferentiating and maturing marrow cells. The nechanism ofbenzene-induced leukemogenesis
is less well understood. Benzene and its metabolites do not function well asmutagens but are highly clastogenic, produc-
ing chromosome aberrations, sister chromatid exchange, and micronuclei. Benzene has been shown to be a multi-organ
carcinogen in animals. Epidemiological studies demonstrate that benzene is a human leukemogen. There is need to bet-
ter define the lower end of the dose-response curve for benzene as a human leukemogen. The application of emerging
methods in biologically based risk assessment employing phannacokinetic and mechanistic data may help to clarify the
uncertainties in low-dose risk assessment.
Introduction
The biological impacts of benzene have been studied in hu-
mans and in animal models for most ofthis century. This review
concentrates on several aspects of the biology ofbenzene. We
discuss its metabolic fate, our current understanding of the
mechanism by which it produces its effects, attempts to develop
pharmacokinetic models for its disposition, and, finally, we
discuss the impact ofbenzene on humans. Our aim is not only to
present a synopsis ofthe literature on benzene toxicity, but also
to challenge investigators to initiate new studies that will lead to
a thorough understanding ofbenzene as a hazardous agent in our
environment.
Metabolism
Benzene is the smallest and most stable aromatic hydrocarbon.
In order to be toxic, benzene must be metabolized to reactive in-
termediates (1-3). Available studies suggest that benzene toxicity
is mediated by multiple metabolites acting on multiple cellular
targets (4). This discussion briefly reviews benzene metabolism,
mechanism of metabolite formation and the chemical reactivi-
ty ofbenzene metabolites in relation to cellular targets. For re-
cent detailed reviews, the reader is referred to Kalf (5), Snyder
and Chatterjee (6), and Yardley-Jones et al. (7).
'Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute, Rutgers, the State
University ofNew Jersey and the University ofMedicine and Dentistry ofNew
Jersey/Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1179.
Address reprint requests to R. Snyder, Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences Institute, Rutgers, the State University ofNew Jersey and the Univer-
sity of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey/Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School. Piscataway, NJ 08855-1179.
Metabolic Pathways
The major metabolism of benzene in vivo takes place in the
liver and consists of the formation of ring-hydroxylated com-
pounds (Fig. 1). Early studies conducted in rabbits (8-10) show-
ed that benzene is hydroxylated to phenol, catechol, hydro-
quinone, and 1,2,4-benzenetriol, which are excreted as ethereal
sulfates and glucuronides in the urine (Fig. 2). Work by Jaffe (11 )
and other investigators (12) showed that benzene metabolism also
involves ring opening as indicated by the urinary excretion of
trans,trans-muconic acid, a ring-opened, six carbon diene dicar-
boxylic acid. The formation of trans,trans-muconic acid (mu-
conic acid) was definitively established by Parke and Williams
(9), who demonstrated the excretion of[ 4C]muconic acid in the
urine of rabbits dosed with ['4C]benzene.
The metabolic pathways ofbenzene originally determined in
rabbits were subsequently established in rats and mice (13-16).
Two metabolic pathways appear to be involved, one leading to
ring-hydroxylated compounds and one that involves ring open-
ing of benzene. The hydroxylated compounds are further
metabolized to glucuronide or sulfate conjugates, which are ex-
creted in the urine. These conjugates are detoxification products,
because conjugation leads to their elimination and prevents the
formation of toxic intermediates derived from hydroxylated
benzene metabolites. Conjugation with glutathione and urinary
excretion of the mercapturic acid is an additional pathway that
detoxifies benzene oxide, the initial reactive intermediate formed
during metabolism ofbenzene to phenol (discussed below). The
urinary metabolite muconic acid is at present the only known
ring-opened metabolite formed from benzene in vivo. This
metabolite is a detoxification product of trans,trans-mucon-
aldehyde, a reactive intermediate formed during microsomal
metabolism of benzene via ring opening (17).
The initial step in the metabolism ofbenzene results in the for-
SNYDER ETAL.
HO
SG
PREMERCAPTURIC
ACID K
0
0
p-BENZOOUINONE
H H
Jl I
OHC-C-C-C =C - CHO
H H
TRANS,TRANS-
MUCONALDEHYDE
CATECHOL
o
1.2,4-TRIHYDROXY BENZENE
FIGURE 1. Intermediary metabolism of benzene. [0] indicates oxidation without specifying mechanism; GSH, glutathione. Question marks indicated suspected,
but as yet unproven, pathways. Dotted lines leading to 1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene suggest that it may be formed by either pathway.
Glucuronide and Sulfate Conjugates
O (S,G) 0 (S,G)
OH
O (S.G)
OH
0 (S,G)?
OH
OH
Mercapturic Acids
CH2-CH-COOH
S NH-COCH3
OrOH
6-N-ACETYLCYSTEINYL-S-
2.4-CYCLOHEXADIENOL
CH2-CH-COOH
S NH-COCH3
PHENYLMERCAPTURIC ACID
OH
S-CH2-CH-COOH
OH NHCOCH3
HYDROOUINONE-S-
PHENYLMERCAPTURIC ACID
DNA-based Adduct(s)
OH
N- N.
H2N3 Nf-
N-7-PHENYLGUANINE
Ring-Opened Metabolite(s)
H H
HOOC-C C-C =C-COOH
H H
TRANS,TRANS-MUCONIC ACID
FIGURE 2. Urinary metabolites of benzene. The sulfate and glucuronide conjugates of phenol, catechol, and hydroquinone have been characterized. The location
ofthe conjugate on 1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene has yet to be established. The glutathione derivatives, the DNA base derivative and the ring-opened product are those
which have been identified in urine.
mation of phenol. Numerous in vitro studies utilizing cellular
fractions or reconstituted purified enzyme systems indicate that
this step involves metabolism ofbenzene by cytochrome P-450
monooxygenase (18). Benzene is a substrate for isozyme P-450
IIEI (19), and P-450 monooxygenases are also active in the
metabolism ofphenol to hydroquinone and catechol (20). The
formation ofphenol is believed to involve the intermediate for-
mation of benzene oxide followed by rearrangement to phenol
(21). Alternatively, phenol can also be formed from benzene ox-
ide by acid-catalyzed opening of the epoxide ring, followed by
o-BENZOOUINONE
294
TOXICOLOGYOFBENZENE29
aromatization via loss ofa proton.
Mechanisms of phenol formation that do not involve an in-
termediate epoxide but rather direct insertion of oxygen or
aromatic hydroxylation (22) may also account for the formation
of appreciable amounts of phenol. Phenol formation from
benzene in a reconstituted system containing rabbit liver P-450
isozyme LM2 (P-450 IIEI) or microsomes was reported to be in-
hibited by the hydroxyl radical scavengers mannitol and dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMS0), as well as by catalase, horseradish perox-
idase, and superoxide dismutase (23). These findings suggest
that the cytochrome P-450-dependent formation of phenol can
be mediated by hydroxyl radicals most likely generated from
hydrogen peroxide. The latter is thoughtto be formed by dismuta-
tion of superoxide anion radicals released from cytochrome
P-450. Hydroxyl radical-mediated phenol formation involves ad-
dition ofa hydroxyl radical to the benzene ring, resulting in the
formation of a reactive hydroxy cyclohexadienyl radical (24).
Phenol can subsequently be formed by a dismutation reaction as
suggested by Cohen and Ofodile (25), who investigated phenol
formation from benzene in a hydroxyl radical-generating Fenton
system. A role for hydroxyl radicals in the metabolism ofbenzene
to phenol has also been suggested by Giorsky and Coon (26), who
concluded that the hydroxyl radical-mediated formation of
phenol is the dominant pathway at micromolar concentrations,
whereas at higher (millimolar) concentrations, the direct oxida-
tion by P-450 is quantitatively of much greater importance.
Cytochrome P-450 mediated metabolism ofphenol leads to the
formation ofhydroquinone andcatechol and the subsequentfor-
mation of 1,2,4-benzenetriol. An alternative pathway for the for-
mation ofcatechol involves metabolismofbenzene oxide by epox-
ide hydrolaseto benzene-trans-dihydrodiol, which is converted
to catechol by the action ofa dehydrogenase. Benzene oxide can
also react with glutathione under the influence ofa glutathione
transferase toeventually yieldaprephenylmercapturic acid (6-N-
acetyl-cysteinyl-S-2,4-cyclohexadienol). Under acidic conditions
this metabolite is aromatized by dehydration to S-phenyl-
mercapturic acid, and both compounds have been observed in
urine (27). The hydroxylated aromatic benzene metabolites are
further metabolized to sulfate or glucuronic acid conjugates.
The metabolite 2-(S-glutathionyl) hydroquinone has been iden-
tified in microsomal metabolism mixtures incubated with
benzene or phenol in the presence ofadded glutathione (28,29).
It is presumably formed by the reaction ofglutathione with ben-
zoquinone, a reactive intermediate derived from the oxidation of
hydroquinone. Hydroquinone-S-phenyl mercapturic acid deriv-
ed from the metabolism of2-(S-glutathionyl) hydroquinone has
been identified as a urinary metabolite in rats dosed in-
traperitoneally with benzene, phenol, or hydroquinone (30).
Thus, Figure 2 shows that the urinary metabolites of benzene
may include the glucuronic and sulfate conjugates ofthe phenolic
metabolites, the premercapturic and the mercapturic acids deriv-
ed from benzene oxide, the mercapturic acid derived from p-
benzoquinone, N-7-phenylguanine, derived from a DNA adduct
of benzene, and muconic acid.
Microsomal metabolism ofbenzene leads to the formation of
tmans,trmns-muconaldehyde (Fig. 3), a reactive ring-opened, six-
carbon diene dialdehyde (17). Muconaldehyde was also shown
to be formed in aqueous solutions ofbenzene irradiated with X-
CHO
CH20H
6-HYDROXY-2,4-
TRANS-TRANS-
HEXADIENAL
CH20H
CH20H
1 ,6-DIHYDROXY-2,4-
TRANS.TRANS-
HEXADIENE
AH
CHO
CHO
TRANS,TRANS.
MUCONALDEHYI
COOH
~CH20H
6-HYDROXY-2,4-
TRANS,TRANS-
HEXADIENOIC ACID
CHO
ALDH
COOH
6-OXO-
DE ~~TRANS,TRANS-
HEXADIENOIC
/ ACID
4OO
COOH
TRANS,TRANS-
MUCONIC ACID
FIGURE 3. Intermediary metabolism of muconaldehyde. ALDH, aldehyde
dehydrogenase; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase. The pathway with the ques-
tion mark indicates a possible route of metabolism.
rays (31,32) presumably via hydroxyl radical-mediated opening
of the benzene ring. These latter studies and others on the hy-
droxyl radical-mediated formation of phenol suggest that free
radicals may participate in benzene metabolism.
The metabolism ofmuconaldehyde (MUC; Fig. 3) by mouse
liver cytosol or a mouse liver soluble fraction results in a varie-
ty ofmetabolites that are formed by oxidation and/or reduction
ofthe aldehyde functional group(s) (33-35). Initial oxidation or
reduction leads to the aldehyde acid and aldehyde alcohol analog
of MUC, respectively. Subsequent reduction of the aldehyde
group ofthe mixed-aldehyde acid MUC analog or oxidation of
the mixed-aldehyde alcohol analog ofMUC leads to the forma-
tion of the mixed-hydroxy acid MUC analog, a metabolite in
which one aldehydic functional group ofMUC is reduced to the
alcohol and one is oxidized to the carboxylic acid. Interesting-
ly, the initial reduction to the aldehyde alcohol MUC analog is
reversible (G. Witz, unpublished data). The mixed aldehyde car-
boxylic acid analog ofMUC is further metabolized to muconic
acid, a urinary metabolite of benzene (9,36,37).
Reactive Metabolites in Benzene Metabolism
The major metabolism of benzene takes place in the liver
where it is mediated by cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase.
Metabolism ofbenzene by cytochrome P-450 results in the for-
mation ofbenzene oxide, an electrophilic reactive intermediate.
Evidence that benzene is indeed metabolized in vivo to benzene
oxide comes from studies by Mueller et al. (38) who identified
N-7-phenylguanine in the urine of rats exposed to 500 ppm
benzene for 8 hr. This adduct is most likely formed by reaction
ofbenzene oxide with the N-7 ofguanine, followed by aromatiza-
tion ofthe benzene ring via loss ofa molecule ofwater and subse-
quent depurination ofthe adduct from DNA. Although benzene
is also metabolized to phenol and other hydroxylated metabolites
inthebonenmarrow (39), P-450mediatedmetabolisminthistissue
occurs toarelativelylimitedextent. This isduetolowlevelsofthis
enzyme system in the bone maffow compared with liver.
295
SNYDER ETAL.
Indirect evidence indicates that muconaldehyde may be
another reactive metabolite formed in the liver (17). In addition,
the reactive intermediatesp-benzoquinone and o-benzoquinone
may be formed in this tissue by oxidation of hydroquinone and
catechol, respectively. These reactive quinone metabolites and
muconaldehyde are direct-acting alkylating agents capable of
reacting with cellular nucleophiles, including DNA (40,41).
Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies indicate that these me-
tabolites are genotoxic (42-45). Once formed in the liver, it is
unlikely that they survive long enough to reach the bone marrow.
It is possible, however, that reactive benzene metabolites, similar
to other reactive intermediates, may be bound to carriers that
release them after transport to the target tissue. Reactive in-
termediates may also be conjugated to form less reactive in-
termediates or "storage forms" which, after transport, release
the reactive metabolite through deconjugation. A third possibili-
ty germane perhaps to muconaldehyde may consist of me-
tabolism to a less reactive compound, i.e., a mixed aldehyde
alcohol MUC analog (Fig. 3), which itselfmay be hematotoxic
or is subsequently reactivated in the target tissue by metabolism
to the original reactive metabolite, i.e., muconaldehyde.
The bonemarrowhas been shown to accumulate hydroquinone
and catechol (46,47), two phenolic metabolites ofbenzene. As
discussed above, bone marrow, unlike the liver, contains low
levels of cytochrome P-450 and high levels of peroxidases.
Phenolic compounds are excellent electron donors for the
peroxidase-mediated metabolism ofhydrogen peroxide. Studies
by Eastmond et al. (48,49) and Sadler et al. (50) have shown that
phenol, catechol, and hydroquinone are excellent substrates for
myeloperoxidase, a peroxidase present in high concentrations in
the bone marrow. During myeloperoxidase metabolism, these
phenolic metabolites undergo one-electron oxidation and co-
valent binding to protein. The reactive species involved in the
binding are presumably radical intermediates, such as the semi-
quinone free radical ofhydroquinone, which are formed during
one-electron oxidation.
Para-benzoquinone is a reactivec3,,3unsaturated diketone that
has been implicated in bone marrow toxicity (51,52). Phenol and
catechol have been shown to stimulate the myeloperoxidase
dependent conversion of hydroquinone to p-benzoquinone
(52,53). Based on these studies, Smith et al. (54) proposed a two-
step mechanism ofbenzene toxicity that involves metabolism to
phenolic compounds in the liver, transport and accumulation of
these compounds in the bone marrow, followed by myelo-
peroxidase-mediated conversion of hydroquinone to p-
benzoquinone in a process stimulated by phenol and possibly
catechol. This mechanism ofp-benzoquinone formation does not
exclude a similar involvement by prostaglandin (H) synthetase
and eosinophil peroxidase in benzene toxicity (55).
Mechanisms of Benzene Toxicity
The most frequently observed toxic effect of benzene in
humans and in animal models used for the study ofbenzene tox-
icity has been bone marrow depression leading to aplastic anemia
(14). The correlation between the effects ofbenzene exposure in
humans and the effects produced in animal models was dem-
onstrated by Santesson in 1897 (56), Selling in 1916 (57) and
Weiskotten et al. in 1916 and 1920 (58,59). As a result many
studies in animals have been aimed at uncovering the mechanism
ofbenzene toxicity for the purpose ofapplying these observations
toward an understanding of the human disease.
During the latter half of this century, it has become apparent
that benzene also causes chromosomal abnormalities indicative
ofgenetic damage (60-64). Attempts to demonstrate mutagenic
activity of benzene have been largely unsuccessful (42), but
benzene is a human leukemogen (65) and causes solid tumors in
animals (66-68). Unfortunately, there is no convenient model for
studying the mechanisms by which benzene produces neoplastic
effects in animals. Although each of these effects, i.e., aplastic
anemia, chromosome damage, and carcinogenesis, are in-
dicative ofthe ultimate impact ofbenzene on bone marrow, the
relationship between these phenomena and the mechanisms by
which they are initiated remain to be fully understood. This sec-
tion describes the effects ofbenzene in model systems, discusses
the mechanisms by which these effects occur as we currently
understand them, and points out data gaps, which when filled
may help us to a better mechanistic appreciation ofthe biological
impact of benzene.
Hematopoiesis
The mechanism ofbenzene toxicity has ben examined on the
basis ofits effects on stem and progenitor cells in the bone mar-
row as well as its effects on the hematopoietic microenvironment.
Hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow give rise to the ma-
jor cell types in the circulation, i.e., erythrocytes, thrombocytes,
and the several major subdivisions which comprise the leuko-
cytes (69). The self-renewing stem cells which reproduce them-
selves, also yield a cell committed to eventual maturation to a
circulating cell. Growthfactors direct committed cells to enter
the maturational process, e.g., in the red cell line the committed
erythroid cell is sensitive to the initiating action of erythro-
poietin. To assure that the level ofmature cells is constant despite
the regular destruction of aged erythrocytes requires that the
marrow provide a mechanism for both maturation from the mor-
phology ofthe primitive stem cell to that ofthe mature circulating
erythrocyte, plus a mechanism for amplification to sustain the
requisite number ofcirculating erythrocytes, i.e., approximately
5 million cells/4L in humans with a survival time of 120 days.
Thus, a complex series ofbiosynthetic events results in the pas-
sage ofthese cells through several defined morphological stages,
during many of which the cells undergo mitosis to increase
total numbers. A related, but unique process leads to megakaryo-
cyte production and eventual release ofplatelets in large numbers
(approximately 250,000/L in humans with a survival time of 10
days). Fewer leukocytes, e.g., between 5 and 12,000 cells/A4L in
most species, are required. However, the process is complicated
by the need for several different forms including granulocytes,
lymphocytes, monocytes, etc., each divided into several function-
al and morphological subtypes and with differing lifetimes. These
also undergo a series of steps directed by cytokines or other
growth factors involving both maturation and amplification.
The hematopoieticmicroenvironment is composed ofa variety
of cells and structures including endosteal cells, fibroblasts,
reticuloendothelial cells (monocytes and macrophages), fat cells,
and bone and sinusoids ofthe marrow and is responsible for sus-
taining stem and progenitor cells. Proteins such as erythro-
poietin, colony-stimulating factors, the interleukins and related
cytokine mediators are products ofmicroenvironmental cells and
296
TOXICOLOGY OFBENZENE
play key roles in directing these events (69). In the absence ofthe
microenvironment, primitive blood cells cannot mature.
Effects of Benzene
Many studies have shown that treatment ofwholeanimals with
benzene leads to decrements in the levels of circulating blood
cells (14). Mechanistic studies have benefited fromthe develop-
ment of a variety ofin vitro techniques. Thus, the bone marrow
ofanimals exposed to benzene using various exposure protocols
can be removed and grown in culture to explore the effects of
benzene on specific cell lines at more or less specific stages of
maturation. Several laboratories have reported on decreases in
the multipotential hematopoietic stem cell (spleen colony form-
ing unit or CFU-S) in mice after a variety ofexposure protocols
(70-73). Similar effects have been observed using the early
granulocyte-macrophage CFU-C assay (72,74). Decreases have
also been observed using the erythroid colony-forming unit
(CFU-E) and the burst-forming colony unit (BFU-E) assay, each
of which defines a committed stem cell early in erythrocyte
development (75,76). Exposure of mice in utero to benzene at
relatively low concentrations resulted in decrements in bone
marrow colony forming units postnatally (77,78). These studies
indicate that benzene exerts a significant impacton both primitive
and early committed stem cells.
In addition to the effects ofbenzeneon stem cells and commit-
ted stem cells, both morphological and functional evidence has
linked benzene to impairmentofthe processes ofmaturation and
amplification. Pronormoblasts, normoblasts, and reticulocytes
appear successively at 24, 48, and 72 hr after reinitiation ofred
cell development by erythropoietin (79). Synthesis of hemo-
globin, including the incorporation ofiron, occurs only between
the pronormoblast and reticulocyte stage ofcellular differentia-
tion (80,81). One method to observe the effects ofchemicals on
various stage oferythropoiesis in vivo involves administration of
59Fe intravenously followed by sampling 1 day later of the red
cells for incorporation ofthe iron into hemoglobin (82,83). This
provides a functional measurement of the reticulocyte pool.
Treatment with chemicals at various times before iron ad-
ministration resulted in a decrease in iron uptake. These data in-
dicate an impairment in red cell development, provided it is
known that the chemical did not interrupt reticulocyte hemo-
globin synthesis. In the case ofbenzene (82,83) hemoglobin syn-
thesis proceeds normally. The maximum decrease in iron uptake
following administration ofbenzene occurred 48 hr before iron
administration, a time at which the reticulocytes are at the earlier
pronormoblast stage ofdevelopment. Normoblastdevelopment
was also inhibited but no effect was observed in these studies on
committed stem cells nor on reticulocytes. Taken together, these
studies suggest effects ofbenzene at both the stem cell and the
progenitor cell stages oferythropoiesis.
Studies by Dexter et al. (84) established a method for the
evaluation ofthe hematopoietic microenvironment. The system
allows for the growth ofan adherent cell layer ofstromal cells in
liquid culture. Stem cells added to this preparation begin the pro-
cess of maturation and proliferation supported by the stromal
cells. Using this method, Garnett et al. (85) exposed mice to
benzene at various doses, removed the bone marrow, and grew
adherent layers that supported the growth, but not the differen-
tiation, ofcolony-forming units from control mice. Inhibition of
differentiation may have been due to the failure ofthese prepara-
tions to grow hydrocortisone-induced fat cells essential to
stromal-supported differentiation. Frash et al. (86)exposed mice
to both radiation and benzene and injected normal mouse mar-
row cells. Using the CFU-S technique, they reported failure to
restore marrow function (86). Incubation ofbone marrow cells
with benzenebefore injection into irradiated micehad no effect
on spleen colony formation. Frash et al. (86) concluded that the
hematopoietic microenvironment was damaged as a result of
benzene treatment.
Effects ofBenzene Metabolites
It appearsthatbenzenetoxicity occurs only under conditions
that permitthe productionofbenzene metabolites. Thus, animals
were protected from benzene toxicity after partial hepatectomy,
which reduced total benzene metabolism in vivo and resulted in
a decrease incovalentbindingofmetabolites in bonemarrow (2).
his was not the first suggestion that benzene metabolites play a
critical role in toxicity. Parke and Williams (9), in their pathfin-
ding report suggested that the phenolic metabolites ofbenzene
might be responsible for benzene toxicity. A number of in-
vestigators subsequently attempted to identify the toxic me-
tabolites ofbenzene. Both Bolscak and Nerland (3) and Snyder
and co-workers (87-89) have studied the effects of benzene
metabolites on 59Fe uptake in miceand found that hydroquinone
and catechol (50-100 mg/kg) are more potent in decreasing iron
uptake than phenol. Para-benzoquinone, the metabolic product
of hydroquinone, is more potent than hydroquinone.
Muconaldehydeandp-benzoquinone were effective in inhibiting
iron uptake in the range of 1-4 mg/kg.
Several studies have focused on the possibility that benzene
toxicity is the result ofsynergistic interactions among benzene
metabolites. Eastmond etal. (49) studied the effect ofadminis-
tering a combination ofphenol and hydroquinone and reported
that the combination enhanced the ability ofeach to inhibit bone
marrow function. Possible explanations for the interaction be-
tween hydroquinone and phenol include the preferential conjuga-
tion ofphenol by sulfate and glucuronide leading to a greater ef-
fective concentration offree hydroquinone, the stimulation ofthe
productionofreactive metabolites fromhydroquinone by phenol,
or both. The same interaction was also observed in Snyder's
laboratory (87,88) using the 59Fe uptake technique.
Guy et al. (89) studied the effects ofcombining muconalde-
hyde plus either hydroquinone orp-benzoquinone on iron uptake
into erythrocytes. They reported that when the binary mixtures
were administered together at doses ofeither which were inef-
fective in reducing iron uptake, the combined effect was to
severely inhibit red cell production. Higherdoses also indicated
interaction. Multiple regression analysis was used to study the
contributions of the components of the binary mixtures. The
results suggested that in inhibiting red cell production, mucon-
aldehyde and hydroquinone react at the same site. Muconalde-
hyde andp-benzoquinone appear to act at two sites. The nature
of these sites are not yet known, but these studies suggest that
benzene toxicity is the resultofthe interaction between benzene
metabolites rather than the effect of a single metabolite acting
independently.
The effects ofbenzene metabolites on the microenvironment
have also been studied. Gaido and Wierda (90-92)evaluated the
297
SNYDER ETAL.
effects of benzene metabolites on the ability of adherent cells
from mousebone marrow to support the growth ofGM-CFU-C
cells. They reported that phenol was not effective below
millimolar concentrations, whereas hydroquinone and benzo-
quinone were the most toxic. Catechol and 1,2,4-benzenetriol
were less potent than hydroquinone and p-benzoquinone.
Previous studies that showed that DBA/2n mice were more sen-
sitive to benzene toxicity than C57/B16mice (93) led Gaido and
Wierda (90-92) to examine the relative ability ofadherent cells
from B6C3F, and DBA/2J mice to support hematopoiesis.
Although no strain differences were observed related to this ac-
tivity, phenol, but not benzene, reduced the ability of stromal
cells to support the development of granulocyte/macrophage
precursor cells.
Stromal macrophages appear to be a significant target in
benzene toxicity. For example, Post etal. (94) found peroxidase-
mediated metabolism of phenol to covalently binding species
along with the inhibitionofRNA synthesis by hydroquinone and
p-benzoquinone. Renz andKalf(95) suggested thatin these cells
hydroquinone inhibits the activation ofinterleukin-l and the ad-
ministration ofrecombinant interleukin-lIe before benzene treat-
ment prevented benzene toxicity in mice. These data suggest that
not only are several benzene metabolites involved inbenzene tox-
icity, but there may also be several targets. It has been demon-
strated that stem cells, progenitor cells, and some stromal cells
are sensitive to benzene metabolites.
Genotoxicity
Mutagenicity
Benzene has not been found to produce mutagenicity in short-
term tests in vitro (42). The Ames Salmonella test, yeast
mutagenicity test, unscheduled DNA synthesis, mouse lym-
phoma test, 6-thioguanine resistance test in Chinesehamster V79
cells, the ouabain resistance test in Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells, and human lymphoblast HGPRT and TK tests did
not indicate that benzene was a mutagen. Tests aimed at detec-
ting neoplastic cell transformation such as the BALB/c 3T3
mouse fibroblast test, C3H lTl/2 mouse cell test, CHO test, and
enhancement of viral (SA79) transformation test were also
negative.
There was a report thatbenzene yielded a positive Ames test
using strain TAIOO and Aroclor-induced rat liver microsomes,
taking advantage of a highly sensitive microflocculation assay
(43,96). Another report suggested a positive cell transformation
result in Syrian hamster embryo cells (97). The results suggest
that except for these two systems, either those cellular targets that
would have to be affected to yield a positive resultwere not sen-
sitive to benzene, or the negative results were caused by the in-
ability ofthose systems to effectively metabolize benzene to reac-
tive intermediates capable ofproducing a positive response. The
hepatic stageofbenzene metabolism in vivo is mediated primari-
ly by cytochrome P-450 IIEI, although under some circum-
stances cytochrome-P-450 IIBi or other cytochromes P-450 may
metabolize benzene. Further metabolic activation in bone mar-
row cells requires peroxidatic activity. In the absence of both
types ofactivating enzymes, mutagenic metabolites will not be
formed and the results would suggest that exposure to benzene
would not yield a mutagenic effect.
Mutagenicity ofbenzene metabolites, however, has been well
demonstrated. Thus, Glattet al. (43) studied the mutagenic ac-
tivity of 13 benzene metabolites using strain TA1535. In the
absence of S9, trans-1,2-benzenedihydrodiol and benzene diol
epoxides were mutagenic. Dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, which
converts the dihydrodiol to catechol, protected against the
mutagenic effect. It is the postulated, but not demonstrated, that
thedihydrodiolcanbeconvertedtoaseriesofisomericdiol epox-
ides via a further epoxidation. The anti-diol epoxide was a
mutagen in strains TA97, TA98, TA100, TA102, TA104, and
TA1535. In V79 cells, the anti-diol epoxide also induced sister
chromatidexchange, acquisitionof6-thioguanine resistanceand
ouabainresistance, andmicronuclei. Althoughtheanti-diol epox-
idehasnotbeendemonstratedtobeametabolicproductofbenzene
asyet, thepotential foritsformationremains, anditmightbeone
ofthe most mutagenic products derived from benzene.
Other metabolites effective in the V79 cells were 1,2,4-tri-
hydroxybenzene, hydroquinone, catechol, and the trans-1,2-di-
hydrodiol which elevated resistance to 6-thioguanine. The most
striking effectin these studies, however, was both thepotency and
great effectiveness ofp-benzoquinone in increasing the frequen-
cy of6-thioguanine resistance while having no effect on ouabain
resistance, and producing no chromosome damage in V79 cells.
Furthermore, p-benzoquinone was relatively ineffective in
Salmonella.
The potential genotoxic activity of trans,trans-muconalde-
hyde, a chemically reactive ring opening product ofbenzene in
microsomal preparations, was investigated in studies by Witz and
co-workers (44,45). Trans,trans-muconaldehyde is generally
highly toxicto cells in vitro. It is an active mutagen in V79 cells
but is weakly mutagenic in Salmonella (44). In CHO cells
trans,trans-muconaldehyde is a potent clastogen (37,45). Thus,
it appears thatifbenzene can undergo metabolic activation, some
ofits metabolites, both ring closed and ring opened, can mediate
mutagenic events.
Chromosome Damage
Since the first reports of Pollini and co-workers (98,99),
benzene hasbeen knownto producechromosomedamage. They
cultured both bone marrow cells and peripheral lymphocytes
from patientsdisplaying severe benzene hemopathy and reported
a high rate of aneuploid cell production. Subsequently, there
were many reported observations ofchromosome aberrations in
blood from workers exposed to benzene. Notable among these
were the reports of Forni and her collaborators (60,61), who
observed chromosome aberrations in agroupofworkers exposed
to benzeneatagreater frequencythan workers exposed to toluene
(60). Follow-up studies ofthese workers revealedthatboth stable
and unstable benzene-induced chromosome aberrations occur-
red. The unstable variety eventually disappear, whereas the
stable form persist and may relate to the eventual development
ofleukemia.
Erexson et al. (100) reported that low-dose exposure to
benzene (10-28 ppm) over4-6 hrproduced sisterchromatid ex-
changes (SCE) in peripheral mouse B-lymphocytes. Tice et al.
(63) demonstrated the production ofsister chromatid exchanges
in mice after short-term exposure to high concentrations of
benzene. The effect was exacerbated when the mice were pre-
298
TOXICOLOGYOFBENZENE
treated with phenobarbital, presumably because at these high
doses phenobarbital induces an enzyme that can efficiently
bioactivate benzene. Although partial hepatectomy was not pro-
tective, co-administration oftoluene reduced SCE by 90%. Witz
et al. (45) reported that administration of trans,trans-mucon-
aldehyde caused SCE in B6C3F, mice. The data suggested that
benzene metabolites play a significant role in producing SCE.
In cultured human lymphocytes in vitro, it is clearthat benzene
metabolites induce SCE (101). Phenol, catechol, and hydro-
quinone produced SCE in a dose-dependent manner in the
absence of added metabolic activation, and the effect was
prevented by glutathione. Sister chromatid exchanges were in-
duced with the following order of potencies: catechol > 1,4-
benzoquinone > hydroquinone, 1,2,4-benzenetriol > phenol >
benzene.
The report by Hite et al. (62) that benzene produced micro-
nuclei in bone marrow polychromatic erythrocytes in mice led
to the development ofan assay featuring the use ofmicronuclei
in peripheral red cells as a rapid screen for chromosomal damage
(102) caused by benzene. Since then micronuclei have been
observed after benzene administration via various doses, routes,
and treatment regimens (5). Harper et al. (103) suggested that
benzene metabolism was necessary to yield micronuclei. Pirozzi
et al. (104) demonstrated that indomethacin, which inhibits the
metabolic activation ofphenolic metabolites in bone marrow by
prostaglandin H synthetase (105), also protects against micro-
nucleus formation.
Covalent Binding to Macromolecules
The observations that in the course of its metabolism some
benzene is converted to reactive metabolites that covalently bind
to protein (106,107) RNA and DNA (108) have led to a series of
studies on the mechanism ofbenzene toxicity.
Irons and Neptun (109) demonstrated that hydroquinone, but
not phenol or catechol, inhibited polymerization of tubulin.
Tubulin possesses nucleophilic sulfhydryl groups that bind
guanosine triphosphate (GI1P), which in turn stabilizes tubulin
for further polymerization to microtubules necessary for spin-
dle formation during cell division (72). Hydroquinone and p-
benzoquinone interfere with GTP-tubulin binding by alkylating
SH groups (109,110). Another protein that is inhibited by benzene
metabolites, hydroquinone, andp-benzoquinone, but not phenol
or catechol, is mitochondrial DNA polymerase--y, which also
possesses a sulfhydryl group at the active site (111). The binding
ofbenzene metabolites to these critical proteins may play a role
in benzene toxicity.
The observations of chromosome damage described above
suggest that the binding ofbenzene metabolites to DNA may also
represent a significant event in benzene toxicity in view of the
chromosome damage discussed above. Lutz and Schlatter (108)
exposed rats to either [14C]- or [3H]benzene by inhalation and
found that liver nuclear DNA contained covalently bound
benzene residues, although Lutz (112) noted that when compared
with other carcinogens, relatively little radioactivity derived
from benzene was boundto DNA. Rushmore et al. (113) took ad-
vantage ofthe properties ofmitochondrial DNA to study DNA
binding by metabolites ofbenzene. The mitochondrion contains
no mechanism for DNA repair and contains a small circular
DNA. Furthermore, the presence ofa cytochrome P-450 mono-
oxygenase in mitochondria capable of metabolizing benzene
facilitated production of reactive intermediates (114). Seven
potential DNA adducts on deoxyguanosine and one on deox-
yadenosine were observed, and structures have been proposed
for one ofthe adducts on deoxyguanosine (40) and for the deox-
yadenosine adduct (115). Neither thymine nor cytosine adducts
were investigated.
Schlosser et al. (105) investigated the oxidation of hydro-
quinone by prostaglandin H synthetase and found that whereas
1,4-benzoquinone, the oxidation product ofhydroquinone, was
bound to cysteine or DNA, inhibition of the enzyme by in-
domethacin inhibited both types of binding as well as micro-
nucleus formation (104) andbenzene-induced myelotoxicity (116).
The low level ofbinding has made it difficult to detect DNA
adducts in vivo. However, use has been made of the 32P-post-
labeling technique to measure benzene related adducts because
ofits great sensitivity. Bauer et al. (117) reported on DNA adduct
formation in rabbit liver. Snyder et al. (87) suggested that DNA
adducts are formed in thebone marrow ofbenzene-treated rats.
Using the same method, Reddy et al. (118) was unable to detect
DNA adducts from benzene in the Zymbal gland, a target for the
carcinogenic activity ofbenzene in the rat, or in bone marrow,
presumably the target for leukemogenic activity. Further
research is needed to determine the role of DNA binding of
benzene metabolites in benzene toxicity and carcinogenesis.
Carcinogenesis
From the mechanistic point of view, benzene-induced car-
cinogenic events have been difficult to study because ofthe lack
ofa convenient animal model. Chronic exposure ofrats and mice
to benzene by inhalation (119) suggests that benzene might induce
acute and chronic myelogenous leukemia and thymic lymphoma
in these species. Large scale, chronic exposure studies by Mal-
toni et al. (66,67) in rats and mice using inhalation or oral ad-
ministration revealed theappearance ofZymbal gland tumors as
well as a variety ofother cancers. These results were confirm-
ed and extended in a National Toxicology Program study (68).
However, these studies have not led to the development ofmodels
ofuse to study the mechanism ofleukemogenesis. A more pro-
mising approach came from Cronkite et al. (120), who reason-
ed that the difficulty in producing leukemia during chronic ex-
posure is because benzene is an inhibitor of cell replication, a
process essential to the development of leukemia. Therefore,
these workers treated mice for 16 weeks with 300 ppm ofbenzene
and then ceased exposure. Subsequently, none of88 control mice
demonstrated neoplasms, but 8 of 90 benzene-exposed mice
displayed lymphoma/leukemias (120). This method has yet to be
fully exploited in the study ofthe mechanism ofbenzene-induced
leukemia.
Prevailing theories suggest that initiating events in car-
cinogenesis may be covalent binding ofreactive intermediates to
DNA or oxidative damage of DNA. Subsequent attempts to
either repair or replicate the DNA propel the cascade ofevents
termed carcinogenesis. Furtherance ofthis process is thought to
require the intervention of one or more promotional steps that
stimulate proliferation of the genetically altered cells. Alter-
natively, so-called epigenetic events may lead to carcinogenesis.
The mechanism ofbenzene toxicity has yet to be defined within
these frameworks.
299
SNYDER ETAL.
If we assume that a genetic alteration underlies the mechanism
of benzene-induced carcinogenesis, we can look toward the
results ofthe genotoxicity studies cited above as indicators ofthe
pathway toward neoplasia. Thus, metabolism to reactive in-
termediates would have to be postulated as an important early
step in the mechanism. Itwould be expected thatbenzene should
then stimulate DNA repair, which would be detectable by un-
scheduled DNA synthesis. However, when measured in hepato-
cytes and HeLa cells, itdidnotappearlikelythatbenzenecaused
DNAdamagesubjectto repairin mammaliancells inculture(42).
Subsequenttoagenetic change, it shouldbepossibleto measure
cell transformation. ThepositiveSyrianhamsterembryotestsug-
gestedthatgiven thepropermetabolicactivating system, benzene
metabolites may be capable ofinducing cell transformation.
The second step would require promotion. The possibility that
unmetabolized benzene might play a promotional role arose from
the observations by Da Silva et al. (121) that benzene activates
membrane protein kinase C, which is also activated by tumor
promoters such as phorbol esters. This activity is shared with
toluene, which produces neither aplastic anemia nor leukemia.
However, whereas toluene might activate protein kinase C, its
metabolites are neither hematotoxic nor carcinogenic.
Some attempts have been made to investigate the mechanism
ofbenzene carcinogenesis in other organs. Reddy etal. (122) and
Low et al. (123) examined the formation of DNA adducts in
Zymbal gland cells in culture and detected DNA binding.
However, adducts were not detected in this organ when the
animals were treated in vivo. Of perhaps greater significance,
however, were the studies of Busby et al. (124), who treated
newborn mice with benzene, benzene oxide, racemates of
benzene dihydrodiol, and benzene diol epoxide-1 and benzene
diol epoxide-2. Although benzene and benzene diol epoxide-l
were inactive in this assay, benzene oxide, the racemates of
benzene dihydrodiol, and benzene diol epoxide-2 induced lung
tumors in the mice. It is likely that benzene oxide and the
dihydrodiol were metabolized to the diol epoxide-2 to initiate
these tumors. It will be important to evaluate the likelihood that
the diol epoxide can be formed in bone marrow in vivo to deter-
mine whether it can be important in leukemogenesis.
One mechanism that might explainthe initiation ofleukemo-
genesis by benzene derives from recent considerations relating
chromosome aberrations with cancer (125). Although chromo-
some breaks and sister chromatid exchanges have been identified
as outcomes of benzene exposure, specific studies of the
possibilities of chromosome translocations have not been per-
formed. Metcalfet al. (126) discussed the relationship between
translocations and leukemogenesis and recalled that about two
dozen nonrandom chromosome translocations have been
reported in both B-cell and T-cell tumors. Often these transloca-
tions have resulted in the close association ofa proto-oncogene
with a gene that codes foran immunoglobulin in a B-lymphocyte
or a T-cell receptor in a T-lymphocyte. The proto-oncogene is
then deregulated and can play an important role leading to the ex-
pansion a neoplastic clone. A recent exampleofthis phenomenon
was reported by de The et al. (127), who demonstrated an asso-
ciation of a specific translocation, designated as t(15;17), with
acute promyelocytic leukemia, in which the net effect is the fu-
sion of the retinoic acid receptor, RARa, with a gene called
PML. These authors suggest that the translocation results in the
formation ofan RAR mutant, the activity ofwhich is to interfere
with promyelocytic differentiation and thereby facilitate the pro-
cess of leukemogenesis. Thus, at least three types of chromo-
some changes caused by benzene metabolites, i.e., gross
chromosome aberrations, micronuclei, and sister chromatid ex-
change, havebeen reported. Ifbenzene metabolites can produce
translocations as well, this mightbe a mechanism for leukemo-
genesis that is parallel to the example cited above.
Pharmacokinetics of Benzene
There have been a number ofattempts to develop pharmaco-
kinetic models ofthe fateofbenzene with the intention ofapply-
ing the results to risk assessments for benzene. The first attempt
to model the fate ofbenzene was made by Sato et al. (128) who
exposed three men to a single exposure of 25 or 100 ppm of
benzene for 2 hr and then observed a triexponential decay of
benzene from their blood. Sato et al. constructed a three-
compartment model made up ofrichly perfused tissues, poorly
perfused tissues, and fat, which acted as a major sink for
benzene. Snyder et al. (18) repetitively exposed mice or rats to
100 or 300ppm ofbenzene for20daysand sampledthe blood for
benzene on days 1, 6, and 20. At higher doses mice achieved
greater increases in blood levels ofbenzene than the rats. The
mice also displayed a greater elimination rate constant than the
rats. The rate ofblood benzene disappearance from mice at the
high dose shifted from monoexponential to biexponential be-
tween the 6thand 20th day, which may have been due to enzyme
induction ofbenzene hydroxylase, i.e., cytochrome P-450 IIEI.
More recent approaches have attempted to factor metabolism
into physiologically basedpharmacokinetic models ofthe fate of
benzene and to develop a method forextrapolating from animal
models to humans. Belilesand Totman (129) constructed a model
using Zymbal gland tumors and blood related cancers as end
points and, recognizing the possibilities ofsynergy and multiple
mechanisms, assumed that the combined metabolites
represented the "reactive agent." Using largely the data of
Sabourin et al. (13) and applying an allometric technique to
estimate scaling between species, they suggested that their
model, which predicts that a working lifetime exposure (40-45
years) to benzene at 10 ppm would result in 6-14 cases of
leukemia/1000, is in goodagreement with federal regulatory risk
assessments based on epidemiological data.
Physiologically based pharmacokinetic models aimed at
relating benzene metabolism and interspecies differences, using
both experimental data and simulations, have been developed by
Medinsky et al. (130), Travis et al. (131,132), Bois et al. (133),
and Spear et al. (134). Each described a multicompartment
system and attempted to relate end points to the generation of
metabolites with emphasis on specific metabolites assumed to be
responsible for generating the end points under consideration.
Thus, Medinsky et al. (130) considered the role ofhydroquinone
and muconaldehyde generated in the liver and Bois et al. (133)
added the metabolic activity ofthe bone marrow in the further
metabolism of metabolites generated in liver. While each
represents animportantadvance in interpreting the metabolic fate
of benzene in relation to the development of benzene-related
disease, they all suffer from lack of sufficient data, as well as
from variability ofthe databetween experimental designs. There
generally is difficulty in fitting empirical data to theoretically
300
TOXICOLOGYOFBENZENE
generated curves, which suggests that the models need to be
improved.
Whereas the disappearance ofbenzene from the blood, follow-
ing administration via any route, can be measured readily, the re-
quirement for metabolism before benzene can produce serious
chronic effects, makes modeling difficult because ofthe uncer-
tainties pertaining to which metabolites are responsible, the
relative impact of each, and the potential for multiple target
effects.
A large number of metabolites have been described above.
Because of their demonstrated, direct effects on bone marrow,
pharmacokinetic models have concentrated on hydroquinone,
alone or in combination with phenol, and muconaldehyde, and
for the most part have assumed that they are formed in liver and
transported to the bone marrow. The possibility that some ofthe
critical metabolites are ultimately formed in bone marrow serves
to complicate the modeling process. For example, although the
metabolites transferred to the bone marrow may be innocuous in
themselves, further metabolic activation in bone marrow,
perhaps mediated by peroxidases, may generate theultimate tox-
ic metabolites (135). Thus, hydroquinone may be released from
the liver, free or conjugated, reach the bone marrow by some
mechanism, and in its free form may be oxidized to p-benzo-
quinone by a peroxidase. Muconaldehyde might be formed in
bone marrow, and the two working in concert would then pro-
duce a toxic effect. The models would have to reflect these fac-
tors, as well as take into account the activity of other potential
toxic metabolites, ifthey are to accurately picture theprocess and
be used in risk assessment with accuracy.
Human Impact
Benzene is a ubiquitous pollutant in both the workplace and in
the general environment. Ambient concentrations can be de-
tected worldwide, including pristine areas, although at levels
much lower than in modern urban societies. Major sources of
benzene include petroleum and petroleum products. Levels of
benzene in gasoline range from approximately I to 5%. Gasoline
serves as a major source ofbenzene exposure in a wide variety
ofsituations including groundwater contamination through leaky
underground storage tanks; air contamination through the
evaporation of gasoline in workplaces and in homes; and
transdermal exposure when gasoline gets on the skin. The ma-
jor cause ofhigh-level exposure remains inappropriate use in an
unregulated workplace; although control measures are leading
to a decreased use ofbenzene as a solvent and organic synthetic
starting block. A major source of personal benzene exposure
comes from cigarette smoking (136), and benzene is also present
in sidestream smoke leading to exposure through passive smok-
ing. Although there are measurable amounts ofbenzene in cer-
tain foods, these are no longer believed to be a significant source
ofbenzene exposure to the general public, particularly in com-
parison to indoor air pollution from gasoline and benzene-
containing solvents or from cigarette smoke within the home or
the office (137).
Nonhematological Effects
The odor threshold for benzene is in the range of 4-5 ppm
(138). The acute nervous system toxicity of benzene appears
similar to the general anesthetic effects oflipophilic solvents and
is assumed to be a direct effect of benzene unrelated to its
metabolites. Acute symptoms include drowsiness, lightheaded-
ness, headache, delirium, vertigo, and narcosis. Levels at which
acute central nervous system effects become apparent are at least
above 100 ppm, an earlier occupational health standard for
benzene, although milder effects could conceivably occur at
lower levels. Based on structure-activity relationships, benzene
might be expected to have acute central nervous system effects
similar to alkyl benzenes at a slightly lower dose for benzene.
Chronic nervous system effects ofbenzene have not been clearly
demonstrated.
Nonhematological tumors have also been demonstrated in
long-term animal studies (139,140). However, at present there is
no reasonably convincing evidence of nonhematological solid
tumors occurring in humans exposed to benzene. A meta-
analysis ofbenzene-exposed populations may be ofvalue in this
regard.
Studies ofthe productive and developmental effects ofbenzene
have shown little aside from hematological effects in the fetus
(77,78). A more thorough evaluation has been called for by Davis
and Pope (141).
Immune dysfunction as a result of high-level exposure to
benzene in laboratory animals has been clearly demonstrated
(142). Lymphocytopenia is an early effect ofbenzene exposure
in animals and in man (143), and there is also evidence sug-
gesting that the immune system can be affected by benzene in-
dependentoflymphocytopenia (144). However, there is currently
no evidence to demonstrate an effect on the immune system of
humans exposed to allowable levels ofbenzene.
Hematological Effects
In humans, as in animal models, the bone marrow is the target
ofbenzene toxicity. A major unanswered question about benzene
toxicity concerns its primary localization to the bone marrow, a
finding that is almost unique in solventtoxicology. As with many
other solvents, benzene is primarily metabolized in the liver, yet
despite evidence that metabolism is necessary for bone marrow
toxicity, hepatotoxicity is not observed. In essence, there are two
different explanations given for bone marrow localization:
specificity in the local metabolism ofbenzene within the bone
marrow or particularities in the susceptibility ofthe bone mar-
row, as compared to the liver or other organ, to a benzene
metabolite or metabolites. For example, Subrahmanyam et al.
(135) recently emphasized the potential role of free radicals in
benzene toxicity, pointing out that the relatively high level of
myeloperoxidase and ofotherperoxidases may be responsible for
localization ofbenzene toxicity to the bone marrow. In contrast,
Goldstein and Witz (145), noting the relative sensitivity of the
bone marrow to chemotherapeutic alkylating agents, have focus-
ed on a potential hematologic role for trans,trans-muconalde-
hyde, an ca,3-unsaturated aldehyde alkylating agent which,
although highly reactive, has a sufficient half-life to theoretically
travel from liver to bone marrow.
Benzene was initially identified as being a human hemato-
logical toxin in the 19th century. Sincethat time the literature is
replete with case studies and series in which fatal aplastic anemia
has been reported in individuals exposed to significant levels of
benzene (146,147). As described above, aplastic anemia is a
301
2SN YDER ETAL.
serious, often fatal, disorder in which the formed elements ofthe
bone marrow are replaced by fat and there is a significant decre-
ment in the formed elements ofthe blood. Humans may display
a decrease in white blood cells (leukopenia), potentially resulting
in death due to infection; a decrease in platelet count (throm-
bocytopenia), potentially resulting in death due to hemorrhage;
and a decrease in red blood cell count (anemia). A lesser extent
of benzene exposure produces lesser degrees of damage to the
bone marrow. The normal human bone marrow has sufficient
reserve capacity to be able to produce approximately six times
more red blood cells under stress than it does under normal con-
ditions. There is also a wide range of statistically normal values
in peripheral blood counts. Thus, earliest forms ofbone marrow
damage due to a compound such as benzene may not be notable
in terms ofa decrease in circulating blood counts. As described
above, studies in laboratory animals have shown that a decline in
colony forming cells indicative of the function and number of
bone marrow precursors can be seen with relatively low levels
of benzene exposure. In humans, individuals with benzene ex-
posure may initially have a count lower than statistically normal
in any one ofthe formed elements, but with significant exposure,
pancytopenia will be observed (146).
There is a wide range between those blood count levels which
are statistically abnormally low and those which produce func-
tional abnormalities. Thus, the range ofnormal in a laboratory
platelet count is often 150,000-350,000/ttL; yet evidence ofab-
normal hemostasis is usually not observed in humans until the
platelet count is less than 50,000/IL. There is, however, some
evidence that in significant benzene toxicity not only is there a
quantitative decrease in formed blood cell elements, but there is
also a qualitative alteration. Such qualitative changes might be
expected to interfere with function of platelets or white blood
cells. A hallmark ofbenzene effect in red cells is an increase in
average cell size, known as the mean corpuscular volume
(calculated by dividing the hematocrit by the red blood cell
count). An increase in the mean corpuscular volume also occurs
with folic acid deficiency and vitamin B,2 deficiency, two
disorders which have in common an interference with DNA syn-
thesis in the bone marrow. An increase in the mean corpuscular
volume is observed in almost any form ofaplastic anemia. As an
increased mean corpuscular volume also occurs relatively ear-
ly in alcoholism, as well as other conditions, it cannot be taken
as a definitive test for benzene exposure at the workplace,
although it can be a useful confirmatory clue (143).
As with any toxicant, there appears to be a variation in the ex-
tent to which individuals differ in their sensitivity tobenzene, and
some suggestion ofa familial tendency (148). However, there is
no evidence ofan idiosyncratic low-level sensitivity to benzene-
induced aplastic anemia similar to that observed with chloram-
phenicol. Interaction with other agents may affect benzene tox-
icity as described above with respect to ethanol and toluene.
Metabolic interaction between toluene and benzene would be ex-
pected when exposure occurs to amixture containing a high ratio
oftoluene/benzene because toluene is a competitive inhibitor of
benzene metabolism (1). However, Sato and Nakajima (128)
reported that there is no significant interaction between benzene
and toluene with respect to their fate when human experimental
exposure was near the threshold limit value.
Neoplastic Effects
LeNoir and Claude reported the first case of benzene-
associated leukemia in humans in 1897 (149) but the diagnosis
was not well documented. In 1965 Browning (149) recorded 61
cases, and by 1977 Goldstein (146) had assembled 121 cases of
benzene associated leukemia. The studies ofVigliani et al. (150),
Aksoy et al. (151), and Infinte et al. (152), each ofwhich examin-
ed large populations, presented convincing evidence of the
leukemogenic activity ofbenzene.
There is unequivocal evidence that benzene is a cause ofacute
myelogenous leukemia (AML), the adult form of acute leu-
kemia. Individual cases in benzene-exposed individuals began
to be reported in the 1920s, but the causal relation was not fully
accepted until less thantwo decades ago. This relationship was
first accepted by hematologists who have long recognized that
anyone with aplastic anemia from apparently any cause has an
increased risk of AML. For example, AML as a second tumor
is, unfortunately, common in cancer patients whose bone mar-
row is affected by radiation and alkylating agents used in
chemotherapy (153). Benzene exposurealso leads to cytogenetic
abnormalities in bone marrow cells and in circulating lym-
phocytes (60,61).
Epidemiological evidence strongly supportive of the causal
relationship between benzene exposure in theworkplace and
acute myelogenous leukemia includes studies ofshoe and other
leather workers in Italy and in Turkey (150,154). In Turkey, a glue
used in thefashioning ofleather goods which had relatively low
levels ofbenzene as a solvent was replaced in the 1960s with one
containing much higher levels. Soon thereafter, Aksoy and his
colleagues reported a wave of patients with aplastic anemia
followed by identification ofnumerous individuals with AML,
many ofwhom had previously been identified as having aplastic
anemia (154,155). Studies of large cohorts of benzene-exposed
workers in the chemical and petrochemical industries have tend-
ed to show an increase in hematological neoplasms (156-160).
The most thoroughly studied cohort has come from Goodyear
Rubber facilities in Ohio. Repetitive follow-up of a cohort of
workers by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) has identified at least 10 cases of acute and
chronic myelogenous leukemia, with only two expected
(152,161,162). To obtain a better understanding ofthe level and
pattern ofbenzene exposure associated with this increased risk
of AML, NIOSH has performed one of the most thorough
retrospective exposure assessments ever done on a cohort of
workers (162). This exposure analysis has been used as a basis
for the current risk assessment of benzene by the U.S. En-
vironmental Protection Agency (EPA). However, it does appear
that NIOSH has significantly underestimated the extent of ex-
posure in the Goodyear plants during World WarII (163,164),
thus leading to some overestimation of the risk of benzene
derived from this cohort. However, it should be emphasized that
the current EPA risk assessment ofbenzene has more uncertainty
associated with the dose response part of this equation than it
does with the exposure. Despite the many arguments concern-
ing the extent to which workers who developed AML were ex-
posed to benzene, the differences all lie within an order of
magnitude. In contrast, the dose-response relationship between
daily environmental benzene exposure in the range ofparts per
billion and leukemia has a much larger degree of uncertainty.
302
TOXICOLOGYOFBENZENE 303
This uncertainty can only be resolved by a better mechanistic
understanding ofbenzene leukemogenesis.
More problematic is the potential causal relationship between
benzene and lymphopoietic cancers in humans. While in no case
is the evidence incontrovertible, there does appear to be more
than sufficient grounds to link benzene exposure with multiple
myeloma (165) and perhaps with certain forms ofnon-Hodgkin's
lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In the case of
multiple myeloma the observations include individual case
reports and a statistically significantly increased number of
myeloma cases in the Pliofilm cohort that is under study by
NIOSH (162,166). In the latter cohort, the association has been
suggested to be problematic in view ofthe lack ofrelationship
with the extent ofexposure. However, as there is a small number
of cases, it is difficult to expect an obvious dose relationship.
There is a strong element ofbiological plausibility that supports
a causal relationship between benzene exposure and multiple
myeloma, as well as other lymphatic neoplasms. Lymphocytes
are definitely a target ofbenzene, with lymphocytedepletion oc-
curring early in the course ofbenzene exposure (146,167). The
readily detected cytogenetic abnormalities in lymphocytes
following significant benzene exposure clearly indicate that lym-
phocyte DNA is affected as a result of benzene exposure, and
there is no question that hematopoietic tissue is subjected to a
carcinogenic metabolite ofbenzene in view ofthe clear causal
relationship with acute myelogenous leukemia.
Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas represent a grab bag ofdifferent
diseases. A certain portion ofthese disorders reflects severe im-
mune depletion as occurs with AIDS or secondary to treatment
related to organ transplantation, in which the tumors occur very
rapidly, sometimes in less than 1 year. However, there is no clear
evidence that benzene produces this form ofimmune depletion.
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is observed in certain work groups
that have been exposed to solvents or other chemicals, but the
evidence that benzene is causally related remains suggestive but
uncertain. Similar arguments as to biomedical plausibility could
be used to link benzene exposure to acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, the leukemia most commonly observed in children.
However, in view of the fortunate absence of well-defined
populations ofchildren that have been exposed to benzene, it will
be particularly difficult to develop the epidemiological data
necessary to evaluate the potential causal relation. Individual
cases in relationship to household benzene exposure are being
observed medically and legally but have not yet been reported in
the clinical literature.
REFERENCES
1. Andrews, L. S., Lee, E. W., Witmer, C. M., Kocsis, J. J., and Snyder, R.
Effects oftoluene on the metabolism, disposition, and hemopoietic toxicity
of 3H benzene. Biochem. Pharmacol. 26: 293-300 (1977).
2. Sammett, D., Lee. E. W., Kocsis, J. J., and Snyder, R. Partial hepatectomy
reduces both metabolism and toxicity of benzene. J. Toxicol. Environ.
Health. 5: 785-792 (1979).
3. Bolcsak, L. E., and Nerland, D. E. Inhibition oferythropoiesis by benzene
and benzene metabolites. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 69: 363-368 (1983).
4. Goldstein, B. D. Introduction: Occam's razor is dull. Environ. Health
Perspect. 82: 3-6 (1989).
5. Kalf. G. F. Recent advances in the metabolism and toxicity ofbenzene. CRC
Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 18: 141-159 (1987).
6. Snyder, R., and Pirozzi Chatterjee, S. Benzene metabolism. In: Molecular
Aspects of Monooxygenases and Bioactivation ofToxic Compounds (E.
Arinc, J. B. Schenckman and E. Hodgson, Eds.), Plenum Press, New York
1991, pp. 375-386.
7. Yardley-Jones, A., Anderson, D., and Parke, D. V. The toxicity ofbenzene
and its metabolism and molecular pathology in human risk assessment. Br.
J. Ind. Med. 48: 437-444 (1991).
8. Porteous, J. W, and Williams, R. T. Studies indetoxication. The isolation
ofphenol, catechol, quinol and hydroxyquinol from the ethereal sulfate frac-
tion ofthe urine ofrabbits receiving benzene orally. Biochem. J. 44: 56-61
(1949).
9. Parke, D. V., and Williams, R. T. Studies in detoxication 49. The
metabolism ofbenzene containing ('"IC) benzene. Biochem. J. 54: 231-238
(1953).
10. Williams, R. T. Detoxication Mechanisms. Chapman and Hall, London,
1959, pp. 188-194.
11. Jaffe, M. Uber die Aufspaltung des Benzolrings im Organismus. 1. Mit-
teilung. Das Auftretan von Muconsaure im Harn nach Darreichung von
Benzol. Hoppe-Seyl. Z. Physiol. Chem. 62: 58-67 (1909).
12. Drummond, J. C., and Finar, I. L. Muconic acid as a metabolic product
ofbenzene. Biochemistry 32: 79-84 (1938).
13. Sabourin, P. J., Bechtold, W. E., Birnbaum, L. S., Lucier, G., and Hender-
son, R. F. Differences in the metabolism and disposition ofinhaled [3HI
benzene by F344/N rats and B6C3F, mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 94:
128-140 (1988).
14. Snyder, R., and Kocsis, J. J. Current concepts ofchronic benzene toxici-
ty. CRC Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 3: 265-288 (1975).
15. Rusch, G. M., Leong B. K., and Laskin, S. Benzene metabolism. J. Tox-
icol. Environ. Health 2(suppl.): 23-36 (1977).
16. Snyder, C. A. Benzene. In: Ethel Browning's Toxicity and Metabolism of
Industrial Solvents, 2nd ed., Vol. 1, Hydrocarbons (R. Snyder, Ed.),
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1987, pp. 3-27.
17. Latriano, L., Goldstein, B. D., and Witz, G. Formation ofmuconaldehyde,
an open-ring metabolite ofbenzene in mouse liver microsomes: a novel
pathway fortoxic metabolites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83: 8356-8360
(1986).
18. Snyder, R., Longacre, S. L., Witmer, C. M., and Kocsis, J. J. Biochemical
toxicity of benzene. In: Reviews in Biochemical Toxicology, Vol. 3 (E.
Hodgson, J.R. Bend, and R.M. Philpot, Eds.), Elsevier, New York, 1981,
pp. 123-153.
19. Koop, D. R., Laethem, C. L., and Schnier, G. G. Identification ofethanol-
inducible P450 isozyme 3a (P45011E1) as abenzene and phenol hydroxylase.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 98: 278-288 (1989).
20. Sawahata, T., and Neal, R. Biotransformation ofphenol to hydroquinone
and catechol by rat liver microsomes. Mol. Pharmacol. 23: 453-460 (1983).
21. Jerina, D. M., and Daly, J. W. Arene oxides: a new aspect of drug
metabolism. Science 185: 573-582 (1974).
22. Hanzlik, R. P., Hogberg, P. K., and Judson, C. M. Microsomal hydrox-
ylation of specifically deuterated monosubstituted benzene. Evidence for
direct aromatic hydroxylation. Biochemistry 23: 3048-3055 (1984).
23. Johansson, I., and Ingelman-Sundberg, M. Hydroxyl radical-mediated,
cytochrome P-450-dependent metabolic activation of benzene in micro-
somes and reconstituted enzyme systems from rabbit liver. J. Biol. Chem.
258: 7311-7316 (1983).
24. Walling, C., and Johnson, R. A. Fenton's reagent. V. Hydroxylation and
side chain cleavage ofaromatics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97: 363-367 (1975).
25. Cohen, G., and Ofodile, S. E. Activation ofmolecular oxygen during a Fen-
ton reaction: a study with '802. In: Oxy Radicals and their Scavenger
Systems, Vol. 1. Molecular Aspects (G. Cohen and R. A. Greenwald, Eds.),
Elsevier, New York, 1983, pp. 74-83.
26. Gorsky, L. D., and Coon, M. J. Evaluation of the role of free hydroxyl
radicals in the cytochrome P-450 catalyzed oxidation of benzene and
cyclohexanol. Drug Metab. Disp. 13: 169-174 (1985).
27. Sabourin, P. J., Bechtold, W. E., and Henderson, R. F. A high pressure li-
quid chromatographic method for the separation and quantitation ofwater-
soluble radiolabeled benzene metabolites. Anal. Biochem. 170: 316-327
(1988b).
28. Tunek, A., Platt, K. L., Przybylski, M., and Oesch, F. Multistep metabolic
activation ofbenzene. Effect ofsuperoxide dismutase on covalent binding
to microsomal macromolecules and identification ofglutathione conjugates
using high pressure liquid chromatography and field desorption mass spec-
trometry. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 33: 1-17 (1980).
29. Lunte, S. M., and Kissinger, P. T. Detection and identification ofsulthydryl
conjugates ofp-benzoquinone in microsomal incubations ofbenzene and
phenol. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 47: 195-212 (1983).
30. Nerland, D. E., and Pierce, W. M. Identification of N-acetyl-S-(2,5-di-
304 SNYDER ETAL.
hydroxyphenyl)-L-cysteine as a urinary metabolite ofbenzene, phenol, and
hydroquinone. Drug Metab. Disp. 18: 958-961 (1990).
31. Daniels, M., Scholes, G., and Weiss, J. Chemical action ofionizing radia-
tions in solution. Part XV. Effect ofmolecular oxygen in the irradiation of
aqueous benzene solutions with X-rays. Biochem. J. 832-834 (1955).
32. Loeff, I., and Stein, G. Aromatic ring-opening in the presence ofoxygen
in irradiated solutions. Nature 184: 901 (1959).
33. Kirley, T. A., Goldstein, B. D., Maniara, W. M., and Witz, G. Metabolism
of trans,trans-muconaldehyde, a microsomal hematotoxic metabolite of
benzene by purified yeast aldehyde dehydrogenase and a mouse liver soluble
fraction. Toxicol. AppI. Pharmacol. 100: 360-367 (1989).
34. Ross, D., Goon, D., Colagiovanni, D., Ruth, J., and Petersen, D. R. In vitro
metabolism of trans,trans-muconaldehyde identification of a novel
metabolite. Toxicologist 11: 181 (1991).
35. Zhang, Z., Rosen, R. T., Fukuda, E. K., Goldstein, B. D. and Witz, G. In
vitro metabolism of trans,trans-muconaldehyde, a microsomal hema-
totoxic metabolite ofbenzene. Toxicologist 12: 387 (1992).
36. Gad-El Karim, M. M., Sadagopa Ramanujam, V. M., and Legator, M. S.
Trans,trans-muconic acid, an open-chain urinary metabolite ofbenzene in
mice. Quantification by high pressure liquid chromatography. Xenobiotica
15: 211-220(1985).
37. Witz, G., Maniara, W. M., Mylavarapu, V. J., and Goldstein, B. D. Com-
parative metabolism ofbenzene and trans,trans-muconaldehyde to trans,
trans-muconic acid in DBA/2N and C57BL/6 mice. Biochem. Pharmacol.
40: 1275-1280 (1990).
38. Mueller, G., Koelbel, M., Heger, M., and Norpoth, K. Urinary S-
phenylmercapturic acid and phenylguanine as indicators of benzene ex-
posure. In: Biological Monitoring ofExposure to Chemicals. Organic Com-
pounds (M. H. Ho and H. K. Dillon, Eds.), John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 1987, pp. 91-98.
39. Irons, R., Dent, J., Baker, T., and Richert, D. Benzene is metabolized and
covalently bound in bone marrow in situ. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 30: 241-245
(1980).
40. Jowa, L., Witz, G., Snyder, R., Winkle, S., and Kalf, G. F. Synthesis and
characterization ofdeoxyguanosine-benzoquinone adducts. J. Appl. Tox-
icol. 10: 47-54 (1990).
41. Schatz-Kornbrust, E., Goldstein, B. D., and Witz, G. The binding of
trans,trans-muconaldehyde to deoxyguanosine and calfthymus DNA. Tox-
icologist 11: 253 (1991).
42. Dean, B. J. Recent findings on the genetic toxicology ofbenzene, toluene,
xylenes and phenols. Mutat. Res. 154: 153-181 (1985).
43. Glatt, H., Padykula, R., Berchtold, G. A., Ludewig, G., Platt, K. L.,
Klein, J., and Oesch, F. Multiple activation pathways ofbenzene leading
to products with varying genotoxic characteristics. Environ. Health Per-
spect. 82: 81-90 (1989).
44. Glatt, H., and Witz, G. Studies on the induction of gene mutations in
bacterial and mammalian cells by the ring-opened benzene metabolites
trans,trans-muconaldehyde and trans,trans-muconic acid. Mutagenesis 5:
263-266 (1990).
45. Witz, G., Gad, S. C., Tice, R. R., Oshiro, Y., Piper, C. E., and Goldstein,
B. D. Genetic toxicity ofthe benzene metabolite trans,trans-muconaldehyde
in mammalian and bacterial cells. Mutat. Res. 240: 295-306 (1990).
46. Rickert, D. E., Baker, T. S., Bus, J. S., Barrow, C. S., and Irons, R. D.
Benzene disposition in the rat after exposure by inhalation. Toxicol. Appl.
Pharmacol. 49: 417-423 (1979).
47. Greenlee, W. F., Sun, J. D., and Bus, J. S. A proposed mechanism of
benzene toxicity: Formation of reactive intermediates from polyphenol
metabolites. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 59: 187-195 (1981).
48. Eastmond D. A., Smith, M. T., Ruzo, L. O., and Ross, D. Metabolic ac-
tivation ofphenol by human myeloperoxidase and horse-radish peroxidase.
Mol. Pharmacol. 30: 674-679 (1986).
49. Eastmond D. A., Smith, M. T., and Irons, R. D. An interaction ofbenzene
metabolites reproduces the myelotoxicity observed with benzene exposure.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 91: 85-95 (1987).
50. Sadler, A., Subrahmanyam, V. V., and Ross, D. Oxidation ofcatechol by
horseradish peroxidase and human leukocyte peroxidase: Reactions ofo-
benzoquinone and o-benzosemiquinone. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 93:
62-71 (1988).
51. Irons, R. D. Quinones as toxic metabolites ofbenzene. J. Toxicol. Environ.
Health 16: 673-678 (1985).
52. Smith, M. T., Yager, J. W., Steinmetz, K. M., and Eastmond, D. A.
Peroxidase-dependent metabolism of benzene's phenolic metabolites and
its potential role in benzene toxicity and carcinogenicity. Environ. Health
Perspect. 82: 23-29 (1989).
53. Steinmetz, K. L., Eastmond, D. A., and Smith, M. T. Hydroquinone
metabolism by human myeloperoxidase is stimulated by phenol and several
other compounds. Toxicologist 9: 281 (1989).
54. Smith, M. T., Robertson, M. T., Yager, J. W., and Eastmond, D. A. Role
ofmetabolism in benzene-induced myelotoxicity and leukemogenesis. In:
Mutation and the Environment Part B (M. L. Mendelsohn and R. J. Alber-
niti, Eds.), Wiley-Liss, Inc., New York, 1990, pp. 125-136.
55. Schlosser, M. J., Shurina, R. D., and Kalf, G. F. Metabolism ofphenol and
hydroquinone to reactive products by macrophage peroxidase or purified
prostaglandin H synthase. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 229-237 (1989).
56. Santesson, C. G. Uber chronische Vergiftung mit Steinkohlenteerbenzin;
vier Todesfalle. Arch. Hyg. Berl. 31: 336-376 (1897).
57. Selling, L. Benzol as a leukotoxin. Studies on degeneration regeneration
ofblood and hematopoietic organs. Johns Hopkins Hospital Rep. 17: 83-142
(1916).
58. Weiskotten, H. G., Shwartz, S. C., and Steinsland, H.S. The action ofben-
zol on blood and blood forming tissues. J. Med. Res. 35: 63-69 (1916).
59. Weiskotten, H. G., Gibbs, G. B. F., Boggs, E. O., and Templeton, E. R.
The action ofbenzol. VI. Benzol vapor leucopenia (rabbit). J. Med. Res.
41: 425-438 (1920).
60. Forni, A., Pacifico, E., and Limonta, A. Chromosome studies in workers
exposed to benzene or toluene or both. Arch. Environ. Health 22: 373-378
(1971a).
61. Forni, A., Cappellini, A., Pacifico, E., and Vigliani, E. Chromosome
changes and their evolution with past exposure to benzene. Arch. Environ.
Health 23: 385-391 (1971b).
62. Hite, M., Pecharo, M., Smith, I. and Thornton, S. The effect ofbenzene
in micronucleus test. Mutat. Res. 77: 149-155 (1980).
63. Tice, R. R., Costa, D. L., and Drew, R. T. Cytogenetic effects of inhaled
benzene in murine bone marrow: Induction ofsister chromatid exchanges,
chromosomal aberrations, and cellular proliferation inhibition in DBA/2
mice. Proc. Natl. Sci. U.S.A. 77: 2148-2152 (1980).
64. Tice, R. R., Vogt, T. F., and Costa, D. L. Cytogenetic effects of inhaled
benzene in murine bone marrow in genotoxic effect ofairborne agents. En-
viron. Sci. Res. 25: 257-275 (1982).
65. IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of
Chemicals to Humans, Vol. 29. Benzene. International Agency for Research
on Cancer, Lyon, 1982, 93-148.
66. Maltoni, C., and Scarnato, C. First experimental demonstration ofthe car-
cinogenic effects ofbenzene. Med. Lav. 5: 352-357 (1982b).
67. Maltoni, C., Cotti, G., Valgimigli, L., and Mandrioli, A. Zymbal gland
carcinomas in rats following exposure to benzene by inhalation. Am. J. Ind.
Med. 3: 11-16 (1982).
68. Huff, J. E., Haseman, J. K., De Marini, D. M., Eustis, S., Maronpot, R.
R., Peters, A. C., Persing, R. L., Chrisp, C. E., and Jacobs, A. C. Multiple-
site carcinogenicity ofbenzene in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F mice. En-
viron. Health Perspect. 82: 125-163 (1989).
69. Pirozzi-Chatterjee, S., and Snyder, R. Mechanisms ofbenzene toxicity. In:
Molecular Mechanisms of Monooxygenases and Bioactivation of Toxic
Compounds. (E. Arinc, J. B. Schenkman, E. and Hodgson, Eds.), NATO
ASI Series A: Life Sciences, Vol. 202. Plenum Press, New York, 1991, pp.
387-414.
70. Uyeki, E. M., Askar, A. E., Shoeman, D. W., and Bisel, T. U. Acute tox-
icity ofbenzene inhalation to hemopoietic precursor cells, Toxicol. AppI.
Pharmacol. 40: 49-57 (1977).
71. Gill, D., Jenkins, V., Kempen, R., and Ellis, S. The importance ofpluripo-
tent stem cells in benzene toxicity. Toxicology 16: 163-171 (1980).
72. Green, J. D., Snyder, C. A., Lobue, J., Goldstein, B. D., and Albert, R.
E. Acute and chronic dose/response effects of inhaled benzene on
multipotential hemopoietic stem (CFU-S) and granulocyte/macrophage
progenitor (GM CFU-C) cells in CD-1 mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.
58: 492-503 (1981).
73. Harigaya, K., Miller, M. E., Cronkite, E. P., and Drew, R. T. The detec-
tion ofin vivo liquid bone marrow cultures, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 60:
346-353 (1981).
74. Toft, K., Olofsson, T., Tunek, A., and Berlin, M. Toxic effects on mouse
bone marrow caused by inhalation ofbenzene. Arch. Toxicol. 51: 295-302
(1982).
75. Baarson, K., Snyder, C. A., and Albert, R. E. Repeated exposures of
C57B16 mice to 10 ppm inhaled benzene markedly depressed erythropoietic
colony formation. Toxicol. Lett. 20: 337-342 (1984).
TOXICOLOGYOFBENZENE 305
76. Seidel, H. J., Barthel, E., and Zinser, D. The hematopoietic stem cell com-
partments in mice during and after long term inhalation ofthree doses of
benzene. Exp. Hematol. 17: 300-303 (1989).
77. Keller. K. A., and Snyder, C. A. Mice exposed in utero to low concentra-
tions of benzene exhibit enduring changes in their colony forming
hematopoietic cells. Toxicology 42: 171-181 (1986).
78. Keller, K. A., and Snyder, C. A. Mice exposed in utero to 20 ppm ben-
zene exhibit altered numbers of recognizable hematopoietic cells up
to seven weeks after exposure. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 10: 224-232
(1988).
79. Filmanowicz, E., and Gurney, C. W. Studies on erythropoiesis. XVI.
Response to a single dose oferythropoietin in polycythemic mice. J. Lab.
Clin. Med. 57: 65-72 (1961).
80. Payne, B. J., Lewis, H. B., Murchinson, T. E., and Hart, E. A. Hematology
oflaboratory animals. In: Handbook ofLaboratory Science, VIII, (E. C.
Melby, Jr. and N. H. Altman, Eds.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1976,
pp. 383-463.
81. Bothwell, T., Charlton, R., Cook, J., and Finch, C. Iron Metabolism in
Man. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1979.
82. Lee, E. W., Kocsis, J. J., and Snyder, R. Acute effect ofbenzene on [59Fe]
incorporation into circulating erythrocytes. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 27:
431-436 (1974).
83. Lee, E. W., Kocsis, J. J., and Snyder, R. The use offerrokinetics in the study
of experimental anemia. Environ. Health Perspect. 39: 29-37 (1981).
84. Dexter, T. M. Hemopoiesis in long-term bone marrow cultures. Acta
Haematol. 63: 299-305 (1979).
85. Garnett, H. M., Cronkite, E. P., and Drew, R.T. Effect ofin vivo exposure
to benzene on the characteristics ofbone marrow adherent cells. Leukemia
Res. 7: 803-810 (1983).
86. Frash, V. N., Yushov, B. G., Karaulov, A. V., and Skuratov, V. L.
Mechanism of action of benzene on hematopoiesis. Investigation of
hematopoietic stem cells. Bull. Exp. Biol. Med. 82: 985-987 (1976).
87. Snyder. R., Dimitriadis, E., Guy, R., Hu, P., Cooper, K. R., Bauer, H.,
Witz, G., and Goldstein, B. D. Studies on the mechanism ofbenzene tox-
icity. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 31-36 (1989).
88. Guy, R. L., Dimitriadis, E., Hu. P., Cooper, K. R., and Snyder, R. Interac-
tive inhibition of erythroid [59Fe] utilization by benzene metabolites in
female mice. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 74: 55-62 (1990).
89. Guy. R. L., Hu, P., Witz, G., and Goldstein, B.D. Depression of iron up-
take into erythrocytes in mice by treatment with the combined benzene
metabolites p-benzoquinone, muconaldehyde, and hydroquinone. J. Appl.
Toxicol. 11: 443-446 (1991).
90. Gaido, K. W., and Weirda, D. In vitro effects ofbenzene metabolites on
mouse bone marrow stromal cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 76: 45-55
(1984).
91. Gaido, K. W., and Weirda, D. Modulation of stromal cell function in
DBA/2J and B6C3FI mice exposed to benzene or phenol. Toxicol. AppI.
Pharmacol. 81: 469-475 (1985).
92. Gaido. K. W., and Wierda, D. Suppression ofbone marrow stromal cell
function by benzene and hydroquinone is ameliorated by indomethacin.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 89: 378-390 (1987).
93. Longacre. S., Kocsis, J. J., and Snyder, R. Influence ofstrain differences
in mice on the metabolism and toxicity ofbenzene. Toxicol. AppI. Phar-
macol. 60: 398-409 (1981).
94. Post, G. B., Snyder, R., and Kalf, G. F. Metabolism ofbenzene and phenol
in macrophages in vitro and the inhibition of RNA synthesis by benzene
metabolites. Cell Biol. Toxicol. 2: 231-246 (1986).
95. Renz, J. F., and Kalf, G. F. A role for interleukin-I in benzene induced
hematotoxicity: inhibition ofthe conversion ofpre-IL-ls to mature cytokine
in murine macrophages by hydroquinone and the prevention ofbenzene-
induced hematotoxicity in mice by interleukin-lca. Blood 78: 938-944
(1991).
96. Shimizu, M., Yasui, Y., and Matsumoto, N. Structural specificity of
aromatic compounds with special reference to mutagenic activity in
Salmonella typhimurium-a series of chloro- or fluoro-nitrobenzene
derivatives. Mutat. Res. 116: 217-238 (1983).
97. Amacher, D. E., and Zelljadt, J. The morphological transformation of
Syrian hamster embryo cells by chemicals reportedly non-mutagenic to
Salmonella typhimurium. Carcinogenesis 4: 291-295 (1983).
98. Pollini, G., and Colombi, R. II danno cromosomica midollare nell
anaemica aplastica benzolica. Med. Lav. 55: 244-255 (1964).
99. Pollini, G., Biscaldi, G. P., and Robustelli Della Cuna, G. Chromosome
changes in lymphocytes five years after benzene haemopathy. Med. Lav.
60: 743-758 (1969).
100. Erexson, G. L., Wilmer, J. L., and Klingerman, A. D. Induction ofsister
chromatid exchanges and micronuclei in male DBA/2 mice after inhalation
ofbenzene. Environ. Mutagen. 6: 408 (1984).
101. Erexson, G. L., Wilmer, J. L., and Kligerman, A. D. Sister chromatid ex-
change induction in human lymphocytes exposed to benzene and its
metabolites in vitro. Cancer Res. 45: 2471-2477 (1985).
102. Schlagel, R., and MacGregor, J. T. The persistence of micronuclei in
peripheral blood erythrocytes: detectionofchronic chromosome breakage.
Mutat. Res. 104: 367-369 (1982).
103. Harper, B. L., Ramanujam, V. M. S., Gad-El-Karim, M. M., and Legator,
M. S. The influence ofsimple aromatics on benzene clastogenicity. Mutat.
Res. 128: 105-114 (1984).
104. Pirozzi, S. J., Renz, J. F., and Kalf, G. F. The prevention ofbenzene-induced
genotoxicity in mice by indomethacin. Mutat. Res. 222: 291-298 (1989a).
105. Schlosser, M. J., Shurina, R. D., and Kalf, G.F. Prostaglandin H synthetase
catalyzed oxidation of hydroquinone to a sulfhydryl binding and DNA-
damaging metabolite. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 3: 333-339 (1990).
106. Snyder, R., Lee, E. W., and Kocsis, J. J. Binding of labeled benzene
metabolitesto mouse liver and bone marrow. Res. Conmmun. Chem. Pathol.
Pharmacol. 20: 191-194 (1978).
107. Tunek, A., Platt, K., Bentley, P., andOesch, F. Microsomal metabolism of
benzenetospecies irreversibly bindingto microsomal proteinandtheeffects
ofmodification ofthis metabolism. Mol. Pharmacol. 14:920-929 (1978).
108. Lutz, W. K., and Schlatter, C. H. Mechanism ofthe carcinogenic action
ofbenzene: irreversible binding to rat liver DNA. Chem.-Biol. Interact.
18: 241-245 (1977).
109. Irons, R. D., and Neptun, D. A. Effects ofprinciple hydroxy-metabolites
ofbenzene on microtubule polymerization. Arch. Toxicol. 45: 297-305
(1980).
110. Pfeifer, R. W., and Irons, R. D. Alteration of lymphocyte function by
quinones through sulfhydryl-dependent disruption ofmicrotubule assembly.
Int. J. Immunopharmacol. 5: 463-470 (1983).
111. Schwartz, C., Snyder, R. and Kalf, G. The inhibition ofmitochondrial DNA
replication in vitro by metabolites of benzene, hydroquinone and p-
benzoquinone. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 53: 327-350 (1986).
112. Lutz, W. K. In vivo covalent binding oforganic chemicals to DNA as a
quantitative indicator in the process ofchemical carcinogenesis. Mutat. Res.
65: 289-356 (1979).
113. Rushmore, T., Kalf, G., and Snyder, R. Covalent binding ofbenzene and
its metabolitesto DNA in rabbit bone marrow mitochondria in vitro. Chem.-
Biol. Interact. 49: 133-154 (1984).
114. Karaszkiewicz, J. W., Snyder, R., and Kalf, G. F. Partial purification of
benzene hydroxylase activity from rat liver mitoplasts. Fed. Proc. 45: 1748
(1986).
115. Pongracz, K., and Bodell, W J. Detection of3 '-hydroxy-l,N6-benztheno-
2 '-deoxyadenosine 3 '-phosphate by 32P postlabeling of DNA reacted with
p-benzoquinone. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 4: 199-202 (1991).
116. Pirozzi, S. J., Schlosser, M. J., and Kalf, G. F. Prevention of benzene-
induced myelotoxicity and prostaglandin synthesis in bone marrow ofmice
by inhibitors of prostaglandin H synthetase. Immunopharmacology 18:
39-55 (1989b).
117. Bauer, H., Dimitriadis, E. A., and Snyder, R. An in vivo study ofbenzene
metabolite DNA adduct formation in liver of male New Zealand rabbits.
Arch. Toxicol. 63: 209-213 (1989).
118. Reddy, M. V., Blackburn, G. R., Schreiner, C. A., Mehlman, M. A., and
Mackerer, C. R. 32p analysis ofDNA adducts in tissues ofbenzene treated
rats. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 253-268 (1989).
119. Goldstein, B. D., Snyder, C. A., Laskin, S., Bromberg, I., Albert, R. E.,
and Nelson, N. Myelogenous leukemia in rodents inhaling benzene. Tox-
icol. Lett. 13: 169-173 (1982).
120. Cronkite, E., Bullis, J., Inoe, T., and Drew, R. Benzene inhalation produces
leukemia in mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 75: 358-361 (1984).
121. Da Silva, C., Fan, X., and Castagne, M. Benzene-mediated protein kinase
C activation. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 91-95 (1989).
122. Reddy, M. V., Blackburn, G. R., Irwin, S. E., Kommineni, C., Mackerer,
C. R., and Mehlman, M. A. A method for in vitro culture of rat Zymbal
gland: use in mechanistic studies ofbenzene carcinogenesis in combina-
tion with 2P-postlabeling. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 239-248 (1989).
123. Low, L. K., Meeks, J. R., Norris, K. J., Mehlman, M. A., and Mackerer,
C. R. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism ofbenzene in Zymbal gland and
other key target tissues after oral administration in rats. Environ. Health
Perspect. 82: 215-222 (1989).
306 SNYDER ETAL.
124. Busby, W. F., Jr., Wang, J. S., Stevens, E. K., Padykula, R. E., Alekse-
jczyk, R. A., and Berchtold, G. A. Carcinogenesis 11: 1473-1478 (1990).
125. Solomon, E., Borrow, J., and Goddard, A. D. Chromosome aberrations
and cancer. Science 254: 1153-1160 (1991).
126. Metacalf, D., Nowell, P. C., Rowley, J. D., and Sachs, L. Meeting
Chromosomal and growth factor abnormalities in leukemia. Cancer Res.
51: 2494-2497 (1991).
127. de The, H., Lavau, C., Marchio, A., Chomienne, C., and Degos, J. The
PML-RARca fusion mRNA generated by the t(5;17) translocation in acute
promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally altered RAR. Cell 66:
675-684 (1991).
128. Sato. A., and Nakajima, T. Dose-dependent metabolic interaction between
benzene and toluene in vivo and in vitro. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 48:
249-256 (1979).
129. Beliles, R. P., and Totman, L. C. Pharmacokinetically based risk assess-
ment of workplace exposure to benzene. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 9:
186-195 (1989).
130. Medinsky, M. A., Sabourin, P. J., Lucier, G., Birnbaum, L. S., andHender-
son. R. F. Aphyisological model forsimulationofbenzene metabolism by
rats and mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 99: 193-206 (1989).
131. Travis, C. C., Quillen, J. L., and Arms, A. D. Pharmacokineticsofbenzene.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 102: 400-420 (1990a).
132. Travis, C. C., White, R. K., and Wards, R. C. Interspecies extrapolation
of pharmacokinetics. J. Theor. Biol. 142: 285-304 (1990).
133. Bois, F. Y., Smith, M. T., and Spear, R. C. Mechanisms ofbenzene car-
cinogenesis: application of a physiological model of benzene phar-
macokinetics and metabolism. Toxicol. Lett. 56: 283-298 (1991).
134. Spear, R. C., Bois, F. Y., Woodruff, T., Auslander, D., Parker, J. and
Selvin, S. Modeling benzene pharmacokinetics across three sets ofanimal
data: parametric sensitivity and risk implications. Risk Anal. 11: 641-654
(1991).
135. Subrahmanyan, V. V., Ross, D., Eastmond, D. A., and Smith, M. T. Poten-
tial role offree radicals in benzene-induced myelotoxicity and leukemia.
Free Rad. Bio. Med. 11: 495-515 (1991).
136. Wallace, L. A., and Pellizzari, E. D. Personal air exposures and breath con-
centrations of benzene and other volatile hydrocarbons for smokers and
nonsmokers. Toxicol. Lett. 35: 113-116 (1986).
137. Wallace, L. A. The Total Exposure Assessment Methodology (TEAM)
Study: Summary and Analysis: Vol 1. EPA-600-6-87-002a. U.S. En-
vironmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 1987.
138. ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Benzene. American Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry, Atlanta, GA, 1989.
139. Maltoni, C., Conti, B., and Cotti, G. Benzene: a multipotential carcinogen.
Results oflong-term bioassays performed at the Bologna Institute ofOn-
cology. Am. J. Ind. Med. 4: 589-630 (1983).
140. NTP. Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of
Benzene (CAS No. 71-43-2) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F, Mice (Gavage
Studies). National Toxicology Program, Research Triangle Park, NC, 1983.
141. Davis, D. L., and Pbpe, A. M. Reproductive risks ofbenzene: Need forad-
ditional study. Toxicol. Ind. Health 2: 445-451 (1986).
142. Irons, R. D., Wierda, D., and Pfeifer, R. W. Immunotoxicity ofbenzene
and its metabolites. Adv. Mod. Environ. Toxicol. 4: 37-50 (1983).
143. Goldstein, B. D. Biological and ambient monitoring of benzene in the
workplace. J. Occup. Med. 28: 1051-1054 (1986).
144. Rosenthal, G. J., and Snyder, C. A. Inhaled benzene reduces aspects ofcell-
mediated tumor surveillance in mice. Toxicol. AppI. Pharmacol. 88: 35-43
(1987).
145. Goldstein, B. D., and Witz, G. Free radicals and carcinogenesis. Free Rad.
Res. Commun. 11: 3-10 (1990).
146. Goldstein, B. D. Hematotoxicity in humans. In: Benzene toxicity: a critical
evaluation. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 2(suppl.): 69-105 (1977).
147. Goldstein, B. D. Clinical hematotoxicity of benzene. In: Advances in
Modern Environmental Toxicology, Vol. 16. Benzene: Occupational and
Environmental Hazards-Scientific Update. Princeton Scientific Publishing,
Princeton, NJ, 1989, pp. 55-65.
148. Aksoy, M., Erdem, S., Erdogan, G., and Dincol, G. Combination of
genetic factors and chronic exposure to benzene in the aetiology of
leukaemia. Hum. Hered. 26: 149-153 (1976).
149. Browning, E. Toxicity and Metabolism of Industrial Solvents, Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1965.
150. Vigliani, E. C., and Saita, G. Benzene and leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 217:
872-876 (1964).
151. Aksoy, M., Erdem, S., and Dincol, S. Leukemia in shoe workers expos-
ed chronically to benzene. Blood 44: 837-841 (1974).
152. Infante, P., Rinsky, R., Wagoner, J., and Young, R. Leukemia in benzene
workers. Lancet ii: 76-78 (1977).
153. Goldstein, B. D., and Kipen, H. Lessons on the second cancers resulting
from cancer chemotherapy. In: Biological Reactive Intermediates IV (C.
M. Witmer, Ed.), Plenum Press, New York, 1990, pp. 619-625.
154. Aksoy, M., and Erdem, S. Follow-up study on the mortality and the
development ofleukemia in44 pancytopenic patients with chronic benzene
exposure. Blood 52: 285-292 (1978).
155. Aksoy, M., Dincol, K., Akgun, T., Erdem, S., and Dincol, G.
Haematological effects ofchronic benzene poisoning in 217 workers. Br.
J. Ind. Med. 28: 296-302 (1971).
156. Wong, 0. An industry wide mortality study ofchemical workers occupa-
tional exposed to benzene. I. General results. Br. J. Ind. Med. 44: 365-381
(1987a).
157. Wong. 0. An industry wide mortality study ofchemical workers occupa-
tional exposed to benzene. II. Dose response analyses. Br. J. Ind. Med. 44:
382-395 (1987b).
158. Bond, G. G., McLaren, E. A., Baldwin, C. L., and Cook, R. R. An up-
date ofmorality among chemical workers exposed to benzene. Br. J. Ind.
Med. 43: 685-691 (1986).
159. Yin, S. N.,.Li, G. L., Tain, F. D., Fu, N. I., Jin, C., Chen, Y. J., Luo, S.
J., Ye, P. Z., Zhang, J. Z., Wang, G. C., Zhang, X. C., Wu, H. N., and
Zhong, Q. C. Leukaemia in benzene workers: a retrospective cohort study.
Br. J. Ind. Med. 44: 124-128 (1987).
160. Rushton, L., and Alderson, M. R. A case-control study to investigate the
association between exposure to benzene and deaths from leukaemia in oil
refinery workers. Br. J. Cancer 43: 77-84 (1981).
161. Rinsky, R. A., Young, R. J., and Smith, A. B. Leukemia in benzene
workers. Am. J. Ind. Med. 2: 217-245 (1981).
162. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young, R. J.,
Okun, A. K., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and leukemia: an epidemio-
logical risk assessment. N. Engl. J. Med. 316: 1044-1050 (1987).
163. Kipen, H. M., Cody, R. P., Crump, K. S., Allen, B., and Goldstein, B. D.
Hematologic effects ofbenzene: a thirty-five year longitudinal study ofrub-
ber workers. Toxicol. Ind. Health 4: 411-430 (1988).
164. Kipen, H. M., Cody, R. P., and Goldstein, B. D. Use of longitudinal
analysis ofperipheral blood counts to validate historical reconstruction of
benzene exposure. Environ. Health Perspect. 82: 199-206 (1989).
165. Goldstein, B. D. Is exposure to benzene a cause of human multiple
myeloma? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 609: 225-334 (1990).
166. Aksoy, M., Erdem, S., Dincol, G., Kutlar, A., Bakioglu, I., and
Hepyuksel, T. Clinical observations showing the role ofsome factors in the
etiology ofmultiple myeloma. Acta Haematol. 71: 116-120 (1984).
167. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., and Sellakumar, A. Hematotoxicity of in-
haled benzene to Sprague-Dawley rats and AKR mice at 300 ppm. J. Tox-
icol. Environ. Health 4: 605-618 (1978).
