Environmental Health Perspectives
Vol. 95, pp. 85-91, 1991
Use of Laboratory Tests for Immune
Biomarkers in Environmental Health
Studies Concerned with Exposure to
Indoor Air Pollutants
by Robert F. Vogt, Jr.*
The immune system is likely to be involved in some ofthe health effects caused by certain indoor air exposures, and im-
mune biomarkers can helpdetermine which exposures and health effects have important immunecomponents. However,
the lack ofstandardized laboratory tests for most human immune markers and the many confounding variables that can
influence them makes interpretation ofresults for exposure and disease end points uncertain. This paper presents an over-
view ofthe immune system and the considerations involved in using tests for immune markers in clinical epidemiology
studies, particularly those concerned with indoor air exposures. Careful study design, well-characterized laboratory
methods, and rigorous documentation ofexposure statusare required todetermine the predictive valueofsuch tests. Clinical
tests currently available for some immune markerscould helpidentify andcharacterize both irritativeand hypersensitivity
reactions to indoor air pollutants. Newertests developed in research settings might provide more incisive indicators ofim-
mune status that could help identify exposure, susceptibility, or preclinical disease states, but their methodologies must
be refined and tested in multicenter studies before they can be used reliably in public health applications.
Introduction
The host defense system ofmammals is a complex network of
cells and biochemical mediators responsible for repairing injured
tissue, identifying and removing foreign substances, destroying
or containing infectious agents, and in some cases eradicating
cancer cells. The host defense system includes both innate (or
nonspecific) mechanisms ofimmunity and acquired (or specific)
mechanisms of immunity. In this review, the term "immune
system" refers to all components ofboth innate and acquired im-
munity, as their components and activities are often intertwined.
Evidence accumulated over the last several years has shown
that indoor air pollution is a major source of exposure to en-
vironmental chemicals (1-4). Environmental pollutants could
potentially lead to adverse health consequences through interac-
tion with the immune system in several different ways. As tox-
icants, they could damageparts ofthe immune system and impair
host defense. As foreign substances (xenobiotics), they could
evoke inappropriate responses or intensify normal responses to
the point that certain immune-mediated functions become
pathological rather than protective. Pbllutants could also have in-
direct effects on the immune system by influencing other organ
systems, particularly the neuroendocrine system.
Alternatively, some pollutants could interact with the immune
system in ways that would not cause adverse health effects, and
*Division ofEnvironmental Health Laboratory Sciences, Centers for Disease
Control, United States Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333.
others could fail to influencethe immune system in any way atall.
These various possibilities can be addressed only through lon-
gitudinal clinical epidemiology studies that combine rigorous ex-
posure and health assessments with standardized laboratory
measurements ofthe cells and mediators ofthe immune systems,
so-called immune biomarkers. This article presents a brief
review of the use of immune biomarkers in such clinical epi-
demiologic studies, with emphasis on immune physiology and
laboratory methods.
Immune System and Environmental
Antigens
A numberofarticles and textbooks provide excellent descrip-
tions ofthe immune system (5-7), and only a briefoverview will
be given here.
Perhaps the most fundamental characteristic ofthe immune
system is its ability to recognize and destroy foreign material.
This activity is exemplified by the pulmonary alveolar macro-
phage, a larger mobile cell found in the lung sacs that avidly in-
gests (phagocytizes) foreign material, including bacteriaand air
pollutants. The macrophage attempts to digest and process in-
gested material with powerful enzymes in an acid environment.
In the case ofbacteria, this response can destroy the infectious
agent and prevent disease. However, ifthe ingested material is a
particular form ofasbestos microfiber, the macrophage itselfcan
be damaged, and lung tissue can be destroyed by the release of
its digestive agents. Thus, the normal function ofthe macrophage
R. F. VOGT, JR.
can prevent or induce disease, depending on the type and dose
ofmaterial to which it is exposed.
Cells ofthe Immune System
Most ofthe several different types ofcells that constitute the
immune system spend at least part of their lifetime in the
peripheral blood, where they make up the white blood cells or
leukocytes. The major types of leukocytes are lymphocytes,
monocytes, and granulocytes.
Lymphocytes (B-cells and T-cells) are the specific recognition
cells ofthe immune system. Each family (clone) oflymphocytes
has unique recognition molecules on its surface, and if lym-
phocytes are activated by recognizing a foreign protein (antigen)
presented by a macrophage (or similar cell), a specific immune
response is initiated. Activated lymphocytes engage in a varie-
ty ofhost defense functions, such as producing antibody (B-cells)
and killing virus-infected cells (T-cells).
Monocytesbecome macrophages whenthey emigrate fromthe
blood. They are distributed throughout many tissues including
the lung, liver, skin, brain, and bone marrow. Their innate ac-
tivities ofphagocytosis and digestion are nonspecific, but they
become part ofthe specific immune response when they present
processed fragments offoreign protein to lymphocytes.
Granulocytes are important auxiliary cells with activities that
are critical to hostdefenseand may alsocontribute to disease pro-
cesses. Neutrophils, like macrophages, are avid phagocytes, but
they are short-lived and less versatile. Mast cells, basophils, and
eosinophils are involved with immunity to larger parasites such
as worms, and they are the primary participants in the allergic
responses to pollens, foods, andother substances. They also ap-
pear to be involved with inflammatory reactions to certain tox-
ic and sensitizing chemical exposures (8-10).
Chemical Mediators ofthe Immune System
Many ofthe defense and regulatory functions ofthe immune
system are conducted by chemical mediators released from its
cells. The only antigen-specific mediators are the antibodies
secreted by stimulated B-lymphocytes. Antibodies (also called
immunoglobulins [Ig]) are composed of several major classes
with different functionalcapacities. IgM andIgGantibodies are
the most general-purpose types; they facilitatephagocytosis, an-
tigen clearance and destruction ofparasites. IgA antibodies are
secreted at the mucous membranes, where they help prevent at-
tachment and invasion by thebillions ofbacteria and viruses that
come in contact with these surface tissues. IgE antibodies are
bound to the outer membrane ofmast cells andbasophils, where
they serve as the recognition molecules for antigens that cause
allergic reactions like hay fever.
Cytokines are extremely potent chemical messengers that ac-
tivate or suppress the functional and metabolic activities oftarget
cell populations that express the appropriate receptors. About a
dozen immune cytokines called interleukins have been well-
characterized. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) andinterleukin-2 (IL-2) play
especially pivotal roles in the overall immune response.
Complement is one ofseveral plasma proteins involved with
hostdefense. It is actually a cascading systemofdifferentprotein
molecules that can be activated by antigen-antibody complexes,
blood-clotting proteins, and other substances. Complement ac-
tivation products haveanumberofactivities, including chemo-
taxis, clearance, and destruction ofcells.
Several small molecules are important immune mediators.
They include different lipid-derived chemicals (such as pros-
taglandins) thathave a wide variety ofeffects on many different
tissues, suchas theactivation or suppressionofimmunecellsand
the dilation or constriction ofblood vessels and airways. His-
tamine, which is stored in the granules of mast cells and
basophils, causes dilationandleakagein small bloodvesselsand
haseffects on immunecellsandothertissues; itis responsiblefor
many ofthe symptoms ofallergy.
Several other chemical mediators have influences on cells of
the immune system, although they are not as central to its func-
tion. These include catecholamines (such as adrenalin), endor-
phins, insulin, transferrin, and others.
Antigens, Haptens, and Allergens
An antigen is a substance that sensitizes an animal to evoke a
specific immune response upon subsequent exposure. The
presence ofaspecific immune responsemay bedemonstratedby
immunochemicalassaysthatdetectantibodies specifically bound
to theantigen, by cellular functionassays that show lymphocytes
reacting specifically totheantigen, orby specifichypersensitivi-
ty reactions in tissues exposed to the antigen (e.g., skin tests).
In order for small molecules (including almostall xenobiotic
chemicals) to be antigenic, they must first combine with tissue
proteins, creating acomplexthattheimmune systemrecognizes
as foreign. The chemical is called a hapten and the protein to
which it is bound is called a carrier. Hapten-carrier complexes
can be formed when reactivechemicals (e.g., isocyanates) form
covalentbonds withtissueproteins orwheninertchemicals (e.g.,
nickelcompounds)aretightlyboundtoproteinsthroughchelation.
Antigens such as ragweed pollen that evoke immediate hy-
persensitivity responses are frequently called "allergens"
becauseoftheir association withtheclinicalsymptomsofallergy.
The factors that make an antigen behave as an allergen depend
on the immune response ofthe individual and (presumably) not
on thechemical natureoftheantigen itself. Allergensdo in fact
generate other immune responses in additionto thoseassociated
with immediate hypersensitivity.
Specificity ofAntibodies
A normal "specific" antibody response includes a mixture
of tens, hundreds, or thousands of antibodies with different
specificities. The nature of this mixture depends on the
dynamic response of living cells (B-lymphocytes), and, it
changes as the animal ages and as each immune response
"matures" over time. It also can vary enormously between dif-
ferent individuals. Individual variance in immune reactivity is
especially notable with the limited responses evoked by the
small hapten molecules.
Forbothtechnical and biological reasons, assaysthatmeasure
only antibody binding do not by themselves establish the pres-
ence of antigen-specific antibodies. Specificity must be
documented by competitive binding assays and, preferably, by
purification (or at least concentration) ofthe specific antibody,
population.
86
TESTS FOR IMMUNE BIOMARKERS IN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH STUDIES
Inflammation, Irritation, and Hypersensitivity
Inflammation, characterized by redness, swelling, heat, and
pain, is the tissue response to injury and invasion by foreign
material. Itbegins as a reaction in the microscopic blood vessels,
which enlarge andopen their walls allowing cells and mediators
to escape from thebloodand enter the tissue. An inflammatory
response may be evoked by simple skin injury suchas a scratch,
without any antigen stimulating a specific immune response.
These simple inflammatory responses are often called irritant
reactions. However, ifa previously encountered antigen enters
the tissue, the inflammatory response may be greatly accelerated
by specific lymphocytesor antibodies, andan immune-mediated
hypersensitivity reaction will occur. Inflammation due to hy-
persensitivity reactions may be immediate (as in allergies), acute
(as in serum sickness), or delayed (as in tuberculosis or beryl-
lium lung disease).
Most inflamed tissue contains a mixture ofirritative reactions
and hypersensitivity responses in their various phases. The
distinctions may be difficult to discern, especially in the mucosal
tissues where inflammation is chronic (see below). In addition,
irritant responses may augment hypersensitivity reactions
through nonspecific "adjuvant effects such as those attributed
to air pollutants including diesel fly ash (11), ozone (12), and
sulfur dioxide (13). Both types of response may contribute to
symptoms ofdisease, buthypersensitivity responses, because of
their greater magnitude, are more likely to result in significant
tissue damage.
Immune Function at the Surface Tissues
ofthe Body
Because most tissue injuries and potential sites ofinvasion by
parasites occur alongthesurfacetissuesoftheorganism, immune
function isespecially well developed intheseareas (14,15). The
twotypesofsurfacetissuesare the skinandthemucosa, thelatter
found in theresriratory, gastrointestinal, andgenitourinary sys-
tems. Both theskinandthemucosa containspecialized cells and
tissuesthatpromotehostdefense. Mucosal surfacesinparticular
are characterized by specialized "goblet" cells that secrete mu-
cous, andtheyarechronicallyinhabitedbyimmunecellsrespond-
ingtotheconstantbarrageofenvironmental irritantsandantigens.
Disorders ofthe Immune System
Threegeneraltyesofdisordersoftheimmunesystemmay have
adversehealticonsequences: immunedeficiencies,inappropriate
immune reactivities, and unregulated immune proliferation.
Immune deficiency disorders, in which the immune system
fails to mount adequate protective responses against infection or
certain forms ofcancer, may be causedby several differenttypes
of immunosuppressive agents. Depending on the nature ofthe
deficiency, the health consequences can range from almost
undetectable (such as increases in the incidence ofmild infec-
tions) to life-threatening (suchas overwhelming sepsis). Highex-
posures to solvent vapors such as benzene and trinitrotoluene
may cause aplastic anemia, which is immunosuppressive since
the bonemarrow precursors forall tpes ofbloodcells, including
leukocytes, are destryed. In addition, benzene may have selec-
tive suppressive effects on lymphocytes (16).
Immune reactive disorders arethose in which immune activity
damages host tissues due to inappropriate or poorly regulated
responses. Again, depending on their cause and nature, such
disorders canbe very mildorvery severe. Commonallergiesare
caused by inappropriate immediate hypersensitivity responses
that release histamine and lipid-derived mediators. These aller-
gic reactions areoftendirected againstairborneantigens andmay
contribute to thepathogenesis ofasthma. Autoimmunediseases
are debilitating immune reactive disorders in which the immune
system reacts against its own tissues. Autoimmune reactions can
damage the skin, liver, kidneys, various glands,joints andother
tissues, leading to diseases such as rheumatoid artritis, systemic
lupus erythematosis, and some types of diabetes. Antibodies
associatedwithautoimmune reactions reactwith self-proteins in
particular tissuesorcell components. Exposure to vinylchloride,
a volatile toxicant and carcinogen, can cause a severe autoim-
munelike illness in humans (17).
hnmuneproliferative disorders involvetheunregulated growth
ofone familyamong the immunecells, leadingto leukemia, lym-
phoma, and similar cancers ofthe immune tissue. Exposure to
highconcentrations ofbenzenevapors greatly increases the risk
ofdeveloping certain leukemias in humans (16).
Nervous System, Stress, and Conditioning of
the Immune Response
The overall immune response is influenced by many systemic
factors, including the nervous system, both indirectly (through
neuroendocrine influences) and direcdy. Direct interactions be-
tween the nervous system and the immune system appear to be
especially important in the mucosal surfaces, where nerve cells
and mast cells may communicate constantly (18). One conse-
quenceofthese interactions is that stress is an important modu-
latorofimmune functionandoneofthemostdifficultvariables
to evaluate.
Recent studies in experimental animals have shown that
changes in immune status and functioncan be elicitedby a neural
stimulustowhichtheanimalshavebeenpreviouslyconditioned.
Both suppressive and reactive changes have been observed to
conditioning stimuli such as taste, odor, and audiovisual cues
(19,20). Therefore, under some circumstances, the perception
of exposure may trigger the same mechanisms that actual ex-
posure triggers, causing the appearance ofan immune reaction
(such as allergy) ina conditioned animal withoutany actual ex-
posure to antigenic material.
Laboratory Assessment of the
Immune System
During the last two decades, remarkable advances in tech-
nology and in our understanding ofthe chemical and cellular
constituents ofthe immune system haveallowed thedevelopment
ofmany assays that evaluate different aspects ofimmune status
or function, collectively referred to as immune biomarkers.
Historically, immunebiomarkers havebeen extremely useful in
detectngexposure to infectiousorganisms, incharacterizingthe
defects that cause immune deficiencies, and in delineating the
pathogenesis ofimmune-mediated diseases. In these situations,
87
R. F. VOGT, JR.
laboratory tests can be applied to targeted populations, often
associated with clinical illness, with some evidence ofthe im-
mune systemasaprimaryparticipantinthepathologicprocesses.
The use of immune biomarkers in environmental health
studies to establish (or attempt to ruleout) thepotential for long-
term health effects due totoxicant exposures is an entirely differ-
ent application. A major difficulty underlying the use of lab-
oratory tests in such studies is the decline in positive predictive
value when the prevalence ofexposure or disease is low. Addi-
tional problems arise with immune biomarkers because oftheir
wide range ofnormal variability, the influence ofmany confoun-
ding factors including neuroendocrine effects, and, most fun-
damentally, from thedearth ofstandardized, well-characterized
laboratory methods. Finally, the lackofprecise exposure meas-
urements is a major impediment toward documenting any rela-
tionshipbetweentoxicants, biomarkerchanges, andhealtheffects.
General Principles for Using Immune Biomarker
Assays
Although the proper useoftests for immune biomarkers may
be helpful in environmental health studies, their improper use
can create confusion andunderminepublic health efforts. To ad-
dress theseconcerns, theCenters forDisease Control (CDC) and
the Agency forToxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
convened a subcommittee on biomarkers oforgan damage and
dysfunction to develop proposed guidelines for the use of
biomarker tests inhealthassessment studies conducted atSuper-
fund sites. The following points are adapted from their final
report (21).
1. The public health goal ofusing tests forbiomarkers is to be
able to inform apopulation thatthe results doordo not sug-
gest the possibility of increased morbidity or mortality
caused by toxicantexposure. Therefore, test results should
be interpretable in the context of health effects and ex-
posures. Toward this goal, normative data obtained from
standardized laboratory methods areessential in assessing
the sensitivity and specificity ofatest forhealth orexposure
end points. Exposure endpoints shouldbe documented by
measured levels oftoxicants whenever possible.
2. Whentestswithunknownsensitivityandspecificityareused
inhealthsurveillance studies, they shouldbeevaluatedun-
der investigative protocols in populations with known ex-
posureordiseaseendpointsandcomparedtotestshavingthe
best-characterized sensitivity and specificity forthoseend
points. Beforeatestisconsidered tohavecompletedthein-
vestigative phases, thebiochemicalorphysicalabnormali-
tyassociatedwiththebiomarkershouldbeidentifled,andthe
nature ofany disease associations shouldbedetermined.
3. Tests for biomarkers should be organized into categories
that allow the most cost-effective public health implemen-
tation. Forthe immune system, the subcommittee identified
three such categories: a basic panel as a general evaluation
of immune status, focused/reflex tests that address par-
ticular aspects ofimmune function, and research tests that
require evaluation indefinedpopulations beforegeneraluse
in either ofthe firsttwo categories. Tests in both the basic
panel group andthe focused/reflex group musthaveclinical
interpretations for disease endoints when values lie outside
established reference ranges. Tests from the basic panel
shouldbe included whenthere is no clear indication ofpar-
ticular health effects or well-definedexposures. Tests from
the focused/reflex panel are suggestedby particularclinical
symptoms, priorlaboratory findings, or specific exposures;
they may be used individually or to augment the basic
panel. Research tests shouldbeusedundertheauspices of
an investigative protocol, as discussed above.
Issues in Laboratory Methodology for Immune
Biomarkers
The CDC/ATSDR subcommittee identified the lack ofstan-
dardized laboratory methods as the mostcritical area requiring
further research and development forthe properuse ofimmune
biomarkers in public health studies. Most immunochemical and
immunobiological measurements, especially those evaluating
cellular parameters, are considerably more complex than sim-
pler biochemical measurements such as enzyme activities.
Moreover, different methods for measuring a particular analyte
can give entirely different results. Even assays that have been
quite informative under controlled experimental conditions in
research settings may not prove useful in public health studies.
For both scientific and pragmatic reasons, any laboratory
method must be evaluated and implemented successfully in
multiple laboratories before it can be useful in public health in-
vestigations. Scientifically, the hallmarkofa true laboratory fin-
ding is its reproducibility, and no laboratory result can be con-
sidered factual until itis independently replicated. Pragmatically,
public health evaluations often require multisite longitudinal
studies in which assays are conducted at different laboratories
and at different times. Therefore, any laboratory assay used for
public health evaluations, no matter how simple or esoteric,
should be continually monitored for its scientific validity through
comparisons within and between laboratories.
Applying Immune Biomarkers to
Indoor Air Exposure Studies
Beyond the issues of methodology and predictive value, the
main considerations for selecting immune marker tests must be
the expectedtypes ofexposures from indoor pollutants and their
potential effects on human health (Table 1). An overview ofthe
major types oftests that might be helpful follows.
Antibodies to Environmental Material
Allergic reactions mediatedbyantibodies toenvironmental an-
tigens from microbes, molds, mites, plants, fabric fibers, insects,
and mammals may be contributors to many of the symptoms
associated with indoorairexposure (22-25). Thetotal serum IgE
antibody level may help discriminate exposed or susceptible
("atopic") populations, but the total level does not have good
predictive value on an individual basis (26). Tests for antigen-
specific IgE antibodies (skintesting orin vitroassays) havebet-
ter predictive value than total IgE for allergic reactions against
many inhaledantigens, butsensitization may be foundinnormals
as well as symptomatic patients (W. K. Dolenand P. B. Williams,
unpublished data).
88
TESTS FOR IMMUNE BIOMARKERS IN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH STUDIES
Table 1. Some examples of indoor air pollutants that cause health effects
related to the immune system.
Effect related to immune system Examples ofcausative indoor air pollutants
Inflammation caused by irritant Respirable particles (smoke dust); volatile
and adjuvant reactions or gaseous chemicals (formaldehyde,
nitrogen dioxide, solvents)
Inflammation caused by Biologically derived antigens (bacteria,
hypersensitivity reactions molds, plants, mites, insects, pests, pets,
livestock, humans); industrial chemicals
(beryllium, isocyanates, others in oc-
cupational settings)
Autoimmune reactions Vinyl chloride (occupational settings)
Immune suppression Benzene, trinitrotoluene (occupational
settings)
Neoplastic proliferation Benzene (occupational settings)
Conditioned neuroendocrine Dimethylsulfide, trimethylamine
effects on immune function (demonstrated only in animal models;
may be elicited by other cues)
Detecting antibodies to environmental chemicals is more com-
plicated, partly because of the specificity considerations dis-
cussed earlier and partly because of technical problems in
developing laboratory assays. In occupational settings, human
antibodies have been detected against anhydrides (27) and iso-
cyanates (28), both reactive chemicals that couple to proteins.
Human antibodies to formaldehyde-treated proteins have also
been reported (29,30), butonly in a few cases has their specifici-
ty been documented by appropriate inhibition assays, and such
assays have not demonstrated specific antibodies in any airborne
exposures to formaldehyde (29).
Auto-Antibodies
As discussed above, the immune system may react against its
own tissues and produce "auto-antibodies." The pathological
significance ofauto-antibodies depends on their concentration,
specificity, avidity, and effector functions. High concentrations
(titers) ofauto-antibodies are often indicative ofactive disease
processes, whereas low titers (as measured by immunofluo-
rescence microscopy) are generally not associated with obvious
clinical end points. Some low-titer auto-antibodies may reflect
increased tissue clearance rather than an uncontrolled immune
response, and as such they might be useful biologic markers for
inflammatory damage caused by irritant responses to airborne
chemicals. However, virtually none ofthe assays for auto-anti-
bodies are sufficiently standardized to measure weak reactions
reliably, and reports oflow-titer auto-antibodies associated with
certain airborne exposures (30) require independent verification.
Other Humoral Mediators
The serum proteins involved with inflammatory responses
(such as complement) may provide some indication ofirritative
or immune reactions to air pollutants. For instance, one report
found that a small but consistent shift toward higher concentra-
tions ofa complement protein was associated with the extent of
outdoor air pollution (31). The predictive value ofthis difference
was quite low, butthe report was well documented. and the assay
method was sound. The finding emphasizes both the reality of
airpollution effects and the myriadofconfounding variables that
can influence immune markers.
Other mediators discussed above (e.g., prostaglandins) may
be useful as markers of inflammatory or immune processes.
Tests for most ofthese mediators should be considered only for
research protocols, as their assays are often poorly standardiz-
ed and their clinical meaning generally unclear.
Nripheral Blood Cells
In humans, the vast majority ofanalysis for cellular markers
is performed onperipheral blood whitecells (leukocytes), almost
all ofwhich are inan inactive "resting" state. Othercells thatare
more indicative ofcurrent immuneactivity (such as those from
the spleen and lymph nodes) are simply not available in most
human studies. Despite this limitation, analysis of peripheral
blood leukocytes can provide important information about im-
mune status.
Completeblood counts (CBCs) givethe most basic data about
the distribution ofperipheral leukocytes. CBCs performed for
environmental health studies should include a five-part differen-
tial to measure all major types of leukocytes, including
eosinophils andbasophils (manyoftheautomatedbloodcounters
do not distinguish the latter two types from neutrophils). All of
these measurements are well-standardized ifconducted in accord
with good clinical laboratory practice, with the possible excep-
tion ofbasophil andeosinophil counts (32). The rangeofresults
for these cellular parameters in reference populations is very
broad (population confidence values of 20-80%) (33), and dif-
ferences within the "normal range" are not associated with ob-
vious or long-term health effects. However, values well outside
the "normal ranges" are very likely to be associated with active
disease processes that involve the immune system.
Immune cells (lymphocytes in particular) can be characterized
more completely by identifying their surface receptors (or im-
munophenotype), which reveals information about their lineage
and activation state. The method ofchoice for these tests is im-
munofluorescence flow cytometry (FC) (34). Until recently,
these measurements were not well standardized, but in the past
3 years considerable effort has been made to increase the relia-
bility of many assay methods (35,36). Because some meth-
odologies are still quite variable and do not give comparable
results, the assays used in clinical epidemiology studies must be
clearly described for findingsto haveany real value [forgoodex-
amples, see Shopp et al. (37), and Edwards et al. (38)]. Efforts
toward uniform calibration (39) and multicenter laboratory
evaluations (40) could increase the amount ofbiological infor-
mation obtained by FC, much of which is now discarded.
Whether any ofthis information will be useful in assessing the
effects ofindoor air exposures on the immune system (such as
unregulated proliferation) remains an open question requiring
thorough epidemiologic and laboratory investigation; previous
reports of "immune dysregulation" caused by airborne ex-
posures (41) are not documented well enough to substantiate
their conclusions.
Functionalassaysofimmunecells fromperipheralbloodcould
in theory provide the most useful information about immune
status because they test the ability of resting cells in actually
responding to a stimulus. However, theseassays are verydifficult
to standardize and require diligent quality control for reliabili-
ty even withina laboratory (37). A varietyofdifferentstimuliand
89
90 R. F. VOGT, JR.
functional response parameters can be evaluated; all must be
considered research tests with uncertain predictive value forex-
posure or health endpoints.
Mucosal Tissue Infiltration by Immune Cells
The most promising approach to cellular assessment for in-
door air exposures may lie in examining immune cells from ac-
cessible mucosal surfaces such as nasal scrapings. Broncho-
alveolar lavage can also provide a sourceofrespiratory mucosal
immune cells, but it is an unpleasant procedure and would not
detect the modest cell infiltration caused by many irritant
responses. Nasal challenge and characterization ofthe human in
situ nasal mucosal response to airborne exposures is a critical
research needs which isjust now being addressed. Early results
suggest that local inflammatory reactions are important factors
in airborne exposures to toxicants (42,43).
Summary
The proper use of tests for immune biomarkers in health
assessment studies couldhelp identify effects ofindoor air pol-
lutants on the immune system and the riskofconsequent health
effects, but only ifthe studies are carefully designed to account
for confounding factors and if the laboratory methods are
rigorously standardized. Atthis time, tests for inflammatory and
allergic mediators are the most likely to give interpretable infor-
mation about exposures and effects. However, tests characteriz-
ing the cellular responses, particularly local tissue responses to
airborne pollutants, will be essential for a complete approach to
health assessment and exposure effects.
This work was supported with funds from the Comprehensive Environmen-
tal Response, Compensation and Liability Act trust fund, by interagency agree-
ment with the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, U.S. Public
Health Service, Department ofHealth and Human Services.
Theauthorappreciatesthe insightful comments on istopicprovidedbyArthur
Dannenberg, Jeffrey Davidson, William Dolen, Larry Fishbein, Harry Hannon,
Ron Harbeck, Howard Kippen, Hillel Koren, William Meggs, David Otto, Paul
Schulte, John Selner, Michael Straight, Abba Terr, and Laura Welch.
REFERENCES
1. Norback, D., Michel, I., and Widstrom, J. Indoor airquality and personal
fictors related to the sick building syndrome. Scand. J. Wrk Environ. Health
16: 121-128 (1990).
2. Spengler, J. P. Indoor airpollution. N. EngI. Reg. Allergy Proc. 6: 126-134
(1985).
3. Wallace, L. A., Pellizzari, E. D., Hartwell, T. D., Sparacino, C., Whitmore,
R., Sheldon, L., Zelon, H., and Perritt, R. The TEAM (Total Exposure
Assessment Methodology) Study: personal exposures totoxic substances in
air, drinking water, andbreathf400residentsofNewJersey, NorthCarolina,
and North Dakota. Emwiron. Res. 43: 290-307 (1987).
4. Lebowitz, M. D. Health effects ofindoor air pollutants. Ann. Rev. Public
Health 4: 203-221 (1983).
5. Roitt, I. M., Brostoff, J., and Make, D. K. Immunology. C. V. Mosby Com-
pany, St. Louis, 1987.
6. Yoshida, S., Golub, M., and Gershwin, M. E. Immunologic aspects oftox-
icology: premises, not promises. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 9: 56-80
(1989).
7. Luster, M. I., Blank, J. A., and Dean, J. H. Molecular andcellular basis of
chemically induced immunotoxicity. Ann. Rev. Pharnacol. Toxicol. 27:
23-49 (1987).
& Vogt, R. F., Dannenberg, A. M., Papirmeister, B., and Scofield, B.
Pathogenesis ofskin lesions caused by sulfur mustard. Fundam. Applied Tox-
icol. 4: S71-83 (1984).
9. Dvorak, H. F. Cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity. J. Allergy. Clin. Im-
munol. 58: 229-240 (1976).
10. Belongia, E. A., Hedberg, C. W., Gleich, G. J., White, K. E., Mayeno, A.
L., Loegering, D. A., Dunnette, S. L., Pirie, P. L., MacDonald, K. L., and
Osterholm, M. T. An investigation ofthe cause ofthe eosinophiliamyalgia
syndrome associated with tryptophan use. N. Engl. J. Med. 323: 357-365
(1990).
11. Muranaka, M., Suzuki, K., Koizumi, S., and lTkafuji, S. Adjuvant activi-
ty ofdiesel-exhaust particulates for the production ofIgE antibody in mice.
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 77: 616-623 (1986).
12. Riedel, F., Kramer, M., Scheibenbogen, C., and Rieger, C. H. Effects ofS02
exposureonallergic sensitization inthe guineapig. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.
82: 527-534 (1988).
13. Osebold, J. E., Gershwin, I. F., and Zee, Y C. Studies on theenhancement
ofallergic lung sensitization by inhalation ofozone and sulfuric acid aerosol.
J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 3: 221-234 (1980).
14. Bienenstock, J., and Gauldie, J. Cellular interactions in lung inflammation
and immunity. Postgrad. Med. J. 64(suppl.) 4: 111-119 (1988).
15. Cebra, J. J., Gearhart, P. J., Halsey, L. F., Hurwitz, J. L., and Shahin, R.
D. Roleofenvironmental antigens intheontogeny ofthe secretory immune
response. J. Reticuloendothel. Soc. 28(suppl): 61s-71s (1980).
16. Kipen, H. M., Cody, R. P., Crump, K. S., Allen, B. C., and Goldstein, B.
D. Hematologic effects ofbenzene: a thirty-five year longitudinal study of
rubber vvorkers. Toxicol. Ind. Health 4: 411-430 (1988).
17. Ward A. M., Udnoon, S., Watkins, J., Walker, A. E., and Darke, C. S. Im-
munological mechanisms inthe pathogenesisofvinyl chloride disease. Br.
Med. J. 1: 936-938 (1976).
18. Bienenstock, J., Tomioka, M., Matsuda, H., Stead, R. H., Quinonez, G.,
Simon, G. T., Coughlin, M. D., and Denburg, J. A. The role ofmast cells
in inflammatory processes: evidence for nerve/mast cell interactions. Int.
Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 82: 238-243 (1987).
19. Kusnecov, A., King, M. G., and Husband, A. J. Immunomodulation by
behavioural conditioning. Biol. Psychol. 28: 25-39 (1989).
20. MacQueen, G., Marshall, J., Perdue, M., Siegel, S., and Bienenstock, J.
Pavlovian conditioning ofrat mucosal mast cells to secrete rat mast cell pro-
tease II. Science 243: 83-85 (1989).
21. Subcommittee on Biomarkers of Organ Damage and Dysfunction of the
Centers for Disease Control and Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry. Internal Reporton Bionmrkers ofOrgan Damageand Dysfunction
forthe Renal, Hepatobiliary and Immune Systems. Centers forDiseaseCon-
trol, Biochemistry Branch, Atlanta, GA, 1990.
22. Al-Doory, Y. The indoor airborne fungi. N. Engl. Reg. Allergy Proc. 6:
140-149 (1985).
23. Gravesen, S., Larsen, L., Gyntelberg, F., and Skov, P. Demonstration of
microoranisms anddust inschools andoffices. Allergy 41: 520-525 (1986).
24. Lowenstein, H., Grvesen, S., Larsen, L., andSchwartz, B. Indoorallergens.
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 78: 1035-1039 (1986).
25. Baldo, B. A., and Panzani, R. C. DetectionofIgE antibodies to a wide rnge
ofinsect species in subjects with suspected inhalent allergies to insecis. Int.
Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 85: 278-287 (1988).
26. Barbee, R. A., Balonen, M., Kaltenborn, Lebowitz, M., and Burrows, B.
A longitudinal study ofserum IgE in acommunity cohort: correlations with
age, sex, smoking and atopic status. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 79: 919-927
(1987).
27. Bernstein, D. I., Zeiss, C. R., W%konsky, P., Levitz, D., Roberts, M., and
Patterson, R. The relationship oftotal serum IgE and blocking antibody in
trimellitic anhydride-induced occupational asthma. J. Allergy Clin. Im-
munol. 72: 714-719 (1983).
28. Cartier, A., Grammer, L., Malo, J. L., Lagier, F., Ghezzo, H., Harris,
K., and Patterson, R. Specific serum antibodies against isocyanates:
association with occupational asthma. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 84:
507-514 (1989).
29. Gammner, L. C., Harris, K. E., Shaughenessy, M. A., Sparks, P., Ayars, G.
H., Altman, L. C., and Patterson, R. Clinical and immunologic evaluation
of37 vorkers exposed to gaseous fornaldehyde. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.
86: 177-181 (1990).
30. Thrasher, J. D., Broughton, A., and Madison, R. Immune activation and au-
toantibodies in humans withlong-term inhalationexposureto formaldehyde.
Arch. Environ. Health 45: 217-223 (1990).
TESTS FOR IMMUNE BIOMARKERS IN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH STUDIES 91
31. Stiller-Winkler, R., Kramer, U., Fiedler, E., Ewers, U., and Dolgner, R. C3c
concentrations in sera ofpersons living in areas with different levels ofair
pollution in North Rhine-Westphalia (Federal Republic ofGermany). En-
viron. Res. 49: 7-19 (1989).
32. National Committee forClinical Laboratory Standards. LeukocyteDifferen-
tial Counting. Publication H20-T. NCCLS, Villanova, PA, 1984.
33. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Total White Blood Cell
Counts for Persons Ages 1-74 Years with Differential Leukocyte Counts for
Adults Ages 25-74 Years: United States, 1971-75. DHHS Publication No.
(PHS) 82-1670, Washington, DC, 1982.
34. Shapiro, H. Practical Flow Cytometry, 2nd ed. Alan R. Liss, New York,
1988, pp. 282-283.
35. Kidd, P. G., and Vogt, R. F. Evaluation ofT-cell subsets during HIV infec-
tion and AIDS: a workshop report. Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 52: 3-9
(1989).
36. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Clinical Applica-
tions of Flow Cytometry: Quality Assurance and Immunophenotyping of
Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes. Publication H42-P. NCCLS, Villanova, PA,
1990.
37. Shopp, G. M., Edwards, B. S., Coons, T. A., Sweeney, M. H., Vogt, R. G.,
Ashmore, L. M., Harper, D. J., Lane, K. A., and Nolla, H. A. Laboratory
assessment ofthe immune system in individuals occupationally-exposed to
2,3,7,8-TCDD: test selection, assay methods and quality control in a cross-
sectional epidemiologic study. Chemosphere 18: 867-874 (1989).
38. Edwards, B. S., Altobelli, K. K., Nolla, H. A., Harper, D. A., and Hoff-
man, R. R. Comprehensive quality assessment approach for flow cytometric
immunophenotyping ofhuman lymphocytes. Cytometry 10: 433-441 (1989).
39. Vogt, R. F., Cross, G. D., Phillips, D. L., and Henderson, L. 0. A model-
ing system evaluating fluorescein-labeled microbeads as internal standars
to calibrate fluorescence intensity on flow cytometers. Cytometry 10:
294-302 (1989).
40. Vogt, R. F., Henderson, L. O., Straight, J. M., and Orti, D. L. Immune
biomarkers demonstration project: standadiz data for flow aquisition and
analysis forcytometric assessment ofexposed immune status intoxicant per-
sons. Cytometry (suppl.) 4: 103 (1990).
41. Levin, A. S., and Byers, V. C. Environmental illness: adisorder ofimmune
regulation. State Art. Rev. Occup. Med. 2: 669-681 (1987).
42. Bascom, R., Naclerio, R. M., Fitzgerald, T. K., Kagey-Sobotka, A., and
Proud, D. Effect of ozone inhalation on the response to nasal challenge
with antigen of allergic subjects. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 142: 594-601
(1990).
43. Koren, H. S., Hatch, G. E., and Grahara, D. E. Nasal lavage as a tool in
assessing acute inflammation in response to inhaled pollutants. Toxicology
60:15-25 (1990).
