Introduction
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is an alternative
to prenatal diagnosis involving the biopsy and genetic
testing of single cells from in vitro obtained oocytes and/
or preimplantation embryos. Only embryos shown to be
free of the genetic defect under study are transferred to
the uterus of the patient. PGD is performed for couples at
high risk of transmitting a genetic condition to their
children; it offers the advantage of circumventing an
invasive prenatal diagnosis and therapeutic abortion.
Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) involves the
selection of euploid embryos to improve in vitro fertili­za­
tion (IVF) results and to avoid pregnancies with chromo­
somal abnormalities [1]. Considering the increasing risk
for aneuploidy with advanced maternal age and findings
of high aneuploidy rates in spontaneous abortions, PGS
has been offered to specific IVF patient groups: patients
of advanced maternal age and patients with recurrent
IVF failure or repeated miscarriages (not due to trans­
locations). For many years, PGS using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) for 5 to 12 chromosomes has been
applied worldwide but without real validation of its
efficiency. In recent years, several randomized controlled
trials have failed to show a benefit for PGS, as summar­
ized in the meta-analysis by Checa and colleagues [2].
Biological (embryonic mosaicism) and technical (limita­
tions of FISH and negative impact of cleavage-stage
biopsy) arguments were proposed to explain the lack of
benefit. Further clinical practice now awaits new
random­ized controlled trials to prove that PGS with
biopsy at other stages, and using new array methods with
full chromosome analysis, improves live birth rates and
reduces miscarriage rates [3]. PGD and PGS rely on the
same technology, but since PGS is offered to (sub)fertile
couples without genetic diseases, it is mostly outside the
scope of this review.
PGD developed in the wake of human IVF and PCR
technology. The first children born after PGD were
reported by Handyside et al. in 1990 [4]. In these initial
cycles, PCR was used for gender determination in
families with X-linked diseases. Later, FISH became the
standard method for sexing, and also for chromosomal
aberrations, while PCR-based methods were used for the
detection of single gene defects. It is essential that these
techniques are adapted to the single-cell level and are
thoroughly validated before clinical application.
PGD requires a multidisciplinary team with a close
collaboration and excellent communication between the
assisted reproduction unit and the medical genetics unit.
Preferentially, both units work within the same institute.
Alternatively, transport PGD can be set up, and IVF
Abstract
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) involves
testing of single cells biopsied from oocytes and/
or embryos generated in vitro. As only embryos
unaffected for a given genetic condition are
transferred to the uterus, it avoids prenatal diagnosis
and termination of pregnancy. Follow-up data from
PGD pregnancies, deliveries and children show an
acceptable live birth rate and, so far, no detrimental
effects of the procedure have been observed. Of
course, the long-term health outcome is currently
unknown. PGD was first performed in 1990 and
remained an experimental procedure for a number
of years. Now, two decades later, it is regarded as an
established alternative to prenatal diagnosis: its use has
expanded, the range of applications has broadened,
and continuous technical progress in single-cell testing
has led to high levels of efficiency and accuracy.
The current gold standard methods (single-cell
multiplex-PCR for monogenic diseases and interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization for chromosomal
aberrations) are being replaced by single-cell whole
genome amplification and array technology. These
generalized methods substantially reduce the pre-
PGD workload and allow more automated genome-
wide analysis. The implementation of laboratory
accreditation schemes brings the field at the same
level of routine diagnostics. This article reviews the
state of the art and considers indications, accuracy and
current technical changes in the field of PGD.
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd
Singling out genetic disorders and disease
Martine De Rycke*
REVIEW
*Correspondence: martine.derycke@uzbrussel.be
Centre for Medical Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101,
Brussels, Belgium
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd
treatment (hormonal stimulation, oocyte retrieval and in
vitro fertilization, embryo culture and embryo transfer) is
carried out at a satellite assisted-reproduction unit. Only
the biopsied embryonic cell samples are transported,
often over long distances, to a genetics unit specializing
in single-cell diagnosis.
Extensive data on PGD cycles, pregnancies, deliveries
and children have been collected by the European Society
for Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) PGD
consortium since 1997 and, although not worldwide, the
data sets offer comprehensive insights into this particular
field of single-cell testing [5].
Indications for preimplantation genetic diagnosis
The main indications for PGD are chromosomal abnor­
mali­ties, X-linked disorders and single gene or mono­
genic disorders. The majority of PGD cycles for
chromosomal abnormalities are aimed at reciprocal and
Robertsonian translocations, while cases with inversions
or insertions are less frequent. For the monogenic dis­
orders, PGD was initially applied for the same indica­tions
as in prenatal diagnosis. According to the latest ESHRE
PGD consortium data, the most common indications for
autosomal recessive disorders are cystic fibrosis, spinal
muscular atrophy and hemoglobinopathies [6]. For the
autosomal dominant disorders, myotonic dystrophy type
1, neurofibromatosis and Huntington’s disease are the
most frequently requested indications; for the X-linked
disorders, PGD is mainly carried out for Duchenne’s
muscular dystrophy, hemophilia and fragile X syndrome.
Sexing with FISH has been most frequently used for X-
linked disorders but more and more specific DNA
diagnoses have been developed. Specific DNA diagnosis
has important advantages: first, healthy male embryos
are not discarded; and second, female carriers can be
identified and excluded from transfer or not, according to
the wishes of the patient and the policy of the center.
PGD is currently available for more than 200 mono­
genic diseases and has lately also been applied for indica­
tions, such as cancer predisposition syndromes and other
late-onset diseases, for which prenatal diagnosis is
ethically difficult [7,8]. For cancer predisposition syn­
dromes that are not fully penetrant and for which some
form of therapeutic measures may be available, prenatal
diagnosis and termination of pregnancy remain contro­
versial. As the preimplantation embryo is often con­
sidered as having less moral value than a fetus, PGD
seems a more acceptable option.
Another more recent indication is human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) typing of preimplantation embryos to
select an embryo that is HLA compatible with an affected
sibling. At birth, hematopoietic stem cells from the cord
blood of the saviour baby are then used to transplant the
sick sibling. HLA typing alone is carried out for acquired
diseases, such as severe aplastic anemia, or HLA typing is
combined with the detection of mutations underlying
immunodeficiencies and hemoglobin disorders [9- 11].
The major ethical objection here is that the future child
may be regarded as an instrument and not as an autono­
mous person. This concern was studied in depth and it
was concluded that considering the efforts of the parents
to cure the sick child and their wish for another child, it is
unlikely that they would treat the saviour child solely as a
donor. In addition, it is universally accepted to rely on an
existing HLA-compatible child as a donor of hemato­
poietic stem cells [12].
So far, few clinical cycles have been carried out for
families carrying heteroplasmic mitochondrial (mt)DNA
mutations [13-15]. The genetics of mtDNA is quite com­
plex and the proportion of mutant mtDNA trans­mitted
from mother to offspring will vary due to a genetic
bottleneck in the oocytes [16]. It is another ethically
difficult indication, as the possibility exists that there are
no zero-mutation embryos for transfer but just embryos
with a low mutation load (that is, the ratio of mutant to
normal mtDNA) under a certain disease-specific
threshold, meaning that the risk for an affected child is
not eliminated but only reduced. PGD for mtDNA
mutations can only be offered reliably when certain
criteria are fulfilled: a close correlation between the
mutation load and disease severity is a first requirement;
second, there should be no change in mutation load with
time; and third, mutant mtDNA should be uniformly
distributed over all blastomeres of the cleavage-stage
embryo [17]. For many mtDNA mutations the latter
information is not available. Therefore, it is recommended
to develop PGD within a scientific research protocol and
to counsel prospective parents adequately and inform
them that a first PGD cycle may be carried out merely to
gather information on the reliability of PGD [18].
Assisted reproductive technology and biopsy
The first step in a PGD cycle is controlled ovarian hyper­
stimulation, aimed at obtaining a large cohort of mature
oocytes. The aspirated oocytes are denuded of surround­
ing cumulus cells before IVF occurs. Intracytoplasmic
sperm injection is preferred over regular IVF, regardless
of the sperm quality, in order to avoid residual sperm
adhering to the zona pellucida after IVF. Remaining
cumulus or sperm cells may lead to contamination when
PCR is used for diagnosis [19].
The biopsy procedure involving breaching of the zona
pellucida and removal of the cell(s) can be carried out at
different developmental stages [20]. Polar body (PB)
biopsy from oocytes (first PB from metaphase II oocytes
and second PB after normal fertilization) is a first
possibility [21]. As PBs do not contribute to normal
fertilization or embryonic development, their removal
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
Page 2 of 6
has no detrimental effect. In countries where embryo
selection is forbidden, PB biopsy is the only legal option
as testing can take place before syngamy, which is the
moment considered as the beginning of an embryo. The
main disadvantage is that PB analysis can only evaluate
the maternal genetic contribution. The ESHRE PGD
consortium data collection indicates that cleavage-stage
biopsy at day 3 is used in the majority of PGD cycles [6].
At this eight-cell stage, embryo compaction has not
started yet and cells are considered to be totipotent. The
zona pellucida opening is mostly carried out with a non-
contact diode infrared laser and one or two nucleated
blastomeres are aspirated [22]. The impact of the random
removal of one or two embryonic cells on further
development and implantation potential is highly
debated. In a recent prospective analysis of a cohort of
single-embryo transfers, the authors demonstrated that
the live birth rate after one-cell removal from eight-cell
embryos (37.4%) is similar to the rate of a control
intracytoplasmic sperm injection group without biopsy
(35.0%), but significantly higher than the rate of the two-
cell biopsy study group (22%). It is therefore recom­
mended to biopsy one cell, provided that an accurate and
reliable diagnosis method is in place [23]. Another limita­
tion of cleavage-stage biopsy is the high chromosomal
mosaicism rate that seems inherent at this developmental
stage and probably evolves to lower rates at the blastocyst
stage via self-correction [24]. Trophectoderm (TE) biopsy
at day 5 is a fast emerging biopsy approach. Some reports
suggest that it may yield substantially higher implantation
and live birth rates than cleavage-stage biopsy [25-27].
About 4 to 20 extra-embryonic TE cells are aspirated and
the inner cell mass, from which the fetus will develop, is
kept intact. This is one advantage compared with
cleavage-stage biopsy; another advantage is that multiple
cells are available for genetic testing, and this may
improve diagnostic accuracy. The drawbacks of TE
biopsy are that it requires a successful embryo culture
system with high blastocyst rates and it leaves limited
time for genetic analysis. The time problem may be
solved by freezing the blastocysts, relying on efficient
vitrification and thaw-survival protocols, and transferring
them later in a natural cycle.
After biopsy, (single) cells are washed and either fixated
for FISH analysis or tubed and lysed for amplification.
Amplification reaction components are added directly to
the lysed cells without prior DNA purification.
Single-cell genetic testing for monogenic disorders
In principle, any monogenic disease for which the
chromosomal locus has been identified can be diagnosed
at the single-cell level. The golden standard today is
fluorescent multiplex PCR in which one of each primer
pair is fluorescently labeled, allowing subsequent
detection of PCR fragments on an automated sequencer.
In indirect tests, multiple short tandem repeat markers
are co-amplified together in one reaction (linkage-based
strategy); for direct testing, markers are combined with
specific mutation(s). The main advantage of linkage-
based testing over mutation-specific testing is that the
single-cell protocols can be used for several couples,
independent of the mutation they carry. This saves time,
resources and manpower in pre-PGD workups for
diseases for which many private mutations have been
identified. The use of polymorphic markers implicates
that during pre-PGD work up, informativity and segre­
gation tests are performed on DNA samples of the couple
and family members to establish which alleles of the
informative markers segregate with the mutation.
Different strategies of PCR and allele discrimination have
been developed for mutation detection over recent years,
and the most important ones are: amplification refractory
mutation system [28], endonuclease restriction [29],
minisequencing [30] and quantitative real-time PCR [26].
PCR-based protocols with short tandem repeat markers
have recently also been applied in PGD cycles for
structural chromosome abnormalities, in which FISH has
been traditionally the preferred method [31,32]. A major
bottleneck with PCR assays is that the single-cell adap­
tation and validation part of the pre-PGD work up has to
be repeated with every new DNA locus. In recent years,
the use of single-cell whole genome amplification (WGA)
as a universal step has been demonstrated to be a
practical and efficient alternative to single-cell PCR. The
first WGA methods were PCR-based and suffered from
incomplete genome coverage and amplification bias, but
the more recent methods are markedly better [33]. One
method is multiple displacement amplification that relies
on isothermal strand displacement amplification with
Phi29 DNA polymerase. This method is very straight­
forward but requires high-quality DNA as the template,
and yields relatively high allele drop-out (ADO) and
preferential amplification rates of 25% on average [34];
this is about five times higher than with fluorescent
multiplex PCR. Other WGA methods involve somewhat
more complex protocols with DNA fragmentation and
library formation prior to amplification; they even
amplify low-quality DNA, and ADO rates are approxi­
mately 10% [35]. Single-cell WGA generates micrograms
of amplified DNA, which is sufficient for several down­
stream applications. Multiple standard PCR assays may
be performed for haplotyping in case of monogenic
diseases [36]. Haplotyping can also be combined with
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for the
detection of chromosomal imbalances. These strategies
are already clinically applied in some centers. Further
improvement and generalization will come from the intro­
duction of high-density single nucleotide polymorphism
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
Page 3 of 6
(SNP) arrays, which enable evaluation of DNA haplo­
typing and chromosomal constitution on the same
platform. The validation of these SNP arrays is ongoing
[37,38]. The implementation of these new technologies
will reduce the procedures substantially and introduce
automation. On the other hand, these arrays will generate
a tremendous amount of genetic data - for instance, on
disease susceptibility genes - and it is expected that this
will entail many ethical discussions and challenges for
genetic counseling.
Single-cell genetic testing for chromosomal
aberrations
The majority of PGD cycles for chromosomal aberrations
are performed for translocations. Balanced translocation
carriers have a high risk for producing chromosomally
unbalanced gametes and present with infertility,
repeated spontaneous abortions and unbalanced
offspring. With FISH, fixated cells are hybridized using
chromosome-specific DNA probes, which are labeled
with different fluorochromes. Probe selection is based
on the break­points of the specific translocation and
chromosomes involved, and should allow detection of all
possible segregation patterns. FISH has a number of
technical limitations and it is gradually replaced by
aCGH. Here, whole genome amplified DNA of the test
single-cell(s) is labeled with a green fluorochrome, while
a red fluoro­chrome is used for the control sample. Both
samples are mixed and hybridized to either a normal
metaphase chromosome spread or, in case of aCGH, to
DNA sequences specific to human chromosomes
spotted on an array. A computerized system allows
analysis of the ratios between both fluorochromes for
each chromosome and detection of imbalances. As
metaphase comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) at
the single-cell level requires several days for analysis,
groups that have presented clinical application of CGH
in PGD have to resort to either polar body analysis [39]
or cryo­preservation of the embryos [40,41]. As aCGH
has a lower hybridization time, it can be performed
within the time frame of PGD. Other advantages over
metaphase CGH are the higher resolution and the
important auto­mation [42]. aCGH following multiple
displacement amplification has been preclinically
validated in single lymphoblasts, fibroblasts and
blastomeres of trans­loca­tion carriers [43], and clinical
data have been published for PGS applications [44].
Compared with FISH, aCGH provides a generalized
platform, circumventing pre-PGD testing of FISH
probes with every new translocation. aCGH, as well as
SNP arrays, yields information on genome-wide copy
number variation, but only SNP arrays offer
simultaneously genotype information and present a
universal platform for both chromosomal aberrations
and monogenic diseases. Therefore, SNP arrays are
regarded as the most promising future strategy for PGD.
Accuracy
Single-cell DNA amplification is technically demanding
because of the small amount of non-purified DNA at the
start, and inherent pitfalls of contamination and ADO,
which can lead to misdiagnosis. ADO is defined as the
random failure of amplification for one of two alleles in a
heterozygous cell. The use of optimized cell lysis and
DNA amplification conditions, along with sensitive
detection systems, should reduce ADO to a minimum.
Contamination is minimized by taking a number of
prevention measures (see best practice guidelines). The
application of multiplex PCR protocols further assists in
monitoring problems of contamination and ADO in
addition to mutation detection, making these assays
highly accurate.
A recent theoretical study on the accuracy of FISH
showed that the technology has the potential of high
accuracy for sexing and for translocations, but not in the
case of aneuploidy screening [45]. Apart from technical
errors such as ADO and contamination, other possible
causes for misdiagnosis involve intrinsic sample quality,
such as chromosomal mosaicism, and human errors,
such as mislabeling, incorrect embryo transfer or
erroneous segregation analysis. According to the PGD
consortium data, low error rates have been observed for
both DNA-amplification-based cycles (0.5%) and FISH-
based cycles (0.1%) [46].
Quality control and assurance
PGD is still relatively unregulated compared with routine
genetic testing. In order to better standardize single-cell
testing and to achieve high quality levels, guidelines for
best practice have been designed by the ESHRE PGD
consortium and by the Preimplantation Genetic Diag­nosis
International Society [47-49]. In addition, four new
extensive guidelines on different aspects of PGD (organi­
za­tion of a PGD center, FISH-based testing, amplification-
based testing and biopsy) are in preparation.
A powerful method for quality assurance is accredita­
tion. In 2008, only 33% of 53 European PGD centers had
achieved or were preparing for accreditation [50]. Many
countries and international authorities now recommend
PGD centers to initiate the accreditation process; that is,
to be committed not only to reach the standards set by
the accrediting body but also to continuously enhance
the quality of the services.
Two programs of external quality assessment (EQA), a
key element of quality assurance [51,52], have been
initiated recently. The UK National External Quality
Assess­ment Service [53], in collaboration with the
ESHRE PGD consortium, has set up EQA programs for
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
Page 4 of 6
PGD for monogenic diseases, while the FISH-based PGD
EQA program is run by the Cytogenetics European
Quality Assessment [54].
Conclusions
In the past two decades, PGD has evolved from an
experimental procedure to a widely accepted alternative
for prenatal diagnosis that is applied to an expanding
range of indications. Non-stop technical improvements
have provided reliable and accurate single-cell assays for
both chromosomal abnormalities and monogenic dis­
orders. As protocols are often family specific, their
develop­ment is labour intensive and time consuming and
can be carried out in specialized laboratories. The
introduction of powerful array technologies following
universal whole genome amplification will reduce the
workload and allow automation. Together with the
imple­mentation of accreditation schemes, this will lead
to improved standardization and uniformity in the
complex process of PGD.
Abbreviations
aCGH, array comparative genomic hybridization; ADO, allele drop-out; CGH,
comparative genomic hybridization; EQA, external quality assessment;
ESHRE, European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology; FISH,
fluorescence in situ hybridization; HLA, human leucocyte antigen; IVF, in vitro
fertilization; mt, mitochondrial; PB, polar body; PCR, polymerase chain reaction;
PGD, preimplantation genetic diagnosis; PGS, preimplantation genetic
screening; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; TE, trophectoderm; WGA,
whole genome amplification.
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
I thank Pascale De Becker for providing feedback and edits on the manuscript.
Published: 6 October 2010
References
1.	 Verlinsky Y, Kuliev A: Preimplantation diagnosis of common aneuploidies in
fertile couples of advanced maternal age. Hum Reprod 1996, 11:2076-2077.
2.	 Checa MA, Alonso-Coello P, Solà I, Robles A, Carreras R, Balasch J: IVF/ICSI
with or without preimplantation genetic screening for aneuploidy in
couples without genetic disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Assist Reprod Genet 2009, 26:273-283.
3.	 Harper J, Coonen E, De Rycke M, Fiorentino F, Geraedts J, Goossens V, Harton
G, Moutou C, Pehlivan Budak T, Renwick P, Sengupta S, Traeger-Synodinos J,
Vesela K: What next for preimplantation genetic screening (PGS)?
A position statement from the ESHRE PGD Consortium Steering
Committee. Hum Reprod 2010, 25:821-823.
4.	 Handyside AH, Kontogianni EH, Hardy K, Winston RM: Pregnancies from
biopsied human preimplantation embryos sexed by Y-specific DNA
amplification. Nature 1990, 344:768-770.
5.	 The ESHRE PGD consortium [http://www.eshre.eu/01/default.
aspx?pageid=201]
6.	 Harper J, Coonen E, De Rycke M, Harton G, Moutou C, Pehlivan T, Traeger-
Synodinos J, Van Rij M, Goossens V: ESHRE PGD consortium data collection
X: Cycles from January to December 2007 with pregnancy follow-up to
October 2008. Hum Reprod 2010, in press.
7.	 Verlinsky Y, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O, Xu K, Schattman G, Masciangelo C,
Ginberg, N, Strom C, Rosenwaks Z, Kuliev A: Preimplantation diagnosis for
p53 tumour suppressor gene mutations. Reprod Biomed Online 2001,
2:102-105.
8.	 Spits C, De Rycke M, Van Ranst N, Verpoest W, Lissens W, Van Steirteghem A,
Liebaers I, Sermon K: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for cancer
predisposition syndromes. Prenat Diagn 2007, 27:447-456.
9.	 Kuliev A, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O, Tur-Kaspa I, Kalakoutis G, Angastiniotis M,
Verlinsky Y: Preimplantation diagnosis and HLA typing for haemoglobin
disorders. Reprod Biomed Online 2005, 11:362-370.
10.	 Verlinsky Y, Rechitsky S, Sharapova T, Laziuk K, Barsky I, Verlinsky O, Tur-Kaspa I,
Kuliev A: Preimplantation diagnosis for immunodeficiencies. Reprod Biomed
Online 2007, 14:214-223.
11.	 Van de Velde H, De Rycke M, De Man C, De Hauwere K, Fiorentino F,
Kahraman S, Pennings G, Verpoest W, Devroey P, Liebaers I: The experience
of two European preimplantation genetic diagnosis centres on human
leukocyte antigen typing. Hum Reprod 2009, 24:732-740.
12.	 Devolder K: Preimplantation HLA typing: having children to save our loved
ones. J Med Ethics 2005, 31:582-586.
13.	 Steffann J, Frydman N, Gigarel N, Burlet P, Ray PF, Fanchin R, Feyereisen E,
Kerbrat V, Tachdjian G, Bonnefont JP, Frydman R, Munnich A: Analysis of
mtDNA variant segregation during early human embryonic development:
a tool for successful NARP preimplantation diagnosis. J Med Genet 2006,
43:244-247.
14.	 Tajima H, Sueoka K, Moon SY, Nakabayashi A, Sakurai T, Murakoshi Y,
Watanabe H, Iwata S, Hashiba T, Kato S, Goto Y, Yoshimura Y: The
development of novel quantification assay for mitochondrial DNA
heteroplasmy aimed at preimplantation genetic diagnosis of Leigh
encephalopathy. J Assist Reprod Genet 2007, 24:227-232.
15.	 Poulton J, Bredenoord AL: 174th ENMC international workshop: Applying
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis to mtDNA diseases: implications of
scientific advances 19-21 March 2010, Naarden, The Netherlands.
Neuromuscul Disord 2010, 20:559-563.
16.	 Poulton J, Chiaratti MR, Meirelles FV, Kennedy S, Wells D, Holt IJ: Transmission
of mitochondrial DNA diseases and ways to prevent them. PLoS Genet
2010, 6pii:e1001066.
17.	 Bredenoord AL, Dondorp W, Pennings G, De Die-Smulders CE, De Wert G:
PGD to reduce reproductive risk: the case of mitochondrial DNA disorders.
Hum Reprod 2008, 23:2392-2401.
18.	 Bredenoord A, Dondorp W, Pennings G, de Die-Smulders C, Smeets B, de
Wert G: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for mitochondrial DNA
disorders: ethical guidance for clinical practice. Eur J Hum Genet 2009,
17:1550-1559.
19.	 Liebaers I, Sermon K, Staessen C, Joris H, Lissens W, Van Assche E, Nagy P,
Bonduelle M, Vandervorst M, Devroey P, Van Steirteghem A: Clinical
experience with preimplantation genetic diagnosis and intracytoplasmic
sperm injection. Hum Reprod 1998, 13:186-195.
20.	 De Vos A, Van Steirteghem A: Aspects of biopsy procedures prior to
preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 2001, 21:767-780.
21.	 Verlinsky Y, Ginsberg N, Lifchez A, Valle J, Moise J, Strom CM: Analysis of the
first polar body: preconception genetic diagnosis. Hum Reprod 1990,
5:826-829.
22.	 Joris H, De Vos A, Janssens R, Devroey P, Liebaers I, Van Steirteghem A:
Comparison of the results of human embryo biopsy and outcome of PGD
after zona drilling using acid Tyrode medium or a laser. Hum Reprod 2003,
18:1896-1902.
23.	 De Vos A, Staessen C, De Rycke M, Verpoest W, Haentjens P, Devroey P,
Liebaers I, Van de Velde H: Impact of cleavage-stage embryo biopsy in view
of PGD on human blastocyst implantation: a prospective cohort of single
embryo transfers. Hum Reprod 2009, 24:2988-2996.
24.	 Barbash-Hazan S, Frumkin T, Malcov M, Yaron Y, Cohen T, Azem F, Amit A,
Ben-Yosef D: Preimplantation aneuploid embryos undergo self-correction
in correlation with their developmental potential. Fertil Steril 2009,
92:890-896.
25.	 McArthur SJ, Leigh D, Marshall JT, de Boer KA, Jansen RP: Pregnancies and
live births after trophectoderm biopsy and preimplantation genetic
testing of human blastocysts. Fertil Steril 2005, 84:1628-1636.
26.	 Kokkali G, Traeger-Synodinos J, Vrettou C, Stavrou D, Jones GM, Cram DS,
Makrakis E, Trounson AO, Kanavakis E, Pantos K: Blastocyst biopsy versus
cleavage stage biopsy and blastocyst transfer for preimplantation genetic
diagnosis of beta-thalassaemia: a pilot study. Hum Reprod 2007,
22:1443-1449.
27.	 McArthur SJ, Leigh D, Marshall JT, Gee AJ, De Boer KA, Jansen RP: Blastocyst
trophectoderm biopsy and preimplantation genetic diagnosis for familial
monogenic disorders and chromosomal translocations. Prenat Diagn 2008,
28:434-442.
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
Page 5 of 6
28.	 Moutou C, Gardes N, Nicod JC, Viville S: Strategies and outcomes of PGD of
familial adenomatous polyposis. Mol Hum Reprod 2007, 13:95-101.
29.	 Spits C, De Rycke M, Verpoest W, Lissens W, Van Steirteghem A, Liebaers I,
Sermon K: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for Marfan syndrome. Fertil
Steril 2006, 86:310-320.
30.	 Iacobelli M, Greco E, Rienzi L, Ubaldi F, Podini D, Nuccitelli A, Tesarik J, Baldi M,
Fiorentino F: Birth of a healthy female after preimplantation genetic
diagnosis for Charcot-Marie-Tooth type X. Reprod Biomed Online 2003,
7:558-562.
31.	 Traversa MV, Carey L, Leigh D: A molecular strategy for routine
preimplantation genetic diagnosis in both reciprocal and Robertsonian
translocation carriers. Mol Hum Reprod 2010, 16:329-337.
32.	 Fiorentino F, Kokkali G, Biricik A, Stavrou D, Ismailoglu B, De Palma R, Arizzi L,
Harton G, Sessa M, Pantos K: Polymerase chain reaction-based detection of
chromosomal imbalances on embryos: the evolution of preimplantation
genetic diagnosis for chromosomal translocations. Fertil Steril 2010.
doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.12.063.
33.	 Coskun S, Alsmadi O: Whole genome amplification from a single cell: a new
era for preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 2007, 27:297-302.
34.	 Spits C, Le Caignec C, De Rycke M, Van Haute L, Van Steirteghem A, Liebaers I,
Sermon K: Whole-genome multiple displacement amplification from
single-cells. Nat Protoc 2006, 1:1965-1970.
35.	 Höckner M, Erdel M, Spreiz A, Utermann G, Kotzot D: Whole genome
amplification from microdissected chromosomes. Cytogenet Genome Res
2009, 125:98-102.
36.	 Renwick P, Trussler J, Lashwood A, Braude P, Ogilvie CM: Preimplantation
genetic haplotyping: 127 diagnostic cycles demonstrating a robust,
efficient alternative to direct mutation testing on single-cells. Reprod
Biomed Online 2010, 20:470-476.
37.	 Johnson DS, Gemelos G, Baner J, Ryan A, Cinnioglu C, Banjevic M, Ross R,
Alper M, Barrett B, Frederick J, Potter D, Behr B, Rabinowitz M: Preclinical
validation of a microarray method for full molecular karyotyping of
blastomeres in a 24-h protocol. Hum Reprod 2010, 25:1066-1075.
38.	 Treff NR, Su J, Tao X, Miller KA, Levy B, Scott RT Jr: A novel single-cell DNA
fingerprinting method successfully distinguishes sibling human embryos.
Fertil Steril 2010, 94:477-484.
39.	 Wells D, Escudero T, Levy B, Hirschhorn K, Delhanty J, Munné S: First clinical
application of comparative genomic hybridisation and polar body testing
for preimplantation genetic diagnosis of aneuploidy. Fertil Steril 2002,
78:543-549.
40.	 Voullaire L, Slater H, Williamson R, Wilton L: Chromosome analysis of
blastomeres from human embryos by using CGH. Hum Genet 2000,
106:210-217.
41.	 Wilton L, Williamson R, McBain J, Edgar D, Voullaire L: Birth of a healthy infant
after preimlantation confirmation of euploidy by comparative genomic
hybridisation. N Engl J Med 2001, 345:1537-1541.
42.	 Wells D, Brynn L: Cytogenetics in reproductive medicine: the contribution
of comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH). BioEssays 2003, 25:289-300.
43.	 Le Caignec, C, Spits C, Sermon K, De Rycke M, Thienpont B, Debrock S,
Staessen C, Moreau Y, Fryns JP, Van Steirteghem A, Liebaers I, Vermeesch, JR:
Single-cell chromosomal imbalances detection by array CGH. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34:e68.
44.	 Munne S, Ketterson K, Wagner C, Hill D, Cohen J, Wells D: Pregnancy
outcome following comprehensive chromosome analysis at the cleavage
and blastocyst stages. Fertil Steril 2010, 94:S175-S176.
45.	 Scriven PN, Bossuyt PM: Diagnostic accuracy: theoretical models for
preimplantation genetic testing of a single nucleus using the fluorescence
in situ hybridization technique. Hum Reprod 2010, 25:2622-2628.
46.	 Wilton L, Thornhill A, Traeger-Synodinos J, Sermon KD, Harper JC: The causes
of misdiagnosis and adverse outcomes in PGD. Hum Reprod 2009,
24:1221-1228.
47.	 Thornhill AR, De Die-Smulders CE, Geraedts JP, Harper JC, Harton GL, Lavery
SA, Moutou C, Robinson, MD, Schmutzler AG, Scriven PN, Sermon KD, Wilton
L: ESHRE PGD Consortium“Best practice guidelines for clinical
preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) and preimplantation genetic
screening (PGS)”. Hum Reprod 2005, 20:35-48.
48.	 Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis International Society: The
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis International Society (PGDIS):
Guidelines for good practice in PGD. Reprod Biomed Online 2004, 9:430-434.
49.	 Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis International Society (PGDIS): Guidelines
for good practice in PGD: programme requirements and laboratory
quality assurance. Reprod Biomed Online 2008, 16:134-147.
50.	 Corveleyn A, Morris MA, Dequeker E, Sermon K, Davies JL, Antiñolo G,
Schmutzler A, Vanecek J, Nagels N, Zika E, Palau F, Ibarreta D: Provision and
quality assurance of preimplantation genetic diagnosis in Europe. Eur J
Hum Genet 2008, 16:290-299.
51.	 Vendrell X, Carrero R, Alberola T, Bautista-Llácer R, García-Mengual E,
Claramunt R, Pérez-Alonso M: Quality management system in PGD/PGS:
now is the time. J Assist Reprod Genet 2009, 26:197-204.
52.	 Harper JC, Sengupta S, Vesela K, Thornhill A, Dequeker E, Coonen E, Morris
MA: Accreditation of the PGD laboratory. Hum Reprod 2010, 25:1051-1065.
53.	 The UK National External Quality Assessment Service (UKNEQAS) [http://
www.ukneqas-molgen.org.uk]
54.	 The Cytogenetics European Quality Assessment Service (CEQA) [http://
www.ceqa-cyto.eu]
doi:10.1186/gm195
Cite this article as: De Rycke M: Singling out genetic disorders and disease.
Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74.
De Rycke Genome Medicine 2010, 2:74
http://genomemedicine.com/content/2/10/74
Page 6 of 6
