© 2010 Castro and Morrison-Bryant,publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an OpenAccess
article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 123–134
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
123
R e vi e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
7720
Management of Pneumocystis Jirovecii pneumonia in
HIV infected patients: current options, challenges
and future directions
Jose G Castro1
Maya Morrison-Bryant2
1
Division of Infectious Diseases,
University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA;
2
Jackson Memorial Hospital/University
of Miami Infectious Diseases
Fellowship Program, Miami, Florida,
USA
Correspondence: Jose G Castro
Division of Infectious Diseases, University
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 1120
N.W. 14th Street, Suite 860, Miami, Florida
33136, USA
Tel +1 305 243 2399
Fax +1 305 243 4728
Email jcastro2@med.miami.edu
Abstract: The discovery of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) was led by the merge
of clustered cases of Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia (PCP) in otherwise healthy people in
the early 80’s.1,2
In the face of sophisticated treatment now available for HIV infection, life
expectancy approaches normal limits. It has dramatically changed the natural course of HIV from
a nearly fatal infection to a chronic disease.3–5
However, PCP still remains a relatively common
presentation of uncontrolled HIV. Despite the knowledge and advances gained in the preven-
tion and management of PCP infection, it continues to have high morbidity and mortality rates.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) remains as the recommended first-line treatment.
Alternatives include pentamidine, dapsone plus trimethoprim, clindamycin administered with
primaquine, and atovaquone. For optimal management, clinicians need to be familiar with the
advantages and disadvantages of the available drugs. The parameters used to classify severity
of infection are also important, as it is well known that the adjunctive use of steroids in moder-
ate to severe cases have been shown to significantly improve outcome. Evolving management
practices, such as the successful institution of early antiretroviral therapy, may further enhance
overall survival rates.
Keywords: HIV, Pneumocystis Jirovecii, PCP, TMP-SMZ
Introduction
Pneumocystis in humans is caused by P. jirovecii, as opposed to P. carinii, the ­latter
being one of the two Pneumocystis species found only in rats.6
The organism was
classified as a protozoan nearly 100 years ago.7,8
In 1988 it was identified as a fungus
based on DNA analysis.9,10
P. jirovecii is a fungus that has maintained its importance
as a pathogen because of its frequent presentation as pneumonia in patients withT cell
mediated immunodeficiency.
Examples of those at risk include persons with a primary or hereditary immu-
nodeficiency, persons on antineoplastic therapy, immunosuppressive drugs, gluco-
corticoids, those with hematological malignancies (leukemia, lymphoma, multiple
myeloma), and of course HIV infection. Three decades into the HIV/AIDS epidemic
it remains as one of the most prevalent opportunistic infections. It is still a common
AIDS defining illness leading to the diagnosis of HIV infection and bringing patients
to medical attention.
P. jirovecii has a worldwide distribution and humans appear to be a reservoir for
this fungus.The modes of transmission and acquisition are not completely understood.
It was previously thought that P. jirovecii did not infect the immunologically normal
host. However, recent studies in immunocompetent animals have shown that P. jirovecii
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care
23 June 2010
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
124
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
produces a typical pattern of infection, transmission and
resolution.11
In addition, PCP was traditionally believed to
arise from reactivation of latent infection.This was probably
because of the evidence of exposure and likely asymptomatic
infection early in life and active disease occurring several
years later. However, no evidence for latency has ever been
demonstrated. Mouse and rat models of PCP have shown that
latency does not develop after infection, which suggests that
PCP results from new infection rather than reactivation of
latent infection.12
The latter is supported by data showing that
distinct strains are responsible for each episode in patients
who develop multiple episodes of PCP.13
P. jirovecii is acquired by inhalation. Once in the alveoli,
it adheres to type I cells, and the subsequent interaction
of P. jirovecii with the alveolar epithelium is considered
critical to the infectious process.14
A significant pulmo-
nary inflammatory response ensues which more potently
contributes to lung injury than the direct effect of the
organism during Pneumocystis pneumonia.The importance
of the immune response was initially demonstrated in an
experiment in which mice with severe combined immuno-
deficiency were infected with PCP, and following infusion
with functional lymphocytes, a rapid deterioration and
even death was seen.15
Subsequent studies showed that the
restoration of immune function in the presence of PCP,
resulted in a rapid increase of proinflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and cellular infiltrate in the lungs of mice, as
the adopted immune system began to function and clear
infection.16
In these studies, mice with similar burden of
infection, but without restoration of immune function, were
remarkably normal in terms of their cytokine response and
physiologic parameters. It has been proposed that when a
balanced CD4+
and CD8+
T-cell response occurs, as in the
normal host, the infection will lead to mild inflammation
that will destroy P. jirovecii and with relative preservation
of lung function. However, when CD8+
T cells initiate the
inflammatory response in the abscense of sufficient CD4+
T
cells to control the infection, a hyper-inflammatory response
follows causing severe lung damage without reducing
organism burden.17
A detailed discussion of the clinical presentation and
diagnostic procedures available for PCP is beyond the scope
of this review, but widely available.18–20
Briefly, the clinical
presentation can vary, though most patients are usually ill for
two to three weeks. Progressive dyspnea is characteristic, but
dry cough, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypoxia, and low-grade
fever are also common manifestations. Lung auscultation in
comparison to symptoms is usually unremarkable. Arterial
blood gas analysis demonstrates an increased alveolar-arterial
gradient and respiratory alkalosis. Oxygen desaturation of
$5% with exercise is a reliable and quick test. 21
Early in the
disease course the chest radiography may be normal, but will
classically show fine, bilateral, diffuse infiltrates beginning
in the perihilar regions. Other presentations include cystic
formation, unilateral infiltrates, cavitary lesions, nodular
densities, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and pneumome-
diastinum (Figures 1–6).22
High resolution computer assisted
tomography (CAT) scans are more sensitive than chest
radiography in the diagnosis of PCP.23
Definitive diagnosis is based on identification of the
organism on histopathology. Sputum induction with hyper-
tonic saline has a diagnostic yield ranging from 50 to 90%
and specificity approaching 100%.24
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy
with bronchoalveolar lavage has .90% sensitivity and
100% specificity. Immunofluorescent staining of bronchial
specimens is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic test
readily available.25
Polymerase chain reaction testing of induced sputum
or bronchoalveolar lavage can also identify and quantitate
Pneumocystis. Several studies have suggested that PCR can
be a sensitive and specific diagnostic test on these samples, as
well as oro-pharyngeal washes, but no commercial PCR test
is broadly available at this time.26
For example some of these
newer PCR diagnostic tests include assays to amplify the
human Pneumocystis mithocondrial large subunit rRNA,
and the internal transcribed spacer region genes. However,
Figure 1 Chest radiograph showing bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltrates and airspace
opacities of Pneumocystis pneumonia.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
125
Management of PCP
the availability of an accurate serologic test would be a major
advance in the diagnosis of PCP. Recent reports describe
potential candidates such as detection of the serum (1–3)
beta-D-glucan.27,28
Treatment
Untreated PCP is almost always fatal. In patients without
HIV infection, response to treatment should begin in 4 to
5 days. In patients infected with HIV, the treatment response
­typically takes longer but should occur within the first
8 days. It is not uncommon to observe clinical deterioration
in the first 24 hours of the initiation of therapy, especially in
moderate or severe cases. If no response occurs within the
expected time, an alternative diagnosis should be sought,
including concurrent infections;29–31
otherwise, an appropriate
­alternative regimen should be used.
Figure 2 Case 2, Chest radiograph showing bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltrates
and airspace opacities of Pneumocystis pneumonia.
Figure 3 One slice from CAT scan of the lungs showing patchy bilateral areas of ground
glass infiltrates and multiple pneumatoceles taken from a patient with Pneumocystis.
Figure 4 One slice from CAT scan of the lungs showing patchy bilateral areas of ground
glass infiltrates and multiple pneumatoceles taken from a patient with Pneumocystis.
Figure 5 One slice of CAT scan of the lungs showing widespread emphysematous
and cystic changes along with multifocal interstitial infiltrates in a severe case of
Pneumocystis pneumonia.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
126
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
The length of treatment is 21 days in HIV-infected patients
and 14 days in non-HIV infected individuals. It is common
practice to extend therapy if there is a delay in the resolution
of signs and symptoms.A longer duration of treatment in HIV-
infected individuals is often needed due to the larger burden
of organisms and the slower response to therapy.
Thedosagesofthesemedicationsmustbeadjustedforrenal
or hepatic impairment. Treatment options, including the type
of medications, need for in-patient care and respiratory support
will be decided by the treating team and will depend primarily
on the degree of illness at diagnosis (Table 1). In general, the
parenteral route is preferred for administering antibiotics to
patientswhopresentwithmoderateorseverediseaseorinthose
with gastrointestinal upset. The recommended and alternative
schemas of treatment are summarized in Table 2.
Antibiotics
These are the mainstay of treatment for PCP. A summary
of the dose, contra-indications and common side effects are
presented in Table 3.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMX)
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is the drug
of choice for pneumocystis. TMP-SMX is made up of two
antimicrobial agents that act synergistically against a wide
variety of bacteria. Although trimethoprim has been com-
bined with other sulfonamides,TMP-SMX is by far the most
widely used. TMP and SMX are individually weak bacteri-
cidal agents, but when given together, they become highly
bactericidal against many bacteria. Maximum inhibition of
most susceptible bacteria occurs when the TMP-SMX con-
centration ratio is 1:20.The drug combination is prepared in a
higher fixed ratio of 1:5; however, peak serum concentrations
of 1:20 are still achieved by both oral and intravenous therapy
because of the wider volume of distribution of TMP.
This regimen has been widely recommended as first line
therapy for the management of HIV-related Pneumocystis
opportunistic infections.32
It has been shown in numerous
studies to be more or equally effective as pentamidine which
was the drug of choice for the treatment of PCP before the
advent of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. TMP-SMX has the
advantage of a comparatively favorable toxicity profile and
has gained wide acceptance due to its long track record and
easy availability.33–36
A prospective randomized non-crossover trial comparing
these two regimens, helped to clarify the results of the more
common complex trials that allowed for frequent changes
in regimen, due to a lack of response or because of adverse
effects.This study reported that 86% of patients treated with
TMP-SMX survived and were without respiratory support at
completion of treatment compared to 61% in the pentamidine
group, 95% CI for the difference in response, 5% to 45%;
P  = 0.03.37
Figure 6 One slice of CAT scan of the lungs showing widespread emphysematous
and cystic changes along with multifocal interstitial infiltrates in a severe case of
Pneumocystis pneumonia.
Table 1 Severity of PCP
Degree A-a gradient*
Mild ,35 mmHg
Moderate 35–45 mmHg
Severe**
.45 mmHg
*
A-a gradient: alveolar-arterial gradient.
**
Severe disease also defined by an Oxygen pressure of 70 mmHg taken at room air.
Table 2 PCP treatment regimens
Preferred regimens
• Trimethoprim (TMP)
15–20 mg/kg/day + sulfamethoxazole 75–100 mg/kg/day PO or IV for
21 days in 3 to 4 divided doses.
• Adjunctive corticosteroids
In moderate to severe disease should receive corticosteroids
(prednisone 40 mg PO bid × 5 days, then 40 mg qd ( 5 days, then
20 mg/day to completion of treatment) starting as early as possible.
IV methylprednisolone
Alternative regimens
• TMP 15mg/kg/day PO + dapsone 100 mg/day PO × 21 days.
• Pentamidine 3–4 mg/kg/day IV infused over . 60 min × 21 days.
• Clindamycin 600–900 mg IV q6h–8h or 300–450 mp PO
q6h + primaquine 15–30 mg/day base PO × 21 days.
• Atovaquone 750 mg suspension PO bid with meal × 21 days.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
127
Management of PCP
The mechanism of action of this combined drug ­regimen
involves the sequential inhibiton of folate biosynthesis by
the organism. Sulfamethoxazole competitively inhibits
dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) which catalyses the con-
densation of p-aminobenzoic acid and 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-
dihydropterin pyrophosphate to form dihydropteroate.38
Trimethoprim inhibits microbial dihydrofolate reductase, and
by this action inhibits purine synthesis and thereby prevents
deoxyribonucleic acid production. These sequential inhibi-
tors in folic acid synthesis likely results in a synergistic killing
effect of microbes.39,40
TMP-SMX absorption is not affected by food or other
medications and bioavailability is approximately 85% for
both compounds. TMP-SMX is available in oral and paren-
teral forms. Peak serum levels ofTMP-SMX after administra-
tion of a double-strength tablet are 1 to 2 microgram/mL and
25 to 60 microgram/mL, respectively. Peak concentrations
are attained within 2 to 4 hours with oral therapy and within
1 to 2 hours with parenteral therapy. The concentrations
achieved after intravenous administration of TMP-SMX are
equivalent to two DS tablets and are 3.5 microgram/mL
and 47.3 microgram/mL respectively. Intravenous therapy
is preferred when absorption is unreliable. TMP-SMX is
widely distributed in the body but tissue concentrations
are generally less than serum concentrations. TMP is more
lipophilic than SMX (apparent volume of distribution 100
to 120 L and 12 to 18 L respectively), resulting in ratios of
1:2 to 1:10 in tissues compared to 1:20 in the extracellular
fluid. CSF penetration of TMP-SMX is generally good, with
TMP concentrations ranging from 20% to 60% of serum
values and SMX concentrations ranging from 12% to 50%
of serum values. The recommended dose for the treatment
of PCP is 15 to 20 mg/kg of TMP per day and 75 to 100 mg/
kg of SMX per day, divided in three or four doses.
TMP-SMX is generally well tolerated in non-HIV-
infected patients. Adverse reactions occur in approximately
6% to 8% of such individuals. In comparison, the adverse
reaction rate is as high as 25% to 50% in HIV-infected
patients. In the latter group, treatment limiting toxicities
occur in one third of cases.41
Reported toxicities include skin reactions (ranging from
mild rash to anaphylaxis), drug fever, bone marrow suppres-
sion, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, pancreatitis, nephritis,
metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia is
due to the blockade of the collecting tubule sodium chan-
nel by trimethoprim (an action similar to that induced by
the potassium-sparing diuretic amiloride). Hyperkalemia
is most commonly seen in HIV-infected patients who are
treated with high doses, but normal doses can also produce
a modest elevation in the plasma potassium concentration in
non-HIV-infected subjects.
Nephrotoxicity associated withTMP-SMX is uncommon;
however, TMP is known to decrease the tubular secretion
of creatinine. This has led to increases in serum creatinine
Table 3 Drugs for treatment of PCP
Regimen Dosage Contraindications Common adverse effects
TMP-SMS
(Bactrim, Septra)
5 mg/kg of TMP every 8 hrs hypersensitivity, megaloblastic anemia
due to folate deficiency
skin reaction (mild rash to anaphylaxis), drug
fever, bone marrow suppression, nausea
and vomiting, diarrhea, pancreatitis, nephritis,
and hyperkalemia
Dapsone
(Avlosulfon)
100 mg daily hypersensitivity, G-6-PD
deficiency
fever, rash, hemolytic anemia, nausea, vomiting,
methemoglobinemia, hepatitis,
aplastic anemia
Clindamycin
(Cleocin)
900 mg IV q 8h hypersensitivity, regional Enteritis,
ulcerative colitis, Hepatic impairment,
antibiotic associated colitis.
diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash,
clostridium, difficile associated colitis
Atovaquone
(Mepron)
750 mg PO BID hypersensitivity rash, GI intolerance, diarrhea, headache, fever,
insomnia
Pentamidine
Pentam-300
4 mg/kg/d IV/IM hypersensitivity nausea, cardiac arrthytmias, hyperkalemia,
nephrotoxicity, hypo-hyperglycemia,
hyper-hypo tension, Hepatic dysfunction,
leucopenia, thrombocytopenia
Trimetrexate*
(Neutrexin)
45 mg/m2 IV qd hypersensitivity, severe
myelosuppression
myelosuppression, increases in serum
aminotransferase levels, anemia, fever,
rash/pruritus, and increased alkaline
phosphatase or serum creatinine levels
Primaquine 15–30 mg PO hypersensitivity, G-6-PD deficiency hemolytic anemia, methemoglobinemia,
leucopenia, nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain
*
No longer available in the US.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
128
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
through interference with certain assays that is not reflective
of a true reduction in glomerular filtration rate.
TMP-SMX desensitization could potentially allow for its
use in those with hypersensitivity reactions. However, there
is no established regimen proven to be safe in such patients.
Mild adverse reactions can be managed with supportive care
and discontinuation of the drug. Attempts at desensitization
with increasing doses of bactrim can be done in mild cases but,
this should never be attempted in those whose adverse event
involves severe rash with mucosal involvement, or anaphy-
lactic type reactions. With the wide use and success of other
therapeutic treatments available, clinical circumstances may
dictate when desensitization procedures are warranted.
Therapeutic failure withTMP-SMX occurs in up to 20%
of cases and cannot be solely attributable to gene mutations.
There are no standardized culture systems for P. jirovecii and
therefore data on drug resistance is unavailable.42
TMP-SMX
resistance is mainly due to point mutations in dihydropteroate
synthase, but, the extent of resistance conferred by these
mutations is unknown without in vitro susceptibility tests.42
Mutations in the DHPS gene increases with exposure to sulfa
drugs and in chemoprophylaxis.42
Though the presence of
these mutations were independently associated with a sig-
nificant increase in 3-month mortality in one study,43
they
have not been shown to invariably result in treatment failure.
Additionally, successful outcome with TMP-SMX in these
instances has been well documented.44
In patients who are allergic to or intolerant of sulfon-
amides, there are several alternatives for mild to moderate
disease (that is usually with an alveolar-arterial oxygen
gradient #45 mmHg).
Dapsone
Dapsone is a synthetic sulfone rapidly and almost completely
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Peak dapsone plasma
concentrations are reached within 2 to 8 hours after admin-
istration. The mean half-life of elimination is about 20 to
30 hours. Twenty-four hours after oral ingestion of 100 mg,
plasma concentrations range from 0.4 to 1.2 µg/ml. A dose
of 100 mg per day produces steady-state plasma concentra-
tions of free dapsone of 2 to 6 µmol/L.
About 70% of the drug is bound to plasma protein.
Dapsone is distributed throughout total body water and is
present in all tissues. However, it tends to be retained in the
skin, muscle and especially in the liver and kidney.Traces of
the drug are present in these organs up to 3 weeks after cessa-
tion of therapy. Following absorption from the gastrointestinal
tract, dapsone is transported through the portal circulation
to the liver, where it is metabolized by both N-acetylation
and N-hydroxylation. Dapsone toxicity, in particular meth-
emoglobin formation, is generally thought to be initiated by
N-oxidation, resulting in the formation of a hydroxylamine
metabolite by cytochrome P450.
Dapsone acts against bacteria and protozoa in the same
way as sulphonamides, by inhibiting the synthesis of dihy-
drofolic acid through competition with para-amino-benzoate
for the active site of dihydropteroate synthetase. Its efficacy
is similar toTMP-SMX in mild to moderately severe disease
with less toxicity.45
Dapsone 100 mg daily plus trimethoprim
15 mg/kg daily is given by mouth in 3 divided doses.
Dapsone therapy may cause a variety of adverse effects,
which may be categorized as pharmacologic, dose-dependent,
allergic, or idiosyncratic reactions. The most frequent and
well-documented pharmacologic reactions are the hemato-
logical side-effects, such as methemoglobinemia, hemolysis
(in patients who have glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD) deficiency) and anemia. Methemoglobinemia occurs
to some extent in all patients receiving dapsone and becomes
less pronounced as treatment is continued due to an adaptive
increase in the activity of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) dependent reductase in the erythrocytes. Meth-
emoglobin levels of below 20% are not usually associated
with symptoms. Dyspnea, nausea and tachycardia usually
occur at levels of 30% or above, while lethargy, stupor and
deteriorating consciousness occur as methemoglobin levels
approach 55%. Levels of 70% are usually fatal. Once meth-
emoglobinemia is suspected, evaluation with a complete
blood count to identify anemia or thrombocytopenia, a blood
smear for Heinz body formation, G6PD assay, arterial blood
gas and methemoglobin level should be performed to confirm
the diagnosis.
Case reports of dapsone-induced methemoglobinemia in
the literature describe the improvement of mild symptoms
with discontinuation of therapy and supportive measures.46
While more symptomatic presentations are treated with meth-
ylene blue and activated charcoal to prevent further gastroin-
testinal absorption. Methylene blue acts as a co-factor for the
alternative pathway of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) system, to convert methaemoglobin
to haemoglobin.47
However, methylene blue should not be
administered in the presence of G6PD deficiency, where low
levels of NADPH exist making it ineffective. In this situation
methylene blue may induce hemolytic anemia, and blood
transfusions are likely to be more useful here, and in cases
refractory to treatment with methylene blue.48
Treatment of
PCP should resume with alternative options for PCP.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
129
Management of PCP
Other side effects include fever, nausea, vomiting,
peripheral motor weakness, dose-unrelated granulocytopenia,
aplastic anemia, and cutaneous reactions such as the sulfone
syndrome.
Clindamycin
Clindamycin is another comparable alternative toTMP-SMX
in terms of therapeutic success and safety.49
The dose is
300–450 mg orally four times a day (or 600–900 mg IV every
6 to 8 hours) plus primaquine 15–30 mg of base daily. The
mechanism of action of both clindamycin and primaquine
against Pneumocystis is unknown.The most common adverse
reactions with this regimen include skin rash, gastrointestinal
complaints, and fever. Primaquine may also cause hemolysis
in patients with G6PD deficiency.
Atovaquone
Atovaquone is hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone, an analog of
ubiquinone, that was initially developed as an antimalarial
agent. It also has activity against P. jirovecii but is less
effective than the above regimens.The mechanism of action
of atovaquone in infections caused by P. jirovecii has not
been fully elucidated. However, among Plasmodium species
the site of action appears to be the cytochrome bc1
complex
(Complex III). Several metabolic enzymes are linked to
the mitochondrial electron transport chain via ubiquinone.
Inhibition of electron transport by atovaquone will result in
indirect inhibition of these enzymes.The ultimate metabolic
effects of such blockade may include inhibition of nucleic
acid and ATP synthesis.
Atovaquone is a highly lipophilic compound with low
aqueous solubility. The bioavailability of atovaquone is
highly dependent on formulation and diet. In suspension it
provides an approximately 2-fold increase in bioavailability
in the fasting or fed state compared to the previously mar-
keted tablet formulation. Plasma atovaquone concentrations
do not increase proportionally with dose.
A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial showed simi-
lar rates of successful therapy when comparing atovaquone to
TMP-SMX in patients with mild to moderate disease (defined
in the study protocol as an alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient
#45 mmHg and partial pressure of oxygen $60 mmHg mea-
sured on room air) and with less adverse events. However,
significantly higher 4-week mortality rates and significantly
higher rates of no response to therapy were noted in the atova-
quone group.50
Conditions affecting absorption and thereby
decreasing the bioavailability of atovaquone were associated
with poorer therapeutic outcomes.50
Efficacy has also been
shown to be comparable to pentamidine in mild to moderate
disease.51
The usual dose is in suspension, 750 mg orally twice
daily, taken with food to increase its absorption.
Adverse reactions include skin rash, fever, gastrointestinal
symptoms, and abnormal liver function tests. Mutations in
the cytochrome b gene have been shown to confer resistance
to atovaquone.
Pentamidine isethionate
Pentamidine isethionate is effective therapy for Gambian
trypanosomiasis, antimony-resistant leishmaniasis, and
P. jirovecii pneumonia. Between 1967 and 1984 its use
was restricted to treating infections due to Trypanosoma
gambiense and Pneumocystis jirovecii. It then became more
commonly used for treatment of PCP among immunocom-
promised patients before the HIV/AIDS epidemic. The
mechanism of action is unclear and may differ for different
organisms. Trypanosomes actively transport pentamidine
intracellularly, where it may then interfere with DNA biosyn-
thesis. With Pneumocystis pneumonia, pentamidine appears
to kill nonreplicating organisms.
There are many studies showing similar efficacy of pent-
amidine toTMP-SMX, but the former is not favored because
of known toxicities and its availability only as an intravenous
preparation.52–54
Pentamidine is given parentally at 4 mg/kg
once daily and is generally regarded as second-line therapy
in severe disease with consideration of its side effect profile.
The aerosol route is recommended only for prophylaxis but
not for treatment of PCP.
Side effects occur in up to 50% of patients receiving pent-
amidine.These reactions have conveniently been categorized
as immediate, local, and systemic and have also included
deaths. Immediate reactions include hypotension in up to 10%,
tachycardia, nausea and/or vomiting, facial flushing, pruritis,
unpleasant taste, hallucinations, and syncope. Local reactions
of moderate to severe pain at the injection site and less fre-
quently, sterile abscesses and tissue necrosis can occur when
given intramuscularly. Urticarial rash, phlebitis and venous
thrombosis complicate intravenous administration. Systemic
reactions include renal toxicity, electrolyte abnormalities,
hypo- and hyperglycemias, cardiac arrhythmias, elevated
transaminases and bronchospasm with inhaled treatment.
Trimetrexate
Trimetrexate is a folinic acid analog structurally related to
methotrexate, whose primary mechanism of action is believed
to be inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase. This reduces the
productionofDNAandRNAprecursorsandleadstocelldeath.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
130
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
Trimetrexate is lipophilic and can passively diffuse across cell
membranes including those of Pneumocystis jiroveciii and its
mammalian host. To minimise toxicity, trimetrexate must be
given with calcium folinate (leucovorin calcium). Leucovorin
acts as a reduced folate coenzyme, which is transported into,
and protects mammalian host cells, but does not protect target
organisms.The recommended dose is 45 mg/m2
once daily, by
theintravenousroute.Leucovorinisadministeredevery6hours
at a dose of 20 mg/m2
and should be continued for 72 hours
following the last dose of trimetrexate.
The most common adverse effect associated with trime-
trexate is myelosuppression (neutropenia and thrombocy-
topenia) that is generally reversible upon dosage reduction
or discontinuation. Other adverse effects include increases in
serum aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase and/or serum
creatinine levels, anemia, fever, rash and pruritus. Trime-
trexate is an alternative option for patients with moderate to
severe PCP who have not responded to or are intolerant of
first-line therapy. However, it is no longer available in the US
since its production was discontinued in March 2007.
Adjunctive therapy
In addition to antibiotics, steroids are recommended as
adjunctive therapy for moderate to severe PCP (defined
as an arterial oxygen pressure of less than 70 mmHg or an
alveolar-arterial gradient greater than 35 mmHg). Ideally,
steroids should be given prior to the first dose of any antibi-
otic or no later than the first 72 hours after the initiation of
therapy.55,56
The usual “steroid regimen” consists of predni-
sone 40 mg orally twice daily for the first five days, 40 mg
orally daily for another five days, followed by 20 mg orally
once daily for an additional 11 days. Methylprednisolone at
75% of the respective prednisolone dose should be adminis-
tered if intravenous therapy is necessary. During the first days
of therapy adjunctive steroids improve, most importantly,
survival, decrease episodes of respiratory decompensation
and decrease the need for mechanical ventilation. Steroids
likely blunt the inflammatory response (that includes the
production of cytokines and other inflammatory markers and
cells) to dying organisms that results in lung tissue damage
during the early course of therapy.57
Future directions and challenges
Caspofungin
Caspofungin is an echinocandin and inhibits fungal beta-1,3-
glucan synthesis, a main component of the cell wall. It is
known to have activity against Candida and Aspergillus
species. There is data on its efficacy in cystic forms of PCP
in murine models.58
Case reports have described its clinical
success when used in combination withTMP-SMX in ­treating
PCP in immunocompromised hosts.59–61
Though these reports
seem promising, clinical trials are needed to support these
findings before Caspofungin can be ­recommended in the
treatment of PCP.
Antiretroviral therapy
Early in the AIDS epidemic, patients with severe PCP and
respiratory failure had such high mortality rates that mechani-
cal ventilation and intensive care were not encouraged.There
has been a gradual improvement in survival over the last two
decades with the adjunctive use of steroids in therapy and
improved intensive care management of these patients.62,63
This trend can be further enhanced with the early initiation of
combination antiretroviral therapy (cART).64
The optimal tim-
ing for initiation of cART has been a subject of debate.There
are well-deserved concerns regarding cART and the possibil-
ity of the immune reconstitution and inflammatory response
syndrome (IRIS), with paradoxical worsening of PCP and
other opportunistic infections (OI). One review of 65 cases of
PCP describes an acute worsening of respiratory symptoms
in 3 patients after the early introduction of cART. However,
they did not report any deaths among these 3 cases.65
The first study looking at the use of cART in patients
presenting with severe PCP found cART to be an indepen-
dent predictor of decreased mortality. The mortality among
patients not receiving cART was 63% in contrast to a signifi-
cantly lower 25% mortality among patients receiving cART
prior to or during hospitalization.66
This initial study set the
stage for a more recent multicentered randomized trial where
early cART was started within 14 days of diagnosis of an OI
versus deferred therapy where cART was started after treat-
ment of the OI was completed; usually $4 weeks into the
study. It was shown that AIDS progression and death were
significantly reduced in the early treatment group, especially
within the first 6 months of the study. Additionally, for the
OIs included within this study of which 63% where due to
PCP, the incidence of IRIS was surprisingly low at 7%. The
improved outcome seen with early cART substantiates its
consideration in clinical practice along with the fact that
patients can usually be supported through an episode of
IRIS if it ocurrs.67
However, there are some reservations among physicians
to the use of early cART. These include non-compliance,
loss of follow up post-discharge, drug interactions and the
potential for drug toxicities. In regard to critically ill patients
especially on hemodynamic supportive therapy, the safety of
cART has not been extensively studied. Limitations of poor
absorption of orally administered medications, by which
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
131
Management of PCP
most ­antiretrovirals are given, may be erratic, predisposing to
resistance and decreased efficacy. Frequent changes in renal
and hepatic function can make it difficult to accurately dose
medications and the detection of drug adverse effects may
be delayed in obtunded patients.68
Moreover, to facilitate a
smooth transition to out-patient care, access to medications
and providers should be in place prior to discharge from
hospital.
Challenges in the management
of opportunistic infections
There is a changing approach to the treatment of oppor-
tunistic infections, with the accumulating evidence of the
early initiation of cART improving morbidity and mortality.
Additional clinical trials showing this benefit are needed to
develop guidelines on what could become the standard of
care.A better understanding of the pathogenesis of IRIS and
ongoing studies to help predict those that are susceptible may
quell the concerns surrounding early cART, provide more
answers and may even lead to improved outcome.
Prevention
Primary prophylaxis
Studies have shown that a CD4 count less than 200 cells/mm3
(or CD4 percentage less than 14) in an HIV-infected patient
markedly increases the risk for PCP, and is an indication to
start primary prophylaxis. One prospective observational
study that supports this recommendation, found 88.9% of
3101 initial episodes of PCP among an HIV-infected popu-
lation, had a CD4 count less than 200.69
Although PCP is
known to occur at higher CD4 counts, the risk is lower,
and probably outweighs the potential for a large number of
adverse events with prophylactic therapy. Oropharyngeal
candidiasis is another indicator for prophylactic therapy,
regardless of the CD4 count. Other non-HIV infected
patients at risk for PCP include those with hematologic
malignancies, solid tumors, inflammatory disorders, as well
as bone marrow and solid organ transplant recipients.70
For
these groups of patients, guidelines on prophylaxis have
not been established, but they are considered to be at simi-
lar risk as patients with advanced HIV infection. Patients
who develop severe PCP while on prophylaxis have a poor
outcome and this may be due to acquired co-trimoxazole
resistance.71,72
TMP-SMX is very effective in preventing PCP opportu-
nistic infections and is the preferred prophylactic regimen.
Aerosolized pentamidine is not as effective as bactrim for
primary or secondary PCP prophylaxis.73,74
However, it is
an alternative option for those unable to tolerate TMP-SMZ
as stated in the most recent guidelines on the prevention of
opportunistic infections in HIV-infected adults and adoles-
cents.75
Although aerosolized pentamidine has higher failure
rates compared to bactrim, it has been shown that compared
to those at risk and not receiving prophylactic therapy, it
significantly reduces the incidence of primary episodes of
PCP with reasonable tolerance of the inhaled drug.76
Atovaquone is another alternative to bactrim for prophy-
laxis.A study comparing atovaquone to aerosolized pentami-
dine showed no statistically significant differences between
these two drugs with regard to incidence of PCP, death, or the
combined end point of PCP and death.77
Atovaquone has also
been shown to have similar efficacy compared to dapsone,
the latter being the second most widely used option for PCP
prophylaxis. In a large randomized study among patients with
intolerance to bactrim, the rates of PCP pneumonia, survival,
and tolerance were similar in the atovaquone and dapsone
groups.78
The recommended regimens for prophylaxis are
listed in Table 4.
Primary prophylaxis may be discontinued once immune
reconstitution with CD4 counts $200 cells/mm3
for at least
three months occurs with antiretroviral therapy. Nevertheless,
it may be possible, to safely discontinue primary prophylaxis
for those patients who have failed to show an increase in the
CD4+
T-cell count above the threshold of 200 cells/mm3
,
despite being well controlled on cART, with HIV viral loads
,50 copies/ml for at least 3 months. It should be noted
that the latter is not recommended, but, there is evidence
that immune recovery may occur with suppression of HIV
alone, even though it is typically thought to be indicated by
an increase in the CD4+
T-cell count.79
The decreased toxicity
and cost with improved adherence to cART would together
be of considerable benefit for such patients.
On the other hand, HIV viral loads have not been used
to assess the risk for developing PCP and have not been
included in guidelines to help determine when to initiate or
discontinue prophylaxis.
Prophylactic therapy should be re-introduced if the CD4
count decreases to less than 200 cells/mm3
.
Table 4 Recommended regimens for PCP prophylaxis
TMP-SMZ one Double Strength tablet once daily or three times a week, or
once daily single-strength tablet by mouth (preferred)
Dapsone 100 mg daily
Dapsone 50 mg daily with pyrimethamine 50 mg plus folinic acid 25 mg
once weekly
Atovaquone suspension 750 mg twice daily
Aerosolized pentamidine 300 mg every four weeks administered
via Respirgard II®
nebulizer
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
132
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
Secondary prophylaxis
Patients with a history of PCP should have lifelong chemo-
prophylaxis, with any of the above mentioned regimens, if
immune reconstitution cannot be achieved. If the CD4 count
is maintained above 200 cells/mm3
for at least three months
in response to cART, then it may be discontinued. Secondary
prophylaxis should be restarted if the CD4 count declines to
less than 200 cells/mm3
or if PCP recurred with CD4 counts
above 200 cells/mm3
.80
Conclusion
PCP is today still one of the most common and most deadly
opportunistic infections in patients with Human Immuno-
deficiency Virus. It is also becoming more prevalent among
non-HIV infected individuals as the number of patients under-
going chemotherapy and immunosuppresion after transplant
is growing. Clinicians must be familiar with its presentation
and management because mild cases are sometimes difficult
to diagnose. On the other hand, some severe cases can prove
fatal despite full supportive intensive care with mechanical
ventilation. Currently, the most effective medication for its
prevention and treatment is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
but other alternative medications are also available.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
1.	 Center of Disease Control and Prevention. Pneumocystis pneumonia –
Los Angeles. MMWR. 1981;30: 250–252.
2.	 Gottlieb MS, Schroff R, Schanker HM, et al. Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia and mucosal candidiasis in previously healthy homosexual
men: evidence of a new acquired cellular immunodeficiency. N Engl J
Med. 1981;305:1425–1431.
3.	 The Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration (2008) Life expec-
tancy of individuals on combination antiretroviral therapy in high-
income countries: a collaborative analysis of 14 cohort studies. Lancet.
2008;372:293–299.
4.	 Palella FJ Jr, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, et al. Declining morbidity
and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency
virus infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators. N Engl J Med.
1998;338:853–860.
5.	 Battegay M, Elzi L. Morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected individuals
– a shift towards comorbidities. Swiss Med Wkly. 2009;139:564–570.
6.	 Chagas C. Nova tripanozomiaze humana: estudo sobre a morfolojia
e o evolutivo do Schizotrypanum cruzi n.gen.,sp., ajente etiolojico de
nova entidade morbida do homem. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 1909;1:
159–218.
7.	 Carinii A. Formas de eschizogonia do Trypanozoma lewisi. Commun
Soc Med Sao Paolo. 1910;16:204.
8.	 Stringer JR, Beard CB, Miller RF, Wakefield AE. A new name (Pneu-
mocystis jirovecii) for Pneumocystis from humans. Emerg Infect Dis.
2002;8:891–896.
9.	 Edman JC, Kovacs JA, Masur H, et al. Ribosomal RNA sequence
shows Pneumocystis carinii to be a member of fungi. Nature. 1988;334:
519–522.
	10.	 Stringer SL, Hudson K, Blasé MA, et al. Sequence from ribosomal
RNA of Pneumocystis carinii compared to those of four fungi suggests
an ascomycettous affinity. J Protozool. 1989;36:14S–16S.
	11.	 Gigliotti F, Harmsen AG, Wright TW. Characterization of transmis-
sion of Pneumocystis jirovecii f. sp. Muris through immunocompetent
BALB/c mice. Infect Immun. 2003:71;3852–3856.
	12.	 Chen W, Gigliotti F, Harmsen AG. Latency is not an inevitable out-
come of infection with Pneumocystis jirovecii. Infect Immun.1993;61:
5406–5409.
	13.	 Helweg-Larsen J, Lee CH, Jin S. et al. Clinical correlation of variations
in the internal transcribed spacer regions of rRNA genes in Pneumo-
cystis jirovecii f. sp. Hominis. AIDS. 2001;15:451–459.
	14.	 Henshaw NG, Carson JL and Collier AM. Ultrastructural ­observations
of Pneumocystis carinii attachment to the lung. J Infect Dis. 1985;151:
181–186.
	15.	 Roths JB and Sidman CL. Both immunity and hyperresponsiveness
to Pneumocystis jirovecii result from transfer of CD4+ but not CD8+
T cells into severe combined immunodeficeincy mice. J Clin Invest.
1992;90:673–690.
	16.	 Wright TW, Johnston CJ, Harmsen AG, Finkelstein JN. Chemokine
gene expression uring Pneumocystis-driven pulmonary inflammation.
Infect Immun. 1999;67:3452–3460.
	17.	 Gigliotti F and Wright TW. Immunopathogenesis of Pneumocystis
jirovecii pneumonia. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2005;7:1–16.
	18.	 Itatani CA, Marshall GJ. Ultrastructural morphology and staining char-
acteristics of Pneumocystis carinii in situ and from bronchioalveolar
lavage J Parasitol. 1988;74:700–712.
	19.	 Cruciani M, Marcati P, Malena M, et al. Meta-analysis of diagnostic
procedures for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in HIV-1 infected
patients. Eur Respir J. 2002;20:982.
	20.	 Castro JG, Espinoza L. HIV infection and Pneumocystis Penumonia
(PCP). In: Galanda CD, editor. AIDS-related Opportunistic Infections.
New York: Nova Biomedical Books; 2009. p. 68–80.
	21.	 Thomas CF Jr, Limper AH. Pneumocystis pneumonia. N Engl J Med.
2004;350:2487–2498.
	22.	 Stover DE, Meduri GU. Pulmonary function tests. Clin Chest Med.
1988;9:473–479.
	23.	 Gruden JF, Huang L, Turner J, et al. High resolution CT in the evalu-
ation of clinically suspected Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in AIDS
patients with normal, equivocal, or nospecific radiograph findings. Am
J Roentgenol. 1997;169:967–975.
	24.	 Zaman MK, Wooten OJ, Suprahmanya B, et al. Rapid non-invasive
diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii from induced liquefied sputum. Ann
Intern Med. 1988;109–117.
	25.	 Kovacs JA, Ng VL, Masur H, et al. Diagnosis of Pnumocystis carinii
pnumonia: improved detection in sputum with use of monoclonal
antibodies. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:589–593.
	26.	 Larsen HH, Huang L, Kovacs JA, et al. A prospective, blinded study
of quantitative touch-down polymerase chain reaction using oral-wash
samples for diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia in HIV-infected
patients. J Infect Dis. 2004;189:1679–1683.
	27.	 Desmet S, Van Wijngaerden E, Maertens J, et al. Serum (1–3)-beta-D-
glucan as a tool for diagnosis of Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia in
patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection or hematological
malignancy. J Clin Microbio. 2009;47:3871–3874.
	28.	 Shimizu Y, Sunaga N, Dobashi K, et al. Serum markers in interstitial
pneumonia with and without Pneumocystis jirovecii colonization:
a prospective study. BMC Infect Dis. 2009;9:47
	29.	 Cruciani M, Marcati P, Malena M, et al. Meta-analysis of diagnostic
procedures for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in HIV-1 infected
patients. Eur Respir J. 2002;20:982–989.
	30.	 Harris C, Specter B, Lim W. Unique chest radriograph features of CMV
complicating PCP in HIV infected infants.Int ConfAIDS. 1993 Jun 6–11;
9:360. (Abstract N PO-B08-1347)
	31.	 Castro J, Mansi G, Espinoza L, et al. Concurrent PCP and TB Pneu-
monia in HIV Infected Patients. Scandinavian J Infect Dis. 2007;39:
1054–1058.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
133
Management of PCP
	32.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for Prevention
and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Infected Adults and
Adolescents, Recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of
Health, and the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. MMWR. 2009;58:6–10.
	33.	 HughesWT.Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole therapy for Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonitis in children. Rev Infect Dis. 1982;4:602–607.
	34.	 Lowell S. Young. Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole in the treatment of
adults with pneumonia due to Pneumocystis carinii. Rev Infect Dis.
1982;4:608–613.
	35.	 Hughes W, Feldman S, Chaudhary S, et al. Comparison of pentamidine
isethionate and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in the treatment of
Pneurnocystis carinii pneumonia. J Pediatr. 1978;92:285–291.
	36.	 Winston DJ, Lau WK, Gale RP, Young LS. Trímethoprim-
­sulfamethoxazole for the treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Ann Intern Med. 1980;92:762–769.
	37.	 Sattler FR, Cowan R, Nielsen DM , Ruskin J. Trimethoprim-
­sulfamethoxazole compared with pentamidine for treatment of Pneumo-
cystis carinii pneumonia in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Ann Intern Med. 1988;109:280–287
	38.	 Helweg-Larsen J, Benfield TL, Eugen-Olsen J, et  al. Effects of
mutations in Pneumocystis carinii dihydropteroate synthase gene on
outcome of AIDS-associated P carinii pneumonia. Lancet. 1999;354:
1347–1351.
	39.	 Hughes WT, Feldman S, Chaudhary SC, et al. Comparison of pentami-
dine isethionate and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in the treatment
of Pneurnocystis carinii pneumonia. J Pediatr. 1978;92:285–291.
	40.	 ArmstrongW, Meshnick S, Kazanjian P. Pneumocystis carinii mutations
associated with sulfa and sulfone prophylaxis failures in immunocom-
promised patients. Microbes Infect. 2000;2:61−67.
	41.	 Safrin S, Finkelstein DM, Feinberg J, et al. Comparison of three regi-
mens for treatment of mild to moderate Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
in patients with AIDS. Ann Intern Med. 1996;124:792–802.
	42.	 NahimanaA, Rabodonirina M, Helweg-Larsen J, et al. Sulfa Resistance
and Dihydropteroate Synthase Mutants in Recurrent Pneumocystis
carinii Pneumonia. Emerg Infect Dis. 2003;7:864–867.
	43.	 Helweg-Larsen J, Benfield T, Eugen-Olsen J, et al. Effects of mutations
in Pneumocystis carinii dihydropteroate synthase gene on outcome of
AIDS-associated P carinii pneumonia. Lancet. 1999; 354:1347–1351.
	44.	 Navin T, Beard C, Huang L, et al. Effect of mutations in Pneumocystis
carinii dihydropteroate synthase gene on outcome ofP. carinii pneumonia
in patients with HIV-1: a prospective study. Lancet. 2001;358:545–549.
	45.	 Hughes W. Use of dapsone in the prevention and treatment of Pneu-
mocystis carinii pneumonia: a review. Clin Infect Dis. 1998;27:
191–204.
	46.	 Hansen DG, Challoner KR, Smith DE. Dapsone intoxication: two case
reports. J Emerg Med. 1994;3:347–351.
	47.	 Landers D, Bergin C, O’Leary A, et al. Dapsone induced methaemo-
globinaemia. Int J STD AIDS. 1996;7:445–447.
	48.	 Ward KE, McCarthy MW. Dapsone-induced methemoglobinemia. Ann
Pharmacother. 1998;32:549–553.
	49.	 Toma E, Thorne A, Singer J, et al; The CTN-PCP Study Group. Clin-
damycin with primaquine vs trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole therapy for
mild and moderately severe Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients
with AIDS: A multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial (CTN 004).
Clin Infect Dis. 1998;27:524–530.
	50.	 Hughes W, Leoung G, Kramer F, et al. Comparison of atovaquone
(566C80) with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole to treat Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia in patients with AIDS. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:
1521–1527.
	51.	 Dohn MN, Weinberg WG, Torres RA, et al. and the Atovaquone Study
Group. Oral atovaquone compared with intravenous pentamidine for
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients with AIDS. Ann Intern
Med. 1994;121:174–180.
	52.	 Western KA, Perera Dr, Schultz MG: Pentamidine isethionate in the
treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, Ann Intern Med. 1970;
73:695–702.
	53.	 Wharton JM, Coleman DL, Wofsy CB, Luce JM, et al. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole or pentamidine for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 1986;
105:37–44
	54.	 KleinNC,DuncansonFP,LenoxTH,et al.Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
versus pentamidine for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in AIDS
patients: results of a large prospective randomized treatment trial. AIDS.
1992;6:301–305.
	55.	 NielsenTL, Schattenkerk, JKME, Jensen BN, et al.Adjunctive corticos-
teroid therapy for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia inAIDS:A random-
ized European multicenter open label study. AIDS. 1992;5:726–731
	56.	 Montaner JS, Lawson LM, Levitt N, et al. Corticosteroids prevent early
deterioration in patients with moderately severe Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia and the acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Ann Intern Med.1990;113:14–20.
	57.	 Consensus statement on the use of corticosteroids as adjunctive therapy
for Pneumocystis pneumonia in the acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:1500–1504.
	58.	 Powles MA, Liberator P, Anderson J, et al. Efficacy of MK-991
(L-743,872), a semisynthetic pneumocandin, in murine models of Pneu-
mocystis carinii. Antimicrob Agents Chemo. 1998;42:1985–1989.
	59.	 Annaloro C, Della Volpe A, Usardi P, Lambertenghi DG. Caspofungin
treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia during conditioning for bone
marrow transplantation. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2006;25:
52–54.
	60.	 Xiang-dong M, Cheng-li Q, Bing HE, et al. Caspofungin in salvage
treatment of severe pneumocystis pneumonia: case report and literature
review. Chin Med J. 2009;122:996–999
	61.	 Utili R, Durante-Mangoni E, Basilico C, et al. Efficacy of caspofungin
addition to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole treatment for severe
Pneumocystis pneumonia in solid organ transplant recipients. Trans-
plantation. 2007;84:685–688.
	62.	 Miller RF, Allen E, Copas A, et al. Improved survival for HIV infected
patients with severe Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is independent
of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Thorax. 2006;61:716–721.
	63.	 Curtis JR,Yarnold PR, Schwartz DN, et al. Improvements in outcomes
of acute respiratory failure for patients with human immunodeficiency
virus-related Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Am J Resp Crit Care
Med. 2000;162:393–398.
	64.	 MorrisA, Creasman J,Turner J, et al. Intensive care of human immuno-
deficiency virus-infected patients during the era of highly antiretroviral
therapy. Am J Resp Crit Care Med. 2002;166:262–267.
	65.	 Wislez M, Bergot E,Antoine M, et al.Acute respiratory failure follow-
ing HAART introduction in patients treated for Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;164:847–851
	66.	 Morris A., Wachterc R. M., Luce, et al. Improved survival with highly
active antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected patients with severe Pneu-
mocystis carinii pneumonia. AIDS. 2003;17:73–80.
	67.	 Zolopa AR, Andersen J, Komarow L, et al. Early antiretroviral therapy
reduces AIDS progression/death in individuals with acute opportu-
nistic infections: A multicenter randomized strategy trial. PLoS ONE.
2009;4:e5575.
	68.	 Huang L, QuartinA, Jones D, Havlir DV. Intensive care of patients with
HIV infection. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:173–181.
	69.	 Chu S, Hanson DL, Ciesielski C, Ward JW. Prophylaxis against Pneu-
mocystis jirovecii pneumonia at higher CD4+ T-Cell counts. JAMA.
1995;273:848
	70.	 Yale SH, Limper AH. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients
without acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: associated illness and
prior corticosteroid therapy. Mayo Clin Proc. 1996;71:5–13.
	71.	 Curtis JR,Yarnold PR, Schwartz DN, et al. Improvements in outcomes
of acute respiratory failure for patients with human immunodeficiency
virus-related Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Am J Resp Crit Care
Med. 2000;162:393–398.
	72.	 Crothers K, Beard CB, Turner J, et al. Severity and outcome of HIV-
associated Pneumocystis pneumonia containing Pneumocystis jiroveci
dihydropteroate Synthase gene mutations. AIDS. 2005;19:801–805.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/hivaids---research-and-palliative-care-journal
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care is an international, peer-
reviewed open-access journal focusing on advances in research in HIV,
its clinical progression and management options including antiviral
treatment, palliative care and public healthcare policies to control
viral spread. The journal welcomes original research, basic science,
clinical & epidemiological studies, reviews & evaluations, expert
opinion & commentary, case reports & extended reports. The manu-
script management system is completely online and includes a very
quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 2010:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
134
Castro and Morrison-Bryant
	73.	 Schneider MM, Hoepelman AI, Eeftinck Schattenkerk JK, et al.
A ­controlled trial of aerosolized pentamidine or trimethoprim-
­sulfamethoxazole as primary prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
N Engl J Med. 1992;327:1836–1841.
	74.	 Hardy WD, Feinberg J, Finkelstein DM, et al. A controlled trial of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or aerosolized pentamidine for second-
ary prophylaxis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients with
the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:
1842–1848.
	75.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for prevention
and treatment of opportunistic infections in HIV-infected adults and
adolescents. MMWR. 2009;58(No. RR-4).
	76.	 Jensen BN, Nielsen TL, Backer V, et al. Aerosolized pentamidine for
primary prophylaxis of Pneumocystis Carinii pneumonia:A controlled,
randomized trial. AIDS. 1993;6:472–477.
	77.	 Chan C, Montaner J, Lefebvre EA, et al. Atovaquone ­suspension
­compared with aerosolized pentamidine for prevention of ­Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia in human immunodeficiency virus–infected
subjects intolerant of trimethoprim or sulfonamides. J Infect Dis.
1999;180:369–376.
	78.	 El-Sadr WM, Murphy RL,Yurik TM, et al. Atovaquone compared with
dapsone for the prevention of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients
with HIV infection who cannot tolerate trimethoprim, ­sulfonamides, or
both. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:1889–1895.
	79.	 D’EgidioaGE,KravcikaS,CooperaCL,et al.Pneumocystisjirovecipneu-
monia prophylaxis is not required with a CD4+T-cell count , 200 cells/
ml when viral replication is suppressed. AIDS. 2007,21:1711–1715.
	80.	 Espinoza, LA. Pneumocystis pneumonia. In: Knox MD, editor HIV/
AIDS Primary Care Guide. Williston, VT: Crown House Pub; 2006.
