HPB Surgery, 1991, Vol. 3, pp. 221-233
Reprints available directly from the publisher
Photocopying permitted by license only
(C) 1991 Harwood Academic Publishers GmbH
Printed in the United Kingdom
REVIEW ARTICLE
INFECTIONS FOLLOWING ORTHOTOPIC LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION
PAUL M. ARNOW
Department ofMedicine, Section ofInfectious Diseases, University of Chicago,
5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637
(Received 3 August 1990)
The epidemiology of infections associated with orthotopic liver transplantation is summarized herein,
and approaches to prophylaxis are outlined. Infection is a major complication following orthotopic liver
transplantation, and more than half of transplant recipients develop at least one infection. The risk of
infection is highest in the first month after transplantation, and the most common pathogens are bacteria
and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Bacterial infections usually occur in the first month, arise in the abdomen,
and are caused by aerobes. The peak incidence of CMV infection is late in the first month and early in
the second month after transplantationn. CMV syndromes include fever and neutropenia, hepatitis,
pneumonitis, gut ulceration, and disseminated infection. Other significant problems are Candida
intraabdominal infection, Herpes simplex mucocutaneous infection or hepatitis, adenovirus hepatitis,
and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Prophylaxis of infection in liver transplant recipients has not been well-studied. Several different
regimens of parenteral, oral absorbable, and/or oral non-absorbable antibiotics active against bacteria
and yeast have been used at various centers, but no randomized controlled trials have been conducted.
Selective bowel decontamination appears to be a promising approach to the prevention of bacterial and
Candida infections, while oral acyclovir may be a relatively convenient and effective agent for CMV
prophylaxis.
Infection is a frequent complication of orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), and
most recipients experience at least one infection during the first few months after
14
transplantation-. The high rate of infection is attributable in part to the poor
underlying condition of patients who require transplantation, but the most impor-
tant factors appear to be intra- and post-operative events. Transplantation surgery is
characterized by a duration often exceeding seven hours’5-7, blood component
replacement exceeding two blood volumes’2’5-7, periods of hypotension, entero-
tomy (accidental or for choledochojejunostomy), and post-operative bleeding with
hematoma formation. Surgery is followed by immunosuppression with several
agents e.g., cyclosporine, prednisone, and azathiaprine to which bursts of
high dose corticosteroids or anti-lymphocyte antibodies are added when rejection
worsens. Under these conditions, it is not surprising that infection is a major
problem.
Epidemiologic studies have characterized the frequency of infection, identified
the major pathogens, and assessed possible risk factors for infection1-5’8. The results
of these studies, summarized in this review, provide a useful guide to the clinician
221
222 P.M. ARNOW
considering either empiric treatment of suspected infection or approaches to
prophylaxis.
BACTERIAL INFECTION
Infection Rates
Rates of bacterial infection following OLT vary considerably, as shown by the
results from selected centers summarized in Table 1. The average number of
infections ranged from 0.51 to 2.0 infection per patient, and the percentage of
patients experiencing at least one bacterial infection ranged from 36% to 68%.
Differences in rates probably are attributable to several factors. First, definitions of
infections sometimes were not stated and apparently varied. One group apparently
included positive cultures of vascular catheters, bile, and urine as infections3, while
another group included only major infections having serious associated morbidity
in most of their tabulations Second, patient populations may have differed in terms
of underlying hepatic disease and in severity of illness at the time of transplan-
tation. These characteristics were not described in some series, even though a
possible role is suggested by the finding at one center that infection rates were
higher in patients with hepatocellular disease than in those with cholestatic
disease1. Third, bacterial prophylaxis differed at the various centers. Four centers
administered intravenous cefotaxime, but the regimens varied in cefotaxime
duration, choice of other systemic antibiotics, and use of oral agents for bowel
decontamination. The center with the second highest rate of bacterial infection
used only perioperative cefoxitin. Adoption of a selective bowel decontamination
(SBD) regimen by the center reporting the lowest rate of bacterial infection may be
a significant advance9. SBD regimens utilize oral non-absorbable agents selected
for their activity against aerobic enteric gram-negative bacilli and Candida. These
regimens have limited activity against gut anaerobes, whose preservation can
impede colonization of the alimentary tract by the more pathogenic aerobes that
have been important pathogens in infections following OLT1.
Epidemiology
Most bacterial infections occurred in the first month after OLT1-5, and the
incidence of bacterial infection declined steadily thereafter. The most common site
of infection was the abdomen, as shown in Table 2. Other major sites of infection
were primary bacteremia, pneumonia, and surgical wound infection. The surgical
procedure itself and technical complications account for the predominant role of
abdominal infections. In one series, episodes of peritonitis were associated with
biliary leaks, cholangitis was associated with biliary duct stricture, and liver
abscesses were associated with technical problems involving the implanted liver1.
Bloodstream infections for which no primary source was apparent ranked second
in frequency. It has been speculated that these infections originate in the
abdomen1’5, presumably as a consequence of unrecognized primary infection or
bacterial translocation. Secondary bacteremia, typically arising from an identified
abdominal site1’4"5, also occurred commonly but is not listed in Table 2. Bacterial
pneumonia was a less frequent problem, but in one series the mortality was 40%1.
223
224 P.M. ARNOW
Table 2 Distribution of Bacterial Infections by Body Site
Percent of Serious Bacterial Infections at Specified Site
Centre Authors Abdomen* Bloodstream Lungs Wound Others
Pittsburgh Kusne et al (1) 41% 9% 19% 10% 21%
UCLA Colonna et al
(2) 270/0 16/o 0 220/o 45o/0
Minnesota Ascher et al (3) 27% 23% 7% 2% 41%
Mayo Clinic** Paya et al (4) 48% 19% 15% 0 18%
Chicago George et al (5) 30% 23% 10% 17% 20%
Infections of the abdomen include intraabdominal abscess, liver abscess, peritonitis, and cholangitis
Bloodstream infections shown for Pittsburgh, UCLA, Mayo Clinic, and Chicago represent cases of bacteremia for which primary site
identified; cases of secondary bacteremia and IV catheter sepsis are excluded
Infections in this category include cases of IV catheter sepsis, urinary tract infection, colitis, pharyngitis, and meningitis
The distribution shown is for major infections only
Pneumonia or cholangitis accounted for most bacterial infections occurring late
after tr.ansplantationTM.
The predominant bacterial pathogens were enteric aerobic gram-negative bacilli
and gram-positive cocci1-5. The relative frequency of isolation of these groups of
organisms reflected substantially the antimicrobial prophylaxis regimen. Aerobic
enteric gram-negative bacilli predominated except in patients at Mayo Clinic,
where an SBD regimen was used9. Notably, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was an
important pathogen both with conventional prophylaxis regimensTM and SBD4.
Anaerobes have been relatively infrequent pathogens, even though enterotomy is
performed and the regimens used for prophylaxis generally did not include agents
with potent activity against anaerobes. The highest proportion of infections from
which anaerobes were isolated was 22% (6 of 27), reported in the series of patients
receiving selective bowel decontamination4.
Risk Factors
Three centers have examined risk factors for infection after OLT. Colonna et al.
studied 35 patients who received 42 liver transplants at UCLA. Patients who
developed infection due to any pathogen (bacterial, viral, or fungal) were com-
pared by univariate analysis to uninfected patients in terms of 14 pre-, intra-, and
post-operative variables. Infections occurring late after transplantation were
included in the analysis. Risk of infection, due to any type of pathogen, was
significantly associated with the following six variables: (1) age > 20 years, (2)
biliary atresia, (3) lower pre-operative albumin level, (4) gastrointestinal or
vascular complications, (5) requirement for post-operative hemodialysis, and (6)
longer ICU stay after surgery. The authors did not examine which, if any, of these
variables were risk factors for bacterial infection alone. Also, inclusion of late
infections may have confounded the analysis of perioperative variables, because of
the long interval between presumed cause (peri-operative variable) and the later
effect (infection). Finally, the temporal sequence between each of the last two
variables (dialysis and ICU stay) and infection is not noted, making the direction of
the association uncertain.
Cuervas-Mons et al. and Kusne et al. examined sequential groups of patients at
University of Pittsburgh. The first set of authors studied 93 patients who underwent
OLT during the 3 year period ending in January 1984. Twenty-seven pre-operative
INFECTIONS AFTER TRANSPLANTATION 225
variables were evaluated for their association with major bacterial infection within
60 days after OLT. The following five variables were significantly associated with
infection: serum creatinine -> 1.52 mg/dl, neutrophil count >- 4,847 cells/mm3,
serum IgG -> 1.546 mg/dl, serum bilirubin -> 18.28 mg/dl, and WBC count >
7,211 cells/mm3. A mechanism for a causal association of these variables with
infection was not proposed. Kusne et al. subsequently reviewed 101 patients who
underwent OLT at University of Pittsburgh between July 1984 and September
1985. Numerous pre-transplant, surgical, and post-operative variables were eva-
luated for an association with severe infection occurring early or late after
transplantation. Variables associated with severe infection due to any pathogen
(bacterial, viral, fungal, or protozoan) were then examined for an association with
bacterial infection alone. The authors found that increased operative time (> 12
hours), increased antibiotic therapy (> 5 days) during the first three months after
OLT, and increased transfusion of red blood cells (> 25 units) or fresh frozen
plasma (> 30 units) were associated with bacterial infection. No association was
found with the five pre-operative variables implicated by Cuervas-Mons et al8.
George et al. examined 19 possible risk factors for bacterial infection during the
first two weeks after transplantation. Logistic regression analysis showed increased
duration of transplantation surgery (-> 8 hrs) and markedly elevated total serum
bilirubin (-> 12 mg/dl) to be significant risk factors.
In summary, the three studies of risk factors for bacterial infection after
transplantation differed in design and results1’5’8. Although unconfirmed, the most
plausible findings are that increased operative time and increased requirement for
blood component transfusion may be risk factors for bacterial infection following
OLT. These characteristics would seem to identify technically more difficult
surgical procedures from which more complications might ensue.
VIRAL INFECTION
Cytomegalovirus
In liver transplant recipients, cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most frequent cause of
serious viral infection and often is the most common individual pathogen of any
type2-4’11. Clinically significant CMV infection has been reported in about one-
fourth of patients1’2’4’11-14, as summarized in Table 3. An additional one-fourth of
patients have serological evidence of CMV infection that is asymptomatic4’11’12.
CMV infection has been detected as early as the first week after transplantation4,
but most cases occurred late in the first month or early in the second month
following transplantation4’11-14.
The clinical manifestations of CMV infection are diverse, and each manifestation
has a spectrum of severity. The most common presentation is a "viral syndrome"
characterized by fever and at least one of the following: atypical lymphocytes,
111
neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia This syndrome generally resolves sponta-
neously or with reduced immunosuppression, but progression to organ involvement
may occur4’12. In liver transplant recipients, the major CMV-infected organs are
liver, gut, and lung. Perhaps because biopsies of transplanted livers routinely are
obtained, hepatitis is the most commonly recognized CMV target organ
4 14 15
syndrome The severity of CMV hepatitis is variable and in most cases mild15.
226 P.M. ARNOW
Table3 Frequency of Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Infection in Liver Transplant Recipients
No. (%) of Pa-
tients No. (%) of Pa-
tients
No. of with Symptomatic with Asymptomatic
Centre Authors Patients CMV Infection CMV Infection
Mayo Clinic Paya et al (4) 53 18 (34)
UCLA Colonna et al (2) 35 6 (17)
Pittsburgh Kusne et al (1) 101 22 (22)
Pittsburgh Singh et al (11) 93 27 (29)
Pittsburgh," Breinig et al (12) 43 5 (12)
Cleveland Gorensek et al
(13) 33 9 (27)
Omaha Stratta et al (14) 211 73 (35)
NR not reported
This series included only pediatric patients
12 (23)
NR*
NR*
28 (30)
8 (19)
7 (21)
NR*
However, hepatitis also has been noted to be a feature of disseminated CMV
infection1’16. Similarly, gastrointestinal involvement by CMV is common when
cultures routinely are obtained17. Despite occasional cases of gastritis or gut
ulceration and hemorrhage’12’18, the clinical consequences of gastrointestinal CMV
usually are minimaP7. CMV pneumonitis, alone or in the setting of disseminated
infection, typically is diagnosed when significant interstitial infiltrates are present to
warrant bronchoscopy or biopsy. The severity of illness at the time of diagnosis may
account at least in part for the greater number of deaths due to pulmonary or
disseminated CMV infection’18. CMV infection also has been associated, most
significantly as a cofactor with HLA antigens, in the development of vanishing bile
duct syndrome19.
The risk of CMV infection has been linked to the serostatus of the recipient and
donor. When the recipient is seropositive, the rate of CMV infection (symptomatic
or asymptomatic) typically exceeds 500/O11’12’14’15"20 and may be higher when the
14 15 20
donor also is seropositive Evidence from kidney transplant recipients indi-
20
cates that seropositive recipients can become infected with donor virus When the
recipient is seronegative, the risk of infection has ranged from about 8% with a
seronegative donor to nearly 100% with a seropositive donor4’5’2. The use of
antilymphocyte therapy has been found to significantly increase the risk of subse-
quent CMV infection in one studyTM. However, in another study neither level of
immunosuppressive therapy nor requirement for rejection therapy (which some-
times included antilymphocyte preparations) was significantly associated with CMV
infection13.
Administration of ganciclovir and temporary reduction or discontinuation of
immunosuppressive therapy currently are the mainstays of treatment of CMV
infection in liver transplant recipients. A favorable response has been reported in
most patients considered to have severe infection14,22,23, SO additional therapies such
as CMV immune globulin have not been routinely employed. Prophylaxis of CMV
infection has been attempted primarily in bone marrow transplant recipients whose
morbidity and mortality from CMV infection is greater than in other immunosup-
pressed patients. A reduced risk of infection and disease has been reported using
CMV immune globulin and seronegative blood products24
and using intravenous
acyclovir25. In renal transplant recipients, high dose oral acyclovir also has been
INFECTIONS AFTER TRANSPLANTATION 227
reported to reduce the rate of CMV infection and disease26. Advantages of oral
acyclovir include reduced toxicity, lower cost, and greater ease of administration.
Intravenous immune globulin plus intravenous then oral acyclovir is being used in
at least one center for CMV prophylaxis14; use of ganciclovir for prophylaxis has
not yet been reported.
Other Viruses
Other herpes viruses cause infections that are less frequent or less serious problems
than CMV. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) reactivation results in mucocutaneous
lesions (oral or genital) in about one-third of adult liver transplant recipients1’11’2.
Because the prevalence of latent HSV infection is lower in children, their rate of
post-transplant HSV infection is correspondingly lowera2’27. Lesions typically have
appeared about three weeks after transplantation’2’27, and treatment with acyclo-
vir has been highly effective1,a2,27. HSV hepatitis is an infrequent though life-
threatening infection, sometimes occurring in association with extensive visceral
involvement1. In one study in which pre-transplant serostatus was documented, the
single case of HSV hepatitis represented primary HSV infection apparently
acquired from the donor.Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection, typically
appearing in reactivation form as localized (dermatomal) zoster, has been reported
months-to-years after transplantation in 5-13% of patients’1’2. This infection
generally is not serious, in contrast to varicella, or primary VZV infection, which
may be fatal1’2. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, occurring either as primary or
reactivation infection, is common and usually asymptomaticTM. Hepatitis has been
ascribed to EBV infection27’28, and cases of EBV-induced lymphoproliferative
syndrome have been reported as a late sequela’28’29.
Adenoviral infections have been a complication of OLT, primarily in
children27’3. In the largest series reported, 22 (8%) of 262 children developed
adenoviral infection, and five had hepatitis caused by adenovirus serotype 53.
Although the source of virus was not explored in these cases, the donor liver was
implicated in a case from another center2. Interestingly, that case also was caused
by adenovirus serotype 5.
Viral hepatitis recurring after transplantation has been a problem most notably
with hepatitis B but with other agents as well. Graft reinfection with hepatitis B
almost invariably occurs and has been associated sometimes with clinically evident
hepatitis31-33
and with impaired survival34. Passive immunoprophylaxis with hepati-
tis B immune globulin and immune modulation with interferon alfa have not been
shown to be of benefit in preventing reinfection32’33’35’36. Nonetheless, liver trans-
plantation remains a viable option for patients with liver failure due to chronic
hepatitis B infection because of the favorable outcome in most patients followed for
32 34
several years after transplantation Delta virus coinfection with hepatitis B also
32 37
recurs after transplantation "; the number of patients reported to-date is too
limited to conclude whether the outcome is significantly worse than with hepatitis B
infection alone. Hepatitis A38
and non-A, non-B hepatitis39’4 also appear to recur
after transplantation. A serious complication associated with acute or recurrent
non-A, non-B hepatitis following transplantation is aplastic anemia which some-
times has been of prolonged duration4.
The consequences of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in liver
transplant recipients have been of concern, and the outcome in 15 patients has been
228 P.M. ARNOW
reported by Tzakis et al.42. Seven patients were infected prior to transplantation,
and eight seroconverted after transplantation. During a mean follow-up period of
4.5 years, four of the HIV infected patients developed manifestations of AIDS.
However, overall survival of HIV infected patients was only slightly lower than that
of other liver transplant recipients.
FUNGAL INFECTION
Fungal infection in liver transplant recipients usually has been caused by Candida.
The incidence of Candida infection has ranged from 13-35% at centers where no
anti-fungal prophylaxis was given or where prophylaxis was begun at the time of
transplantation1’2’18’42-44. In striking contrast, Paya et al.4
reported only a 2%
incidence of invasive Candida infection in a series of 53 patients given a selective
bowel decontamination regimen which included nystatin. The regimen was given
for a prolonged period beginning three days prior to active donor search and
continuing until 21 days after transplantation9. The majority of Candida infections
have occurred in the first month after transplantation, and virtually all cases have
4 18 42 43
occurred within the first two months The usual site of infection has been
the abdomen, and other presentations have included pneumonia, candidemia, and
1.2 4 18 42 43
disseminated candidiasis Risk factors for fungal infection were examined
among patients in two different time periods by investigators from University of
Pittsburgh!’42’43. In both series, patients with candidiasis predominated, but they
were pooled together with patients with aspergillosis. Risk factors identified in both
studies were longer duration of systemic antibiotic therapy after transplantation,
longer operative time, and greater requirement for post-transplantation surgery. In
another study, recovery of Candida from surveillance cultures of multiple mucosal
surfaces was a common finding in patients with invasive candidiasis but was of fairly
low (47%) positive predictive value44.
Other fungi of importance are Aspergillus and Cryptococcus. A few cases of
infection due to these pathogens have been noted in most large series1’3’4’27’42’43, but
time of onset and other details of individual cases seldom are reported.
Surprisingly, in one early series, aspergillosis was proven, usually at autopsy, in 9
(9%) of 100 patients45. Aspergillosis has presented most commonly as pneumonia
or disseminated infection; involvement of brain has been a frequent finding in
patients with disseminated infection46 and also has been noted as a localized finding
or with pulmonary infection45-47. Mortality is very high, so aspergillosis has
accounted for a substantial proportion (about 20%) of cases in autopsy-based series
of liver transplant recipients46’47. Conventional treatment of aspergillosis is with
high dose amphotericin B, to which flucytosine or rifampin may be added.
Itraconazole is a promising new agent that has been used successfully to treat solid
organ transplant recipients with aspergillosis48. Cryptococcosis, an infrequent
problem, has presented as meningitis or pneumonia. As in other immunocom-
promised patients, crypotoccal meningitis may have an insidious onset with subtle
clinical manifestations. Consequently, lumbar puncture is warranted to obtain a
diagnostic specimen of cerebrospinal fluid when there are complaints of headache
or changes in mental status. Treatment with fluconazole49
is an alternative to
conventional therapy with amphotericin B plus flucytosine5.
INFECTIONS AFTER TRANSPLANTATION 229
PARASITIC INFECTION
The principle parasitic infection of liver transplant recipients has been
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP). PCP has not been found in some smaller
series of transplant patients2’6, but most larger series have reported an incidence of
1-11%1,3,4,27. The onset of PCP has been as early as 20 days after OLT1, but cases
generally have occurred several months after transplantation1’4’27. The frequency of
PCP has been sufficiently low that prophylaxis is not routinely administered at
many centers. Toxoplasma gondii, a protozoan pathogen of particular importance
in cardiac transplant recipients, rarely has been reported in liver transplant
patients1’51. Chagas disease, caused by Trypanasoma cruzi has been transmitted by
donor kidneys and may eventually be transmitted to liver transplant recipients via
the organ or blood transfusion.
SUMMARY
Infection following OLT is a major problem that has been characterized only
during the past few years. Serious infection occurs in about two-thirds of patients,
and the risk of infection is greatest during the first month after transplantation1’2’4’18.
During the first two or three weeks, most infections are bacterial and arise in the
abdomen. The usual pathogens are aerobic enteric gram-negative bacilli and hard-
to-treat bacteria such as enterococci, coagulase-negative staphylococci, and
Pseudomonas that generally are outside the spectrum of the cephalosporin used for
prophylaxis. To a lesser extent, Candida also is a significant abdominal pathogen
during the first month or two. Beginning about three weeks after transplantation,
CMV infection becomes increasingly important while the frequency of bacterial
and fungal infection decreases. Beyond the second or third month after transplan-
tation, the overall risk of infection declines, and the array of possible problems at
that stage includes community-acquired bacterial pneumonia, cholangitis, CMV
disease, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Initial empiric treatment of suspected bacterial infection during the first few
weeks after OLT should be aggressive because of the patient’s immunosuppressed
condition and the high frequency of primary or secondary bacteremia. The regimen
elected should be based on three considerations" the "usual" pathogens following
OLT, the likely pathogens following the type of anti-bacterial prophylaxis given to
the patient, and the degree of risk from ongoing nosocomial problems such as
18 45
legionellosis or aspergillosis One regimen to consider for infections following
conventional cefotaxime prophylaxis is the combination of a ureidopenicillin with
tobramycin. Whatever empiric regimen is begun, it should be accompanied by
vigorous diagnostic efforts to identify abscess or other problems that may require
surgical intervention.
With regard to prophylaxis, promising options are available, though incomple-
tely studied, for prevention of bacterial, fungal (yeast), and CMV infection.
Selective bowel decontamination, directed toward elimination from gut of aerobic
gram-negative bacilli and yeast, appears to decrease the risk of post-transplant
infections due to those pathogens. Confirmation of efficacy in a randomized
controlled trial is needed, since the only reported experience to-date is with a
230 P.M. ARNOW
selected sub-group of patients who had a single transplant procedure, had not
required antibiotics for at least two weeks prior to transplantation, and were stable
enough to be on the SBD regimen pre-operatively for a mean of two weeks while
active donor search proceeded4’9. Possible modifications of the SBD regimen
include shorter pre- and post-transplant duration or use of alternative anaerobe-
sparing agents such as quinolones. For CMV prophylaxis, the most economical
approach may be oral acyclovir, which has shown promise in renal transplant
recipients. Trials of oral acyclovir during the first two months after liver transplan-
tation appear warranted, and use of ganciclovir for brief periods when there is early
evidence of active viral replication should be considered.
References
1. Kusne, S., Dummer, J.S., Singh, N., Iwatsuki, S., Makowka, L., Esquivel, C., Tzakis, A.G. and
Starzl, T.E., Ho, M. (1988) Infections after liver transplantation: an analysis of 101 consecutive
cases. Medicine, 67, 132-143
2. Colonna, J.O. II, Winston, D.J., Brill, J.E., Goldstein, L.I., Haft, M.P., Hiatt, J.R.,
Quinones-Baldrich, W., Ramming, K.P. and Busuttil, R.W. (1988) Infectious complications in
liver transplantation. Arch. Surg., 123, 360-364
3. Ascher, N.L., Stock, P.G., Bumgardner, G.L., Payne, W.D. and Najarian, J.S. (1988) Infection
and rejection of primary hepatic transplant in 93 consecutive patients treated with triple immuno-
suppressive therapy. Surg. Gynecol. Obstet., 167, 474-484
4. Paya, C.V., Hermans, P.E., Washington, J.A. II, Smith, T.F., Anhalt, J.P., Wiesner, R.H. and
Kromm, R.A.F. (1989) Incidence, distribution, and outcome of episodes of infection in 100
orthotopic liver transplantations. Mayo Clin. Proc., 64, 555-564
5. George, D.L., Arnow, P.M., Fox, A., Baker, A.L., Thistlethwaite, J.R., Emond, J.C.,
Whitington, P.F. and Broelsch, C.E. Bacterial infections complicating liver transplantation:
epidemiology and risk factors. Rev. Infect. Dis. (in press)
6. Krom, R.A.F., Wiesner, R.H., Rettke, S.R., Ludwig, J., Southorn, P.A., Hermans, P.E. and
Taswell, H.F. (1989) The first 100 liver transplantations at the Mayo Clinic. Mayo Clin. Proc. 64,
84-94
7. Busuttil, R.W., Colonna, J.O. II, Hiatt, J.R., Brems, J.J., El Khoury, G., Goldstein, L.I.,
Quinones-Baldrich, W.J., Abdul-Rasool, I.H. and Ramming, K.P. (1987) The first 100 liver
transplants at UCLA. Ann Surg, 206, 387-399
8. Cuervas-Mons, V., Millan, I., Gavaler, J.S., Starzl, T.E. and Van Thiel, D.H. (1986) Prognostic
value of pre-operatively obtained clinical and laboratory data in predicting survival following
orthotopic liver transplantation. Hepatology, 6, 922-927
9. Wiesner, R.H., Herman, P.E., Rakela, J., Washington, J.A. II, Perkins, J.D., DiCecco, S. and
Krom, R. (1988) Selective bowel decontamination to decrease gram-negative aerobic bacterial and
Candida colonization and prevent infection after orthotopic liver transplantation. Transplantation,
45, 570-574
10. Van der Waaj, D. (1982) Colonization resistance of the digestive tract: clinical consequences and
implications. J. Antimicrob. Chemother, 10, 263-270
11. Singh, N., Dummer, J.S., Kusne, S., Breinig, M.K., Armstrong, J.A., Makowa, L., Starzl, T.E.
and Ho, M. (1988) Infections with cytomegalovirus and other herpesviruses in 121 liver transplant
recipients: transmission by donated organ and the effect of OKT3 antibodies. J. Infect. Dis., 158,
124-131
12. Breing, M.K., Zitelli, B., Starzl T.E. and Ho, M. (1987) Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus,
and other viral infections in children after liver transplantation. J. Infect. Dis., 156,273-279
13. Gorensek, M.J., Carey, W.D., Vogt, D. and Goormastic, M. (1990) A multivariate analysis of risk
factors for cytomegalovirus infection in liver-transplant recipients. Gastroenterol, 98, 1326-1332
14. Stratta, R.J., Shaefer, M.S., Markin, R.S., Wood, P., Kennedy, E.M., Langas, A.N., Reed,
A.C., Woods, G.L., Donovan, J.P., Pillen, T.J., Duckworth, R.M. and Shaw, B.W., Jr. (1989)
Clinical patterns of cytomegalovirus disease after liver transplantation. Arch. Surg., 124, 1443-
1449
15. Paya, C.V., Hermans, P.E., Wiesner, R.H., Ludwig, J., Smith, T.F., Rakela, J. and Krom,
INFECTIONS AFTER TRANSPLANTATION 231
R.A.F. (1989) Cytomegalovirus hepatitis in liver transplantation: prospective analysis of 93
consecutive orthotopic liver transplantations. J. Infect. Dis., 160, 752-758
16. Snover, D.C., Htitton, S., Balfour, H.H. Jr. and Bloomer, J.R. (1987) Cytomegalovirus infection
of the liver in transplant recipients. J. Clin. Gastroenterol, 9, 659-665
17. Alexander, J.A., Cuellar, R.E., Fadden, R.J., Genovese, J.J., Gavalier, J.S. and Van Thiel,
D.H. (1988) Cytomegalovirus infection of the upper gastrointestinal tract before and after liver
transplantation. Transplantation, 46, 378-382
18. Jacobs, F., Van de Stadt, J., Bourgeois, N., Struelens, M.J., De Prez, C., Adler, M., Thys, J.P.
and Gelin, M. (1989) Severe infections early after liver transplantation. Transplant Proc., 21,
2271-2273
19. O’Grady, J.G., Alexander, G.J.M., Sutherland, S., Donaldson, P.T.,Harvey, F., Portmann, B.,
Calne, R.Y., and Williams, R. (1988) Cytomegalovirus infection and donor/recipient HLA
antigens: interdependent co-factors in pathogenesis of vanishing bile duct syndrome after liver
transplantation. Lancet, 2, 302-305
20. Haagoma, E.B., Klompmaker, I.J., Grond, J., Bijleveld, C.M.E., The, T.H., Schirm, J., Gips,
C.H. and Slooff, M.J.H. (1987) Herpes virus infections after orthotopic liver transplantation.
Transplant Proc., 19, 4054-4056
21. Grundy, J.E., Lui, S.F., Super, M., Berry, N.J., Sweny, P., Fernando, O.N., Moorhead, J. and
Griffiths, P.D. (1988) Symptomatic cytomegalovirus infection in seropositive kidney recipients:
reinfection with donor virus rather than reactivation of recipient virus. Lancet, 11,132-135
22. Paya, C.V., Hermans, P.E., Smith, T.F., Rakela, J., Wiesner, R.H., Krom, R.A.F., Torres,
V.E., Sterioff, S. and Wilkowske, C.J. (1988) Efficacy of ganciclovir in liver and kidney transplant
recipients with severe cytomegalovirus infection. Transplantation, 46, 229-234
23. Harbison, M.A., DeGirolami, P.C., Jenkins, R.L. and Hammer, S.M. (1988) Ganciclovir therapy
of severe cytomegalovirus infections in solid-organ transplant recipients. Transplantation, 46, 82-
88
24. Bowden, R.A., Sayers, M., Fluornoy, N., Newton, B., Banaji, M., Thomas, E.D. and Meyers,
J.D. (1986) Cytomegalovirus immune globulin and seronegative blood products to prevent
primary cytomegalovirus infection after marrow transplantation. N. Engl. J. Med., 314, 1006-1010
25. Meyers, J.D., Reed, E.C., Shep, D.H., Thornquist, M., Dandliker, P.S., Vicary, C.A., Fluornoy,
N., Kirk, L.E., Kersey, J.H., Thomas, E.D. and Balfour, H.H. Jr. (1988) Acyclovir for
prevention of cytomegalovirus infection and disease after allogeneic marrow transplantation. N.
Engl. J. Med., 318, 70-75
26. Balfour, H.H. Jr., Chace, B.A., Stapleton, J.T., Simmons, R.L. and Fryd, D.S. (1989) A
randomized placebo-controlled trial of oral acyclovir for the prevention of cytomegalovirus disease
in recipients of renal allografts. N. Engl. J. Med., 320, 1381-1387
27. Andrews, W., Fyock, B., Gray, S., Coin, D., Hendrickse, W., Siegel, J., Belknap, B., Hogge, A.,
Benser, M., Kennard, B., Stewart, S. and Albertson, N. (1987) Pediatric liver transplantation: the
Dallas experience. Transplant Proc., 19, 3267-3276
28. Randhawa, P.S., Markin, R.S., Starzl, T.E. and Demetris, A.J. (1990) Epstein-Barr virus-
associated syndromes in immunosuppressed liver transplant recipients. Am. J. Surg. Pathol., 14,
538-547
29. Ho, M., Jaffe, R., Miller, G., Breinig, M.K., Dummer, S., Makowka, L., Atchison, R.W.,
Karrer, F., Nalesnik, M.A. and Starzl, T.E. (1988) The frequency of Epstein-Barr virus infection
and associated lymphoproliferative syndrome after transplantation and its manifestations in
children. Transplantation, 45, 719-727
30. Koneru, B., Jaffe, R., Esquivel, C.O., Kunz, R., Todo, S., Iwatsuki, S. and Starzl, T.E. (1987)
Adenoviral infections in pediatric liver transplant recipients. JAMA, 258, 489-492
31. Portmann, B., O’Grady, J., Williams, R. (1986) Disease recurrence following orthotopic liver
transplantation. Transplant Proc., 18 (suppl. 4), 136-141
32. Colledan, M., Grendele, M., Gridelli, B., Rossi, G., Fassati, L.R., Ferla, G., Doglia, M., Gislon,
M. and Galmarini, D. (1989) Long-term results after liver transplantation in B and delta hepatitis.
Transplant Proc., 21, 2421-2423
33. Demetris, A.J., Jaffe, R., Sheahan, D.G., Burnham, J., Spero, J., Iwatsuki, S., Van Thiel, D.H.
and Starzl, T.E. (1986) Recurrent hepatitis B in liver allograft recipients. Am. J. Pathol., 125,161-
172
34. Starzl, T.E., Demetris, A.J. and Van Theil, D. (1989) Liver transplantation (second of two parts).
N. Engl. J. Med., 321, 1092-1099
232 P.M. ARNOW
35. Lauchart, W., Muller, R. and Pichlmayr, R. (1987) Long term immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B
virus reinfection in recipients of human liver allografts. Transplant Proc., 19, 4051-4053
36. Rakela, J., Wooten, R.S., Batts, K.P., Perkin, J.D., Taswell, H.F. and Krom, R.A.F. (1989)
Failure of interferon to prevent recurrent hepatitis B infection in hepatic allograft. Mayo Clin.
Proc. 64, 429-432
37. Agnes, S., Avolio, A.W., Magalini, s.C., Nanni, G., Foco, M., Serino, F., Hassan, G.,
Marinucci, G., Boldrini, G. and Castagneto, M. (1989) Results of liver transplantation for
hepatitis delta disease without immunoprophylaxis. Transplant Proc., 21, 2426-2428
38. Fagan, E., Yousef, G., Brahm, J., Garelick, H., Mann, G., Wolstenholme, A., Portmann, B.,
Harrison, T., Mowbray, J.F., Mowat, A., Zuckerman, A. and Williams, R. (1990) Persistence of
hepatitis A virus in fulminant hepatitis and after liver transplantation. J. Med. Virol., 30, 131-136
39. Wall, W.J., Duff, J.H., Ghent, C.N., Stiller, C.R., Keown, P.A. and Kutt, J.L. (1985) Liver
transplantation: the initial experience of a Canadian center. Can. J. Surg., 28, 286-289
40. Grendele, M., Gridelli, B., Colledan, M., Rossi, G., Fassati, L.R., Ferla, G., Lunghi, G. and
Galmarini, D. (1989) Hepatitis C virus infection and liver transplantation. Lancet, 2, 1221-1222
41. Tzakis, A.G., Arditi, M., Whitington, P.F., Yanaga, K., Esquirel, C., Andrews, W.A.,
Makowka, L., Malatak, J., Freese, D.K., Stock, P.G., Ascher, N.L., Johnson, F.L., Broelsch,
C.E. and Starzl, T.E. (1988) Aplastic anemia complicating orthotopic liver transplantation for
non-A, non-B hepatitis. N. Engl. J. Med., 319, 393-396
42. Kusne, S., Dummer, J.S., Singh, N., Makowka, L., Esquivel, C., Starzl, T.E., Ho, M. (1988)
Fungal infections after liver transplantation. Transplant Proc., 20, 650-651
43. Wajszczuk, C.P., Dummer, J.S., Ho, M., Van Thiel, D.H., Starzl, T.E., Iwatsuki, S. and Shaw,
B. Jr. (1985) Fungal infections in liver transplant recipients. Transplantation, 40, 347-353
44. Tollemar, J., Ericzon, B.-G., Holmberg, K. and Andersson, J. (1990) The incidence and diagnosis
of invasive fungal infections in liver transplant recipients. Transplant Proc., 22, 242-244
45. Schroter, G.P.J., Hoelscher, M., Putnam, C.W., Porter, K.A. and Starzl, T.E. (i977) Fungus
infections after liver transplantation. Ann. Surg., 186, 115-122
46. Boon, A.P., Adams, D.H., Buckels, J. and McMaster, P. (1990) Cerebral aspergillosis in liver
transplantation. J. Clin. Pathol., 43, 114-118
47. Martinez, A.J. and Puglia, J. (1988) The neuropathology of liver, heart, and heart-lung transplan-
tation. Transplant Proc., 20, (suppl. 1), 806-809
48. Viviani, M.A., Tortorano, A.M., Langer, M., Almaviva, M., Negri, C., Cristina, S., Scoccia, S.,
DeMaria, R., Fiocchi, R., Ferrazzi, P., Goglio, A., Gavazzeni, G., Faggian, G., Rinaldi, R. and
Cadrobbi, P. (1989) Experience with itraconzole in cryptococcosis and aspergillosis. J. Infection.,
18, 151-165
49. Robinson, P.A., Knirsch, A.K. and Joseph, J.A. (1990) Fluconazole for life-threatening fungal
infections in patients who cannot be treated with conventional antifungal agents. Reo. Infect. Dis.,
1, (suppl. 3) $349-$363
50. Bennett, J.E., Dismukes, W.E., Duma, R.J., Medoff, G., Sande, M.A. Gallis, H., Leonard, J.,
Fields, B.T., Bradshaw, M., Haywood, H., McGee, Z.A., Cate, T.R., Cobbs, C.G., Warner, J.F.
and Ailing, D.W. (1979) A comparison of amphotericin B alone and combined with flucytosine in
the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis. N. Engl. J. Med., 31,126-131
51. Salt, A., Sutehall, G., Sargaison, M., Woodward, C., Barnes, N.D., Calne, R.Y. and Wreghitt,
T.G. (1990) Viral and Toxoplasma gondii infections in children after liver transplantation. J. Clin.
Pathol, 43, 63-67
(Accepted by S. Bengmark on 10 September 1990)
INVITED COMMENTARY
Recent advances in organ preservation, refinements in surgical technique, and the
routine use of veno-venous bypass has made orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT)
a relatively safe and common procedure today. Dr. Arnow’s review emphasizes the
need to focus on infection as the major cause of morbidity and mortality in these
INFECTIONS AFTER TRANSPLANTATION 233
patients. The timing and causes of bacterial, fungal and viral infections include
reports from major centers encompassing a vast experience. The additional need
for immunosuppression during this period not only complicates management but
also sets the stage for subsequent viral illness.
Antibiotic prophylaxis has proven its importance in lowering the rate of posto-
perative infections in general surgical patients1. This approach in patients undergo-
ing OLT is less clear, and requires special definition with regard to considerations
of,critically ill preoperative patients, prolonged operative time, and specific upper
gastrointestinal flora. Selective bowel decontamination, as reported by the Mayo
Clinic group seems to decrease serious gram negative infection in the first 3
postoperative weeks, however its acceptance will not be universal until rando-
mized prospective studies are done. The need for such a prolonged and extensive
regimen may not be necessary for all patients. ICU bound pretransplant patients
may well benefit from combined oral and intravenous prophylaxis at the time of
admission, while stable out patient candidates could simply be prepared from the
time of donor identification.
CMV continues to cause significant morbidity in OLT patients and often follows
bursts of increased immunosuppression required to manage rejection. It has even
been implicated in the development of chronic rejection. The successful use of
prophylactic acyclovir in renal recipients2
has naturally extended to those undergo-
ing OLT and prospective studies are underway. Gancyclovir is now available for
treatment of established infections and should be considered for future prophylac-
tic trials in high risk patients. Not one case of PCP p.neumonia has been reported in
over 600 patients undergoing transplantation at the University of Pittsburgh since
routine PCP prophylaxis was begun in December 1988. This is compared to 11
episodes with 3 deaths in 101 patients undergoing OLT prior to this time3.
Considering the risk/benefit ratio, PCP prophylaxis should be routinely adminis-
tered to all patients.
The management of established infections is equally difficult with choice of
appropriate antibiotics based on culture profiles and with minimal nephrotoxicity.
Meticulous attention to surgical technique and hemostasis is of utmost importance
initially. Routine microbial surveillance postoperatively and careful attention to
technical complications which frequently lead to infections, combined with timely
reductions in immunosuppression cannot be over emphasized.
References
1. Burnakis, T.G. (1984) Surgical Antimicrobial Prophylaxis: Principles and Guidelines.
Pharmacother, 4(5), 248-271
2. Balfour, H.H. Jr., Chace, B.A., Stapleton, J.T. and Simmons, R.L. A Randomized
Placebo-Controlled Trial of Oral Acyclovir for the Prevention of Cytomegalovirus disease in
Recipients of renal allografts. N. Engl. J. Med., 320, 1381-1387
3. Kusne, S., Dummer, S., Singh, N. et al. (1988) Infections after Liver Transplantation. An analysis
of 101 Consecutive Cases. Medicine, 67(2), 132-143
F. Maureen Martin
Richard Simmons
Department of Surgery
University of Pittsburgh
