V030
IMPROVEMENT OF SURGICAL TREATMENT OF HYDATID
DISEASE OF THE LIVER
xu MING-QIAN
Research unit of hydatidology ofpeople’s hospital of Xinjiang
Autonomous Region, Urumqi, 830001 P.R. China
There were 1,640 patients with hydatid disease who underwent surgical
treatment in our hospital during 1953-1990. of these, 1,204 cases were
liver hydatid disease, and 1,319 operations yielded 1,716 Echinococcus
cysts. The methods ofremoval ofhydatid cyst were: 1) hepatic lobectomy
2) removal of intact hydatid cyst 3) removal of hydatid cyst by aspiration.
Removal of the cysts left in the liver residual ectocyst cavities as large
as the cysts and bile-containing bloody retention cyst, usually resulted in
secondary infection, causing liver abscess. The clinical observations and
experimental studies of this series revealed the mechanism of intrahcpatic
biliary fistula formation and the natural rule of cavity closure, allowing
rational cavity management and modification of operative methods. This
reduced the frequency of postoperative biliary fistula and of secondary
infection, and also shortened the healing period.
V031
HYDATID DISEASE OF THE LIVER:
CISTOPERICISTECTOMY
PROF. V. ROVATI DR, E. FALESCHINI, DR. G. NERVETTI, DR. G. TAGLIABUE,
DR. F, COLTURANI.
Istituto Scienze Biomediche L. Sacco Cart. Patologia Chirurgica Universita di Milano
Italia
The video shows a case of hydatidosis of the left hepatic lobe,
appearing on the surface of the parenchyma. Cisto-pericistectomy was
performed. This is the treatment of choice, because it doesn’t cause
reduction of the functional parenchyma and has better possibilities for
radical.
P001
NEONATAL BILE DUCT PERFORATION AND STRICTURE:
TWO OF A KIND?
W.A. BEMELMAN, H.A. HEY, A. VOS and M.N. van der HEYDE
Departments of Paediatric Surgery and Surgery, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam
Benign bile duct strictures are occasionally seen in early infancy.
Usually, no cause can be identified and the stricture is said to be
"congenital". Spontaneous bile duct perforation is a rare entity which
occurs in the first 12 weeks after birth. This disease may present as a
subacute illness withjaundice, acholic stools, failure to thrive and
progressive biliary ascites. A pseudocyst may be found in the
hepatoduodenal ligament at laparotomy. Both spontaneous perforation
and the stricture of the duct tend to be locatedjust proximal of thejunction
of common bile duct and cystic duct. We have analyzed our patient
material in order to asses whether infants treated for a neonatal bile
stricture could have had a bile duct perforation prior to the clinical
manifestation of the stricture. Three cases were found. Two of them had a
Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy for a bile duct stricture located at the
junction of the common bile duct and the cystic duct at an age of three and
20 months respectively. One infant had a transient period of moderate
jaundice associated with dilated intrahepatic ducts at an age of one week.
The other child had a period of melaena and haematemesis presumably
caused by haemobilia two months after birth. In both cases the symptoms
resolved spontaneously. The third infant had an explorative laparotomy
for extrahepatic cholestasis five weeks after birth. A pseudocyst filled with
bile was found which was located in the hepatoduodenal ligament. The
cyst was drained. The perforation site could not be identified. Two weeks
after surgery, a biliary fluid collection was drained percutaneously. These
cases suggest that spontaneous bile duct perforation might pass
unobserved when located in the hepatoduodenal ligament, and might
proceed to a bile duct stricture.
P002
RESULTS OF RECONSTRUCTIVE PROCEDURES FOR BILE
DUCT INJURIES AND BENIGN STRUCTURE
COLOVIC R., SAVIC M., MILICEVIC M. AND BILANOVIC D.
Institute for Digestive Diseases, University Clinical Center,
Belgrade 11000, Yugoslavia, Koste Todorovica br. 6.
The aim ofthis retrospective study is to evaluate the long-term results of
reconstructive procedures for bile duct injuries and benign strictures. A total
of 86 pts. were analyzed, 57 women (66.3%) and 29 men (33.7%). Two pts.
had congenital bile duct stricture, 6 had stricture due to chronic pancreatitis
and 78 pts. had bile duct injuries. One bile duct injury was due to an
abdominal penetrating wound and 77 were iatrogenic (12 "acute" injuries
and 65 presenting as postoperative benign strictures). In 66 pts. bile duct
injury occurred during cholecystectomy, in 9 during gastrectomy and in 2
during operation for liver hydatid disease. Two pts. had disinsertion ofthe
papilla ofVateri and 75 pts. had section or resection ofthe bile duct.
Unsuccessful previous reconstructive procedures were done in 52 pts. to 6
times. According to the Bismuth classification 25 pts. (29.0%) were type I,
25 pts. (29.0%)were type II, 23 pts. (26.9%)were type 1II, 12 pts. (14.0%)
were type IV and pt. (1.16%) was type V. Six pts. had intrahepatic bile
duct stricture and 25 pts. had intrahepatic stones. Reconstruction ofthe
previously done Roux-en-Yjejunal limb was necessary, since it was found
to be too short, in the majority ofpts.
The reconstructive procedures in the 12 pts. with "acute" injuries were:
implantation ofthe papilla into the duodenal stump and into a Roux-en-Y
loop, 8 end-to-end anastomosis over a "T" tube brought out through a
separate bile duct incision. Reconstructive procedures in the 74 pts. with
postoperative benign strictures were: 75 cm long Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy in 67 pts., choledochoduodenostomy in 3 pts.,
choledochoplasty in pt. and resection of stricture with end-to-end
anastomosis in 2 pts. Reconstruction was impossible in pt.
Overall operative mortality was 1.2%. The pt. with portal vein thrombosis
in whom reconstruction was technically impossible, died 4 months after
operation due to uncontrollable variceal bleeding. Two pts. died three years
after successful reconstruction due to unrelated causes. All remaining pts.
are alive and entered into a follow-up protocol. The average follow-up
period was 5 years (median 4.2 years). According to Blumgart’s criteria
good results were achieved in 76 pts. (89.4%), satisfactory in 6 pts. (7.0%)
and unsatisfactory results in 3 pts. (3.5%). One pt. with unsatisfactory results
was reoperated and later entered into the "good results" group. Factors
influencing outcome were the level of stricture, portal hypertension, time
from injury to definitive operation, number ofunsuccessful previous
attempts at reconstruction and the hypertrophy/atrophy complex. The
authors conclude that the majority of "acute" bile duct lesions and benign
bile duct strictures can be managed successfully.
40
P003
SURGICAL PROCEDURES IN PATIENTS WITH MIRIZZI
SYNDROME. A CRITICAL REVIEW
A. COGLIANDOLO, G. GIACOBBE M.A. GIOFFRE F.M. GULINO, B. MICALI
General Surgery, University ofMessina, Italy
Mirizzi Syndrome (MS) indicates a clinical picture of obstructive
jaundice by a stone impacted in the cystic duct and/or the surrounding
inflammation of the common bile duct. Its incidence has been reported
from 0.5 to 1.3% ofpatients undergoing surgery for benign biliary disease
(Tulassay; Csendes). The goal ofthis study was to examine the value of
surgical options in the treatment of the syndrome.
Among 1880 patients operated on for gallstones we found 6 MS
(0.3%). There were 4 males and 2 females (mean age 63 years).
According to Csendes classification (slightly modified), 3 patients (50%)
were a type lesion, a type II (17%) and 2 a type III (33%). In type
patients, jaundice was caused by gallstone compression in patient (type
Ia) and by inflammatory reaction in the remaining 2 (type lb). A correct
diagnosis was preoperatively established in 4 patients (66.6%) by
endoscopic cholangiography. In all patients a cholecystectomy was
performed. In 4 cases (2 type I, type II and type III) a choledocostomy
with T-tube was performed. In 2 patients (type and III respectively) a
bilioenteric anastomosis was constructed. No mortality or major
complications were observed. In patient type III operated on
choledocostomy, bile drainage was more productive than 3 Its/day to
require a reinstillation ofbiliaryjuice. T-tube was removed on 20th
postoperative day without complications.
In conclusion, MS is a rare complication of gallstones disease requiting
an appropriate surgical treatment which must be calibrated on the type of
lesions and local conditions.
TULASSAY et al.: Acta Endoscopica 17 (2): 61-65, 1987.
CSENDES et al.: Br.J. Surg. 76 (11): 1139-1143, 1989.
P004
MANAGEMENT OF IATROGENIC INJURIES TO BILIARY
DUCTAL SYSTEMS
L.C. JIMENEZ. E. MORENO, J. BERCEDO, C. LOINAZ, M.A. GARCIA, J. SEOANE,
J. IBAlqEZ, I. GONZALEZ-PINTO
Hospital 12 de Octubre. Service of General and Digestive Surgery "C". Madrid, Spain
The bile duct injuries usually occurs during cholecystectomy, being
related to variations in the anatomy, traction, bleeding, etc.
We operated upon 60 patients (pts) because biliary iatrogenic injuries.
Nine were diagnosed during operation, eight in the postoperative period
and 43 later in the follow-up (strictures).
The location ofthe early injuries was: complete transection of common
hepatic duct in 7, complete ofcommon duct in 5, partial of common duct
in 3, complete of common hepatic duct in and desinsertion ofpapilla in
1. The location of the strictures was: common hepatic duct in 13, common
duct in 12, hepaticojejunostomy in 9, hepatico duodenostomy in 4,
choledocho-choledochostomy in 3, choledocho (cyst)-duodenostomy in
and cholecysto-duodenostomy in 1. The repair techniques were:
cholangio-jejuno-duodenostomy in 36, Roux-en-Y central cholangio-
jejunostomy in 11 and peripheral in 1, total sphincterotomy in 5,
choledochoduodenostomy in 2, suture and T-tube in 2, choledochotomy
and T-tube in and choledocho-choledochostomy over T-tube in 1.
The postoperative mortality was 5.9% in the early diagnosed injuries
and 6.9% in the late one (strictures). The postoperative morbidity was
17.6% in the early diagnosed group and 4.6% in the late one. In the
follow-up we studied 14 pts of the early injuries, 11(78.5%) being well
and 37 of the late one, 33(89.2%) being well.
We conclude that the postoperative mortality was similar in early and
late diagnosed biliary injuries, being the postoperative morbidity and long-
term results better in the late diagnosed injuries.
P005
TRANSDUODENAL SPHINCTEROPLASTY AND
TRANSAMPULLARY SEPTECTOMY-INDICATIONS AND
RESULTS
S.B KELLY. A. YONG, B.J. ROWLANDS
Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Science, Royal Victoria Hospital, Grosvenor
Road, Belfast, BT12 6BJ. Northern Ireland
Thirteen patients received transduodenal sphincteroplasty and
transampullary septectomy between 1987 and 1991. All patients had
severe pain for greater than 2 years which was refractory to medical
therapy. There were no serious complications. Mean age was 46 years
(range 20-60 years) and sex distribution was 8M:5F. Mean hospital stay
was 14 days (range 8-45 days). Six patients had chronic pain unrelieved
by cholecystectomy. At follow-up (mean 3.2 years) pain is much
improved or abolished in 5 of 6 patients. Four patients had chronic
pancreatitis. At follow-up (mean 2.1 years) pain is much improved or
abolished in 3 of4 patients. Two patients had recurrent pancreatitis. At
follow-up (mean 2.2 years) pain is much improved or abolished in of 2
patients One patient was found to have papillary stenosis when
undergoing cholecystectomy. Four years later pain is much improved.
Pancreas divisum was present in 3 patients; chronic pancreatitis,
recurrent acute pancreatitis and postcholecystectomy pain. Accessory
sphincteroplasty was performed in the two patients with pancreatitis.
Transduodenal sphincteroplasty and transampullary septectomy can
relieve pain in patients with postcholecystectomy pain and recurrent
pancreatitis, presumably by improving drainage of the obstructed ducts.
Careful patient selection maximises the chance of a successful outcome.
P006
IATROGENIC LESIONS OF BILEDUCTS IN
CHOLECYSTECTOMIES BETWEEN 1980 AND 1989
M. KOZELJ V. FLIS, S. POTRC
Maribor Teaching Hospital, Maribor, Slovenia
In 10 years 6646 cholecystectomies were done (1927 men, 4179
women, average 52.6 years, range 14-91). In 8 cases (6 women, 2 men,
average 62 years, range 28-75) iatrogenic lesion of the bile duct occured.
In 7 cases elective, in one case urgent operation was carried out. 7 lesions
were detected and treated in the case of surgery, once the lesion was
overlooked. This patient was reoperated 6 months later for choledochus
stricture. 6 cases were operated by senior surgeon (with more than 500
performed cholecystectomies) (incidence 0.1% or lesion per 974
operations) and 2 by residents (up to 25 performed cholecystectomies)
(incidence 0.2% or lesion per 398 operations). 6 times operation was
done antero- and twice retrogradely). All lesions occured before
intraoperative cholangiography was carried out. Bile duct was injured 4
times (twice transsection, twice partial lesion), the common hepatic duct
once (complete transsection), fight hepatic duct twice (partial lesion) and
left once (longitudinal lesion). No patient was adipose and no other
technical problems during operation were reported. In partial lesion direct
suture was applied once and 3 times suture over the T tube. In complete
transsection termino-terminal reconstruction over the T tube was
performed. In patient with overlooked lesion after 6 months stricture
developed. She was reoperated and biliodigestive anastomosis after Roux
was performed. In two female patients reoperations were required after
primary reconstruction over T tube. In both cases finally biliodigestive
anastomosis after Roux was done. All patients are now without
complaints (follow up between 12 months and 5 years). Authors
concluded that iatrogenic bile duct lesion is a serious complication that
should be reconstructed by experienced surgeon only.
41
PO07
HUMAN PERICARD FOR RECONSTRUCTION OF BENIGN
IATROGENIC COMMON BILE DUCT (CBD) STRICTURES IN
THE PIG
G. LEXER, G. MEISER, H. KAINDL, H.W. WACLAWICZEK, O. BOECKL,
W. PIMP
st Surg. Dept. and L. Boltzmann-Inst. for Exp. Surg., Landeskrankenanstalten Salzburg,
Austria
Extrahepatic benign biliary tract strictures are usually iatrogenic. In an
attempt to avoid bilioenteric anastomosis various biologic and artificial
materials have been employed without satisfactory results. The purpose of
this study was to determine whether human pericard could be used as a
CBD substitute in exp.bile duct repair. Material and methods: In 8 pigs
(20-25kg) a midline laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia
and a subtotal stenosis produced over a mm thick needle. Pre- and
postop, once a week cholestasis parameters were evaluated and CBD
diameters measured by sonography. 3 weeks later the CBD obstruction
was replaced by a human pericard patch plastic using 7,0 Prolene single
sutures, without endoluminal stenting. Another 6 weeks later the CBD
was dissected and a duodenotomy performed for intra-op, retrograde
cholangiography. Finally the CBD was excised for histology and electrone
microscopy.
Results: CBD diameters in mm, x SD preop.: 4,5+_0,54; 3 weeks after
OP 1:14, 0-_3,59; 6 weeks after OP 2:9,0+-1,68. Bilirubin levels in mg/dl x
SD preop.: 0,375_+0,09; 3 weeks after OP 1:0,5_+0,27; 6 weeks after OP
2:0,325_+0,05.
Morphology: In all cases the pericard patch was overgrown by
immature biliary epithelium, no fistula or stenosis was observed within 6
weeks. Conclusion: In the exp. model of bile duct stricture that has been
presented, bile duct injuries were repaired using human pericard as a free
graft which proved to be an acceptable material for reconstruction of
benign common bile duct strictures.
P008
TREATMENT OF IATROGENIC INJURY OF THE BILE DUCT
T.J. LIU, C.C. WU, C.J. HUANG, R.Y. HUANG, M.D. YANG, T.C. WU, F.K. P’ENG
Division of General Surgery, Dept. of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Unrecognized iatrogenic injury of extrahepatic bile duct usually causes
obstructive jaundice, repeat cholangitis and subsequent liver cirrhosis and
failure. The experiences of treatment in 19 patients with iatrogenic injury
of bile duct were reviewed. The original operations which caused bile duct
injury were cholecystectomy in 15, cholecystectomy with
choledochotomy in 3, suture ligation ofbleeding duodenal ulcer in 1. In 5
patients injuries were recognized during cholecystectomy and end to end
anastomosis of the bile duct was carried out in 2 and Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy was carried out in 3. For the other 14 patients, injury
of the bile duct was found in 8-105 days after operation. The operations of
bile duct reconstruction of these patients were Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy in 8, Longmire’s left hepaticojejunostomy in 2,
hepaticoduodenostomy in two gastrectomized patients and ductoplasty
with T-tube stenting in 2. Percutaneous biliary drainage is necessary for
relieving obstructivejaundice in 12 of these patients. One patient (5.3%)
died after reconstruction of the bile duct. Of the 18 patients survived after
operation, two (11.1%) had stenosis of bilioenteric anastomosis (average
52.1 months, range 8-99 months) after reconstruction. Both of them had
multiple operations (>4) on their bile duct before our operation. However,
no operative management with per cutaneous balloon dilatation of the
stenotic site was effective without requiting re-operation.
Meticulous bile duct dissection and anastomosis are mandatory in
reconstruction for iatrogenic bile duct injury and percutaneous balloon
dilatation is suggested when stenosis of the bile duct occurs after
reconstruction.
P009
CHOLEDOCODUODENOSTOMY FORBENIGN BILIARY
DISEASES IN OLD AGE
DR. NOCE ROBERTO; DR. GALUPPI GAETANO; DR. ABBONDATI ANTONIO;
DR. STEINWEG MICHELE; PROF, DR. ERNESTO NICORA
IV Divisione Chirurgica Ospedale "S. Martino" Genova, Italy.
Head: Prof. Ernesto Nicora
In the last ten years we performed 54 side-to-side CDS in patients of 70
years or more for benign biliary diseases 44 (81.4%) underwent for
cholelitiasis associated with choledocus dilatation by a papillary stenosis,
6(11.1%) for stenotic cholangitis of the terminal choledocus, 4(7.5%) for
choledochostenosis by a chronic pancreatitis. The age of the patients
ranged from 70 to 95.29(53.7%) were women and 25(46.3%) men. Only
one patient died of cardiac failure on the fifth day after operation. Some
complications occurred in 9 patients: 3 bad biliary fistula (only in one of
them we were compelled to reoperate the patient in order to perform
another bilio-intestinal anastomosis); had severe metabolic troubles
following a severe diabetes; 3 had bronchopneumonia medically cured.
Thejaundice disappeared after 3-10 days after operation in almost all the
patients, and the hepatic enzymes brought back to normal as well. Only
one patient showed a bad cholangitis after a few months, not easily
controlled. So, we can assert:
1) CDS can be performed when ERCP was unsuccessful or impossible
especially in old patients
2) CDS is an easy and quick operation with an acceptable rate of
mortality and morbidity
3) CDS isn’t matched with a high rate of post operative cholangitis.
P010
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF BENIGN BILE DUCT
STRICTURES
T.SUWA, S.HIRAKATA, K.HAYASHIDA, and F.KIMURA
Surgical Department, Omiya Red Cross Hospital, Yono City, Saitama, 330, Japan
The purpose of the study: We investigated usefulness ofpecutaneous
transhepatic cholangiocatheterization (PTCC) by diagnosing and treating
of41 cases through examining the kinds ofbacterias contained in bile
juice and dilation extent of the bile duct.
Method and material: Drainage of bilejuice and cholangiography were
performed under PTCC in 41 patients with 16 males and 25 females
whose average age was 54 and ages rainged from 19 to 81. Stricture cases
of the bile duct proper were 27 (papillitis and primary sclerosing
cholangitis etc.). 4 stricture cases were caused by the surrounding organs
diseased (tumour forming pancreatitis etc.) and 10 cases were done by
operation and/or trauma.
Results: Bacterial culture became positive with 29 cases (66%).
Measurements of diameter of the intrahepatic bile duct were conducted
during PTCC and extent of dilations were examined based upon total
bilirubin level of less than 3.0mg/dl and more than 3.1mg/dl. In the
former case, 6 out of 13 cases showed heavy dilation of the intrahepatic
bile duct with 10mm or more in diameter and in the latter case, 6 out of 25
cases showed slight dilation of4.9mm in diameter. Radical operations
were performed in 19 out of 41 cases. Remaining 22 patients were treated
by means of drainage through an indwelling catheter. In 8 cases stricture
of the bile duct was dilated by a bougie and the patients were cured with
no complication.
Conclusion: PTCC is useful to mitigatejaundice and cholangitis
caused by benign bile duct stricture and also to treat the stricture itself.
42
P011
UNUSUAL CASES OF BENIGN STRICTURE OF THE BILIARY
TRACT
H.TAKEHARA N.KOMI, M.NISHI, A.OKADA, Y.MIYOSHI, K.MASAMUNE
First Department of Surgery, School ofMedicine
The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, 770 Japan
Three patients, one child and 2 adults, with unusual benign stricture of
the extra biliary duct are reported.
First case is a 3 year-old boy complicated with biliary obstruction from
ischemic change of the biliary ducts due to devascularization of the
extrahepatic duct at 10-month after extended right hepatectomy for
mesenchymal hamartoma of the liver.
Second is a 18 year-old male with obstructivejaundice due to
compression ofthe common bile duct caused by enlarged collateral
varicose veins, so-called cavernous transformation following extrahepatic
obstruction of the portal vein.
Third is a 63 year-old male with obstructive jaundice caused by
sclerotic vascular ring of the fight hepatic artery.
The definitive diagnosis was obtained by some imaging evaluations and
laparotomy. They have been released fromjaundice by surgical
interventions. These causations are uncommon, especially the first case
illustrate a heretofore unrecorded entity ofbiliary obstruction from
ischemic change of the bile ducts following resection for tumour.
P012
SURGICAL TItERAPY OF IATROGENIC LESIONS OF THE
COMMON BILEDUCT
K.RADEBOLD. J.R. SIEWERT
Dept. of Surgery, Technical University ofMunich, Germany
The high rate of late complications indicates that iatrogenic lesions of
the common bile duct are a high surgical challenge for well experienced
surgeons.
Patients: From July 1st 1982 to Sept. 30th 1991, we operated on 24
patients (16 women and 8 men, mean age 45.1 years) with iatrogenic
lesions of the common bile duct. The location of the injury was 2x the
right hepatic duct, 3x the confluens region, lx the middle part and 8x the
distal part of the choledochus.
Diagnosis was established by ERC and ultrasonography.
Surgical therapy: Intraop, detected lesions (16 patients, 66%) were
sutered (4x), a completed disrupted bile duct was operated by end-to-end
anastomosis (Sx), hepato-jejunostomy Y-Roux (Sx) and
choledochoduodenostomy (once). 8 late detected lesions were treated by
suturing (3x) and biliodigestive anastomosis (Sx).
Results: Post-operative complications resulted in 11 patients (45.8%):
2x postoperative bile fistula, 2x early cholangitis, lx early restenosis
followed by reoperation. Late complications were: 2x chronic cholangitis,
5x restenosis followed by bouginage (3x) and reoperation (2x), in one case
after six years.
Conclusion: Even after early successful reconstruction patients remain
at a high risk for late complication, like chronic cholangitis with biliaric
cirrhosis and restonosis followed by reoperation.
P013
THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF BENIGN STRICTURE OF
THE BILE DUCT COMPLICATING WITH CHOLELITHIASIS
LIANG-FANG XIA
Dept. of Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical College, Guizhou Province P. R.
China
From 1973-1986, 443 cases ofprimary cholelithiasis had been operated
in our hospital. Among them 146 (32.96%) were complicated with bile
duct strictures. There were 243 strictures altogether. The locations of
stricture were as follows. Left lobe: LHD 50m 20ms lmi 18 ls 13 li 22.
2 Right lobe: RHD 41 as ai 15 ps pi 4.54 patients had lesions in the
intrahepatic and common bile duct (B 26 CHD 28 DCD 3). The diagnosis
was made mainly by PTC, ERCP, B-US and CT in the preoperative
period, by cholangiography, selective segmental cholangiography and/or
surgical exploration during operation, by cholangiography through a T or
U tube post-operatively. 87 patients were treated with plastic incision on
the high positioned strictures combined with choledoenterostomy, 11
cases combined with support by T tube and choledoenterostomy. 12 cases
of right lobe lesions were managed by plastic incision and U tube support.
20 patients were treated by partial lobectomy plus T tube drainage. 16
cases were deal with dilatation of the high positioned bile duct plus U tube
support. The mortality was 2%. The results of follow-up were: Excellent
68.7%, Good 19.8%.
P014
TREATMENTFOR KLATSKIN-TUMORS
ST. ARENS. P. DECKER, A. HIRNER
Bonn University, Surgical Department, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 5300 Bonn 1, Germay
In our department 17 patients, 9 female and 8 male, suffering from
Klatskin-tumors have been treated during the period from 1.2.89 to 1.10.
91. The mean age was 63,8 years.
In stage (T1NoM0) was one patient, in stage II (TzNoM0) two patients,
in stage III (TI,zNM0) one patient, in stage IVa (T3NM0) 12 patients and
in stage IVb (T4NM) one patient.
Klatskin-tumors often are locally resectable. In about 20-50% a part of
the liver needs to be resected (4 pat.=23.5%),either as a hilar-limited
resected (1 pat. =6%) or as an extented right or left hemihepatectomy (3
pat. =17.5%). In 10- 20% the large vessels have to be resected and
reconstructed.
The rate ofresection for hilar cholangiocarcinoma of 23.5% in our
group is very close to the average of 30%, described in the literature.
The mortality rate was 0%.
In spite of the bad prognosis, resection ofthe tumor and reconstruction
of continuity seems to offer the best therapy and all patients suffering from
Klatskin-tumors have to be approached with assessment for resection in
mind.
43
P015
RADIATIONASSOCIATED MALIGNANCIES OF THE
BILIARY TRACT
c.w. BIERMANN; G. FR6SCHLE; R. SCHWARZ; U. MEYER-PANNWITT;
CH.E. BROELSCH
Department of Surgery and Radiotherapy; The University of Hamburg, Germany
Malignancies of the biliary tract are rare diseases. Tumor induction
after radiotherapy are reported in several papers. We report about three
cases with consecutive biliary tract carcinoma 18-32 years after
manifestation of an urogenital carcinoma. All three patients 52-63 years)
were treated with additive radiotherapy after surgical-urological therapy.
Icterus was the top rancing symptom of this secondary carcinoma. In two
of the three cases surgical tumor resection was performed (biliary duct
resection with central liver resection; pancreatico-duodenectomy).
Because of the bad general condition-ofhealth the third patient only got a
biopsy of the tumor. All patients died within two years after diagnosis.
The accidental accumulation of the rare biliary tract carcinoma after
urogenital malignancies in our collections of clinical cases (two
seminoma; one bladder tumor) give rise the question about the causal
associatio between primary carcinoma, additive therapy and the
development of secondary carcinoma.
P016
EPIDEMIOLOGIC AND CLINICAL DATA OF PATIENTS
CARCINOMA OF THE GALLBLADDER: HYSTOTYPE,
BILE ANALYSIS, STONE COMPOSITIONASSOCIATED
FACTORS AND RISKFACTORS
F.CETTA, F.LOMBARDO, V.GARGANO
Institute of Surgical Pathology, University of Siena, Italy
Clinical data and stone and bile analysis in 17 consecutive patients with
gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) who had a complete surgical removal of
their gallbladder, alone or together with a minor or major liver resection,
were related to histological findings.
Patients with adenocarcinoma (ADC) (n=13) had large cholesterol or
combination stones in 11 cases, black mud in case and combination
stones with black mud in one case. Bile culture was positive in 25% of
cases, pancreaticobiliary reflux (PBR) was evident in 2 of 7 cases.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SQC) was found in 4 cases. It was always
associated with large (> 1.5-2 cm) long lasting cholesterol stones. Bile
culture was negative. Evident PBR was not detectable.
On the basis ofpresent data and of the literature review concerning
gallbladder carcinoma and premalignant lesions or conditions it is
suggested that ADC (in particular papillary ADC) and SQC seem to be
associated with possible different "pathogenetic" factors. ADC, the most
frequent histologic type, is sometimes associated with PBR, but less
frequently with gallstones.
On the contrary, SQC is more closely related to long lasting cholesterol
stones and to risk factors affecting their formation (female sex, obesity,
multiple pregnancy, dietary factors).
P017
NUTIIITIONAL & METABOLIC ALTERATIONS,DIETARY
HABITS AND ASSOCIATED GALLSTONES IN THE
PATHOGENFIS OF BILE TRACT CANCER
CETTA F. LOMBARDO F, *JEPPSSON B, **DE ALMEIDA A
Institute of Surgical Pathology, University of Siena Italy, *Department of Surgery Lund
University, Sweden, **Surgical Clinics University of Lisbon, Portugal
The design of the study has been to show differences in the incidence of
gallstones (and of various gallstone types) and bile tract carcinoma in 4
different European countries: a Mediterranean country as Italy, an Atlantic
country as Portugal and two Northern countries as Germany and Sweden.
It has been hypothesized that Mediterranean countries with a higher intake
of vegetables, olive oil and carbohydrates could have a different incidence
of both gallstones and related cancer as compared to countries of North
Europe, with a higher intake ofbutter, animal fats, smoked meat or fish.
All patients who are scheluded for bile tract surgery will be enrolled in
one major hospital centre per country. They will have systematic bile and
stone analysis, in addition to histology of the specimen. Preliminary
studies performed in Italy on consecutive surgical patients with bile tract
diseases, who had bile, stones and gallbladder (or bile tract) wall
prospectively examined have shown that different types of gallstones are
associated with gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) and periampullary
carcinoma (PC). In particular, GBC is associated with gallstones in more
than 95% of cases and stones are large long lasting cholesterol stones. On
the contrary, PC is associated with gallstones in only 33% of cases and
stones are almost always pigment stones (a peculiar type ofpigment
stones, that are concomitantly black and brown). Concerning gallbladder
carcinoma, in a series of 1200 consecutive surgical cases with gallstones,
8% of the patients older than 50 years and with gallstones larger than
1.5cm had a GBC. On the basis of these preliminary results, it has been
hypothesized that; 1) cholesterol, black and brown pigment stones are
related to different factors and are expression ofphysicochemical,
bacteriological and nutritional conditions that are different for the various
types of gallstones; 2) Patients older than 50, with large long lasting
cholesterol stones are at higher risk of developing gallbladder carcinoma;
3) On the contrary, patients with large cholesterol gallstones in the
gallbladder have a very low risk of developing PC.
P018
PROXIMAL EXTRAHEPATIC BILE DUCT ORS:
EXPERIENCE WITH 23 CASES
I.DIAZ, V.TONINI, J.BALSELLS, J.L.LAZARO, R.CHARCO, E.MURIO,
C.MARGARIT
Liver Trasplantation Unit, Department of Surgery, Hospital General Vall d’Hebr6n,
Universidad Aut6noma, Barcelona, Spain
Twenty-three patients with proximal extrahepatic bile duct tumors
(EBDT) were treated at our institution between 1975 and 1990. There
were 17 males (73.9%) and 6 females (26%). The age ranged from 35-86
years (mean age 62 years). At presentation, all patients werejaundiced
and three had cholangitis. Diagnosis was established by ultrasonography,
ERCP or PTC, and CT-scan. Localization of the turnout at the bile duct
bifurcation was: type 121.7%, type I143.5% and type II134.8% (Bismuth-
Corlette classification). Complete resection of all macroscopic tumour
was accomplished in 8 patients (34.8%, Group I). The final histology
report revealed microscopic evidence of tumour at the proximal resection
margin in 6 of these 8 patients. In the remaining 15 patients the cancer
was in advanced stage, with involvement of surrounding structures or
distant metastasis. Those patients underwent palliative procedures: Group
II was submitted to palliative resection (5 patients, 21.7%), and in Group
III (10 patients, 43.3%) intrahepatic cholangiojejunostomy was performed
in 3 patients and transtumoral intubation was carried out in 7 patients. The
30-day hospital mortality rate was none in Group I, 40% in Group II, and
57.1% in Group III. The morbidity rate was of 25% in Group I, 80% in
Group II, and 60% in Group III. Significant difference in mean survival
time was observed in Group as compared with the two other Groups
(30.4 months versus 6 months). Long term survival in patients with
EBDT is rarely achieved even in those cases (35-50%) in which a
complete resection ofthe tumour can be performed. Local recurrence is
the usual cause of death, the tumour spreads along the periductal vessels
and may infiltrate the intrahepatic ducts over a wide distance, the
retroduodenal tissues ofthe hilar area and the hepatoduodenal ligament.
EBDT should be considered as regional rather than local affections,
therefore total hepatectomy with complete resection of the biliary system
and its lymphatic drainage tract by means of a Whipple procedure
followed by liver trasplantation may offer a more radical approach and
provide a better survival time or a definitive cure in a selected group of
patients.
44
P019
UPPER CBD TUMORS: RESECTABILITY CRITERIA
G.MGAZZANIGA. M.FILAURO, C.BAGAROLO, E.CIFERRI
st Department of Surgery S.Martino Hospital, Genoa, Italy
Tumors origing ofbiliary confluence are rarely treated with a curative
resection; this is due to the advanced endo- and extrabiliary diffusion of
the neoplasm at the diagnosis. On a total number of 100 primitive hepatic
hilum tumors observed from 1970 to 1990, 55 (55%) cases underwent to
surgical approach; the remaining 45 (45%) were treated with endoscopic
or percutaneous palliative methods, or suffered no treatment at all. 26
(47.3%) of operated patients had "curative" resection of the tumor, 17
(30.9%) "palliative" resection, 12 (21.8%) a simple biliary decompression
with various methods. Long-term results are significantly better for
resective surgery (curative + palliative), compared with biliary
decompression (without tumor resection). Criteria adopted to decide the
opportunity of a laparotomic approach are mainly: the absence of general
contraindication to surgery; the absence of local factors, such as liver
metastasis (or massive direct invasion); portal thrombosis (main trunk or
bilateral branches), bilateral arterial occlusion, peritoneal dissemination.
During laparotomy, tumor resection is adopted when absence of local
contraindication is conferred, and a bilio-digestive anastomosis on
uninvolved biliary branches is feasible. In conclusion, the "gold standard"
of upper CBD tumor treatment is curative resection.
P020
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF HILARBILE DUCT
CARCINOMA: CLINICAL ANDPATHOLOGICAL STUDIES
Z.Q.HUANG, W.H.LEE
Department of Hepato-Biliary Surgery and Pathology
The General Hospital of P.L.A., Beijing, People’s Republic of China
Surgically treated cases ofhilar bile duct carcinoma were revealed. 50
cases were explored between 1986 and Dec, 1990, resection was carried
out in 31 cases, a resectability rate of 62%. In the same period of time, 5
autopsy cases and 27 resected specimens were studied pathologically. In
this series, major hepatic resections was done in 14 cases. No operative
mortality rate. 6 patients were still living and well for 1-4 years after the
operation. Most late deaths died ofbiliary obstruction and infection as the
result of local recurrence of the tumor. The median survival period was
15 months. Pathologically, papillary adenocarcinoma in 6 cases, well
differentiated in 21, low differentiated in 3, carcinoma simplex in 2. The
causes of death in 5 autopsy cases were due to sepsis instead of tumor
metastasis. Since many of the cases were seen late, earlier diagnosis and
treatment is needed. We preferred the prolonged use of U-tube drainage
after resection.
P021
RADICAL SURGERY FOR CARCINOMA OF HEPATIC HILUS
L.C. JIMENEZ E.MORENO, C.LOINAZ, M.A.GARC1A, J.BERCEDO, P.RICO,
I.GARCIA, D.HERNANDEZ
Hospital 12 de Octubre. Service of General and Digestive Surgery "C", Madrid, Spain
The carcinoma ofhepatic hilus is slow-growing tumor.
Radical surgery have been performed with curative or palliation
purpose.
Between January 1974 and June 1991, we treated 47 patients, with bile
duct carcinoma, performing a resection in 16 (34%). The mean age was
55.4 years (rang: 27-75). All patients were jaundiced with a mean
bilirubin value of 18.8 mg%ml.
The certain preoperative diagnosis was carried out in 7 pts. (P.T.C. and
E.R.P.C.), being suspicious in 9 (ultrasonography and C.T.).
The techniques of resection were: 1) Tumor resection without
hepatectomy in 7 pts (lymphadenectomy in 5); 2) Tumor resection,
lymphadenectomy and left hepatectomy in 5; 3) Tumor resection,
lymphadenectomy and fight hepatectomy in 2 (1 with added segmental
portal resection); 4) Tumor resection, lymphadenectomy and IV
segmentectomy in and 5) Liver transplantation in 1.
There was not postoperative mortality. Among postoperative
complications we outline: bile leakage in 4 (25%), subhepatic abscess in
and fight subphrenic abscess in 1. The mean survival of the patients who
left the hospital was 26.2 months, being alive 3 at 6.9 and 32 months,
respectively. One patient (6.2%) died without recurrence 63 months after
operation.
With radical resection the 5-year survival is very low, but we can obtain
a good palliation.
P022
SURGICAL PROBLEMS FORMIDDLE AND DISTAL BILE
DUCT CANCER
KAYAHARA M NAGAKAWA T, UENO K, OHTA T, NAKANO T, MORI K,
TAKEDA T, AND MIYAZAKI
Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Japan
Operative problems for middle and distal bile duct cancer were studied
from the clinicopathological point of view in an effort to identity those
factors which influence the operative procedures. Forty patients were
treated by surgical resection for middle and lower bile duct cancer during
the 17-year period. Of the forty cases, only nineteen patients underwent
curative resection. Three and five-year survival rates for curatively
resected cases were 62.7%, and 48.4%, respectively. No patients who
underwent noncurative resection survived for 2 years. There was
significant difference between two groups. As to the noncurative factor,
ew(+): evidence of cancer cells at external cut surface, was most
important. For middle bile duct cancer, cancer cells were seen at exposed
surface to portal vein. Mode ofrecurrence revealed that recurrence of
choledochojejunostomy was most frequent for middle bile duct cancer
(five of six cases), and periaortic or retroperitoneal recurrence for lower
bile duct cancer (all cases).
It is concluded that radical resection is necessary to perform the curative
operation; pancreatoduodenectomy with combined resection ofportal vein
including the resection of lymph nodes and nerve plexus is needed except
for early carcinoma.
45
P023
THE EFFECT OF PARTIALARTERIALIZATION OF THE
PORTAL VEIN ON THEDEARTERIALIZED LIVER
NAKANO T, NAGAKAWA T, UENO K, TAKEDA T, MORI K, NAKANO Y,
MAEDA K, KAYAHARA M, OHTA T AND ITSUO MIYAZAKI
Department of Surgery (II), School ofMedicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan
For curative operation of the cases ofbiliary tract carcinoma with
hepatic hilar involvement, dissection of the total hepatoduodenal ligament
containing hepatic artery and portal vein is required. As a management of
preserving liver function during the early hazardous period after
dearterialization of the liver, the effect of partial arterialization of the
portal vein was studied during 7 days. 15 mongrel dogs were divided into
3 groups: control group, a group in which the collaterals to the liver were
dissected and the hepatic artery was ligated (hepatic artery ligated group)
and a group in which a femoral artery-portal vein shunt was produced
with the urokinase coating catheter with the dissection of the hepatic
arterial flow (partial arterialized group). In the partial arterialized group,
portal blood was sufficiently oxygenated, and the oxygen demand and
supply and tissue metabolism were kept approximately normal. GOT and
GPT increased but not statistically. On the other hand, the hepatic artery
ligated group showed acidosis in hepatic venous blood, reduction of
oxygen supply at 7 days after the operation. GOT and GPT markedly
increased and remained high level for 7 days. These results indicate that
partial arterialization of the portal vein effectively preserves the liver
function on the dearterialized liver in the early period.
P024
THE USE OF WIDE BORE SELF EXPANDING STAINLESS
STEEL ENDOPROSTHFSIS FORDRAINAGE OF MALIGNANT
OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICE (MOJ)
AA POLYDOROU N HARITOPOULOS, C VAGIANOS, A VEZAKIS, C POTARIS,
B GOLEMATIS
Departments of Surgery, Hippocration Hospital, Athens Rion University Hospital, Patrai,
Greece
The palliative treatment of MOJ by the insertion of an endoprosthesis
(EP) is well established. With this procedure, there are two problems: A.
The limited size (10-12 Fr) of the EP that can be used and B, The tube
blockage which necessitates replacement of the EP. To address this
problem, a new wide bore self expanding stainless steel EP (Wallstent,
Medinvent) has been used. This EP in the compressed form has a
diameter of 9 Fr and expands to a diameter of 30 Fr when released in a
stricture. Of 12 patients with MOJ treated (M/F 9/3, mean age 67, range
47-87), 6 had pancreatic Ca, 4 cholangiocarcinoma and 2 metastatic Ca.
All patients had serum bilirubin more than 15 mg/dL. A total of 13 EP
were used. Eleven EP were placed endoscopically. There were no serious
complications related to the procedure. Three patients died 2, 6 and 12
weeks after EP insertion and the rest are alive 2-34 weeks after drainage.
Biliary decompression was successful in all with normal serum bilirubin
in all alive patients. One patient with pancreatic Ca required a second EP
5 months later because oftumor overgrowth. This new EP provides a
considerably wider lumen for bile duct drainage comparing to currently
used plastic EP. Procedural complication rate is not increased. Late
blockage seems to be less frequent and EP migration is almost impossible.
Further studies with new self expanding WP are warranted.
P025
DIFFERNET SURGICAL APPROACH IN KLATSKIN’S
ORS
G. GOZZETTI, A. PRINCIPE A. MAZZIOTTI, G.L. GRAZI, M.L. LUGARESI,
F. RUBERTO
Clinica Chirurgica 2,University ofBologna, Bologna, Italy
The prognosis for patients with Klatskin’ tumors is conditioned by the
site and extension of the lesion. From 1981 to 1991, 42 pts have been
observed. The average age was 60 (32-81) years with a male:female ratio
2:1. The pts selection and the indication for a correct management were
assessed on the basis of detailed biliary imaging (Bismuth-Corlette’s
classification). Liver resection was carried out in 10 pts (resectability:
23.8%). Twenty-three cases (54.7%) had a palliative treatment: 5 external
biliary drainage, 7 transtumoral drainage and 11 bilio-digestive
anastomosis. In 9 pts (21.4%) no treatments were possible. Ofthe 10 pts
with a radical treatment, 5 are currently alive (mean follow-up 37.8 mo.;
range 4-96 mo.) the remaining 5 pts had a mean follow-up of 18 mo.
(range 4-42 mo.). Ofthe 23 pts where a palliative procedure was
performed, 5 are still alive (mean follow-up 10.6 mo.; range 2-24 mo.);
the mean survival of the 18 pts who have died was 10 mo. (range 1-30
mo.). Best results were obtained in the cases of trans-tumoral drainage.
Conclusions: In Klatskin’ tumors the prognosis is related to the grading
and staging of the lesion. Liver resections have the best long term
prognosis with a good quality of life.
P026
STAGING AND TREATMENT OF GALLBIADDER CANCER
A. PRINCIPE M.L. LUGARESI, F. RUBERTO, G. GOZZETTI
2nd Department of Surgery-University of BOLOGNA
Gallbladder carcinoma (Ca) is characterized by rapid growth and fatal
prognosis. Early diagnosis is usually fortuitous and only in I, II, III stage
of Nevin, resection surgery have radical results. MATERIAL AND
METHODS. During the period 1981-1991 we have observed 50 pts. (33F,
17M;2/1). The average age was 64 yrs (44-91yrs). Diagnosis was carried
out as follows: ultrasonography, ERCP, PTC, arteriography, CT scan, i.v.
cholangiography. In 41 pts, Ca was at the V stage: in 4 the operation was
not carried out; in 12 only explorative laparotomy was performed; in 17, a
palliative operation was carried out: in 12 cases with external biliary
drainage and in 5 biliodigestive anastomosis was performed. Only in 8
cases was it possible to do a wedge-resection (WR). The remaining, 9 pts
at the II and 8 at the III stage, were treated with a radical removal of the
tumour: in 5 cases cholecystectomy was considered to be sufficient, in 4
cases also WR was performed. RESULTS: The average survival rate,
after a year on the V stage was 11.4%. 4 pts., on stage II and III are still
alive with an average survival rate of 3.7 yrs (range of 1-7 yrs) and 5 have
died, 4 for recurrence of the turnout (average survival rate 27.2mo).
CONCLUSIONS: early diagnosis of gallbladder Ca, useful for a radical
treatment, is rare. Histological testing of the gallbladder removed per
lithiasis is therefore the only valid procedure for timely treatment and
resecfive surgery have significant results in the first 3 stages.
46
P027
A CASE OF ADENOSQUAMOUS CARCINOMA OF THELIVER
H. SASAK[ M. HAYASHI, N. OHHASHI, K. NAKAMURA, K.AMANO
Department of Surgery, Owase Municipal Hospital, Owase City, Mie 519-36, Japan
A case of adenosquamous carcinoma arised from the left hepatic duct is
reported with a literature review.
Case: A 65-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of
epigastric discomfort.
Physical examination revealed a 5cm mass in epigastric region.
Laboratory studies showed increase of serum Al-p, LAP, and y-GTP.
While CEA and AFP were within normal limits, CA19-9, SPAN-l,
DUPAN-2 levels were high.
US and CT scan demonstrated a mass, 5x4cm in size, in the lateral and
medial segment of the liver. An ERCP revealed an abnormal tapering at
the left hepatic duct. Arteriography demonstrated no tumor stain but
encasement around the left hepatic artery. Under the diagnosis of
cholangiocellular carcinoma of the left hepatic duct, left hepatic
lobectomy was performed. The resected specimen showed a encapsulated
tumor, 6x5x6cm in size, with central necrosis associated with several
satellite nodules.
Histologically, the tumour was confirmed to be adenosquamous
carcinoma.
(Discussion) Adenosquamous cell carcinoma is a very rare tumor ofthe
liver with poor prognosis. Since the original report by Pianzola in 1971,
24 cases were collected through 1991. Clinicopathological features are
discussed with the literature review.
P029
NON INVASIVE CARCINOMA OF THE GALLBLADDER: A
RETROSPECTIVE MULTICENTER STUDY OF 72 CASES
G. ZEITOUN J.M. HAY
French Association for Surgical research. 8, avenue des Peupliers, 92270 Bois-Colombes,
France
The purpose of this study was to analyze the survival ofpatients treated
for carcinoma of the gallbladder at stage (intramucosal only) or I!
(involvement of mucosa and muscularis).
Methods: 420 carcinomas of the gallbladder, operated from 1978 to
1985 were analyzed, Among them, 72 were non-invasive: 20 stage
patients, 52 stage II. Symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and survival have
been studied in both groups.
Results: There were 16 men (22%) and 56 women (78%).
Results are summarized in table.
(%) GROUP GROUP II
Symptoms Past history of gallstones 24 31
Pain 71 76
Jaundice 32 30
Fever 40 36
Palpable mass 21 18
Ultrasonography Thickenedwall 32 33
Preoperative diagnosis 5.8 5.6
Treatment cholecystectomiy 80 77
bilioenteric anastomosis 5 9
Intraoperative diagnosis 39 22
Histology adenocarcinomas 85 86.3
lymph nodes involved 0 8
Radiation therapy 0 9.6
Survival (actuarial) year 72 58
4 years 25 19
Conclusion: Survival rates show no difference (p<0.01) between the
two groups. The poor rate of survival after 4 yrs in group suggests that
more aggressive treatment should be performed (wider resection, adiuvant
therapy).
47
P028
EXPERIENCE WITH60 PATIENTS WITH
CHOLANGIOCARCINOMA
R.L.V.D. HUL P.W. PLAISIER, L.S. LAMIRIS, O.T. TERPSTRA
Departments of General Surgery and Radiology, University Hospital ’Dijkzigt’, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands
We analyzed 60 patients (25m; 35f) in our hospital who were
diagnosed to have a proximal or midductal cholangiocarcinoma in the
period of 1980-1990. 56 Patients presented withjaundice, 3 with pain in
the upper abdomen and with haemobilia. Most prominent atypical
symptoms were loss of weight (n=30) and fatigue (n=20). Most
commonly used diagnostic tool was ultrasonography (n=59), which
showed dilated intrahepatic bile ducts in 50 and hilar mass in 18 cases.
Endoscopic cholangiography (n=48) raised suspicion for malignancy in
46, whereas percutaneous cholangiography (n=31) did this in 30 patients.
Localisation oftumor was: bifurcation of common hepatic duct (42),
common hepatic duct (13) and midcholedochal (4), case could not be
traced. All tumors were adenocarcinomas except for leiomysarcoma.
According to the TNM-classification of tumor there were 6 T2- and 39
T3- tumors; of 15 tumors size was unknown. Lymphnode involvement
was found in 12, other metastases in another 12 cases. Treatment
consisted of: stent placement in 32 followed by local irradiation in 13
cases. Radical resection was performed in 16 with additive irradiation in 6
cases. A bilio-digestive bypass was performed in 8 with additive
irradiation in 4 cases. If divided in radical treatment (n=10) and palliation
(n=39), mean survival was 108+32wk (SEM) and 39+7wk (SEM),
respectively. Ofthe remaining 10 patients 6 are still alive (4 with radical
treatment, 2 with palliation) and 4 were not treated We conclude that early
diagnosis followed by radical treatment is essential in this otherwise fatal
disease.
P030
PALLIATIVE SURGICAL APPROACHES FOR MALIGNANT
EXTRAHEPATIC OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE
KOCOKPINAR T.. GONGOR A., HASDEMLR .A.O. ALTUN S. ARAN Y.
S.S.K Ankara Hospital I. Surgery Department Ankara-Turkey
Various operative techniques can be performed for palliation ofirrespectable
cancers ofmalignant extrahepatic obstructivejaundice. In our clinic the
techniques tended to this palliation are inspected in two major groups; the first is
drainage procedures with participation ofthe ductus choledochus and the second
is drainage procedure with the participation of gall bladder (or Ductus cysticus)
GROUP: Consist of, choledochoduodenostomi (CDS) (31 cases), T-tube
drainage (4 cases), Choledochal stent application (1 case), Choledochojejuostomi
(2 cases) Hepaticojejunostomy (1 case), and Hepaticoduodenostomy (1 case), (40
cases totally)
[I GROUP; consist of cholecystojejunostomy (CJS) (24 cases),
cholecystoduodenostomy (8 cases), (32 cases totally), (CJS subgroup was
continued on with a Braun anastomosis)
In both groups the effectiveness ofthe drainage procedure was appraised with
the measurement ofbilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (AP), SGOT, SGPT levels pre
and postoperatively. The results are shown at the table below.
Preop Group
Group
Postop Group
Group II
Hospital. T.Bil D.Bil AP SGOT SGPT Op.
time time
16.7 12 60.3 86.2 114.8
18.7 13.3 34.1 82.3 128.2
12days 6.6 4.7 23.7 55.6 80.2 154
12 days 6.2 4.4 15.3 50.6 65.6 128
Reduction ratios oft.he postoperative values are as follows (%)
Group 0 6.5 60’9160"7 43.5 30.2 112.9Group lI 0 163.4 66.9155.2l 48.6 48.9
Inhospital mortality rate for the GROUP was 5% (2 cases, myocardial
infarction) and it was 9.3% (3 cases, lung edema (1), G.I.S. bleeding (2)) for the
second group. Early morbidity rate of GROUP was 20% and it was 25% for the
GROUP II.
The difference between the numerical values oftwo groups are not to be found
meaningful biostatistically (p>0.05). But, from the point view of affectiveness at
the postop period. The reduction ratios ofthe values were significantly
meaningful for both offthe two groups.
COMMENT: In both groups, there was not a meaningful difference between
CDS and CJS from the view ofaffectivity ofthe drainage, morbidity rate and
mortality rate. Nevertheless, CDS showed a little more superiority to the other
kind of surgical techniques.
KEY WORDS: Palliation, Extrahepatic malignancy, Drainage.
P031
INTRAPORTAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY: A NEW IMAGING
MODALITY OF BILIARY TRACT MALIGNANCY
T. NOGUCHI. F. MARUTA, T. KAKAZU, T. IKEGAMI,
Y. HASHIKURA, H. MATSUNAMI, S. KAWASAKI, M. MAKUUCHI
First Department of Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan
We used a newly devised system for intraportal ultrasonography
OPUS) in order to evaluate tumor invasion into portal venous trunk in
patients with biliary tract malignancy.
Methods: The subjects studied were five patients (one with Caroli
disease; two with bile duct cancer; two with gallbladder cancer in
advanced stage). Ultrasound Imaging System with specially designed
Imaging Catheter (CVIS; 20MHz-SF, 30MHz-5F, 4.3F) was used for
IPUS. The catheter was inserted through the small mesenteric venous
branch and was advanced into the main portal trunk where the IPUS was
performed. Obtained pictures from IPUS were compared with portal
venography and intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) in terms oftumor
invasion.
Results: No signs of tumor invasion were demonstrated on IPUS,
IOUS, or portal venogram in a patient with Caroli disease. In two patients
(one with bile duct cancer and the other with gallbladder cancer), portal
venography showed compression ofthe main portal trunk while IPUS
revealed no tumor invasion into the wall of the portal vein. Similar results
were obtained using IOUS in these two patients who subsequently
underwent extended fight lobectomy. Although compression of the portal
vein was demonstrated on portal venography similarly in the remaining
two patients, abnormal density area ofthe portal venous wall indicative of
tumor invasion was noted on IPUS, which was confirmed by IOUS.
Conclusions: IPUS is useful in detecting tumor invasion into the wall of
the portal vein in patients with biliary tract malignancy.
P032
LYMPHATIC SPREAD OF GALLBLADDER CANCER: CT
EVALUATION
T. OOTANI, Y. SHIRAI, K. TSUKADA, K. YOSHIDA, T. MUTO
Department of Surgery, Niigata University School of Medicine, Niigata, Japan
[Aim] The aim of this study is to evaluate the role of CT in depicting
lymphatic spread in gallbladder cancer (GBC) [Patients and methods]
The CT findings of lymph nodes in 47 patients with GBC were analyzed.
The size of lymph nodes was recorded. The shape was classified into four
types: fiat, oval, round, lobular. The enhanced pattern was classified into
three types: homogeneous, ring-like, macular. All patients underwent
radical resection with lymph nodes dissection. Dissected lymph nodes
were examined histologically. [Results] 79 lymph nodes were visualized
on CT imaging in 47 patients. Metastasis was histologically proven in 48
of the 79 nodes. In 46 (96%) out of 79 nodes, the size measured more than
10ram. In 47 nodes (98%), the shape was oval, round, or lobular. In 47
nodes (98%), the enhanced pattern was ring-like or macular. We decided
the following criteria for a diagnosis ofpositive nodes: a soft tissue mass
with (1) size of more than 10ram, (2) oval, round or lobular shape, and (3)
ring-like or macular enhanced pattern. This criteria showed sensitivity of
90%, specificity of 91%, accuracy rate of 67% for detection of positive
nodes. Our criteria detected metastasis of the cystic nodes in 33%,
paricholedochal nodes in 56%, posterior superior pancreatoduodenal
nodes in 60% hepatic nodes in 74%, retroportal nodes in 88%, inter-
aortico-caval nodes in 90%, superior mesenteric artery nodes in 33%.
[Conclusions] (1) The criteria for positive nodes were a soft tissue mass of
more than 10ram with oval, round or lobular shape, which changed ring-
like or macular. (2) CT scan is a reliable examination for detection of
metastasis of the peripancreatic nodes and inter-aortico-caval nodes.
P033
ACUTE CHOLANGITIS INASSOCIATION WITH ACUTE
PANCREATITIS: INCIDENCE,DIAGNOSIS AND PROGNOSIS
A. AGOROGIANNIS. E. NAOUM, IOANNA AGOROGIANNI
Surgical Department, General Hospital of Larisa-Greece
During the last 13 years (from Jan 1978 to Dec 1990) at the Surgery
Department of the General Hospital of Lafisa, we operated on 2,650
patients with benign diseases of the biliary tract. Of these patients 267
(10.09%) had acute pancreatitis (AP) and 160 (6.04%) had acute
cholangitis (ACH). This study is referred to 37 consecutive patients
presenting with ACH in association with AP. These patients were
operated at the same period of time. Despite the association of common
bile duct stones, and material after intrabiliary rupture of hydatid desease
of the liver, with ACH and AP, the coexistence ofthe condition in the
same patient is very rare and has not received the proper attention by
surgeons. The aim of this study is to examine the incidence of the
condition, the clinical and biochemical findings, when the two diseases
coexist, and analyse and compare the same parameters in case each
diseases appears alone. The incidence of the condition in our patients was
1.4% for gall-stone and hydatid disease cases, 23.1% for the group with
ACH and 13.9% for the cases with AP. The features that were measured
and compared in our patients were clinical (jaundice, pyrexia, liver
tenderness, rigors, shock) and the criteria of Ranson and Imrie. The
characteristic operative findings of ACH were choledochitis, redness of
the mucosa of the CBD, pus into the CBD and multiple abscesses of the
liver.
The results indicate that the association of the two conditions makes the
disease more serious, the clinical and biochemical indices are all worse
and the mortality is higher (22%). Gallstones or hydatid material are found
more often operatively and the operation must be done earlier.
P034
ACUTE CHOLANGITIS BYBENIGN CAUSES OF BILIARY
OBSTRUCTION: CLINICAL,BIOCHEMICAL AND
PATHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS
A. AGOROGIANNIS. E. NAOUM, I. PRAPPAS
Surgical Department, General Hospital ofLarisa-Greece.
The last 13 years (Jan 1978 to Dec 1990) at our Surgical department
2,650 patients underwent operation for benign diseases of the liver and
biliary tract. Among them 160 patients were operated for acute cholangitis
(6.04%) .58% of these patients were females and the 42% males. The
mean age of all the patients was 62 years. All the patients hadjaundice,
fever, chills and abdominal pain within 72 hours of operations, were
defined as having clinical cholangitis and this was confirmed operatively.
The purpose of this study is to determine the correlations between
microscopic changes in the liver ductural system, the clinical status ofthe
patient, the gross findings of suppuration in the CBD, the clinical
postoperative course and the final outcome ofthe patients. 104 patients
(group A) had clinically preoperatively the Charcot’ triad (fever > 38,chills, jaundice and abdominal pain). 56 patients (group B) had clinically
the Reynolds five signs (mental confusion and septic collapsous).
Preoperative laboratory values included white blood count, serum
bilirubine, SGOT, alcaline phosphatase, BUN and creatinine. During the
operation liver biopsy was taken and macroscopic findings were obtained.
Bile and blood cultures were done. Microabscesses of the liver were found
in 5 patients belonging to Group A. Pus into the CBD was found in 47
patients, the 46 belonging to Group A. The data ofthis study indicate that
patients with suppurative and nonsuppurative ACH demonstrate a
correlation between liver histology, clincial presentation ofthe disease and
biochemical findings. The more are the clinical and biochemical features,
the more severe is the liver inflamation, the longer is the postop course of
the patient and worst the outcome.
48
P035
EARLY SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE
CHOLECYSTITIS
P. BACCARI. C. STAUDACHER, P.L. PAESANO**, D.PAROLINI, E. BRAMBILLA,
V. DI CARLO*.
Chirurgia d’Urgenza, Pat. Chirurgica* Radiologia Diagnostica**
IRCCS S. Raffaele, Univ. Milan, Italy
This study was carried out to retrospectively assess the validity of early
cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis. 734 cholecystectomies were
performed over a 10-year period in our surgical unit, of which 198 were
early cholecystectornies for acute cholecystitis. The average preoperative
hospital stay for acute cholecystitis was 2.9 days The overall hospital stay
for elective and early surgery was 14.9 days and 11.6 days, respectively.
Ultrasonography was carried out at admission in all the cases of acute
cholecystitis, with 91.4% of positive results confirmed at operation.
Complications of acute cholecystitis (empyema, gangrene, perforation)
were found in the 28.7% and calculi of the common bile duct in the 15.1%
of the cases. The mortality for early cholecystectomy was 0.5%. No
patient submitted to elective cholecystectomy died. There were no
significant differences in postoperative complications between early and
elective surgery. Patients over 70 years of age who underwent early
surgery (24.2%) had more frequent complications of acute cholecystitis
(P<0.05), choledochal stones (P<0.001), and postoperative septic
complications (P<0.05). In conclusion early surgical treatment is a safe
procedure and more cost-effective than the delayed approach. Also elderly
patients often necessitate this approach for the more serious complications
of acute cholecystitis.
P036
DIAGNOSTIC AND MANAGEMENT PECULIARITIES OF
CHOLANGITIS IN GERIATRIC PATIENTS
A.P. CHADAEV
Department of General Surgery, 2nd Medical Institute, 10strovityanova, Moscow, USSR
A review of 251 patients in the old and aged with marked clinical
picture of cholangitis was found in 5% cases. The main deciding
diagnostic factor in the rest cases was the orderly carrying out of
Ultrasound, Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiography and Laparoscopy.
In 23% cases Obstructive Cholangitis was present with bile hipertension
which demanded decompression of the bile ducts. As a result of
Endoscopic Papillosphincterotomy (EPST) and extraction of gallstones in
80% cases, choledocholithiasis was removed, which made complex
management highly effective. In the remaining 11% cases endoscopic
correction ofbile flow made it possible to avoid biliodigestive
anastomosis and operation was restricted to choledochotomy with external
drainage ofbile ducts. In destructive cholecystitis accompanied with
cholangitis (14%) EPST, Laparoscopic transcutaneus, transhepatic
puncture, sanitation and drainage of the gallbladder was carried out in first
stage of management, which made it possible in high risk patients to carry
out radical operations with comfortable conditions for the second stage of
operative management. Differential tactics in the management of
cholangitis in the old and aged makes it possible to lower the
postoperative mortality rate.
P037
RECURRENT PYOGENIC CHOLANGITIS DOES IT EXIST IN
YUGOSLAVIA?
R. COLOVIC. M. SAVIC and M. MILICEVIC
Institute for Digestive Diseases, University Clinical Center,
11000 Belgrade, Koste Todorovica Br. 6, Yugoslavia
A retrospective analyses of patients who fulfill the strictest criteria for
primary recurrent cholangitis was carried out. Eighteen patients were
operated during a 5 year period ranging from 1.01.1986. to 31.12. 1990.
Men and women were equally represented. The youngest patient was 30
years old, the oldest 64 the average age being 50. Ten patients were
operated earlier to 4 times. Five patients (27.8%) did not have
gallbladder stones and another five patients (27.8%) did not have stones in
the common bile duct. All 18 patients had intrahepatic stones, 10 pts.
(55.8%) in the left lobe, 6 pts. in the right lobe and 2 patients (11.0%) had
stones in both lobes. Fourteen patients had recurrent attacks of cholangitis,
2 patients had obstructivejaundice and 2 patients had upper abdominal
symptoms at admission. Twenty operations were carried out in 18
patients. One patient had an additional postoperative endoscopic
sphincterotomy. In 12 pts. (66.6%) all intrahepatic stones were removed.
Left lobectomy (segments II and III) was performed in 7 pts. and
hepaticojejunostomy in 7 patients. Two patients had both procedures
simultaneously performed.
There was no mortality. All patients have been followed up from to 5
years, average follow up time being 3.5 years. Good results were achieved
in 15 patients (83.3%), satisfactory results in pt. (5,5%) and
unsatisfactory in 2 pts. (11.0%).
That authors conclude that recurrent pyogenic cholangitis is a rare but
present condition in our area and that it can be successfully managed by a
combination of operative modalities in the majority ofpatients with good
results. The retention ofone or even more stones does not necessarily
mean a treatment failure, since stones can pass spontaneously later on.
P038
EVOLUTION FO THE DIAGNOSIS AND THE SURGICAL
MANAGEMENT IN BILIARY LITHIASIS ON 5500
OPERATIONS
D. MARIAN. L. AZAMFIREI
st Department of Surgery, Tirgu-Mures, Romania
The authors are presenting a retrospective study on 5500 operations.
Two groups of patients operated between 1964 1975 (n=1695) and 1981
1990 (n=3805) for biliary lithiasis were studied comparatively. The
average number of operations raised yearly from 166 to 380. Suppurative
acute cholecystitis increased from 8, 90% (151) to 22, 12 (842) to the
prejudice of gangrenous and perforation acute cholecystitis. The
association with pancreatic lesions increased from 3, 60% (61) to 12, 92%
(550). Combined gallbladder and choledocholithiasis raised from 4, 82%
(82) to 7, 17% (223) because a better preoperative and operative
exploration. Gallbladder carcinoma increased twice from 0, 35% (6) to 0,
60% (23) with an unmodiff’led operability rate of 78%. The coincidence of
others tumors increased from 2, 48% (42) to 3, 86% (148). The biliary
interventions were: simple cholecystectomies decreased from 79, 35%
(1355) to 67, 30% (2561); the association with biliary drainage increased
from 16, 63% (282) to 20, 34% (774). The interventions on the pancreas
increased from 1, 17% (20) to 4, 46% (170). Further associate operations
more frequents were hemicolectomy 0, 68% (26), gastrectomy 1, 49%
(57%), vagotomy 0, 78% (36), all for the second group.
Cholecystectomies for acalculous cholecystitis decreased from 6, 76%
(114) to 4, 94% (188) because of the preoperative exploration and a more
efficient conservative treatment. The mortality decreased from 1, 94%
(33) to 1, 31% (50)thus: after emergency operations from 8, 60% (16)to
4, 30% (16) and after elective operations from 1, 12% (17) to 0, 99% (34).
49
P039
THE PLACE OF SURGICAL AND ENDOSCOPIC OPTION IN
ACUTE OBSTRUCTIVE SUPPURATIVE CHOLANGITIS
(AOSC)
G. GIACOBBE, T. MANGANARO, A.COGLIANDOLO, M.A.GIOFFRI, B.MICALI
General Surgery, University of Messina, Italy
AOSC is a rare, severe complication of stones, biliary stricture and
cystic dilatation of CBD. Despite recent advances, surgery has different
morbidity and mortality rates, whereas endoscopic approach seems to be
more safe. However, the relative value of primary surgical or endoscopic
drainage has not been determined.
A retrospective study concerning the last ten years included 45 patients
with specific symptoms of AOSC. Surgery was reserved to 32 patients (13
males, 19 females, mean age 61 years) unresponsive to medical treatment
at most 72h from the onset. Lithiasis was the main factor in 26 patients
(81%). In 4 (13%) a biliary stricture was documented and in the remaining
2 (6%) an ampulloma and a Mirizzi syndrome, respectively. Surgical
operations are shown below.
Cholecystectomy + choledocostomy 10(31.2%)
Cholecystectomy + sphincterotomy 8 (25.0%)
Cholecystostomy + sphincterotomy 3 (9.4%)
Cholecystectomy + bilioenteric derivation 10(31.2%)
Transtumoral intubation (3.2%)
Mortality was seen in 5/32 (l 6%), post-surgical complications in 8/32
(25%).
Endoscopic sphincterotomy (ES) and/or associated drainage were
applied in 13 patients (7 males, 6 females, mean age 64 years) with
AOSC, 9 of whom (69%) had biliary stones and 4 (31%) malignant
obstruction. No mortality occurred. Complications were observed in 3/13
(23%).
In conclusion, our results suggest that ES is a safe, effective option to
make up the primary decompression of biliary tree in patients with AOSC.
Surgery should be employed in patients with poor response to ES and
whenever the cause of AOSC has to be removed.
P041
STUDY OF THE CELLULARIMMUNITY IN PATIENTS WITH
ACUTE CHOLECYSTITIS
L. LORENTE J.I. ARIAS, A. MILLA, M.P. SUAREZ, J.J. GARCIA, G. GERMAN,
M.A. ALLER, J. ARIAS, H. DURAN, J.L. BALIBREA.
Department of Surgery I. Hospital, Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
A study was made of cellular immunity in patients with acute lithiasic
cholecystitis who underwent delayed cholecystectomy at different
moments of the evolution. The results are compared to those obtained in
patients in whom elective cholecystectomy was realized for cholelithiasis.
In patients with acute cholecystitits, alterations of the subpopulations of
T lymphocytes are associated with an increment of macrophages that do
not express Ia antigen (BL2).
The increment of macrophages at the expense of macrophages BL2
demonstrates that there are no quantitative variations in the macrophage
subpopulations that express Ia antigens. It is hypothesized that
macrophages BL2 constitutes the subpopulation that induces alterations in
the lymphocellular subpopulations in patients with acute cholecystitis.
P040
ANEVALUATION OF ULTRASONIC GUIDED CHOLECYSTIC
PUNCTURE AND SUCTIONAS A NEWINITIAL
MANAGEMENT FORACUTE CHOLECYSTITIS
KITA I1)., KINAMI Y1, 2)., KOJIMA YI., AKIYAMA T,SAITO H1).,
HAGIWARA HI)., TAKASHIMA, S1).
The Second Department of Surgery,Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute2).
Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan
As an initial management for acute cholecystitis, we have developed
the percutaneous transhepatic cholecystic puncture and suction (PTCPS).
This study was performed to evaluate the efficacy of PTCPS in the
management of acute cholecystitis. Fifty-four patients with acute mild or
moderate cholecystitis received this method during the past 4 years from
1986 to 1990. Of them, 29 patients were accompanied with
cholecystolithiasis, and 25 patients had no stones. The PTCPS was carried
out as follows. Under ultrasonic guidance, the gallbladder was punctured
using a 22-gauge needle, and its contents removed by suction. After
cholecystography, antibiotics (Amino-glycoside 40 mg) was infused into
the gallbladder, and then the needle was removed. The relief of abdominal
pain, the removal of fever, the decrease of white blood cell counts, and the
improvement of us and/or CT findings were observed within 3 days after
PTCPS in the patients obtained the therapeutic effects. Of 29 patients with
cholecystolithiasis, 22 patients (76%) revealed availability, 7 patients
(24%) indicated no or unclear effect. Of 25 patients with acalculous
cholecystitis, 22 patients (88%) showed availability, 3 patients (12%)
indicated no or unclear effect. In the latter group, 22 patients recovered
from acute cholecystitis. These results suggest that the PTCPS is effective
as an initial management for the patients with acute cholecystitis.
P042
DETERMINATION OF COPPER,IRON, ZINC IN SERUMAND
URINE INTHE PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC CHOLECYSTITIS
AND CHOLELITHIASIS PRE ANDPOST OPERATION
LI JIN MING ET AL.
Surgery Dept of Henan Provincial Hosp of Armed Police Forces
Zheng Zhou China 450052
Determination of copper, iron, zinc, copper/zinc in serum and urine in
34 patient with chronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasis as control was
carried on with flame atomic absorption method pre and post operation.
All cases have been confirmed by B ultrasonid, pathological examination
and cholecytectomy. Statistical results show that serum copper is
markedly higher in patients of chronic cholecysfitis and cholelithiasis pre
and post operation (P<0.001). Urine copper does not significant difference
in patients ofpre and post operation (P>0.05). Serum zinc and urine zine
ofpre are lower than post operation (P<0.001). Copper/Zinc Ratio in
serum is quite different in pre and post operation (P<0.001). The serum
fermm and urine in pre is much lower than post operation (P<0.01 or
P<0.001). Our study result shows that abnormity metabolism of copper
zinc ferrum in serum and urine ofpatients with chronic cholecystitis is a
dynamic state observed value in treatment. It will be very helpful for
diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of chronic cholecystitis with
cholelithiasis.
50
P043
ACUTE CHOLECYSTITIS IN AGED PATIENTS
PROUSALIDIS J., FAHADIDIS E., APOSTOLIDIS A., KATSOHIS C., ALETRAS H.
A. Prop. Surg. Clinic. Ar. University, Thessaloniki
The aim of this study is the analysis of the results in 62 patients over 70
years of age with acute cholecystitis treated in our department from 1970
to 1990. The clinical picture in 47 patients was mild and in 15 severe. In
14 cases (10 calculous, 4 acalculous) the acute cholecystitis subsided with
antibiotics (Group A). In 48 more cases (45 calculous, 3 acalculous)
following 1-3 days conservative treatment, operation was undertaken.
Besides acute cholecystitis there was gangrene of gallbladder in 10,
choledocholithiasis in 7 and choloperitoneum in 7 cases. Cholecystostomy
in 25, cholecystectomy in 15 and cholecystectomy with exploration of the
bile duct in 8 cases was performed (Group B). There was one death in
group A and 3 deaths in Group B. The hospital stay was 20 days. In
conclusion the clinical findings in acute cholecystitis in the aged are
usually mild. In the case offailure of medical treatment, after 2-3 days
emergency surgery should be performed.
P044
URGENT SURGERY IN ACIfI CHOLECYSTITIS
F. SEFERIADIS. A. MYSTAKIDIS, G. SVORONOS, K. KINDYLIDIS,
G. VELMACHOS
"Sotiria" General Hospital, Athens, Greece
The management of any patient with the diagnosis of an acute biliary
condition, must be argued for the individual case, guided by certain
general indications. Indications for surgery during an acute attack of
cholecystitis are: a sustained fever beyond 48 hours, signs of peritoneal
irritation, features of cholangitis, gerneral peritonitis, presence of heart
disease.
450 cholecystectomies were performed over a 6 year period in our
surgical department of which 48 were early cholecystectomies for acute
cholecystitis, cholecystostomies were carried out in 4.2%. The overall
hospital stay was 16.2 days. Ultrasonography was carried out in all cases.
Empyema and gangrene were found in 34.2% and calculi of the common
bile duct in 14.2% of the cases.
The mortality rate for early cholecystectomy was 0.4%. There were no
significant differences in postoperative complications between early and
ellective surgery. But ifthe structures cannot be recognized because of the
presence of oedema it is safer to abandon cholecystectomy in favour of
cholecystostomy.
Cholecystectomy is clearly ideal provided it is safe. Experts in
gallbladder surgery regard cholecystostomy with condescension because
they always find it possible to remove the gallbladder during an acute
attack. Thus no shame should be experienced in occasionally carrying out
cholecystostomy in an emergency.
P045
STUDIF OF INFLUENCE FACTOR ON BILIARYEXCRETION
OF ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
TAKEAKI SHIMIZU YOSHIAKI TSUCHIYA, OSAMU SATO
Department of Surgery, Shinrakuen Hospital, Niigata, Japan
The faculty of biliary excretion of antimicrobial agents was very
important for the therapy to the biliary tract infection. The aim of the
present study was to evaluate the influence factor on biliary excretion of
antimicrobial agents. Previously, we found the fact with the correlation of
bile acid metabolism and biliary excretion of cephalosporin and
tetracycline antibiotics such as CFIX, CEZ, CPZ, CMD, CZX and MINO.
The biliary excretion of all these antibiotics closely correlated to the total
bile acid concentration in bile.
The LFLX, TA167 (new quinolone antimicrobial agents) and
meropenem (carbapenem antibiotic) were examined the biliary excretion
and bile acid in bile to the 35 patients with external biliary drainage. The
concentration of these agents in serum and bile and the bile acid were
measured by HPLC method. The meropenem levels in bile were
correlated with secondary/primary (S/P) bile acid (r=-0.694571, p<0.1).
NY198 concentration in bile was very closely correlated with free bile
acid in bile (r=0.851643, p<0.02). These were not correlated with total bile
acid concentration in bile.
Conclusion. In biliary tract infection, total bile acid in bile was
decreased and free bile acid, S/P in bile were increased. Therefore, it was
considered that the biliary excretion of these antimicrobial agents was an
excellent result in the infectious condition.
51
P046
IS THEINVESTIGATION BYULTRASOUNDARELIABLE
METHOD FORACUTE CHOLECYSTITIS EARLYDIAGNOSIS?
L. SPAGGIARI, P. CARBOGNANI, P. DELL’ABATE, P. SOLIANI,
M. RUSCA, E. CUDAZZO, R. SABBAGH AND E. FOGGI.
Department of General, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy
The purpose ofthis retrospective study was to analyse the data obtained
from the use in emergency cases ofultrasonography (US) as an instrumental
means of accurately diagnosing acute cholecystitis, helping the surgeon to
choose the fight moment for cholecystectomy. The period covered by the
study was from January 1987 to June 1991; during this time, 94 patients (52
males and 42 females of mean age 65.5 years) with suspected clinical
diagnosis of acute cholecystitis, underwent early cholecystectomy (within 72
hours of onset of symptoms) following clinical, laboratory and US
evaluation. The US findings considered for the study were: gallbladder (gb)
stone/s (A); wall thickening (B); gb distension (C); bile duct stone/s (D); bile
duct dilatation (E); gas in the gb (F); echogenic mass shadow about the gb
(G); opacities which moved with change in patient’s position (H). US
examination was performed with the patient in supine position, using 3.5
mHz probes; the same radiologist performed the examination for 88% ofthe
cases. The data, collected and inserted into a computrized card designed
specially for the study, were subsequently compared with those from the
laboratory and with histopathological results. In all cases histology
confirmed the pre-operative diagnosis, and in 19 ofthem presented a picture
of serious cholecystitis (empyema in 4 and gangrene in 15 cases). The US
findings most frequently seen together were B+C in 69 cases (73.5%) and
A+B+C in 63 cases (67%); ifwe consider only the serious cases of
cholecystitis (19/94-20%) the US finding B+C was seen in 84.2% ofthe
patients. In 15% (14/94) of all cases leucocyte count was less than 8000
w.c./mm3: in 11 (78.6%) ofthese 14 patients, the US showed A+B+C
together. 8 ofthe 94 patients (8.5%) presented with leucocytosis more than
20000 w.c./mm3; in all cases (100%) the US showed A+B+C together and
in 5 cases a fourth US finding was present. The data emerging from our
experience lead to several considerations: the US finding most often seen in
emergency conditions during acute cholecystitis were B+C (73.5%) and
A+B+C (67%); the percentage of association of these findings rose (A+B+C
84.2%) in the more serious cases; US was reliable (A+B+C 78.6%) even in
cases where leucocyte counts were silent, confirming the diagnosis in all
cases in which the latter was considerably high (A+B+C 100%).
Ultrasonography, although dependent upon the observer and therefore giving
variable results from one centre to another, is a simple method ofearly
diagnosis, ofrelatively low cost noninvasive, easily available and with good
sensitivity (73.5%) increasing to 84.2% in serious cases. We thus confmn
that the emergency diagnosis of acute cholecystitis is still based on
evaluation ofclinical and instrumental parameters, and that ultrasound is the
simplest and most reliable method ofdiagnosing acute cholecystitis.
P047
PREVENTIVE CHOLECYSTECTOMYFORACUTE
ACALCULOUS CHOLECYSTITIS (A.A.C.)
P. VRACHNOS L. LAPIDAKIS, A. KORDONIS, G. HESKETH,
L. PAPASTAMATIOU,
Dept. of Surgery, Apostle Paul Hospital, Athens, HELLAS
Many factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of"post stress"
cholecystitis. As the aetiology remains obscure, pronounced biliary stasis,
shock, high viscosity ofbile, disturbed hormonal regulation following
parenteral nutrition, massive transfusions and endotoxaemia, etc., have
been suggested to be involved.
Based on a 5 year experience, during which 18 cases ofA.A.C. were
surgically treated, with a mean time of delay of diagnosis of 2,3, days,
early perforation ofthe gallbladder in 27.8% of the cases and a 22.2%
mortality rate was observed (Papastamatiou, 1989). In another 13 cases,
postoperative acute cholecystitis was seen in patients with prior
cholelithiasis, but it is hard to discern whether or not the stones were the
cause of the acute episode.
For the last 18 months, preventive cholecystectomy during the course
of emergency laparotomy for blunt abdominal trauma, was applied in all
suspected cases. In spite ofthis strategy, 5 patients, out of47, were not
cholecystectomized and 2 of them developed A.A.C. All patients with
cholelithiasis were also subjected to cholecystectomy.
It should be pointed out that A.A.C. is a rare condition with a fulminant
course and high mortality. Diagnosis is not easy, as pain is difficult to
evaluate in multiple trauma patients, especially in intubated patients; fever
andjaundice may be of diverse origin; lab tests are of secondary value and
only repeated ultrasonography and diagnostic peritoneal lavage may
confirm the first clinical suspicion. It is concluded that the removal of an
innocent gallbladder, in the course of an emergency laparotomy, is less
dangerous for the patient than allowing the possibility ofthe occurence of
A.A.C.
P048
MRIDIAGNOSIS OF HEMORRHAGIC CHOLECYSTITIS:
CLINICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
F. YAMAMOTO1, YONGLIN PU2, H.I. GIMI3
Yamamoto Hospital, Imari, Japan Beijing Medical, University, China2 Shionogi Institute,
Osaka, Japan3)
The pathognomonic MRI appearance of hemorrhagic cholecystitis was
described in two surgically proven cases (one is acute cholecystitis and
another is chronic cholecystifis). The MR imaging was obtained using a
0.ST RESONA unit. Spin echo sequences were used. On Tl-weighted
image (TR/TE=620/25) and proton-weighted image (TR/TE=1800/40) in
the lumen of the gallbladder there is an irregular hyperintense area. On the
T2-weighted image, the area was hypointense in its center and
hyperintense in its periphery relative to the surrounding bile.
An in-vitro experiment was performed in order to determine what
amount ofblood can be detected. 0.2 ml ofblood in 10ml of bile can be
detected as a hyperintense area on Tl-weighted image (TR/TE=500/20),
and on proton-weighted image (TR/TE=2000/30) 0.4ml ofblood in the
10ml ofbile can be detected as a slightly hyperintense area. 0.6ml blood
mixed with bile cannot be detected at any time in any sequences. Ifthe
blood is not mixed with bile there is a significant correlation between the
blood/bile signal intensity contrast and amount of blood (0.0-0.6 ml in
10ml bile)on Tl-weighted (r=0.966, p=0.0004) and proton-weighted
images (r=0.935, p=0.002). If the amount ofblood is large, in this study
3.0ml in 10ml ofbile, there are two layers in the blood. The signal
intensity in the upper layer is higher than that in the lower layer in all the
MR images. The above blood/bile signal intensity contrast and signal
intensity difference are because of different paramagnetic effects of
intracellular and extracellular deoxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin. In
the upper layer of large amounts ofblood, in the small amounts ofblood
and in the periphery of the blood in the gallbladder the red blood cell
underwent lysis. In the lower layers of large amounts of the blood and in
the center of blood in the gallbladder the red blood cell was intact.
P049
ACUTE ACALCOLOUS CHOLECYSTITIS IN EMERGENCY
SURGERY
N V. JARAMOV. I.V. VIACHKI, N.M. PENKOV, D.I. VIACHKI
Centre of Urgent Medikal Aid, Sofia Bulgarian Academi of Medicine, Sofia, Bulgaria
The authors discuss their experience in surgical treatment of 48 patients
who were operated on for acute acalcolous cholecystitis/AAC/. Poiting
out the multifactorial developement of the disease, they attribute the
principle role to the vascular and enzymatic genesis. All patients had had
acutely inflamed gallbladders; 40/83, 3%/had areas of necrosis or
gangrene. The mortality rate was 4.1%/2 patients/.
Computed tomographic/CT/or sonographic evidence of gallbladder
wall thickness 4mm, pericholecystitis fluid or subsersal edema without
ascites, intramural gas, or a sloughet mucosal membrane was considered
diagnostic criteria for AAC.
THE authors emphasize that active surgical Tactics is necessary and
that approach to the management of patients with AAC must be
differentiated.
P050
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF CHOLEDOCHALCYST
H. FUJIWARA T. ISHIDA, K. OGINO, T. ICHIHARA, K. WAKITA, M. HAMANO,
A. YAMADA, T. ASATSU, K. TSUJIMOTO, T. MITSUNO
Yodogawa Christian Hospital, Osaka, Japan
Choledochalcyst is a rare congenital condition in Western cultures and
details of the disease have never been reported. In Japan it seems that
choledochalcysts occur more frequently than in other countries. Ten cases
of choledochalcysts were observed in this decade (1981-1990) in
Yodogawa Christian Hospital.
In ten patients, one male and 9 females, the mean age was 32.5 years
(range 8-49 years), and in each one pancreaticobiliary maljunction was
noted. While the classic triad of pain, jaundice, and a palpable fight upper
quadrant mass are pathognomonic, these three were not all present in these
ten patients. Eight were admitted for abdominal pain, one forjaundice,
and one had no symptom. Later one 43 year old woman was diagnosed
with this by ultrasonography in a medical examination.
According to "Todani Classification", five patients had type cyst, one
had II cyst and four had type IV cyst.
All ten patients were treated with cholecystectomy and extrahepatic
cystic resection plus hepaticojejunostomy by Roux-en-Yjejunum loop.
Through the histological examination it was discovered that a 49 year old
woman had a malignant tumor in the gallbladder.
The postoperative course was uneventful except for two patients with
mild cholangitis from technical problems and all patients survived.
The purposes oftreatment is first to free the patient of all symptoms and
second to remove the propensity for malignant degeneration. When there
are indication of choledochalcyst we believe that the surgical treatment of
choice is extrahepaticcystectomy and Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy for
divergence ofbile and pancreatic secretion even if the patient has no
visible symptom.
52
P051
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF CYSTIC ENLARGEMENT OF
EXTRAHEPATIC BILE DUCTS
H.-J. MEYER. CId. SCHMID, B. RINGE, G. GUBERNATIS, J. JHNE,
R. PICHLMAYR
Klinik ftir Abdominal und Transplantationschirurgie,
Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany
Cystic enlargement of the extrahepatic bile duct system denote rare
abnormal findings. Although the pathogenesis is still unknown, congenital
origin is still supposed.
We report on our experiences with extrahepatic bile duct cysts treated
between 1976 and 1991. Among a total of 33 pts. with various types of
cystic lesions 13 pts. were obtained with choledochal cysts. 8 ofthese pts.
showed Alonso-Lej/Todani type I, one pt. each revealed type II and III or
could not be categorized whereas two pts. had multiple cysts (type IV).
The medical history of 7 pts. revealed cholecystectomy 4 to 22 years ago;
predominating clinical feature was recurrent cholangitis in other 7 pts. 12
of 13 pts. were treated by surgical resection ofthe cystic malformation; in
11 pts. a bilio-jejunal anastomosis with a Roux-en-Y loop was performed
and in one pt. an end-to-end anastomosis of the common bile duct was
carried out. One pt. died postoperatively caused by septic complications
following intraabdominal bleeding. After a mean follow up of 68 months
Opts. are still alive, the other three pts. died, whereas one pt. within two
years after surgery with a carcinoma of the bile duct.
Cystic enlargement of an extrahepatic bile duct may develop within all
anatomic structures, but no current classification includes all types of cysts
described so far. Surgical treatment is always indicated favoring complete
resection of the cyst. Postoperative follow up is necessary to detect
recurrency as well as malignant transformation.
P052
THE CURRENT MANAGEMENT OF BILIARY CYSTS
G. GOZZETTI, A. PRINCIPE A. MAZZIOTTI, M.L. LUGARESI, F. RUBERTO
Clinica Chirurgica 2,University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Biliary cysts are a rare congenital anomaly occurring in all the biliary
tree. The high rate of neoplastic degeneration (3-28% in the extrahepatic
cysts; 7-14% in the intra-hepatic cysts; 50% in the cystic-enterostomies)
influences surgical treatment, with the preference given to the complete
resection, instead of the more comfortable biliary derivation. From
October 1981 to November 1991, 15 pts with biliary cysts were observed,
12 female and 3 male, mean age of 36 years (range 6-72 years). Pre-op.
work-up consisted in US scan, CT scan, ERCP and PTC. According to
Todani’s classification, 5 cysts were classified as type I, 5 as type IVa, and
5 as type V. Twelve pts (80%) had a concomitant lithiasis and 6 of them
had a previous biliary derivations. All the extrahepatic cysts (type and
IV) were excised and in one case a carcinoma was found on the posterior
wall (10%). Three hepatic resections were carried out for segmentary
intrahepatic lesions (1 type IVa, 2 type V). The remaining 6 pts had
multiple intrahepatic localizations: 5 biliodigestive anastomosis and left
hepatectomy, extended at the V and VI segment, were performed in those
cases. The patient with neoplastic degeneration died 14 months after
surgery. The good results obtained with the others pts (F.U. 6 month 11
years) demonstrated that total excision, when feasible, is the only and
definitive therapeutical choice.
P053
’HANGING’ NONCALCULOUS GALLBLADDER
TZARTINOGLOU E., PROUSALIDIS I., APOSTOLIDIS A., KATSOHIS C.,
ALETRAS H.
A Prop. Surg. clinic, Ar. University, Thessaloniki
The removal of acalculous and not acutely inflamed gallbladder in
patients with typical biliary pain remains a questionable procedure. This
study was conducted to present our experience in some cases with this
problem. In the period 1982-90, 1089 cases of calculous and acalculous
gallbladder disease were treated in our clinic. In this period, 27 patients
with acalculous, not inflamed, but in abnormal position, with long spiral
cystic duct, oblong gallbladder were subjected to cholecystectomy. The
mean duration of symptoms, compatible with cholelithiasis, was 5 years.
Oral cholecystogram and ultrasonography, provided that other causes of
chronic abdominal pain have been excluded, led to the diagnosis. There
were 13 lumbar, 9 pelvic and 5 iliac long size gallbladders, with poor
function in 20 of them. During cholecystectomy, the organ was invested
by peritoneum, suspended in 7 cases from cystic duct and cystic artery, or
in 20 cases from a kind of mesentery. On pathological examination, mild
chronic inflammation in 19 cases and minimal changes in 8 cases were
reported. The minimum follow up was one year and the maximum 9
years. Complete relief of symptoms was achieved in all the cases. In
conclusion, cholecystectomy could be tried in these symptomatic
’hanging’ gallbladders, probably more readily than is usually done.
P054
SURGERY OF BILIARYLITHIASIS IN AN AGED PATIENT.
OUREXPERIENCE ON 238 CASES.
M.V. TATA P.CRETI, S. MORINI, R. PAGANI
Surgical Department, San Giacomo in Augusta Hospital, Roma, Italy
Biliary lithiasis is a pathology very frequent in the advanced age and
represents 20% of our surgical experience on the aged patient. In the time
included between 1980 and 1990, in the Surgical Department of San
Giacomo Hospital in Augusta of Rome, 238 patients (61 M and 177 F)
affected by calcolosis of biliary tracts have been operated of age included
between 75 and 93 years, average (79.42). 154 patients 65% (41 M and
113 F) have been operated with 13 deceases (8%) 2 M and 11 F during the
hospitalization. 84 patients (35%) 20 M and 64 F have been operated in
urgency with 14 deceases (16%) 6 M and 8 F during the hospitalization. 9
patients have undergone a re-operation from the 15th day postoperative to
18 months. In 11 patient an acute pancreatitis was present. The operations
executed have been the following: cholecystectomy (230),
cholecystostomy (4), choledocholithotomy (22), drainage of main bile
duct (48), papillostomy (64), biliodigestive anastomosis (23), close of
biliary fistula (10), deletion of infundibulum of the cholecystis (1),
drainage of thorax and abdomen (1). In 37 patients an associated
pathology was present that has required a contemporary surgical
treatment. Surgical therapy of biliary lithiasis presents in the aged patient a
risk moderately increased as to the classes of inferior ages. Unfortunately
the reluctance to refer an aged patient ot surgical therapy often compels
the surgeon to intervene on complex situations and often in urgency,
greatly increasing the operative risk.
53
P055
NONINVASIVE DIAGNOSIS OF HEMANGIOMA OF THE
LIVER
ATHLIN L, EKELUND L, BJORNEBRINKJ.
University ofUme, Sweden
It is important to separate benign cavernous hemangiomas ofthe liver
from primary and secondary malignant tumors. Ultrasonography (US),
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MR[) have
been reported to be of value in the differential diagnosis. In this study we
compared CT and low-field MR[ in the diagnosis ofhemangioma in the
liver in 12 pts with median age 52 years. Hematological and liver function
tests, CEA and AFP were within normal limits. MR[, CT and US were
performed in all pts and angiography in 3 pts. MR images of the liver
were obtained with a low-field resistive magnet operating at 0.02 T or
0.04 T. Prior to i.v. contrast administration all tumors were low attenuated
at CT, followed by varying degrees of contrast enhancement. At MR[ a
considerably increased homogenous signal intensity on T2-weighted
images was characteristic considered more or less as patognomonic. In
conclusion we found it possible to demonstrate hemangioma ofthe liver
with MR[ also at ultra-low field strength.
P056
UNUSUAL PRESENTATIONS OF BRUCELLARLIVER
ABSCESS REQUIRING SURGICAL TREATMENT
I. DIAZ, J. BALSELLS, C. MARGARIT
H-B-P. Unit, Department of Surgery, Hospital General Vall d’Hebron. Universidad
Autonoma. Barcelona, Spain
Brucellar liver abscess is an exceptional complication of chronic
brucellosis, although liver involvement in brucellosis is frequent, as
nonspecific or granulomatous hepatits. We present two cases that required
surgical treatment. First case: a 48 years old female patient was diagnosed
of brucellar liver abscess and treated with percutaneous drainage and
antibiotics. One year later a chronic bile fistula remained after the PT
drainage. ACT scan showed a persistent small lesion with calcium
deposits in the liver. The patient underwent a surgical excision ofthe
fistulous tract and the hepatic granuloma without complications.
Second case: a 33 years old female patient presented with abdominal
pain. An abdominal US and CT scan showed a 6 cm low atttenuation
lesion with central calcification in the right hepatic lobe. A solid liver
tumor involving the right lobe and diaphragm was found at operation. A
right hepatectomy with partial excision of the right diaphragm was
performed. The patient made and uneventful recovery, The pathology
exam showed a tuberculoid liver abscess with caseous necrosis. Cultures
and Ziehl exam were negatives. The diagnosis ofbrucellar hepatic abscess
was made because brucella agglutination titer was reported positive. Past
history revealed an febrile episode 2 years before that resolved
spontaneously, serology test were then negative. Despite medical therapy
and percutaneous drainage, most ofthe reported cases of brucellar abscess
had required surgical drainage or resection. Furthermore, sometimes a
diagnosis of liver tumor cannot be ruled out and hepatic resection is
indicated.
P057
UNRELIABILITY OF THEPRE-OPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS IN
CASES OF FOCAL NODULAR HYPERPLASIA
G. GOZZETTI, G.L. GRAZI, E. JOVINE, A. FRENA, A. MAZZIOTTI
Clinica Chirurgica 2,University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
The correct diagnosis ofbenign liver lesions is often difficult on the
simply basis of the pre-operative imaging, especially in pts monitored for
neoplastic diseases. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively
reviewed the hospital charts of 14 pts with different pre-operative
diagnosis who had a liver resection done and in whom the presence of
FNH could be assessed only after the examination of the surgical
specimen. Three pts were male and 11 female. The mean age was 41.3
years (range 21-62). All the pts had a pre-op US scan, 12 a CT scan, 8 an
hepatic angiography and 4 an MR scan. RESULTS: Two lesions were
detected intra-op, during surgery for colo-rectal cancer. FNH was
correctly diagnosed in 3 (21.4%) pts at US, in 2 (16.6%) pts at CT scan
and in (12.5%) at angiography. No lesions at all were seen in (7.1%)
US scan and in 2 (16.6%) CT scans. In the remaining pts uncorrected
diagnosis of HCC, hamartoma, metastasis, hydatidosis and
cholangiocarcinoma where formulated.
CONCLUSIONS: The large diffusion of the non-invasive imaging
revealed a ever more frequent number ofhepatic lesions. Nevertheless the
pre-op, diagnosis of FNH remains a diagnostic dilemma and FNH is often
a post-operative finding. In dubious cases surgical removal the lesion has
to be performed.
P058
INDICATION AND RESULTS OF RESECTION IN BENIGN
LIVER TUMORS
U. KANIA J. KALFF, K. WALGENBACH, A. HIRNER
Department of Surgery, Bonn University Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25.5300
Bonn 1, Germany
The indication for a surgical intervention of benign lesions ofthe liver
can be summarized as followed:
Benign adenoma ofthe liver are an indication for hepatic resection
because oftheir incidence ofbleeding complications and the possibility of
malignant transformation. Focal nodular hyperplasia should only be
operated on for diagnostical reasons or for symptoms caused by extensive
tumor size. Scintigraphy (HIDA-Scan) plays a major role as a diagnostical
tool for the differential diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia. The
potential danger of a ruptur ofhemangioma ofthe liver is often
overestimated. The incidence is approx. 5%. Surgical treatment is only
necessary for cavernous giant hemangioma and hemangioendothelioma in
pediatric patients with symptomatic a-v shunting and resulting cardiac
insufficiency.
Cautious indication for hepatic resection in benign hepatic tumors led to
an operative treatment in 30 of our patients during the last 2 1/2 years.
Hospital mortality was 0 %. The morbidity rate was below 10%.
54
P059
PERCUTANEOUS DRAINAGE OF PYOGENIC HEPATIC
ABSCESSES
D.CUZZOCREA C. FAMULARI.
G. Mazzeo, S. Pante’, T. Centorrino, M.T. Fonti, V. Lepore, A. Certo, O. Freni.
Depart. of Surgical Pathology (Chief: D. Cuzzocrea M.D.) Messina University Italy
The goal of our study aimed to value the efficacy ofpercutaneous
drainage (PD) in the management ofpatients with single pyogenic hepatic
abscesses (SPHA). Between 1989- 1991, 4 patients, average 52 years
with SPHA, all in the right lobe, were treated with PD, by US or CT
guidance. In 2 patients was necessary to insert two catheters to get a better
drainage of the abscess cavity (AC). The aspirated purulent material was
sterile in 3 cases and an association ofbroad-spectrum antibiotics was
administered by systemical and topical way; the bacterial growth was
positive (Stafilococcus aureus) in case and a specific antibiotic was
given by the same way. No morbidity or mortality is reported. Drainage of
the hepatic AC was maintained for an average of 30 days and the average
hospital stay was 38 days. Follow up confirmed in all cases the AC
disappearance and no disease relapse. We believe that PD of SPHA
combined with systemic and topical antibiotic therapy should be the
treatment of first choice because this method, characterized by a low
morbidity and mortality rate, can avoid to the critically ill patient the
surgical stress.
P060
HEPATOCELLULARADENOMA:
EXPERIENCE IN 29 PATIENTS
A. WEIMANN B. RINGE, J. KLEMPNAUER, P. LAMESCH, R. PICHLMAYR
Klinik ffir abdominal- und Transplantationsclfirurgie Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Hannover, FRG
INTRODUCTION: In hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) differential
diagnosis including focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) may be difficult. Indication for surgery in HCA arises
from the tendency for spontaneous bleeding and development of
malignancy.
PATIENTS AND RESULTS: From 1980 to October 1991 diagnosis of
HCA was established in 29 of 308 patients (pts) with benign liver tumors
(9.4%). Female/male ratio was 3:1:1, median age 31 (range 15-58) years.
Median tumor diameter was 12 (range 4-20) cm. Use of oral
contraceptives was known in 11 women (50%). Upper abdominal
symptoms led to diagnosis in 19 pts (65.5%). Tumor bleeding occured in
7 pts (24.1%) requiring emergency laparotomy in 3 pts (10.3%). Prior to
surgery, dignity of the tumor remained unknown in 22 pts (75.9%).
Resection of the tumor was performed in 22 pts with an operative death of
one pt (mortality 4.5%). Liver transplantation was successfully performed
in four pts (three with glycogenosis type I). One pt with glycogenosis had
undergone previous resection for HCA with incidental HCC. At the time
of transplantation the resection specimen revealed multiple HCA without
signs of malignancy.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that HCA resection is required
to prevent bleeding and development of HCC. According to previously
published results our strategy in benign liver tumor is to diagnose
hemangioma and FNH by bloodpool- and cholescintigraphy and to
operate on all tumors with uncertain dignity because HCA cannot be ruled
out.
P061
THE DIFFICULTIES OF AN EXACT DIAGNOSIS OF BENIGN
LIVER TUMORS AND THE SURGICAL CONSEQUENCE
K. RADEBOLD J.R. SIEWERT
Dept. of Surgery, TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF MUNICH, GERMANY
Diagnostic procedures often fail to evaluate the dignity of liver tumors.
Operative resection is the consequence to establish an accurate diagnosis.
This is of high importance in patients with an underlying malignancy.
Patients: Between 1982 and 1991 we diagnosed 51 benign liver tumors
in 17 men (33%) and 34 women (67%) with an average age of 52.7 years.
In 13 patients (25.5%) there was a coexisting malignant tumor.
Histology: There were hemangiomas n=31 (M:F 1:1.3), focular
nodular hyperplasias n=13 (M:F=I:3), adenomas n=5, lymphangioma
n=1, cholangiofibroma n=l.
Diagnosis: 23 tumors (45%) were discovered with ultrasound in
patients with unspecific abdominal pain (ofthese 14 were resected). 17
tumors (33.3%) were found accidentally during an operation, 5 (10%) in
routine diagnostic evaluation before cancer resection (4X operation) and 6
(11.7%) in follow-up studies (2x op.).
Treatment: There was an indication for operative resection in 34
patients (66.6%) and hepatic artery embolisation in one: 10 x radiological
confirmation (CT-scan, MR, ultrasonography) could not be obtained, so
resection followed, l0 tumors discovered intraoperatively were easily
removed; 9 tumors were resected because of coexisting cancer, and in 5
cases patients became symptomatic as an indication for operation.
Resection is the treatment of choice 1. when there is an uncertainty of
diagnosis 2. in patients with a coexisting malignancy (to plan further
cancer therapy) 3. in symptomatic patients 4. in large adenomas with the
risk of malignancy and hemorrhage.
P062
AMOEBOMAS OF LIVER TREATED BY PERCUTANEOUS
DRAINAGE reportoftwo cases
N. IVANIS. M. RUBINIC,
Department of Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology Division, KBC Rijeka, Croatia
This is the report of two patients in whom the diagnosis and treatment
of liver amoebomas was made by ultrasound guided percutaneous
aspiration puncture. Both were young patients, 33 year old woman and 38
year old man. After the establishment of diagnosis, we decided to treat
these amoebomas by percutaneous drainage and systemic intravenous use
of metronidazol. In the case of young woman, the result of treatment was
little residual cyst ofthe left lobe which contained clear and sterile liquid.
In the second patient amoeboma completely dissapeared with total
restitution of the liver parenchyma.
In both cases the successful management of liver amoebomas was done
by percutaneous drainage with Angiomed LADS set, guided under the
ultrasound control (Hitachi EUB 410).
On the poster all phases of the treatment of our patients are shown.
55
P063
SIMPLIFIED TECHNIQUE FORPLACEMENT OF THE NEW
DENVERPERITONEOVENOUS SHUNT
R.H. LUND
Associate Professor of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.A.
In 1990, the Denver Biomaterials Company developed a new
peritoneovenous shunt, with a reduced venous calibre, allowing for easier
access to the superior vena cava. The new shunt reduces the operative
time, is more conductive to local anesthesia, and is associated with
reduced complications.
The flow dynamics of the shunt are presented.
A technique of inserting the shunt with the use of peel-away introducers
for both the peritoneo and venous insertion is described in detail.
The new Denver shunt, with this technique, is associated with
decreased operative morbidity and with post-op complications. The shunt
has been used satisfactorily in both malignant and non-malignant ascites.
P064
GENETIC ASPECTS OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS AND CHRONIC
ACTIVEHEPATITIS
A.V. SHAPOSHNIKOV S.A. SHAPOSHNIKOV, V.G.R. NAYANAR,
Department of Surgery, Rostov Medical Institute, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
We studied the following genetic characters in 107 patients with liver
cirrhosis(LC) & 58 patients with chronic active hepatitis (CAN);
Geneological analysis: types of body constitution, antropometric indices
(height, weight, types of hands & feet); Dermatoglyphics ofpalms &
fingers; the ABO system & Rh(D) factor. These characters were also
studied in 250 healthy men & women. In the Child’s classification of LC,
the patients under Child A were 7; B-57; C-43. Out of these 40 patients
were subjected to different types of operations. Investigations showed that
in the first generation the heritability of LC 8= CAH was 30.4% & 41.6%
resp. Ectomorphic type ofbody constitution was more predominant in LC
patients (men-44.6% women-36.2%, in healthy 14.2% & 6.3% resp.).
Analysis of finger & palm dermatograms revealed that indices of
Furrugata & Cummings in male patients with LC was low (44.7 & 57.6
resp.), in healthy 68 & 101. These indices were extremely low in female
patients with CAH (5.2 & 18.9) in healthy -62.2 & 101.4. Dunkmeirs
index raised by 10 times (333.3), in healthy 30.9. Amongst patients with
LC palm line "E" goes right across the palm in 12.5%, in healthy 0%.
Patients with LC more often have A-antigen (60.0%) & Rh negative
(50.0%), in healthy -36.7% & 17.6% resp. In conclusion it can be
presumed that LC & CAH have hereditary predisposition.
P065
ALTERATION OF FLUIDITY OF LIVER CELL MEMBRANES
(LCM) FOLLOWING PORTAL BRANCH LIGATION IN
CIRRHOTIC AND NORMAL RATS
MITSUAKI KOHMOTO JUNJI TANAKA, WANG BEN ZHANG,
MASANORI YOSHIDA, TAKAYUKI KASAMATSU, KEN-ICHI FUJITA,
JUN TAMURA
The First Department Of Surgery, Kyoto University School Of Medicine
Recent interventional modalities have enabled to apply preoperative
portal branch embolization thereby leading to safe hepatectomy. On the
other hand, membrane fluidity is suggested to play an important role on
cellular function. Present study was aimed to clarify the LCM function
following portal vein ligation (PBL) in cirrhotic and normal rats. Materials
and methods: Cirrhosis was induced by an intraperitoneal injection of
thioacetamide for 3 months. PBL refferring to 70% volume of liver was
conducted. Membrane fraction was collected by gradient centrifugation.
Fluidity was determined by measuring fluorescence polarization (P-value)
with DPH as probe dye. Results: P-values of normal LCM are maintained
in narrow range of 0.181_+0.012 (mear_+SD). In normal liver, the P-values
were decreased to 0.172 and 0.165 at 12 and 24 hours after PBL, then
followed by a gradual recovery to normal level on 7th day. In contrast, P-
values of LCM from ligated lobe were increased to 0.196 at 12 hours after
PBL and persistently high until 7th day. On the other hand, in cirrhotic
liver, the P-values were decreased to 0.175, 0.161, 0.165, 0.164, 0.165,
0.180 and 0.188 at 12, 24, 48 hours, 1, 2, 3 and 5 weeks after PBL. In
ligated lobe, the high P-values were continued until 5 weeks studied.
Conclusions: Above results indicate that cirrhotic liver requires for longer
time in restoring membrane function than normal.
P066
CHANGES IN CHEMICAL MEDIATOR RELEASE AND
SURFACE MARKEREXPRFSION OF PRIMARY CULTURED
RATAND H12VIAN HEPATIC MACROPHAGES IN LIVER
CIRRHOSIS
N.FUNAKI. S.ARII, T.SASAOKI, Y. ADACHI,
H. HIGASHITSUJI, S. FUJITA, M. FURUTANI, ,M. MISE, J. TANAKA, AND T.TOBE
First Department of Surgery, Kyoto University, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Liver cirrhosis has been well-know by the weakened host defence and
altered metabolism which tend to cause serious perioperative
complications. In our attempt to clarify this mechanism and to improve the
perioperative treatment, we analyzed hepatic macrophages (HM) from
male Wistar rat and human of their secretary ability of highly potent
mediators and surface markers thought to serve for intercellular
communications.
HM from rat with CC14-induced cirrhosis showed reduction in O2-,
PGE2, and TNF releases, and increases of IL-1 release compared to that
from normal liver rat. Surface expressions of IL-2 receptor, and Ia and
asialo-GM antigens were also decreased in cirrhotic rat.
Human HM from cirrhotic specimen also showed reduction of Oz-release, and increase of IL- release compared to that from normal liver
specimen, and decreased PGE production in accordance with
deterioration of liver function.
Our results may suggest the possible participation of functionally-
altered HM in the changes ofhost defence and metabolism in liver
cirrhosis.
56
P067
CELL KINETICS FOLLOWINGPORTAL BRANCHLIGATION
IN NORMAL AND CIRRHOTIC RATS
KEN-ICHI FUJITA JUNJI TANAKA, JUN TAMURA,
MITSUAKI KOHMOTO, MASANORI YOSHIDA, TAKAYUKI KASAMATSU,
WANG BEN ZHANG
It is well known that portal branch ligation (PBL) induces a
regeneration and an atrophy in the nonligated and ligated lobes. This
phenomenon has been clinically applied for safe hepatectomy. The present
study was aimed to investigate cell kinetics following PBL in normal and
cirrhotic rats. Materials and methods: Cirrhosis was conducted to an
intraperitoneal injection of thioacetamide for 12 weeks. PBL referring to
about 70% volume of liver was performed in normal and cirrhotic rats.
Cell kinetics were analyzed using flow cytometry with 2-color analysis of
propidium iodide and FITC-conjugated antibody for bolusly injected
BrdU. Results; DNA histogram changed as follows; Diploid nuclei in
non-ligated lobe: 57% (25), 76.8 (36.5), 52.6 (26.5), 57 (37), 42 (18.5), 50
(26) at 24, 48, 72, 168 and 336 hours after PBL in cirrhotic rats (normal).
In ligated lobe, C2 nuclei were; 57% (25), 73 (36), 66 (32), 60 (57), 48
(29), 55 (21) at the given time course. DNA histogram of cirrhotic rats
showed similar tendency to those of normal. On the other hand, the peak
of BrdU uptaken nuclei in nonligated lobe were delayed up to 3 days, in
reference to 2 days in normal. No significant measurement were observed
either normal, cirrhosis or ligated and non-ligated lobes. Conclusion:
Above results suggest that cirrhotic liver has similar cell kinetics after
portal branch ligation but delayed peak of S-phase. Such time-consuming
regeneration in cirrhotic liver may need longer observation until safe
operation.
P068
MAJORSURGERY FORHEPATIC HYDATIDOSIS
G. BELLI, A. MONACO, M.F. ARMELLINO, F. PASTENA AND
M.L. SANTANGELO
Istituto Chirurgia generale Trapianti II Faculty University of Naples, Naples, Italy
During the last years hepatic hydatidosis has been usually treated by
marsupialization. Only recently aggressive surgical procedures, such as
hepatic resections and peficystectomy, have gained worldwide
acceptance. At our Istitution between 1983 and 1990, fifteen patients with
hepatic hydatidosis were treated, including three recurrences. There were
9 females and 6 males with an average age of 48.7 years (range 31-71).
The location ofthe cyst was: right lobe 11, left lobe 1, caudate lobe 1,
right lobe plus IV segment 2. The marsupialization was performed in 5
cases, capitonnage in 1, peficystectomy in 8 and right trisegmentectomy in
1. Two biliary fistulas after marsupialization and one digestive emorragy
by peptic ulcer after pericystectomy were observed. We had no
postoperatory mortality and no recurrence was observed in the follow-up
(1 7 years). Due to the low incidence of morbidity, mortality and
recurrence we conclude that pericystectomy or hepatic resection, when
indicated, should be the treatment of choice for hepatic hydatidosis.
P069
BILIARY COMPLICATIONS IN LIVERHYDATIDOSIS:
INCIDENCE, SURGICAL TREATMENT AND OUTCOME
G.M. DANIELE G. PISANO, G. GARAU, M. POMATA
Dept. Gen. Surgery, University of Cagliari
Ospedale S. Giovanni di Dio, 09124 Cagliari, Italy
Biliary complications in liver hydatidosis include rupture of the cyst
into the biliary tract and what is commonly called parahydatid pathology:
that is gallstones, common bile duct stones and papillitis. The present
study was undertaken to evaluate the real incidence of such complications
and the results of surgery over a large series ofpatients operated on for
hydatid cysts of the liver. Over a total of 261 patients, biliary rupture
occurred in 57 cases (21.8%) and parahydatid pathology in 58 cases
(22.2%). Biliary rupture was found most frequently in single cysts
(78.9%), mainly large ones (45.6%). The site of rupture involved the fight
and left hepatic duct in 61.4% of the cases. In 9 patients (15.9%) rupture
was found in recurrent cysts. Radical procedures (hepatic resection and
total pericystectomy) were possible in 61.4% of the cases. Biliary drainage
was accomplished in all cases ofbiliary rupture, in 31 patients with
parahydatid pathology and in other 21 cases of the whole series. For this
purpose elective procedure was transduodenal sphyncteroplasty
performed in a total of 107 patients. Mortality related to the 57 cases of
biliary rupture was 5.2% and postoperative complications in the same
group was 30.3%. The authors stress the importance of transduodenal
sphyncteroplasty as the procedure of choice in such complications of liver
hydatidosis.
P070
HAEMOPERITONEUM AS INITIAL SIGN OF POST-
TRAUMATIC RUPTURE OF HEPATIC HYDAT1D CYST
(PRHHC): A CASE REPORT
c. FAMULARI. G. MAZZEO, A. MACRI’, M.L. TERRANOVA, T. CENTORRINO,
M.T. FONTI, V. LEPORE, D. CUZZOCREA.
Surgical Pathology Messina University Italy
A young man was admitted as emergency with a clinical feature of
severe hypovolaemic shock and an history of abdominal trauma. The US
and CT scan revealed a cystic lesion ( 82 mm) oftype according Gharbi
classification in the 7th segment and an unhomogeneous area of deep
parenchymal laceration (0 80 ram) interesting the 5th and the 6th segment
of the liver; a considerable hemoperitoneum was present. At emergency
laparotomy the exploration of the liver pointed out a fight hilar
echinococcal cyst with an anterior and posterior tear ofpericyst, full of
clotted blood; the endocyst was found in pelvis and taken away. A total
pericystectomy with US guidance was performed, the residual cavity was
closed. We preferred to leave "in situ" the cyst in the 7th segment and
treat it afterwards by PAIR technique. The peritoneal cavity was washed
with 1% cetrimide solution to prevent metastatic hydatosis. The patients
was discharged well in 18th day with albendazole. Follow up at 9 months
results free ofrelapse. We emphasize that hemoperitoneum as intial sign
of PRHHC put diagnostic doubts for the unusual clinical presentation and
for the US and CT images suggestive of liver parenchyma lesion. Total
pericystectomy is the most efficient surgical technique in the treatment of
hydatid cysts.
57
P071
HEPATIC ECHINOCOCCOSIS. A BENIGNDISEASE?
T. LIAKAOS. J. KOUFOPOULOS, D. KAKOULIDIS. S. DENDRINOS
2nd Surgical Department of Athens General Hospital.
152 Mesogeion Av. Athens Greece.
To assess the efficacy of various surgical techniques in the treatment of
hepatic enchinococcosis we reviewed 325 operations which were carried
out from January 1973 till December 1990 on 254 patients with liver
hydatid disease. We performed 70 radical pericystectomies with or
without typical hepatic resections (group A) and 247 conservative surgical
procedures (group B). There was postoperative death in group A and 3
in group B (overall mortality rate 1.5%). Mean hospital stay was 14 and
14.5 respectively. 12 major complications (17%) were noted in group A,5
of which (7.1%) required reoperation. In group B there 55 major
complications (22.2%) p<0.05 and 13 of those (5.2%) were also
reoperated p<0.05.
A total of 221 patients (88.4%) were available for follow-up (mean
follow up time 8.7 years). Recurrent disease was detected with liver
nucleotide scan (in the early patients), ultrasonography, CT-scan and
serologic tests. 63 reoperations were carried out for recurrent disease in 51
patients from both groups (overall recurrence rate 23%). The recurrence
rate was 11.6% (8 patients) and 23.7% (43 patients) for group A and B
respectively p<0.05.
Though the mean hospital stay, the rate of major complications and
reoperations were almost identical in both groups the control of the
recurrence seems to be better in group A. We think that the use of radical
procedures on every case could be extremely hazardous and the increased
morbidity will outweigh the benefits of the recurrence control. The
surgical treatment of the hepatic hydatid cyst is a difficult and complicated
procedure and the recurrence rate of the disease is still very high. We
believe that the future of its treatment lies on the development of new
chemotherapeutic agents.
P072
MANAGEMENT OF HYDATID CYST-INTRAHEPATIC BILE
DUCT COMMUNICATIONS
M.MILICEVIC B.STEFANOVIC, Z.RADOVIC, M.BULAJIC, M.PETROVIC, I.JEKIC,
P.BULAJIAC AND D. STEFANOVIC
Institute for Digestive Diseases, University Clinical Center,
Belgrade 11000, Yugoslavia, Koste Todorovica br. 6
A total of 368 patients with hydatid cysts of the liver were operated at
the Institute during a period ranging from 01.01.1966. to 01.01. 1990.
Hydatid cyst-intrahepatic bile duct communications were found in 90 pts.
(24.5%). Age of the patients ranged from 12 to 66 years with a median
age of 39.9 years. The diameter of the cysts ranged from 5.5cm to 20cm
with a median diameter of 10cm. Solitary cysts were found in 76.4 pts and
the right lobe was involved in 68.1% pts.
When possible (visible large communication) bile ducts were visualized
(intraoperative cholangiography or intraoperative ultrasound) and level of
communication assessed.
Operative management was suture in 73 pts. (81.1%-minor, peripheral
ducts), suture combined with "T" drainage and choledochoduodeno-
anastomosis in 10 pts. (11.1%), while 7 pts. (7.8%)had "T" drainage only.
The postoperative stay ranged from 7 to 93 days, the average stay was
24.7 days. The most frequent complications were wound infection 21 pts.
(23.3%), pleural effusion in 13 pts. (14.3%) and biliary fistula in 7 pts.
(7.7%).
The long hospital stay was predominantly due to infection and secretion
of the wound. Biliary fistula closed spontaneously in 4 pts., and
endoscopic sphincterotomy was necessary in 3 pts. The authors conclude
that hydatid cyst-intrahepatic bile duct communications are frequent and
during operation they have to be looked for regardless of the color of the
cystic content. Prolonged hospital stay is due to a high incidence of
infected cystic contents and resulting postoperative infection. Long term
results are good, conservative management spares liver tissue and
postoperative duct fistulas can be managed without operation.
P073
RUPTURE OF HYDATID CYST OF THE LIVER INTO THE
BILIARY TRACT
A.PAPAVASILIOU C.SIMOPOULOS, A.POLYCHRONIDEDS, A.BOUNOVAS
Propedeutic Dept. of Surgery, Thrace University, Alexandroupolis, Hellas.
Rupture of hydatid cyst of the liver into the biliary tract is the most
common complication of the disease, with an incidence up to 5-25%
18 patients underwent operation for intrabiliary rupture of hydatid cysts.
In our series, 10 were females, (aged 32-80 years, mean 48 years) and 8
males (aged 15-73 years, mean 47 years).
Four types of operations were performed:
1. Exploration and drainage of the common bile duct by T-tube, and
external drainage of the cyst. (11 patients).
2. Choledochoduodenostomy and external drainage of the cyst. (3
patients).
3. Common bile duct exploration and choledochoduodenostomy
without external drainage of the cyst. (2 patients).
4. Common bile duct exploration and external drainage with T-tube,
without external drainage of the cyst (2 patients).
Choledochoduodenostomy is prefered in dilated ducts, whereas
sphincteroplasty seems to be more suitable in cases with normal common
duct.
P074
SUCCESSFUL ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT OF
POSTOPERATIVE BILE LEAK (PBL) AFTERSURGICAL
TREATMENT OF LIVERHYDATID CYST DISEASE (HCD)
AA POLYDOROU. C VAGIANOS. E SKANTZOS, E KRESPIS, ANDROULAKIS
Departments of Surgery, Hippocration Hospital, Athens Rion University Hospital, Patrai,
GREECE
Persisted PBL is a serious complication following surgical treatment of
liver HCD. Until recently relaparotomy was necessary. We describe five
cases of external PBL after surgical drainage of liver HCD successfully
treated by endoscopic sphincterotomy (EST) and nasobiliary drain (NB)
placement. Four patients were male and the mean age was 45 yrs (25-70).
The patients had high output external biliary fistulas (500-1800 ml/day)
persisted for a period of 4-20 weeks. ERCP demonstrated the site of
biliary leakage in all patients. EST was performed and a 7 Fr NB was
placed at the closest possible site where the bile leak was detected by the
cholangiography. Bile was continuously aspirated through the NB using
an underwater drainage system, applying a negative pressure of 20cm
H20. After this procedure the bile leak was decreased dramatically and
ceased in all patients 5-15 days later. Repeat cholangiograms confirmed
the fistulas healing and the NB were then removed. There were no
complications of EST or NB placement. ERCP is highly effective in
determining the site ofbiliary leakage. In high output fistulas with
multiple communications with the biliary tree EST may not be sufficient
treatment. The selective placement of a NB drain combined with
continuous aspiration ofbile seems to be the treatment of choice in
patients with high output external PBL following surgical treatment of
liver HCD.
58
P075
CT DIAGNOSIS OF HEPATIC ECHINOCOCCOSIS
xu MING-QIAN, DONG ZHAO-HO
The People’s General Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Urumqi, Xinjiang,
830001 China
The diagnosis of hydatid disease is based on: (1) a history of contact
with dogs or sheep in prevailing areas; (2) absence of subjective
symptoms in early stage ofinfection and the gradual occurrence of
pressure symptoms with the slow growth of hydatid cyst; (3) the
formation of liver abscess as a result of complicated infection ofhydatid
cyst and the development of acute abdomenal pain and anaphylactic shock
as a consequence ofrupture ofhydatid cyst; (4) the typical sign on
palpation ofhydatid cyst projecting under the liver; (5) the acoustic
images displayed by ultrasonic detection; and (6) immunological
diagnosis.
These procedures, however, are difficult to find early pathological
changes. The use of computerized X-ray tomography in the diagnosis of
hepatic echinococcosis not only makes it possible to diagnose an
asymptomatic parasite-carrier but also detects accurately images of
various pathological pictures of hydatid cyst. The preoperative diagnostic
accuracy rate in this series was 98.8%.
P076
PALLIATIVE TREATMENT OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
MALIGNANT LIVERNEOPLASMS
EMM.BANDOUVAS. N.ALEANDRIDOU, J.PARHARIDOU, E.ANDROULAKAKIS,
C.KOUNDOURIS, KALISTROS, ASTERIADIS, E.KIVERNITAKI, P.KADMAKIS,
A.MITSIS, A.SALMARIDIS, H.MARGARI, E.KOURI, H.KARAIOSIFIDOU
"Helena Venizelou" Hospital, 2 E. Venizelou Sq., GR-11521 Athens, Greece
The majority of patients with primary or secondary liver malignancies
are not suitable for radical surgical procedures aiming at removal of the
tumours.
We are referred to 102 patients, 30 of whom with colorectal metastatic
cancer were treated with chemotherapy and had got median response total
rate 40% median duration ofresponmders 6 months, median survival rate
of responders 12 months and non responders 6 months. Forty patients had
got local arterial administration of chemotherapeutics with 80% response
and 10 months duration of it and median survival 18 months against 13
months median survival of non responders. Twenty patients with single
or metastatic tumours were treated by resection and showed 5 years
survival time in up to 50% 10 year survival in 25%. Twelve patients
treated by transient occlusion ofthe hepatic artery combines with regional
cytostatic infusion had got total response rate: 90%, duration 16 months,
survival rate: 22 months.
The most preferable method of treatment in unresectable cases is
transient occlusion of the hepatic artery combined with intra-arterial
cytostatic infusion, because of comparatively low peroperative mortality.
P077
ATTITIYDES TOWARDS DETECTION ANDMANAGEMENT
OF HEPATIC METASTASES: A SECOND LOOKAFTERFIVE
YEARS
D.J. BRUINVELS L.M. DE BRAUW, J.KIEVIT, C.J.H. VAN DE VELDE,
Department of Surgery, University Hospital Leiden, The Netherlands
In order to obtain information about attitudes towards detection and
management of hepatic metastases of colorectal origin, five years ago a
questionnaire was sent to 248 hospitals in 13 western countries. The
response rate was 98%.
In 98% of all hospitals a standardised follow up regimen was used, in
84% cea-levels were measured, and hepatic resection of liver metastases
was performed in 95%. However, resectability creteria varied
considerably between countries and hospitals, ranging from solitary
metastases in most Dutch and British hospitals to multiple bilobar
metastases in most German hospitals.
Concerning non-operative treatment, the majority (74%) of all hospitals
administered some form of chemotherapeutic treatment to patients with
irresectable metastases, while 33% gave supplied adjuvant chemotherapy
after resection of hepatic metastases.
By using a simplifed decision analytic model based on the utility of
follow up, an extended questionnaire has been designed, and has been sent
to all 1960 members of the World Association of Hepato-Pancreato-
Biliary Surgery in November 1991. The results of this new investigation
will be compared with those of the preceding one, and will be evaluated
using decision analysis in order to assess the variability in and the
potential usefulness of liver surgery for colorectal cancer metastases.
P078
PATTERN OF RECURRENCE AFTERLIVERRFECTION
FOR COLORECTAL LIVERMETASTASES
G. GOZZETTI, G.L. GRAZI, E. JOVINE, A. GALLUCCI, A. MAZZIOTTI
Clinica Chirurgica 2 o, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Liver resection (LR) is still discussed in the cases ofpts with colorectal
matastasis for the high recurrence rate after surgery. PATIENTS AND
METHODS: In order to evaluate the patten ofrecurrence after curative
LR for colorectal metastases, 23 clinical variables of 64 pts operated on
over the past 10 years have been crosstabulated with the appearance of
recurrence and results have been evaluated by means of the chi-square
test. RESULTS: Thirty (46.9%) pts are currently alive and 34 (53.1%)
died. Recurrence appeared in 24 (40%) pts and it has been the cause death
in 16 pts. Four pts received a repeated LR for recurrence and 3 ofthem are
currently alive with a follow-up ranging from to 34 months. Univariate
analysis has shown that recurrence appeared more frequently in pts with
lesions of more than 5 cm and who had major LR (p<0.05), but the use of
perioperative blood transfusions seemed to be the most important single
factor for the development of new neoplastic lesions (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Care has to be take in monitoring patients after LR for
colorectal metastases, especially if some risk factors are present for
recurrence. Early detection of new lesions allows the performance of
repeated resections in selected cases, with satisfactory long-term survivals.
59
P079
DO ALTERATIONS IN RENAL HAEMODYNAMICS PREDICT
THE PRFENCE OF HEPATIC MICROMETASTASES?
SA JENKINS DM NOTT, YATES & T. COOKE
University Department of Surgery, Liverpool, UK
We have previously shown that the elevation in the hepatic
perfusion index (HPI) in the presence of overt tumour in the rat is
accompanied by a significant decrease in renal blood flow (RBF).
Since there is little information on the temporal relationship between
alterations in RBF and the growth and development of hepatic
tumour, we have undertaken such a study in the rat. Male Fisher rats
received an intraportal injection of 1.6 x 107 Walker cells and controls
with the same number of dead cells. RBF and hepatic blood flow
were measured by the microsphere method and by dynamic
scintigraphy 2,4,6, and 21 days after intraportal administration of
viable or dead Walker cells. Micrometastases were present
histologically at 4 days and the HPI (51.8+1.68) was significantly
greater (p<0.0001 Mann Whitney U test than in controls
(33.78+1.77). The increase in the HPI at 4 days was accompanied by
a significant increase in the mean renal transit time (3.95_+1.18 sec)
compared to controls (2.28_+0.48 secs). Conversely, the RBF was
significantly reduced in animals with micrometastases (7.32_+2.81
ml/min) compared to controls (14.02+3.42 ml/min). These changes in
HPI, renal transit time and RBF were maintained at 6 and 21 days.
These results suggest that RBF is reduced during the early stages of
growth and development of hepatic tumour. Furthermore, since
renograms with a flow phase are technically easier to perform in man
that estimations of the HPI, determination of RBF may be of value in
the detection of occult liver metastases.
P080
SANDOSTATIN (SMS) INHIBITS THE GROWTH OF TWO
ANIMALMODELS OF COLORECTAL LIVERMETASTASES
IN THE RAT
S.A. JENKINS, N. DAVIES, J. YATES, H. KYNASTON, B.A. TAYLOR
University of Liverpool Dept of Surgery, Liverpool, UK
The treatment of colorectal liver metastases cancer remains poor, the
majority of patients dying within one year of diagnosis. We have
developed two models of liver metastases which reliably produce hepatic
tumour following intraportal (IP) inoculation of tumour cell lines in which
we have investigated the effects of SMS on their growth and development.
Following IP injection of x 107 K12/Tr cells (an adenocarcinoma of
colonic origin syngeneic to the BDIX rat), or 4x106HSN cells (a
fibrosarcoma syngeneic to the Hooded Lister (HL) rat), groups of 12 rats
received either SMS 2 ug bd or saline (control) for 3 (HL rats) or 4 (BDIX
rats) weeks. There was a significant reduction (Mann Whitney U,
p<0.001) in the percentage hepatic replacement ofhepatic tumour in the
SMS treated grpups compared to controls, 17.5%, 5.7-24.2% and in HL
rats; median 2.7%, 0-26.5%; controls; median 76.4%, 56.3-85%. The
reduction in the growth and development ofboth types of tumour was
associated with a marked stimulation ofhepatic RES activity and a
decrease in liver blood flow compared to controls, offering an explanation,
at least in part, for the mechanism of action of the somatostatin analogue.
These results indicate that SMS significantly inhibits the progression of
hepatic tumour in two animal models of liver metastases and may be of
benefit in the treatment of hepatic metastases in man. Further studies are
required to evaluate this hypothesis.
P081
RETICULOENDOTHELIAL SYSTEM (RES) STIMULATION:
LEVAMISOLE COMPARED WITH OTHER KNOWN RES
STIMULANTS
S.A. JENKINS N. DAVIES, J. YATES, B.A. TAYLOR
University of Liverpool Dept of Surgery, Liverpool, UK
Combined adjuvant therapy with fluorouracil and the
immunomodulatory drug levamisole has been shown to significantly
increase survival in patients with Dukes C colorectal cancer. The reason
for levamisole’ efficacy is not known. We have compared the effect of
levamisole on the hepatic and splenic reticuloendothelial system (RES)
with other known RES stimulants. Groups of 10 male wistar rats received
either saline (control), glucan, zymosan, chlormethiazole, sandostatin or
levamisole. RES was assessd by the hepatic and splenic uptake of 99m Tc
sulphur colloid (SC), 20 minutes after an intravenous injection of 2.5 MBq
of colloid. Hepatic uptake of SC was significantly increased in all the
treatment groups (p<0.001 Mann whitney U), when compared to the
control group (medican, range). Controls (4.8, 2.6 16.3), glucan (14.9,
7.5- 30.1), zymosan (12.6, 6.8- 35.2k), chlormethiazole (24.1, 16.6-
34.3), sandostatin (34.4, 29.9 45.1) and levamisole (15.4, 6.3 17.6 ).
Splenic uptake of SC was significantly increased in all groups except the
levamisole group. Compared to controls, sandostatin increased uptake of
sulphur colloid significantly more than levamisole in both liver and spleen
(p<0.005). The results of this study suggest that levamisole is a stimulator
of hepatic RES function and this may account for its efficacy in adjuvant
therapy. Sandostatin is a more potent stimulator ofRES activity and its
use as an adjuvant in the treatment of colorectal cancer deserves further
investigation.
P082
EFFECTIVE TREATMENT OF LIVER TUMOURS IN RATS
WITH MELPHALANIN ISOLATED LIVERPERFUSION (ILP)
A. MARINELLI, LM DE BRAUW, P KUPPEN, CJH VAN DE VALDE
Departments of Surgery and Pathology, University Hospital Leiden,
P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands
The achieved concentration of cystostatic drugs in tumour tissue is an
important factor in determining the effectiveness of anticancer therapy. An
ILP technique has been developed to allow treatment with higher and
more effective doses of anticancer agents. Administering the maximally
tolerated doses (MTD) of melphalan in ILP (12mg/kg) and in hepatic
artery infusion (HAI; 6mg/kg), ILP resulted in a four times higher
concentration in liver tumour tissue. To determine the bonus effect of this
higher concentration in liver tumours, turnout bearing rats were randomly
assigned to five groups: three control groups (no treatment, sham HAI,
sham ILP) and two groups treated with the respective MTD of melphalan
in HAI and ILP. Both sham treatments had no effect on the tumours. In a
cell kinetic study flow cytometric DNA analysis revealed that tumour cells
in rats treated with melphalan in ILP were blocked much earlier in their
cell cycle than tumour cells in HAI treated rats. This suggests that higher
concentrations were achieved in tumour cells of ILP treated rats. In the
tumour growth study complete remissions were observed in nine out of
ten ILP but in none of the HAI treated rats. It can be concluded that
treatment with the MTD of melphalan in ILP did, but in HAI did not result
in high enough concentrations of melphalan in the tumour cells to kill
them and induce complete remissions. In our model the results with
melphalan were better than those with 5-fluorouracil and those with
mitomycin C. Therefore, in 1991 a clinical phase II study with melphalan
in ILP has been started in our department.
60
P083
THE USE OF SAPHENOUS VEIN GRAFTS TO CIRCUMVENT
ANATOMICAL VARIATIONS ENCOUNTERED AT HEPATIC
ARTERY CATHETERISATION
c s MCARDLE, A GOLDBERG, H ANDERSON, T G COOKE, D P LIEBERMAN,
STEWART
University Department of Surgery, Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, Scotland
The advantages of hepatic arterial chemotherapy for colorectal liver
metastases are an increase in tumour drug levels and reduction in systemic
toxicity. Complex surgical procedures have been described to insert and
maintain hepatic artery catheters. We describe a simple method of
inserting catheters.in patients with anomalous vascular anatomy.
Of 55 consecutive patients with colorectal liver metastases undergoing
hepatic artery catheterisation, anatomical variations were present in 18
(33%). Nine patients had a dual blood supply, most commonly an
unbranching right hepatic artery arising from the superior mesenteric
artery and a left hepatic artery arising from the coeliac axis.
In the latter patients, adequate perfusion was obtained by inserting two
catheters, one into the gastroduodenal artery to perfuse the left lobe and a
second into the right hepatic artery using a saphenous vein graft as a
conduit.
This technique is widely applicable to patients with abnormal hepatic
arterial anatomy.
P084
THE VALUE OF DUPLEX/COLOUR DOPPLER SONOGRAPHY
IN THE DETECTION OF COLORECTAL LIVERMETASTASES
c s MCARDLE E LEEN, A GOLDBERG, T G COOKE, ROBERTSON,
G R SUTHERLAND
University Department of Surgery and Department of Radiology, Royal Infirmary,
Glasgow, Scotland
Conventional imaging techniques are unable to detect small liver
metastases due to limited resolution and contrast differentiation. It is know
however that the presence of hepatic metastases leads to subtle changes in
liver blood flow, and it is possible that by monitoring these
haemodynamic changes, earlier detection of liver metastases may be
feasible. In this study, a novel method of detecting liver metastases by
measuring liver blood flow using a Duplex/Colour Doppler System was
assessed.
Hepatic arterial and portal venous blood-flows were measured in 16
controls, 50 patients with gastro-intestinal cancer and 6 patients with
breast cancer. The ratio of hepatic arterial: total liver blood-flow (Doppler
perfusion index, DPI) and the ratio of hepatic arterial: portal venous
blood-flow (Doppler flow ratio, DFR) were calculated.
The DPI and DFR values in patients with overt liver metastases were
significantly elevated when compared with controls (0.52+0.13 V
0.13+0.07 and 1.27+0.71 V 0.15+0.10 respectively: P<0.0001).
The results suggest that Duplex/Colour Doppler ultra-sound
measurement of hepatic perfusion changes may be of value in the
detection of liver metastases.
P085
RESULTS OF REGIONAL THERAPY FOR COLORECTAL
LIVERMETASTASES
c s MCARDLE. A GOLDBERG, H ANDERSON, T G COOKE, N WILLMOTT,
A WHATELEY, D KERR
University Department of Surgery, Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, Scotland
Until recently the results of systemic chemotheapy have been regarded
as disappointing. Attempts to improve response rates have been limited by
systemic toxictiy. Attention has therefore turned to the use of regional
therapy whereby high levels of therapeutic agent are achieved in the target
organ whilst systemic exposure is reduced.
We have developed and tested a variety of biodegradable and non-
biodegradable cytotoxic-loaded and radioactive microspheres to be
administered via an indwelling hepatic artery catheter with or without
Angiotensin II infusion. Systemic toxicity was minimal. Unfortunately,
although regression of stable disease was achieved in most patients,
survival was limited by the development of extrahepatic disease, mainly
lung metastases.
We have recently completed a phase study of weekly 24 hour regional
5-FU infusion in combination with folinic acid. Dose limiting toxicity was
encounted at 2.0 g/m2/week 5-FU, a level substantially above that used
systemically. Disease progression was delayed in all patients. To date,
none of the patients have died (follow up 8-16 months). A phase I! study
is now under way.
P086
PREOPERATIVE HEPATIC IMAGING IN THE DETECTION
OF COLORECTALMETASTASES
C.G. SCHULZE H. KELLER
Departments of Surgery and Radiology, University of Freiburg, Germany
Over a 36 month period, 26 patients with hepatic metastases of
colorectal carcinoma were preoperatively evaluated with 4 imaging
techniques. The results of ultrasonography (US), intravenously enhanced
computerized tomography (CT), selective hepatic arterial contrast CT, and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were compared with operative
findings including intraoperative US. A total of 49 lesions were identified,
the sensitivity for tumour detection being: arteriographically enhanced CT
86%, MR170%, CT 66%, and US 64%. This advantage for
arteriographically enhanced CT was most marked for lesions less than
cm in diameter. MRE was clearly superior to arteriographically enhanced
CT or CT in detecting vascular involvemnet (85% versus 30% and 12%,
respectively; p <0.01). A combination of ateriographically enhanced CT
and MRI should be used for preoperative assessment of hepatic
metastases.
61
P087
SURGICAL TREATMENTFORHEPATIC METASTASES
FROM COLORECTAL CANCER- INFLUENCE OF
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL FACTORS ON SURVIVAL
M. SHIMAZU Y. KOMORI, J. SUZUKI, T. ESAKI, A KIMURA, Y. YASUDA,
J. FJITA, H. SUGENOYA, A. HASUMI, M. MARUTA, H. AOKI
Department of Surgery, Fujita Health University School ofMedicine, Toyoake, Japan
From 1974 to 1991, 52 patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal
cancer underwent 57 curative hepatic resections. Thirty-two patients had
unilobular metastases (mutiple in 8 patients), and 20 patients had bilobular
mutiple metastases. The 1-month operative mortality rate was 0%. The
overall 5-year survival rate was 40.6%. Five-year survival rate of the
patients with unilobular metastases was 54.2%, significantly higher than
17.5% ofthe patients with bilobular metastases. The tumor distribution
rather than the number of metastases appeared to markedly influence the
survival rate after hepatic resection. In the patients with unilobulaar
lesions, metachronous metastases seemed to have survival advantages
when compared with synchronous metastases. In the patients with
bilobular lesions, the presence of small tumors _<10mm indicating the
latency of micrometastases seemed to prove poor survival within 19
months, althought 5-year survival rates of the patients with tumors>10
and>20 mm were 27.9% and 37.5%, respectively. Multivariate analysis
using Cox’ proportional hazard model showed that microscopic invasion
to sinusoidal space or intrahepatic portal vein was an independent
prognostic factor.
P088
PATTERN OF F-18-FLUORO-D-GLUCOSE (FDG)
ACCUMULATION IN LIVER TUMOURS: PRIMARY AND
SECONDARY CANCERS
F.W. SMITH. S.D. HEYS, N.T.S. EVANS, D. ROEDA, P. SHARP, J.R. MALLARD &
O. EREMIN.
Depts of Med. Physics, BioEng. and Surg, Aberdeen Univ, Medical School, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen AB9 2ZD
Thirteen patients, aged 56-72 years, with advanced coloretal cancer,
have been studied using F-18-FDG and Positron Emission Tomography
(PET). One patient had a histologically proven hepatoma and twelve had
adenocarcinoma of colon-rectum treated surgically. Ten of latter had liver
metastases but 2 had no evidence of hepatic involvement. In 7 of the
patients with metastatic tumour, a second examination was performed 4
weeks after treatment; in 3, a third examination was performed 5 months
later. In all cases, the radioactivity was seen to accumulate in the periphery
of the tumours with a large central area showing no uptake, and matching
the periphery of the tumour as demonstrated by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). In 5 cases imaged after immuno-chemotherapy (static
response ultrasound, x-ray CT and MRI), there was no change in tumour
uptake of 18-F-FDG when imaged with PET. In 2 patients, however,
tumour regression (>50%) was documented with serial 18-F-FDG and
PET and confirmed by other imaging modalities. In the 2 cases of
suspected but not proven metastases, no abnormal accumulation of F-18-
FDG was seen.
PET is a non-invasive and sensitive method for detecting hepatic
metastases and for monitoring response to treatment.
P089
INDUCTION INTRAARTERIAL CHEMOTHERAPY PLUS
CYTOREDUCT1VE SURGERY FOR MULTIPLE LIVER
METASTASES
M. STEVES. J. VIDAL-JOVE, P. SUGARBAKER
The Cancer Institute, Washington Hospital Center, l0 Irving St., NW Washington,
DC 20010
An estimate of 12% ofpatients with colorectal cancer will develop
metastases limited to the liver. Fifty percent of these will present multiple
liver metastases and therefore they will not be candidates for standard
surgical approach. Intraarterial chemotherapy alone results in high
response rates but little improvement in survival. The hepatic
cytoreduction protocol has combined the benefits ofregional
chemotherapy with consolidation surgery and/or interstitial radiation
therapy in a population of patients with multiple liver metastases. At
present, seven patients have been entered into this protocol study. Patients
were treated with induction hepatic artery infusion ofmitomycin C (20
mg/m infused via a peripherally placed catheter). Two cycles with 4
week intervals were employed before consolidation treatments. All
metastatic disease remaining in the liver was then resected using loop and
ball-tip electrocautery. Unresectable tumor nodules were treated by
radiation therapy using 125I seeds placed at 0.5cm intervals. No major
complications of this technique were observed. Follow-up has been short
and 3 patients are awaiting surgery. The hepatic cytoreduction protocol
with induction intraarterial chemotherapy provides a comprehensive
multimodality treament plan for patients with mutiple liver metastases.
(1)-R. Sarper, W.A. Fajman, V.A. Tarcan and D.W. Nixon. J Nucl Med
1981; 22:318-321
P090
RSU-1069 WITH DEARTERIALIZATION FOR LIVER
TUMOUR
LIQING WANG, BO G. PERSSON AND STIG BENGMARK
Dept. of Surgery, Lund University, Lurid Sweden
In this work we wanted to find out if a single dearterialization for 2
hours combined either with the new bioreductive drug RSU-1069 (a
nitroimidazole agent), or mitomycin C (MMC) was more effective than
either treatment alone to delay the growth of a liver tumour
(adenocarcinoma transplanted to the rat liver). Both these drugs are known
to be preferentially cytotoxic under hypoxic conditions. Five days after
inoculation forty-seven rats were randomly divided nto the following
groups: A (n=7), RSU-1069 (49mg/kg) injected introperitoneally 15
minutes before initiation of a single dearterialization for 2 hours with an
implanted minioccluder; B (n=6). a single dearterialization for 2 hours; c
(n=6). MMC (Smg/kg) before 2 hours of dearterialization; D (n=6). MMC
alone; E (n=6). RSU-1069 alone; F (n=6) sham operation as control.
Before the treatment, on day 12 and 18 the tumours were measured.
Results: The tumour growth was dramatically delayed in group A
compared to all the other groups (p<0.05) and only modestly delayed in
group C compared to D, E and F (p<0.05).
Conclusion: These results showed the effectiveness of dearterialization
in potentiating the bioreductive toxicity of RSU-1069 and, though to a
lesser extent, MMC. Thus bioreductively activated cytotoxicity may be of
potential use together with dearterialization to the treatment of hepatic
tumours.
62
P091
PREDICTABILITY OF HEPATIC METASTASES AND
HEPATIC PERFUSION INDEX
E. XAVIER DA CUNHA. ANA FERRER ANTUNES, J. RODRIGUES BRANCO,
F. CASTRO SOUSA.
Dept. of Surgery III and Dept. of Nuclear Medicine Coimbra University Hospital;
Coimbra, Portugal.
Diagnosis of hepatic micrometastases is an unsolved problem in
digestive surgical oncology. Hepatic perfusion Index (HPI), the relative
hepatic arterial contribution to total liver blood flow, derived,by dynamic
hepatic scintigraphy (DHS) (1) has been suggested as a promising method
in the definition of a high risk group ofpatients prone to develop overt
hepatic metastases after an apparently curative resection. In this
prospective study we attempted to evaluate the utility and reproducibility
ofpreoperative determination of a HPI in 147 patients with a digestive
cancer. A normal range has been obtained in a group of 17 non neoplastic
patients with an upper limit of 0.28. Overt liver metastases were found in
34 patients undergoing laparotomy, and 26 had elevated HPI values
(76.4%). No apparent hepatic metastases were found in the remaining 113
patients submitted to a "curative" resection ofthe primary tumour; 64 had
elevated HPI values. These patients were followed up by periodic clinical
examination, hepatic ultrasonography and CT scans. At one year of
follow-up 64 patients were evaluated. Seven patients developed hepatic
metastases; six of these patients had initial elevated HPI values and one
had an initial normal value. Filthy-seven patients did not developed
hepatic metastases, 36 had elevated initial HPI values and 28 had normal
HPI values. These data result in a sensitivity of 76.9% and a specificity of
43.3% for DHS and a predictive value for a positive HPI of 16.7% at one
year, and a predictive value for negative HPI of 96.4%. These results
showed that although initial elevated HPI values did not identify high risk
group ofpatients prone to develop hepatic metastases, patients with initial
normal HPI values have a confirmed low risk of developing hepatic
metastases.
P092
CEA INBLOOD ANDBILEPROBES IN BENIGN AND
MALIGNANT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
K. W. JAUCH, M. HEISS, G. MEYER, S. VOGEL, R. LAMERZ
Surgical and Medical Department, University Clinic Groghadern, Munich FRG
The clinical relevance of increased CEA-levels in bile as early sign of
liver metastases or hte risk of metastases in colorectal cancer was
described by Yeatman et al (Ann. Surg. 213, 113, 1991).
We determined CEA concentrations in blood and bile in 50 patients
with gall stones (group1), 10 patients with benign bowel disease (group2)
and 65 malignant disease (group3). CEA determination used a
conventional RIA and percloric CEA extraction ofbile.
Serum CEA was elevated only in 34% of group3 patients. CEA ofbile
in group and 2 was between 2 and 153ng/ml, while in group3 hte
concentrations were significantly higher and reached levels up to
12700ng/ml. In group 3 we found a significant correlation of serum and
bile CEA witha r=0,632.
Using ROC analysis an optimal cut off level ofbile CEA was
determined at 45 ng/nl. Above this level were 16 and 20% of group resp.
2 and 52% of group3 resp 83% when liver metastases were apparent.
Follow up will show if elevated bile CEA exceeds prognostic beside
diagnostic value.
P093
THE TIMING OF SURGERY IN NECROTIZING ACUTE
PANCREATITIS
A. AGOROGIANNIS, E. NAOUM, IOANNA AGOROGIANNI
Surgical Department.General Hospital of Larisa-Greece.
During the period of the last 13 years pancreatic and pefipancreatic
debridement combined with wide drainage to manage severe necrotic
acute pancreatitis (AP) was used in 32 patients. At the same period we
operated at our Institution on 2650 cases of benign diseases of the biliary
tract. Among them 267 patients were operated for AP (10,07%) and the
54 of them (20,2%) had the necrotic severe type of the disease. The
Ranson scores and Imrie scores confirm the initial severity of the attacks.
Pancreatic necrosis was defined as the presence of necrotic areas
entopancreatically or in the peripancreatic tissue, suspected clinically and
confirmed by CT combined with intravenous contrast enhancement and
operatively. Debfidement and necrosectomy was done in different dates
from the onset of the attack of AP. 7 patients (Group A) were operated
from the 4th to the 8th day, 10 patients from the 9th to 20th, and 15 after
the 21st day. The 3 groups were comparable. In case overwhelming
sepsis was manifested the operation was urgently. The numbers of the
operations, the days of hospitalization, the time ofrecovery and the final
outcome were calculated with other parameters for the 3 groups. All were
statistically better in the 3rd group. The mortality in group A was 57,7%,
in group B 30% and in group C 6,6%. More tedious was the operation and
we had more bleeding in the early operative group.
According to our experience we suggest the timing of debridement in
AP, after the 21st day of the initial attack. As this time a clear plane of
demarcation between necrotic and viable tissue, by formed granulation
tissue was formed in the late group C, the necrotic material separated and
the cavity develops well defined walls.
P094
THE ACTIVATION ANDINACTIVATION OF KININ-
KALLIKREIN SYSTEM INACUTE PANCREATITIS.
TH. PAVLIS, KR. DASKALAKIS EV. ANAGNOSTOU, TH. MAYROMATIS,
SP. MILINGOS.
3rd Surgincal Department, "Evangelismos" Medical Center
Athens, Greece,
One of the main enzymic systems activated in acute pancreatitis (AP) is
the Kinin-Kallicrein system. Bradykinin is degraded by kininases.
Kininase II, is an enzyme also known as angiotensin-1 converting enzyme
(ACE).
In the last two years, ACE activity levels were investigated in 20
patients suffering from AP, at different stages of their disease. Serum ACE
activity levels were found significantly increased on admission (accute
phase of the disease) compared with ones found 4 days after their
admission and ones obtained when the disease was subsided (post oral
refeeding). The increased serum ACE activity levels found in the acute
phase of pancreatitis represent probably a homeostatic responce ofthe
organism to counteract the increased levels ofbradykinin in AP.
We do not propose serum ACE activity as a diagnostic AP test,
however is a quantitive expression ofthe Kinin-Kallikrein system
activation and inactivation, system that participates in the disease’s
pathophysiology.
63
P095
P095
BIO-CLINICALPROGNOSTICFACTORSIN SEVEREACUTE
PANCREATITIS: APROSPECTIVE,MITICENTRIC STUDY
D. PEZET, N. ROTMAN, D. CHERQUI, C. CHASTANG, B. CHEVRET,
P.L. FAGNIEZ
H6pital Henri Mondor, Cr6teil, et H6pital Saint-Louis, Pads, France.
From October 1986 to January 1991, the prognostic value of several
bio-clinical parameters were studied in 234 patients with severe acute
pancreatitis requiring admission in an intensive care unit. Bio-clinical
parameters were collected on admission and at 48 hours. The collected
data allowed to establish specific (Ranson, Glasgow) and non specific
(MOF, SAPS) severity scores. Survival curves and curves ofpancreatic
abcess occurrence were constructed by the method of Kaplan-Meier and
compared with the Log Rank test. A mutivariate analysis was made
according to the Cox model. Complete Ranson score was available in 145
patients (mean: 3.9+/-2.0). Bio-clinical parameters influencing survival
were: age>55 years, arterial pressure<120mmHg, BUN>9mmol/1, serum
creatinine level> 120 ktmol/1, LDH>I.5N, Pa02<60mmHg (p 0.05).
Criteria influencing pancreatic abscess formation were: age>55 years,
arterial pressure<120mmHg, temperature>38C, Creatinine serum
level>120 ktmol/1, hematocrit <30% (p<0.05). The scores predicting
survival were: SAPS (p<0.0006), Ranson criteria>3 (p<0.000I) and the
Glasgow score (p<0.001). The occurence of a pancreatic abscess was
correctly predicted only by the Ranson criteria (p<0.02). Independant
variables influencing survival were age over 55 years and more than 3
Ranson criteria. Independant variables influencing the occurance of an
abscess were: age, hematocdt value and glucose serum level. lmmol/1.
P096
DEATHS DUE TO ACUTEPANCREATITIS
Z.Y.GU, K.H. ZHANG
Dept. of Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
From October, 1957 to March, 1985, 908 patients with acute
pancreatitis (AP) were admitted to our hospital. 77 belonged to necrotic
AP, 34 cases died, including 14 sudden deaths. Diagnosis was verified by
autopsy in 24 cases, by surgical exploration in 8, and by other means in 2.
It was found that the local pathological changes ofpancreas were not so
serous in the group of sudden deaths as in others. However, the systemic
changes, ie, pneumonedema, rupture ofthe cardiac muscle, tonsillar
hedna and others, were more severe in the sudden deaths than the
remainings. This is implicated that a systemic lethal factor released at the
early stage ofAP. We used systemic support ofAP patients at the early
stage and explored the patients only when complications ensued. Neither
Ranson nor Imire risk factors was helpful in predicting sudden deaths of
AP cases.
P097
THEEFFECTS OF SANDOSTATIN (SMS) ONPANCREATIC
BLOOD FLOW (PBF), STRUCTUREANDFUNCTIONDURING
THEDEVELOPMENT OFEXPERIMENTALLYINDUCED
ACUTEPANCREATITIS (AP).
SA JENKINS, S ELLENBOGEN, H KYNASTON, N DAVIES, R SUTTON,
N ROBERTS AND JN BAXTER
University Department of Surgery, Liverpool, UK
Since there is little data on the temporal changes in PBF during the
development ofAP, we have carded out such a study in rats and
investigated the effects ofSMS. AP was induced in male Wistar rats by
common bile duct ligation and an i.v. infusion ofCaerulin (Sug/kg/h) for
2h. Control rats received a s.c. injection of saline immediately before and
8h after the induction of acute pancreatitis and the experimental group 2gg
of SMS s.c. Organ blood flow (microsphere method), serum amylase
levels and pancreatic structure were determined 4 and 16h after the start of
the study 4h after the induction ofAP the pancreas in the controls was
oedematous and all displayed marked hyperamylasaemia. At 16h the
pancreas in the controls was haemorrhagic and necrotic but the serum
amylase levels were decreased. SMS ameliorated both the change in
pancreatic structure and function at 4 and 16h. SMS significantly reduced
(p<0.01 ANOVA) PBF (2.3ml/min/g dry wt.) compared to control
animals at 4h (4.1 _-+0.7), but maintained pancreatic perfusion (2.1 _+0.4)
compared to the reduction observed in the controls (0.6 _-+0.9) at 16h
(p<0.001). The results ofthis study indicate that SMS prevents early
hypofusion and late hyperfusion during the development ofAP in the rat.
Further studies are required to determine whether the changes in PBF
elicited by SMS and responsible for its protective effect on pancreatic
function and structure.
P098
SANDOSTATIN (SMS) AMELIORATES THEDELETERIOUS
EFFECTS OFEDOTOXINONPANCREATIC STRUCTURE,
FUNCTIONANDBLOODFLOWINRATS
SA JENKINS, H. KYNASTON, N DAVIES, YATES, N ROBERTS, K PARSONS
AND BA TAYLOR
University Department of Surgery, Liverpool, UK
Previous studies have shown that experimentally induced pancreatitis
results in a systemic endotoxaemia which is ameliorated by SMS. The aim
ofthis study was to establish whether endotoxaemia resulted in changes in
pancreatic structure, function and blood flow in the rat and whether SMS
influenced any ofthese effects. Groups ofmale Wistar rates received i.p.
endotoxin (2mg/100g) or saline. Halfofthe animals in each group
received SMS (2gg s.c) immediately before and 12h after administration
ofendotoxin or saline. Organ blood flow (microsphere method) hepatic
reticuloendothelial system (RES) activity (liver: blood 99 Tc sulphur
colloid) serum amylase and pancreatic structure were determined 16h after
the administration ofendotoxin or saline. Endotoxin administration
resulted in an oedmatous haemorrhagic pancreatitis which was prevented
by SMS. Pancreatic blood flow (1.06 _+0.6 V 2.4ml/min/g dry wt; p<0.01)
and hepatic RES activity (4.33 _+0.44 v 6.3 _+0.23; p<0.001 ANOVA)
were significantly less in endotoxin treated rats compared to those treated
with endotoxin plus SMS. SMS also prevented the hyperamylasaemia
observed in endotoxin treated rats. The results ofthis study indicate that
endotoxin has a deleterious effect per se on pancreatic structure, function
and blood flow in the rat which are ameliorated by SMS, thereby offering
a p.aytial explanation, for its beneficial effect in experimentally induced
acute pancreatitis.
64
P099
TIlE EXPERIENCE OF TREATMENT OF THE PANCREATIC
PSEUDOCYSTS IN TALLINN STATE HOSPITAL
M. EIVIN, J. LIND, A. M.3ESALU, A. JOSING
Tallinn State Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia
During the period from 1974 to 1990 we have treated 53 patients with
pancreatic pseudocysts. They were divided into 3 groups Postnecrotic
pseudocysts (41); II Retention pseudocysts (7) III Postnecrotic
pseudocysts, having a communication with the pancreatic duct (5).
The patients were treated as following-
1. External draining gr-33, III gr 2 times
2. Cystodigestive anastomosis I-3, III times
3. Distal pancreatic resection 4 times
4. Whipple’s maneuvre II- 2 times
5. Pancreatodigestive anastomoses 1, II 5, III- 2 times.
Altogether we had 3 lethal results (5,6%).
As a conclusion we can say, that for acute pseudocysts external
draining is usually curative, for retention pseudocysts surgical
manipulations should address the ductal pathology.
P100
GABEXATE MESILATE VS APROTININ IN THE TREATMENT
OFACUTE PANCREATITIS. RESULTS OF AMULTICENTRIC
TRIAL
P. PEDERZOLI C. BASSI, S. VESENTINI, R. GIRELLI, M. FALCONI,
D. LOMBARDI, H. ABBAS, A MACCAGNANI, A BONORA AND G. CAVALLINI*
Surgical and *Medical Department, University of Verona.
In order to verify the efficacy of Gabexate Mesilate (FOY) versus
Aprotinin (A), a prospective multicenter randomized double-blind trial
was carried out in moderate-severe acute pancreatitis (AP), using FOY
3g/day vs A 1500000 UIK/day for seven days. 199 pts suffering from AP
were enroled by 34 centers from Jan ’89 to Dec ’90. The main admission
criteria were: onset from not more than 72h, at least 2 Ranson positive
criteria and CT evidence of acute pancreatic damage. In the 182 analyzed
pts (106 male, 76 female; mean age 57.6 years) the etiology was: biliary
56%, alcoholic 25.8%, post-operative 7.1%, unknown 7.1%, others 3.8%.
Median Ranson’ score was 3. Edema was detected by CT scan in 66 pts;
necrosis in 116 (63.7%). 91 pt were treated with A and 91 with FOY. The
main prognostic factors were comparable in the two groups. Every pts was
followed-up for 8 days after end of the treatment to assess the
development of systemic complications (c), pseudocysts (p) and early
sepsis (s), need of surgery (h) and mortality rate (m). A long term follow-
up was then performed at 3 months: 7 pts out of the 116 necrotic cases
died within 15 days (6%) with an overall incidence of c of 14.7% (23.5%
treated with A vs 7.7% with FOY: Chi-square test p 0.05). h was
necessary in 25.5% in A group and 10.8% in FOY group (Chi-square test
p 0.05). No statistical differences were found in p,s and m also at the 3
months follow-up. These data suggest that, in the early phases of AP,
FOY treatment is more effective than A in reducing c and h.
P101
C-REACTIVE PROTEINE AND C3-C4 FACTORS OF
COMPLEMENT CHANGES, INPROGNOSIS OF ACUTE
PANCREATITIS
G. PERPIRAKIS M. VELEGRAKIS, N. NIKOLAKAKIS, F. SEFERIADIS,
S. KANDILAKIS, N. PARASKAKIS.
Department of Surgery Gen. Rethimnon hospital, Crete Greece.
The prognosis of an acute pancreatitis attack (AP) is decisive for its
proper treatment. For this reason besides the multiple factor scoring
systems there has been an effort to identify a simple biological index
which will discriminate with accuracy the cases of mild severity from
those of high severity. We studed the CRP and C3-C changes in 54
patients with (AP) during the day 1,2 and 7. The results indicate that the
high levels of CRP which remain 48 hours from the the onset can
precisely discriminate the cases of mild severity from those ofhigh
severity, p<0.001. Similar results were observed in the fluctuations of C
(p<0.001) amongst complicated and non complicated cases during all
measurements. C changes on day 1, were different between the two
groups (p<0.001) while the day 2 and 7 non significant differences was
observed (p=NS). In conclusion the determination of CRP and C fraction
of the complement on day 1,2 and 7, can precisely identify the cases with
complication tendencies from those with satisfactory outcome.
P102
ETIOLOGICAL FACTORS OF ACUTE PANCREATITIS IN
SURGICALLY TREATED PATIENTS
TH. POLIMEROPOULOS. E. YETTIMIS, P. VACHLIOTIS, E. KALOKERINOS,
H. TSIPRAS, H. COSTOPANAYIOTOU
st Dep. of Surgery, Athen’ General Hosp., Greece
The examination of the etiological factors of acute pancreatitis (A.P.) in
223 surgically treated patients is the aim of the study. The morphologic
pictures seen during operation were: steatonecrotic alterations (144 pts)
pancreatic abscess (43pts) and pancreatic pseudocyst (36 pts). The most
common causative factor was biliary tract disease, present in 203 pts
(91.0%). Lithiasis was responsible for A.P. in 163 pts. In 40 pts with no
stones in the billiary tract, cholesterolosis of gallbladder’ mucosa was
found and this was confirmed by microscopic examination. It was also
found in 38 pts with lithiasis. The total incidence of cholesterolosis was
38.4% and was associated with 13.2% of steatonecrosis (18 pts), 33.3% of
pancr, abscesses (12 pts) and 32.2% ofpancr, pseudocysts (10 pts). Other
etiologic factors were: alcoholism (3 pts), familiar lyperlipedemia (2 pts),
surgery (3 pts) and unknown in 8 pts. Conclusions: (a) Biliary tract
lithiasis is the main cause of A.P. in Greece (b) Cholesterolosis of
gallbladder’s mucosa is a serious cause of A.P. and is related with severe
complications. (c) It is wise to perform cholecystectomy whenever A.P. is
treated by surgery even if there are not palpable stones.
65
P103
TIMING ANDEXTENT OF SURGERY FOR GALLSTONE
PANCREATITIS (GP)
H. POOLA. J. TROOST, A. VIIKLEPP, P. ALAS
Dept. of Surgery, Tallinn Central Seamen’s Hospital, Estonia
Timing and extent of surgery for GP remain controversial. A
retrospective analysis of the results of 74 consecutive patients, operated on
for GP during the same admissions presented. Choledocholithiasis was in
43.2%, pancreonecrosis in 27%, destructive cholecystitis in 16.2%,
suppurative cholangitis in 8.1% and diffuse peritonitis in 8.1% of cases.
Mean age 55 years, 86.5% female.6 patients died (8.1%) and morbidity
was 13.5% (10 patients). In group. (gr) (n=27) early surgery was
performed during 3 days in patients who failed to respond to intensive
treatment. From this gr 13 patients needed immediate surgery and there
were 2 lethal cases with acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis. Mortality in gr
was 7.4%. In gr 2 (n=47) early delayed surgery was used. From this group
18 patients had exacerbation of disease after temporary subsiding and they
had to be operated on emergently. All 4 deaths in gr 2 (8.5%) occured
with latter patients reason of death being a large myocardical infraction in
and progressive peripancreatic necrosis in 3 cases. Cholecystectomy was
performed in 91.9%, choledochotomy in 41.9% and various
decompression drainage in 87.5% of cases. Operations on the pancreas
were carried out in 14.9% of cases. Timing and extent of surgery depend
on severity of case and its response to conservative treatment. It’
sometimes difficult and unrealistic to plan the time of performing surgery.
P104
THE ROLE OF PANCREATIC RFECTION FOR SEVERE
ACUTE NECROTIZINGPANCREATITIS
B.M. WANG. Y. TANG, X.G. HU, M.C. WU
Department of Surgery, First Teching Hospital (Chang Hal)
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China
Acute necrotizing pancreatitis accompanied by any one of the following
conditions, such as shock, respiratory or renal failure, GI bleeding, psychic
disturbance, and operative finding or CT scan showing extrapancreatic
infiltration and area of necrosis greater than 2/3 pancreas, is classified as
having the severe form ofthis disease. From January 1976 to December
1990, 25 patients fullfiled the above criteria. Eight patients were managed
conservatively, and 4 died with a mortality of 50%; while 17 patients were
managed by vigorous supportive therapy followed by resection of the
clearly demaarcated portion of pancreatic necrosis: 12 by resection of the
tail, 4 by resection ofthe body and tail, and by resection of the head.
Intra-abdominal abscess, colonic or pancreatic fistula, intestinal
obstruction, and GI bleeding occurred postoperatively in 7 patients. Five
patients (29.4%) died between several days and weeks postoperatively;
death being due to sepsis and multisystem failure in 2, respiratory failure,
massive intrapefitioneal hemorrhage, and septic shock in each one ofthe
other 3, respectively. Of the 12 survivals, requires insulin. During the
same period 59 patients with different severity of the disease were
managed by simple capsulotomy plus drainage, necrosectomy plus
drainage, or necrosectomy plus local lavage, respectively. Twenty patients
died postoperatively with a mortality of 33.89%. Although the optimum
therapy of this disease is still controversial, necrosectomy plus local
lavage seems to be the recent trend of managment due to its lower
mortality and morbidity. Nevertheless, the authors believe that the
optimum therapy should be highly individualized. Timely resection of
well demarcated portion of necrotic pancreas may still play a role in some
carefully selected patients to salvage those who are otherwise succumbed.
P105
POSTOPERATIVE PANCREATIC ANDPERIPANCREATIC
ABSCESSES OF ACUTE HEMORRHAGIC -NECROTIZING
PANCREATITIS
YANG SEN HUA YANG YI CUN,
Chengdu Third People’s Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
Postoperative pancreatic and peripancreatic abscesses (PPA) of acute
hemorrhagic-necrotizing pancreatitis (AHNP) are often difficult to
prevent, diagnose and treat effectively. Incidence of PPA is very high.
PPA occured in our 28/77 cases (36.36%). Its diagnosis depended on the
properties of peripancreatic exudates, its culture and pathology, image
means and exploration. PPA, the so-called engymatic abscess coexisted
with numerous other serious complications, might be the cause of some of
the latter such as hyperglycemia. MOF, etc. Overall mortality was
51.14% (16/28 cases) those of operative and non-operative treatment
were 50% (5/10) and 61.11% (11/18) respectively. Expect operative
procedures there were no significant differences between groups of
various related surgical situations. As yet how to lower the incidence of
PPA is still very difficult due to some proper belonged factors such as the
lingering course of pancreatic inflammation. No specific clinical
manifestations of PPA and diverse display of complications making
diagnosis difficult, continuous BUS and CT might be helpful. The
treatment of PPA cannot be too emphasized on surgical drainage, often for
several times.
P106
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE HEMORRHAGIC-
NECROTIZING PANCREATITIS IN THE AGED
YANG SEN HUA,YANG YI CUN
Chengdu Third People’s Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
How about the surgical treatment of acute hemorrhagic-necrotizing
pancreatitis (AHNP) in the aged? Among the 55 cases treated surgically
the age of 20 cases (36.36%) was above 60. 6 cases were operated upon
before 43 hours and 14 after 49 hours after onset of AHNP. The
operations included capsulectomy and drainage (12 cases), necrosectomy
or regular resection ofthe pancreas and peritoneal and pancreatic bed
lavage (8) with gastrostomy, jejunostomy and cholecystostomy or
choledochostomy or both(6). Postoperative complications were numerous
and serious the chief causes of death. The mortality was 60% (12/20
cases), though very high, yet not significantly higher 45.71% (16/35 cases)
of the younger (p>0.05). We prefer earlier timing for operation when
necessary and choose easier and more conservative operative procedure
necrosectomy as basic operation. For putting the pancreas in good rest,
triple-stomies seems worth-while to adopt. It is very important for
improving curative effect to manage the complications intensively.
66
P107
PLASMAPHERESIS INACUTENECROTIZING
PANCREATITIS: CIRCULATORYEFFECTS ANANIMAL
STUDY
H. ZIRNGIBL, S. MANN
Department of Surgery, University ofRegensburg, FRG
Acute necrotizing pancreatitis (a.n.p.) still causes a high lethality from
60 to 80 %.
After activation ofenzymes, complement system and coagulation
system multiple organ failure (MOF) develops. Surgical therapy is not
able to change fatal outcome in the socalled vasoactive phase. In an
animal experiment we have investigated the effect ofextracorporal
detoxication with plasmapheresis in taurocholat induced a.n.p, in the dog.
21 male dogs were randomized in 3 groups. 8 with plasmapheresis and
a.n.p., 8 only with a.n.p, and 5 sham. Circulatory monitoring, using Swan-
Ganz-Catheter measuring CO, PCWP, CVP and peripheral resistance,
arterial blood pressure was installed about 9 hours. 2 hours after steady
state a.n.p, was induced. Observation started for a 7 hour period.
Afterwards lung and heart were prepared for histopathological
investigations.
We saw the very best effects in circulatory system in the group of
animals treated by plasma pheresis. Also histopathological investigatins
showed, that plasmapheresis is able to reduce toxic effects ofpancreatitis
in the lung.
We conclude, that plasmapheresis is able to reduce systemic toxic
effects and is helpful in the management ofa.n.p, in the first vasoactive
phase ofthis disease.
P108
OUREXPERIENCEINTHE TREATMENT OF ACUTE
BILIARYPANCREATITIS
VIACHKI IV., N.JARAMOV, N.PENKOV, D.VIACHKI
BULGARIAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE
Centre ofUrgent Medical Aid
The authors have studied 358 cases ofacute biliar pancreatitis. Among
them 192 men and 166 women. In all the cases in the complex medical
therapy the following was included: Ftorafur by scheme, forced diuresis,
aqua-physiological and protein solutions, depending on the ionogramme,
proteinogramme, the central venous pressure, diuresis, as well as stopping
ofthe pancreatic pain.
In 132 of all the cases endoscopic papilosphincterotomia was carried
out. From all the patients only 71 were operated, and for 10 ofthem
splanchicectomia was done.
The authors proposed practical conclusions on the basis ofthe analysis
ofthe cases.
P109
OCTREOTIDE IN THETREATMENT OF
POSTCHOLECYSTECTOMYACUTEPANCREATITIS
V.PERCOPO,L.SORRENTINO,F.P.LEZZOCHE,S.PERCOPO,B.TESAURO
1st Surgery Dept.2nd Medical School, University ofNaples
We want to value the octreotide effectiveness in treatment of
postcholecystectomy acute mild pancreatitis (PAMP) (amilasemia:300-
10000). Study has been performed about a uniform pattern of 30 females,
age average 48.2 (range 25-65). Cholecystectomies have been performed
by the same surgical team. Patients have been stratified into 3 groups: A)
10 patients affected by PAMP treated with i.v. continuous infusion of
natural somatostatin (0.25 mg/h) for 7days; B) 10 patients with PAMP
treated with i.v. octreotide (0.3 mg/day) followed by the same dosage s.c.
from the day ofcanalization and for total 7 days; C) 10 patients with out
PAMP (contol group). Therapeutic effectiveness has been valued on the
basis ofclinical symptoms (pancreatic pain), seric and urinary amilase
levels, canalization time. Pancreatic pain has been decreased in A and B
groups within 48 h, but more quickly in B group. Seric and urinary
amilase levels has become regular within 7 days in A and B group,
however decrease has been faster and higher in patients treated with
octrotide. S Statistical differences between two groups aren’t significant
yet. Canclization average time has been 68h in A group, 78h in B
group,50,5h in C group. Longer canalization time in B group compared
with A and C groups is due to greater powerful of octreotide. These data
proved that natural somatostatin and octreotide have an overlapping
usefulness in the treatment ofPAMP. It is to be under lined, however, the
better compliance ofthe octreotide because of: subcutaneous
administration, shorter time ofparenteral nutrition, economic advantages.
Pll0
MANAGEMENT OF PERIAMPULLARY CARCINOMA
P. DECKER, U. KANIA, D. DECKER, A HIRNER
Bonn University, Surgical Department, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 5300 Bonn 1, Germany
The survival rate ofpatients having a periampullary carcinoma depends
on histology, tumor size and patients age.
There are different possibilities oftreatment:
pancreaticoduodenal resection (Whipple’s operation)
local excision ofthe tumor
biliodigestive anastomosis
In contrast to the carcinoma ofthe pancreas with a five-year survival
rate of4.9%, a better healing rate can be achieved in periampullary
carcinoma. The five-year survival rate of4.9%, a better healing rate can be
achieved in periampullary carcinoma. The five-year survival rate
following local excision about 18.6%, whereas the five-year survival rate
following pancreaticoduodenal resection about 50%.
The following concept of surgical treatments should be discussed:
1. In old patients having a lot ofrisk factors a local excision ofthe
tumor should be the treatment ofchoie.
2. The smaller the carcinoma the more "radical" should be the surcical
treatment.
3. The better the histopathology (for example: carcinoma ofthe Papilla
Vateri) the more radical should be the treatment.
In the University Boon three patients were treated according to this
surgical management in the last year. Twice the patients were treated by
Whipple operation, one 77 year-old patient had a local excision with
biliodigestive anastomosis.
67
Plll
WHIPPLE’S OPERATION IN THE TREATMENT OF COLON
CANCERWITH DUODENAL INFILTRATION
M. MORENO J.C. RULZ ADANA, C. CERQUELLA, J.M. FRADEJAS, A. CARABIAS
y G. PEREZ
Hospital Universitario de Getafe. Getafe. Madrid.
Colonic neoplasm in the hepatic flexure ofthe colon infiltrates and
fistulize to the duodenum in 19-25% of cases. These tumours can reach a
high volume and in absence of liver metastases they cannot be considered
as non resectable and must be treated with extended surgery with
oncological criteria.
For the treatment of these tumours in 1960 GALLAGHER proposed
the term of Extended right colectomy that includes a cephalic
duodenopancreatectomy. This form oftreatment has not been widely used
and few cases have been treated.
Two cases are presented. The first one corresponds to a patient of 67
years of age with colo-duodenal fistula and the other one to a 59 years-old
male wide with infiltrationof the duodenum. Both cases were treated with
extended right colectomy and in the latter a wedge liver resection was
performed because of infiltration of the liver.
Postoperative course was uneventful and the survival is 6 years in the
first case and one year in the second. This last case died of recurrence.
Postoperative course was uneventful and the survival is 6 years in the
first case and one year in the second. This last case died ofrecurrence.
Extended surgery can be safely performed in these patients and long
term survival is possible as it occured in our former patient.
Pl12
CLINICO-PATHOLOGIC STUDY OF CARCINOMA OF THE
PAPILLA OF VATER.
MORI K, NAGAKAWA T, TAKEDA T, NAKANO T, KAYAHARA M, OHTA T,
UENO K, MIYAZAKI
Department of Surgery (II), School of Medicine,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, 920 Japan
A total of 34 cases of carcinoma of the papilla of Vater were studied by
preparing 5mm step-wise whole tissue sections from each patient in order
to clarify the tumor’ extension histopathologically. The 5-year survival
rate was 47.0%. The 5-year survival rate for the patients with lymph node
metastases was significantly worse than that for those without lymph node
metastases (P<0.05). Lymph node metastases were located primarily in
the retropancreatic area and around the superior mesenteric artery. There
was a long-term survivor who had lymph node metastases at the first and
second barrier. He received complete dissection of the first and secoond
barrier lymph nodes. We suggest that dissection of the second barrier
lymph nodes, especially around the superior mesenteric artery, is a
necessary component ofradical surgery for carcinoma of the papilla
Vater.
Pl13
ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF
PAPILLARY TUMORS
M. RUBINIC M. IVANIS, M. URAVIC A DEPOLO,
University Medical Center, Rijeka, Croatia.
The introduction of ERCP, and in recent years also of endoscopic
ultrasonography, presents a great step forward in the diagnostics and
therapy of turnouts of the ampular region. In a five-year period 1370
examinations of this kind were performed. The patients were divided
into two groups. In 610 patients (Group A) indications for ERCP was
obstructive jaundice, tumors of the papilla of Vater were found in 12
(1.2%). In 760 patients (Group B) with other various biliary and
pancreatic disorders papillary tumor was found in only one female
patient. Summarized results showed that incidence of papillary
tumors in series of 1370 ERCP-s was 13 (0.9%)
This paper points out the importance of ERCP in diagnosis of
papillary tumors and helps in planning further treatment, which may
be palliative as well as more radical surgical procedures.
Pl14
GUIDELINES FORPERCUTANEOUS CATHETERDRAINAGE
OF PANCREATIC PSEUDOCYSTS
A. D’EGIDIO
Department of Surgery, University ofWitwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Between November 1987 and April 1991 we submitted to percutaneous
catheter drainage (PCD) all patients with post-necrotic cysts (due to
autodigestion and extravasationofpancreaticjuice). There were 16 type
cysts (in acute pancreatitis) and 10 type II cysts (in chronic pancreatitis).
Overall recurrence rate was 4%, three patients had fistulization into bowel;
no deaths occured. PCD was successful in all type cysts; in type II cysts
was associated with prolonged drainage and complications when cyst-duct
communication was present.
INDICATIONS FOR PCD: 1) immature symptomatic cysts 2)
enlarging cysts 3) infected cysts 4) large cysts > 8 cm. 5)cysts not
resolving.
CONTRAINDICATIONS: 1) cysts associated with ductal stricture 2)
cysts not accessible to percutaneous route 3) doubtful diagnosis 4)
presence of infected pancreatic necrosis.
PROTOCOL FOR PCD: 1) CT scan prior to catheter insertion 2) fluid
for cytology, microbiology and amylase 3) catheter in situ until drainage
stopped 4) sinogram through the catheter prior to its removal 5) E.R.C.P.
prior to PCD in cases of chronic pancreatitis, in acute pancreatitis when
indicated.
During this period no surgical internal drainage procedures performed
in our unit.
68
Pl15
RESECTIVE AND DERIVATIVE SURGERY FOR CHRONIC
PANCREATITIS
G.R. FRONDA S. ENRICO, M.P. CAPOZZI, M. TOPPINO, U. CATTANEO
Department of Surgery. University of Torino (Italy)
(Head: Prof. F. Morino)
Surgery for Chronic Pancreatitis (CP) is recommanded for intractable
pain and complications. The choice ofthe type ofoperation (resection vs.
derivation) depends on the extension ofthe lesion, the type ofcomplications
and the morphology ofthe Wirsung. During the period 1976-1991, a total of
111 operations for CP were performed in 98 pts. (m.85, f.13). The mean age
was 47.6 years (31-72). Alcoholic intake was positive in 73 cases (74.5%).
All the pts. had intractable pain, while pseudocysts were present in 67
(68.3). Fifty-three were the derivative operations (28 Wirsungo-
jejunostomy; 19 cysto-jejunostomy; 6 cystom-gastrostomy) 34 the resection
(21 spleen-pancreatectomy; 4 distal pancreatectomy; 9
duodenopancreatectomy) and 24 other different interventions ofwhich 14
bilio-digestive anastomosis. The mortality rate was 18.3% (18 pts.); the
postoperative complications were 13 (11.7%), on the other hand late
complications occurred in 9 pts. and required 13 interventions. The average
follow-up was of75.8 months (6-168) and concerned 64 pts.; we observed a
good resolution ofthe pain in 54 pts. (84.3%). Pseudocyst or Wirsung
drainage is the goal ofderivative surgery, meanwhile resection is indicated
for irreversible lesions ofthe Pancreas. In our experience, the Partington-
Rochelle’ intervention preferred, because it permits to spare pancreatic
tissue and an eventual subsequent intervention; it’s also characterized by
minor mortality and complications. Cystic drainage hasn’t given good
results, probably because it has’t drained a sufficient portion ofthe gland.
For this motive, for some years, we have abandoned these techniques since
valid radiologic methods have been developed such us U.S. o C.T.-guilded
drainage or Percutaneous Pancreatic Cystogastrostomy. Resection has been
reserved to those cases with complications not otherwise resolvable, or in
the case ofderivation failure. We have nearly always performed a distal
pancreatectomy with or without splenectomy with acceptable long-term
results as for as pain is concerned. We still prefer the
Duodenopancreatectomy in the cephalic forms.
Pl16
MAJORBLEEDING COMPLICATING PANCREATITIS:
ETIOPATHOGENFSIS AND RISKFACTORS
G. GLATI, B. POROWSKA, P. NEGRO, D. FLATI, M. CATARCI, P. TORDIGLIONE
AND M. CARBONI
V. Surg. Path. University ofRome "La Sapienza" Italy
Massive haemorrhage, although rare, represents one of the most feared
sequelae ofpancreatitis. On the basis of a personal experience ofthree
cases and of a comprehensive review of 277 cases reported in the
literature during the last century the AA hereby discuss the
etiopathogenesis and the most important risk factors of this rather
uncodified pancreatitic complication.
Major bleeding may complicate the course of either acute or chronic
pancreatitis, the latter being more frequently involved. Pseudocysts, severe
inflammation, regional necrosis and infection may cause major vessel
erosion with or without pseudoaneurysm formation which eventually may
result in severe bleeding into the gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneum
and peritoneal cavity. Mortality rate was found to be related to the
etiology of the bleeding along with its localization and the underlying
anatomo-pathologic findings. In patients with chronic pancreatitis it was
27.4% while in patients with acute panoreatitis or chronio pancreatitis
with acute exacerbation it was 61.4% and 57.1% respectively. Splenic,
gastroduodenal and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries were the most
commonly involved vessels being associated respectively with a mortality
rate of 21.5%, 38.4% and 61.1%. Massive haemorrhage complicating
infected necrosis or abscesses implies a worse prognosis when compared
to bleeding associated with pseudocysts with or without pseudoaneurysms
(mortality rates being 53.8% and 50% vs 37.1% snf 26.9% respectively).
In conclusion the AA claim that the knowledge of the etiopathogenetic
mechanisms and risk factors involved (infected necrosis, insufficient
debridment, abscesses, long standing pseudocysts), might contribute to
improve the prognosis of the most dramatic of pancreatitis.
Pl17
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL CHANGES OF THELIVERIN
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS.
RP JALLEH. JA GILBERTSON, CS FOSTER & RCN WILLIAMSON
Department of Surgery and Histopathology, RPMS, Hammersmith Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.
Many patients with severe, alcohol-related chronic pancreatitis appear
to have normal livers at operations. We report the histological appearances
of intraoperative liver biopsies in a series of 52 patients (40 men, 12
women; mean age=41 years) with histologically proven chronic
pancreatitis. Alcohol was the aetiological agent in 40 patients with an
estimated daily consumptionof 216_+32g for 12.8___1.4 years (mear+SD).
Causes in the other 12 patients were previous acute pancreatitis (5),
choledochal cyst (1) and unknown (6). Liver function tests were abnormal
in only 7 patients. Histological changes included steatosis (n=18),
intrahepatocyte iron (11) and copper (2). Cholestasis was present in
biopsies from 5 patients with extrahepatic billiary obstruction. Fibrosis
cirrhosis and Mallory’ hyaline were not seen. Immunohistochemistry
revealed a dense portal lymphoid infiltration in 47 specimens (90%)
comprising T-lymphocytes (45_+5 cells per portal tract). B-lymphocytes
(10-+3 cells per tract) were seen in only 8 biopsies, macrophages (43
specimens) had a parenchymal distribution T-lymphocytes were more
common in alcoholics than non-alcoholics (95 vs 75%, p<0.05). All other
histological were similar in the two groups. The minor hepatic changes
and protal infiltration seen in chronic pancreatitis of all aetiological types
suggest migration of inflammatory cells from the pancreas rather than a
direct hepatotoxic process.
Pl18
SONOGRAPHIC FOLLOW-UP OF CYSTOGASTROSTOMY
FORPANCREATIC PSEUDOCYST
P.G. SFIKAKIS J.A. BIRIS, S.B. KONTOSTOLIS, P.J. TZARDIS, N.L. LEKACOS
2nd Surgical Unit, Tzanion Gen. Hospital, Piraeus, Greece
We present our experience on postoperative sonographic imaging and
evaluation of transgastric cystogastrostomies following elective surgery
for pancreatic pseudocysts. Our method consists ofperforming an
"acoustic" window, by giving the patient 500cc of water to drink prior to
examination, which fills the lower half ofthe stomach as well as the
residual pseudocyst cavity (RPC) and the patient is examined in the prone
or erect positions, with transducers of 3 and 3.5MHz.
Sixteen patients aged 48-76 were examined at the 10th, 60th and 120th
post.op.day and the results were compared to simultaneous CT-scanning.
In 94% of our cases the RPC had disappeared by the 120th day, and one
patient is still under evaluation and his RPC has greatly dicreased. The
distention ofthe stomach by water, improves visualization ofthe body and
tail of the pancreas, overcoming the problem ofbowel gas the presence of
which thwarts the ultrasonographer.
Thus, our method is less costly, easily and rapidly performed, with
relatively high specificity and sentitivity and is considered to be the gold
standard in evaluating patients after cystogastrostomy, compared to the
CT-scan
69
Pl19 P120
ULTRASO CONTROLLED CLEAVAGE OF THE
PANCREATIC DUCT: less operationtime, less trauma
J. H. SIMANOWSKI, V. MENDEL, TH. REUHL, H. HEYMANN
Klinik und Poliklinik fuer Allgemeinchirurgie der Medizinischen Hochschule Hannover,
Podbielsldstr. 380, D-W 3000 hannover 51, Germany
Introduction: The detectionof a dilated duct in a chronically inflamed
calcified pancreas can be a time consuming task for the surgeon, while
blind puncture with a needle may cause a traumatizing failure.
Methods: A sterilized 5 MHz linear array transducer (Siemens AG,
Germany) was put crosswise and directly on the pancreas. Under
ultrasound control a needle was positioned into the duct and the cleavage
was performed using a cautering scalpel. Meanwhile we possess a
specially designed puncture setup which allows a stable guidance ofthe
needle while under ultrasound control.
Results: In 21 cases ofpancreatico-jejunostomy we did an ultrasound
controlled cleavage ofthe pancreatic duct. 1-2 trials took 2-4 minutes to
puncture the duct. No mispuntures or bleeding were caused and all
patients recovered fast from the operation.
Conclusion: Ultrasound controlled cleavage ofthe pancreatic duct
reduces operation time as well as the trauma caused by mispuntures and is
therefore highly recommended.
THE SURGICAL TREATMENTOF THE CHRONIC
PANCREATITIS
F.I. TODUA, G. SH. SVANIDZE
Regional Scientific-Research Clinical Diagnostic Centre, Tbilisi, Georgia
The aim ofthis study is the perfection ofthe method of surgical
treatment of the patients affected with chronic pancreatitis. 148 cases out
ofthe 191 cases ofthe patients affected with pancreatitis, were chronic
alcoholics. 102 cases were affected with calculus ofthe pancreas and its
ducts. In 48% ofpatients after US and CT control were noticed widening
ofthe ducts and the cystic widening ofthe ducts. On 91 patients with
chronic calculus pancreatitis were performed operations with the intemal
drainage ofthe pancreatic ducts pancreatojunoanostomosis. In 18 cases
anastomosis was combined with the distal resection ofthe Pancreases to
20 patients affected with the chronic calculus pancreatitis with the cyst of
the head ofthe pancreas, the marginal cystopancreatojunoanastomosis
was performed. In 26 cases the extemal drainage through anastomoses
was added to anastomosis. To 4 patients affected with chronic calculus
alcohol pancreatitis, a distal resection was perfomed. The leading method
of surgical treatment ofthe chronic pancreatitis is the operation, with the
internal drainage ofthe pancreatic ducts. The surgical treatment ofchronic
alcholic pancreatitis gives us good results in 78% ofthe cases.
P121
THE CLINICALMORPHOLOGICALFINDINGS OF
SCLEROSINGPANCREATITIS WITH CHOLANGITIS
MIMICKINGPANCREATIC CARCINOMA
MARRANO D., SANTINI D.,* CAMPIONE O., CASADEI R.,
SALERNO A.,* PASQUALINI E., GRECO V.M.
Ist. I^Clinica Chirurgica Generale Terapia Chirurgica Universitt di Bologna (Italy)
(*) Ist. Anatomia Patologica Universitt di Bologna (Italy)
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is characterized by a chronic
fibrotic inflammation ofbile ducts involving the entire extra and
intrahepatic system. The involvement ofthe pancreas in PSC is extremely
rare and histologically poorly documented. We present the detailed
clinical-pathological features of an unusual chronic pancreatitis with
sclerosing cholangitis involving extensively the pancreas which clinically
appeared undistinguishable from pancreatic cancer. A 35 old man, with
no history of alcohol or drug abuse, presented with sudden and increasing
jaundice. Ultrasonographic and computed tomographic examination
showed a cephalo pancreatic mass with marked stricture ofcholedocus. A
pancreatico-duodenectomy was performed. Grossly the pancreatic head
was firm with a mass-like enlargement. The bile ducts were fibrously
thickened. Histological findings showed interstitial fibrosis, acinar
atrophy and marked periductal lymphoplasmocitic inflammation, diffuse
infiltration within and around pancreatic ductal tree by neutrophilic
leucocytes and vasculites. Sclerosing pancreatitis with diffuse cholangitis
seems to be the better term for this condition. Tests for antinuclear
antibodies was positive while antimitocondrial antibodies and the LE cell
test were negative. All serological examinations for infectious diseases
were negative. In conclusion we report our experience with an unusual
case ofchronic pancreatitis suggesting that this form may represent a
separate entity. Some clinical-pathological features lead us to consider
this lesion as a rare variant ofPSC with extensive involvement ofthe
pancreas.
P122
FOLLOWUP RESULTS OFPANCREATICOJEJUNOSTOMY
IN CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
H.KOHLER, FE.LUDTKE, R. NUSTEDE, A.SCHAFMAYER, HJ. PEIPER
Dept. of General Surgery University ofGoettingen, Goettingen, FRG
Between 1968 and 1981 in 138 patients (101 male, 37 female, mean
age 41.2 years) a side-toside pancreaticojejunostomy was performed.
Follow up studies were performed in 95 patients, mean follow up period
was 10 years (4-14). Late mortality was 19%, general condition improved
in 62%, pain relief was observed in 65% ofthe patients. Latent or
manifest diabetes occured in 21%, stool fat changed to normal in 30%,
relapses ofpancreatitis occured in 41% ofthe cases. In general, results
were good in patients who denided alcohol postoperatively.
70
P123
SOLID AND PAPILLARYNEOPLASM OF THE PANCREAS.
REPORT OF A CASE
R. CHARCO, I. DIAZ, A. EDO AND C. MARGARI
Liver Transplantation Unit. Department of Surgery. Hospital General Vall d’Hebron.
Universidad Aut6noma de Barcelona, Spain
Solid and papillary neoplasm of the pancreas is an extremely rare and
not widely known tumour with predilection for young female patients. Its
low incidence ranges from 0.17% to 2.7% of nonendocrine pancreas
cancers. Only 27 well-documented cases have been reported in the
literature. Its histogenesis remains a matter of controversy.
We report a 28-year old woman with a 1-year history of epigastric pain.
Clinical examination was normal. CT-scan revealed a tumour with solid
and cystic areas located in pancreas tail.
The patient underwent distal pancreatectomy and esplenectomy.
Postoperatively, low flow pancreatic fistula was resolved in one week.
Grossly, the tumour appeared well circumscribed and measured 10 cm in
diameter. On cross section, it was multilocular with yellow solid areas
discolored from haemorrhage. Microscopically, the tumour was composed
ofpolygonal cells with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and round to oval
nuclei with a low mitotic rate. There was a solid and pseudopapillary
pattern around blood vessels. Many cystic areas with fibrin clots inside
showed cholesterol deposits and histiocytes inits walls.
Immunohistochemical staining for a alpha-1-antitrypsin and pre-keratin
were positives. The findings support an origin from exocrine pancreas.
Diagnosis was compatible with the solid and papillary tumour ofthe
pancreas. Nine months after surgery patient has no evidence ofrecurrence.
Long survival or even cure can be expected, but the accumulated
experience indicate that this neoplasm should be regarded as a low-grade
potentially malignant tumour.
P124
PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF KLOPPEL ORGRADING VS.
TNMIN PANCREATIC CARCINOMA
P.C. GIULIANOTTI, *G. FORNACIARI, *J. BRUNO, G. ROSSI, A. COSTA,
U. BOGGI, A. PIETRABISSA, T. BALESTRACCI, A. GUADAGNI, R. DI STEFANO,
F. MOSCA
Istituto Di Chimrgia Generale e Sperimentale, *Istituto di Anatomia Patologica,
Dipartimento di Epidemiologia Biostatistica C.N.R., Universith di Pisa, Italy
An improvement in defining the tumor grading of pancreatic cancer
might contribute to surgical decision making and help selecting those
cases which might benefit from adjuvant treatments. A relationship
between survival and new grading system was proposed by Kloppel et al.
in 1985. A retrospective analysis was therefore carried out at our
Institution comparing Kloppel grading to standard TNM grading in 57 pts.
with histologically proven ductal adenocarcinoma out of 116 who
underwent a pancreatic head resection for malignancy between 1982 and
1990. Grading was assessed through examination of the following
histologic and cytologic factors: numbers ofducts, mucus production,
epitelial shape, nucleous position and shape, presence of anisonucleosis
and number of mitosis out of 10HPF at XS00. A score from 0 to 2 was
given for each factor by two different pathologists and the mean value
obtained from at least 5 repeated oservations for each patient was used to
allocate the patient to his Kloppel or TNM grading. The numeric data of
57 cases were included in the present study. To correlate the two grading
systems (3 grades for Kloppel and 4 grades for TNM), TNM grade 4 were
downgraded to grade 3. By this arbitrary modification, the concordance
index (K) between the two systems was relevant (K=0.85)
(P<0.001[TestT]). There was no correlation neither between grading
(TNM or Kloppel) and TNM staging (Exact Test di Fisher) nor between
grading and preoperative duration of symptoms (Test di Kruskal-Wallis).
In conclusion our analysis suggests that neither the Kloppel nor the
TNM grading are reliable tools to predict survival in patients with
pancreatic cancer (Breslow, Mantel-Cox test). In addiction Kloppel
grading did not show any significant over the classical TNM grading.
P125
SURGICAL STRATEGY COMBINED WITH
INTRAOPERATIVE RADIOTHEPY FORRESECTABLE
PANCREATIC CANCER
T. HIRAOKA. K. KANEMITSU, S. TASHIRO, I. KAMIMOTO, S. SUGIHARA, H.
TAKAMORI, H. NISHIDA, Y. MIYAUCHI
First Department of Surgery, Kumamoto University Medical School, Kumanoto, Japan
The policy of surgical treatment for pancreatic cancer was studied
retrospectively. We have changed historically our policy oftreatment four
times upto date as follows; standard operation (n=lg), standard operation
plus intraoperative radiotherapy (IOR) (n=15), extended operation alone
(n=9) and extended operation plus IOR (n=lg). Five year survival rate of
extended operation plus IOR group was 27.8%, but the longest survivor in
patients of 3 other operation groups lived for only 3.3 years. Five year
survival rate was calculated according to the stage of TNM classification
in the 19 with extended operation plus IOR; stage (n=1), 100%, stage 2
(n=3), 0%, stage 3 (n=l 1), 37.5%, stage 4 (n=4), 0%. Two of three cases
with stage 2 tumor died of liver metastases without local recurrence and
another one is still alive. On the other hand, survival of 12 cases with
small cancer (a diameter ofless than 2 cm) in our hospital and affiliated
hospitals was studied. Two cases of stage tumor died in the
postoperative period. Survival rate of 6 cases of stage tumor was 66.7%.
They underwent only standard operation. Of 3 cases of stage 3, only one
case with extended operation plus IOR is still alive 4.2 years. One case
with stage 4 is still alive 1.3 years after standard operation. We would like
to indicate standard operation for patient with stage turnout and
extended operation plus IOR for patient with stage 4 turnout, only
conservative operation should be indicated.
P126
THEFACTORS FOR CURATIVE TREATMENT IN
PANCREATIC CANCER
H. IZUMIKA. M.YOSHIDA, K. SHIMADA,K. FURUTA, Y. ITOH, T. SUZUKI,
H. YOKOTA, G. KANEDA, S. FUNAMOTO, N. KOBAYASI, K. ASO, H. MIENO,
K. SATO, H. OHMIYA, Y. HIKI, A. KAKITA
Department of Surgery, Kitasato University, School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan
This is the study to evaluate the factors to affect the prognosis of
pancreatic cancer after surgery. Following analysis was done according to
"General Rules for Cancer ofthe Pancreas" in Japan.
Fifty-three resected cases out of 163 pancreatic cancer cases were
divided into 4 groups by their tumour size; T (< 20cm) eight, T2(2.1 4.0
cm) 33, T (4.1 6.0cm) 11 and to T (6.1cm <) one cases. Curative
resection was performed in 29 patients (54.7%). Noncurative rates ofT1
to T4 were 12.5%, 48.5%, 54.5%, and 100% respecitively. The factors
affecting on curative resection were distance from tumour to dissected
margin (ew), pancreatic stump (pw) and bile duct stump (bdw). Recurrent
rates ofT to T were 75.0%, 63.6%, and 100% respectively.
In conclusion, because of anatomical factors, pancretic cancer has
limitation for curative resection and for survival after surgery. To progress
the prognosis of pancreatic cancer, we need not only to extend surgical
procedures but also to find out more effective adjuvant therapy.
71
P127
RESECTION OF CARCINOMA OF THE BODY AND TAIL OF
THE PANCREAS
c D JOHNSON M SCHWALL, FLECHTENMACHER, M TREDE
University Surgical Clinic, Mannheim & University Surgical Unit, Southampton
Carcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas is regarded by many as
incurable. Resection is rarely attempted, because the tumour often presents
at an advanced stage.
In a consecutive series of 102 cancers of the body and tail of the
pancreas, we have performed a resection in 13. All patients have had a
minimum 12 months follow up. When possible a left pancreatic resection
was performed (n=7); growths extending up to the neck were treated by
total pancreatectomy (n=6). Adjacent organs were excised when tumour
invasion was present and complete clearance could be achieved (n=3).
There were no postoperative deaths. Median survival is 26 months
(range 3-40). Six patients have survived two years (46%) and 6 are still
alive 13-36 months after surgery. In contrast 11 patients with locally
invasive, non-metastatic tumours all died within 12 months of diagnosis.
Carcinoma of the body and tail ofpancreas may be resected with a
good chance of survival beyond two years in suitable cases.
P128
PANCREATIC SITYMPMANAGEMENT AFFER
PANCREATODUODENECTOMY
G. NANNI. G. SARRO, G. BRAGHERIO
Division of General Surgery, C. Fornaroli General Hospital Magenta (Milan), Italy
The surgical treatment ofresectable cancer of the head of the pancreas
is still controversial: pancreatoduodenectomy (Whipple’s Operation) or
total pancreatectomy. The arguments in favour or against these procedures
are the maintenance of endocrine function, the avoidance of the risk of
pancreaticojejunostomy, the operative mortality and morbidity, the
oncological radicality as well as the longterm survival.
From 1985 to 1990, 34 pancreatoduodenectomies were performed, with
the following kinds of management of the pancreatic stump:
pancreaticojejunostomy 11 cases (32%), with 2 dehiscences and
reoperation; pancreatic stump closure and Neoprene injection in the
pancreatic duct 15 cases (44%), with 8 cases of diabetes in the follow-up;
pancreatic duct ligation and pancreatic remnant closure iwth fibrin glue
protection and perioperative administration of Octreotide 8 cases (24%),
with 2 cases ofpancreatic fistula which closed spontaneously. The
operative mortality was zero.
It appears that the last procedure could reach all the proposed
objectives: the maintenance of endocrine function without the risk of
pancreaticojejunostomy, and the same oncological radicality and longterm
survival. The very low pefioperative mortality and morbidity and the good
quality of life, justify the further use and evaluation of this technique.
P129
PALLIATIVE SURGERY OF THE PANCREATIC CANCER
F. SEFERIADIS. A. MYSTAKIDIS, I. KONSTANTINIDIS, B. BASTAS,
K. STAVRIDIS, G. VELMACHOS
"SOTIRIA" General Hospital, Athens, Greece
If the malignant tumor proves to irremovable, the majortiy of surgeons
perform one of the many short-circuiting or decompressive operations.
The choise of these palliative procedures continues to be
cholecystojejunostomy using the Roux-en-Y loop or the simplejejunal
loop technique combined with side-to-sidejejunojejunostomy or end-to-
side hepaticojejunostomy is carried out to circumvent the possibility of
subsequent duodenal obstruction.
Authors report a retrospective study of patients with primary pancreatic
tumors who underwent palliative procedures in our department.
They were 28 male and 19 female who ranged in age from 48 to 82
years. Surgical treatment included laparotomy with biopsy alone in 6
patients choledochojejunostomy in 29 patients and cholecystojejunostomy
in 12 patients. The mortality rate was 9%. In 36 patients a side-to-side
jejunojejunostomy was carried out. A number of surgeons consider that
cholecystogastrostomy is the operation of choice for anatomical reasons.
This procedure, however, has disadvantages.
The results of the palliative operations are disappointing, as the average
mortality rate is about 5 to 10% and within 5-9 months of the operation
nearly all such patients are dead. When survival exceeds year the
question always arises as to whether or not the primary lesion in the
pancreas was in fact cancerous.
P130
UTRASOUND CONTROLLED FINE-NEEDLE BIOPSY,
ADDITIONAL METHOD IN CASES OF PANCREAS TUMORS?
J.H.SIMANOWSKI V.MENDEL, TH.REUHI, H. HEYMANN.
Klinik und Polildinik fuer Allgemeinchirurgie der Medizinischen Hochschule Hannover,
Podbielskistr. 380, D-W 3000 hannover 51, Germany
Sometimes it is impossible to clarify the dignity of turnouts in the
pancreas head or in the choledochus previous to the operation. Parts of
duodenum and pancreas have to be removed, even if the final histology
shows a benign turnout. Is it possible do decrease this number using the
operative ultrasound examination?
After the usual inspection ofthe operation field the pancreas head
turnout is punctured under ultrasound control. Using a 5 MHz finger- or
T-shaped linear array transducer the tumour is punctured in its central and
peripheral portions with a 0.6 or 0.7mm wide Chiba-needle under
ultrasound view. The collected cells are transferred immediately to a
cytology laboratory.
In 13 cases without a preoperative diagnosis of a malign tumour we
performed this work- and costintensive operative ultrasound guided
puncture. In 3 out of 13 cases we were able to detect malignity of the
tumour using the described method. In 8 cases the pancreas was resected
and the final histoloth showed in 6 cases a carcinoma, while in 2 cases the
tumor was caused by an inflammation. 2 early cases with an operative
earned cytology of PAP II were not resected and died 1.5 e.g. 2 years later
due to a pancreas carcinoma. In two cases the histology failed.
Cytology gained from operative, ultrasound guided puncture of
pancreas tumours does not give a usefull result during the operation.
Obviously the cytology fails in cases of highly differentiated pancreas
head carcinomas. Until now it seems impractical to detect a tumour inside
the inflammative tissue using ultrasound guidance and collecting cells this
way from different areas of the tumour. The theory to find the area ofhigh
mitoses in a specific area inside the pancreas tumor with ultrasound
control lide it is done in cases of liver carcinoma has failed.
72
P131
EVALUATION OF SERUM CA 19-9INPANCREATOBILIARY
CARCINOMAS
UENO K, NAGAMORI M, INOUE T, TAKEDA T, NAKANO T, MORI K,
KAYAHARA M, OHTA T, NAGAKAWA T, MIYAZAKI I.
The Department of Surgrey II, School ofMedicine, Kanazawea University, Kanazawa,
Japan
Serum concentrations ofthe CA 19-9 antigens were determined in 149
patients with pancreatobiliary carcinomas. Seventy six patients had
pancreatic carcinomas (57 head and 19 body/tail cancer) and seventy three
had biliary carcinomas (29 gallbladder, 31 bile duct and 13 ampula
cancers. The overall sensitivbity ofCA 19-9 was 75.2% (73.7% in
pancreatic cancers, 79.3% in gallbladder cancers, 83.7% in bile duct
cancers and 53.8% in apulia cancers). In 25 patients with obstructive
jaundice underwent the biliary decompressions, serum CA 19-9 in 19
cases (76.0%) decreased apparently after the decompressions. Staging and
resectability ofthese cancers were related to the serum CA 19-9 levels.
The normalizations after the resections had the relationships with
pathologicial curability. For the early detections ofthe recurrence in the
patients with curative resections, the elevations of serum CA 19-9 levels
were more available than the diagnoses by CT and MRI imagings. The
conculsion was as follows the frequent measurements of serum CA 19-9
levels were available to the diagnoses and the treatments in the patients
with pancretobiliary carcinomas.
P132
INHIBITORYEFFECT OFA CHOLECYSTOKININ
ANTAGONIST ONPANCREATIC CARCINOGENESISAFFER
PANCREATOBILIARYDIVERSION
P WATANAPA, B FLAKS, H OZTAS, PH DEPREZ, CALAM,
RCN WILLIAMSON
Department of Surgery and Medicine, Hammersmith Hosp., Royal Postgraduate Medical
School, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, United Kingdom.
The role ofcholecystokinin CCK has been explored in pancreatic
carcinogenesis following pancretobiliary diversion PBD )< using the
specific CCK receptor antagonist CR-1409. Male Wistar rats n=80 ),
aged 3 wks and weighing 180-240g, were given weekly i.p. injections of
azaserine 30mg/kg/wk for 3 wks. One week later
animals were randomised to receive either PBD or sham PBD and
thereafter to receive s.c. injections ofeither saline or CR-1409 10
mg/kg/day, 5 days a week ). Surviving rats were killed at 6 months, when
cardiac blood was taken for CCK assay and the pancreas was excised for
wet weight measurement and quantitative estimation of atypical acinar
cell foci AACF ), the precursor ofcarcinoma, PBD reduced body weight
6-16% less than shams but trebled the absolute and relative pancreatic
weights P < 0.001 ). CR-1409 blunted this adaptive response, reducing
absolute pancreatic weight by 33% P < 0.005 .) PBD quadrupled
circulating CCK concentrations, regardless ofthe antagonist treatment.
Acidophilic AACF occurred only in rats with PBD. CR-1409 markedly
reduced the number ofobserved acidophilic AACF by 90% P < 0.001 ).
Moreover, CR-1409 reduced the mean focal diameter ofeach lesion by
18% P < 0.005 ), the mean focal volume by 58% (P < 0.05 and the
percentage ofpancreas occupied by acidophilic foci by 95% P < 0.001 ).
PBD enhanced pancreatic carcinogenesis and CR-1409 inhibits this
enhancement.
P133
EVALUATIONOF THREENEWTUMOURMARKERS (CA
M43, CA 195 AND TPS) INPANCREATIC CANCER
A. ZERBI, S PASTORI, D. PAROLINI, G. BANRI, M. CARLUCCI, V. DI CARLO.
Pat. Chirurgica, L. Analisi-lRCCS S, Raffaele-Univ. Milan-Italy
We compared serum levels ofthree new tumour markers (CA M43,
CA 195 and TPS) to levels ofCA 19-9 in 71 patients with citologically or
histologically proved pancreatic cancer (group 1) and in 21 patients with
othe pancreatic diseases (13 acute pancreatits, 7 chronic pancreatitis,
islet cells tumour) (group 2). The following cut-offs were used: CA M43
(Genetic System-USA)< 10 U/L; CA 195 (Hybritech Europe-Belgium),
11 U/L; TPS (Beki Diagnostics-Sweden), 40 U/L; CA 19-9 (Sorin
Biomedica-Italy), 37 U/L.
CA M43 CA 195 TPS CA 19-9
Sensitivity: 53.5% 75.4% 91.5% 78.9%
Specificity: 96.4% 60.7% 21.4% 72.4%
The mean positive values (U/L) resulted 266 for CA M43, 453 for CA
195, 684 for TPS, 1958 for 19-9 in group 1; in group 2 they were,
respectively, 12, 28, 2112, 112. CA M43 showed the best predictive
positive value (97.4%), greated even than CA 19-9 (87.5%), whereas CA
195 presented the best predictive negative value (50%). Serum levels of
CA M43 CA 195 and CA 19-9 were related to the stage ofthe tumour
(higher values in more advanced stages), whereas TPS values did not
show this correlation.
Our data suggest that CA 19-9 remains the most reliable marker in the
management ofpancreatic cancer. CA M43, although poor sensitive, is
highly specific in detecting pancreatic cancer, and its role deserves further
studies.
P134
LOCALIZEDUNRESECTABLEPANCREATIC CARCINOMA:
SURGERY +INTRAOPERATIVF_,+ EXTERNAL
RADIOTHERAPY
E BALEN, JA CIENFUEGOS, F PARDO, JL HERNANDEZ, FONZALEZ, V VILLA,
C BENITO, TORRAMADE,
Dept. of Surgery, Clinica Universitada, Univ ofNavarra, Pamplona, Spain
Different modes ofradiotherapy and biliary bypasses have achieved a
significant longer survival and a good local control in localized and
unresectable pancreatic carcinoma. We analyze our experience in 30
patients diagnosed ofpancreatic carcinoma with vascular invasion, but
without distant metastases. They were operated upon to perform tumour
biopsy, intraoperative radiotherapy 15-20 Gy and biliary bypass and/or
gastrojejunostomy. Fractionated external beam radiotherapy was
delivered up to 40-55 Gy. Symptoms :jaundice (19 cases), abdominal
pain (23). Tumour size was greater than 5 cms in 7 patients, and was
located in the head (13), body (8) or head-body (9) ofthe pancreas.
Complications related to radiotherapy, 2 cases ofGI bleeding with one
death; related to the surgical procedure, abscess, 2 colangitis and 2
obstrictivejaundice among the 10 gallbladderbiliary-bypasses. Among
the 23 patients with abdominal pain. 7 were not followed-up and 15 had
no pain one month after surgery (11 ofthem did not suffer from pain
along their survival time). Medium survival time ofthe dead patients was
10 months (range 3-23). Currently 4 patients are alive at 3,8,10 and 10
months. A good local control was achived in the majority ofcases and
tumour progression was mainly to the liver, peritoneum and bone
73
P135
VARIATIONS OF PANCREATICDUCTS RESEMBLING
NEOPLASTIC CHANGES ANANATOMO-CLINICALSTUDY
B.STIMEC, M. BULAJIEC, M.MILICEVIC AND M. TERZIC
Institute ofAnatomy, Institute ofDigestive Diseases, Gyn/Ob Clinic, Faculty ofMedicine,
University ofBelgrade, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
We investigated normal variations ofthe pancreatic tree which could
give the false positive diagnosis ofmalignancy. The study was carried out
on 93 specimens ofhuman pancreas from autopsies, and on 103
endoscopic retrograde pancreatograms (ERP). The anatomic specimens
underwent dissection, pancreatography and corrosion casting. Ansa
pancreatica, a loop ofthe main pancreatic duct (MPD), which can be
interpreted on CT as a tumefaction, was found in 11.3% ofthe anatomic
specimens and in 16.5% ofERPs. Variations ofthe MPD course, such as
sygmoid and descendent, can look like pathological displacement. They
were found in 20% ofthe cases. Shortening ofthe MPD, if not belonging
to pancreas divisum or the congenital short pancreas, might also be
diagnosed as neoplastic changes in the region ofpancreatic tail. The
minimum length ofthe MPD was 142 mm on anatomic specimens and
131 mm on ERPs. The region ofpancreatic isthmus often presents
shortening and rarefication ofthe side branches, due to the superior
mesenteric vessels. This variation, which can give the impression of
neoplastic branch amputation, was found in 39% ofthe anatomic
specimens and in 32% ofERPs. The anatomical and clinical method were
highly correlative.
P136
INTRADUCTALPAPILLARYTUMOROF THEPANCREAS: A
CLINICALANDMORPHOIX)GICAL STUDY OFTWO CASES
MARRANO D., SANTINI D.,* CAMPIONE O., CASADEI R., ALBERGHINI M.,*
PASQUALINI E., PIVA P.
Ist. I^Clinica Chirurgica Generale e Terapia Chirurgica, Universita di Bologna (Italy)
(*) Ist. Anatomia Patologica Universita di Bologna (Italy)
Intraductal papillary tumors ofthe pancreas encompass a variety ofrare
lesions described in literature under different terms. A clinico-pathologic
study on 2 cases ofintraductal papillary-cystic neoplams ofthe pancreas,
surgically treated at the 1st Surgical Clinic, Bologna University, is
reported. Both patients were male with a long history of symptoms
resembling those of chronic pancreatitis. The patients underwent total
pancreatectomy. Grossly the tumors diffusely involved the main
pancreatic ducts in the body-head region, but sections clearly exhibited
soft masses cystically distending and partly occluding the ducts.
Histologic examination showed a diffuse intraductal papillary proliferation
with a cystoarchitectural pattern ranging from mild atypia-dyspasia to
severe dysplasia-in situ carcinoma.
Carcinomatous stromal invasion was never observed.
Interestingly the remaining non-neoplastic ducts, showed awide and
diffuse spectrum ofdifferent types ofhyperplasia and metaplasia. We
emphazse that this peculiar kind ofintraductal neoplasm constitute a
pancreatic tumor entity to distinguish from the common ductal
adenocarcinoma and the mucinous cystic tumors.
Moreover the morphologic pattern the lack of stromal infiltration and
all cases reported in literature suggest that these tumors may be considered
low-grade malignancies.
P137
CLINICAL STUDY OF THEPANCREATOSCOPE
(BABY SCOPE) FORPANCREATIC DISEASES
Y. HAYASHIDA, T. SHIMIZU, N. MIZOBUCHI, H. GONDA, T. MAEKAWA,
N. SAKAKIBARA,
1st Department of Surgery, Juntendo University, School ofMedicine, Tokyo, Japan
The progress and development offiber optics made possible the
production ofthe pancreatoscope.
The examination was done in 15 pancreatic cases, panceatities and
pancreatic cancer, using this pancreatoscope. The useful results ofthe
baby scope are reported in this study. The diameter ofthe baby scope is
only 0.8mm, and inserted into the pancreatic duct through the channel of
the mother scope (duodenal fiber scope, JF type fiber scope). Furthermore,
the baby scope is inserted through the catheter (diameter is 1.2mm). The
baby scope is therefore inserted easily into the pancreatic duct wiht a
catheter. Consequently, the observations ofthe ductual lesion in the
pancreas in made possible by the use ofthe scope. Narrowing ductual
mucosa ofthe pancreas were observed in cancer cases. Also typical
findings were observed in mucinproduce pancreas cancer. In normal
cases, the smooth-surfacd ductal mucosa was observed.
Using this baby scope and combining the brushing cytology, futher
progress in direct vision biopsy, is made in the diagnosis ofpancreatic
diseases.
Good results are reported in this study ofthe pancreatoscope.
P138
INDICATIONSFORINTRAOPERATIVE CHOLANGIOGRAPHY.
RESULTSIN ’OPEN’ ANDLAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY.
G.ALEXIOU, M.PAPADOPOULOU, B.PAPALOIS, P.ANTONIOU,
K.PAPADIMITROPOULOS.
2nd Surgical Dept., Air Force General Hospital, Athens, Greece
From August 1987 until August 1991 we performed 508 ’open’
cholecystectomies. An intraoperative cholangiography (IC) was performed
in 379 cases and in 35 ofthem (9.23%) the existence ofcholedocholithiasis
was confirmed. In 6 ofthose cases (17.14%) choledocholithiasis was
indicated by a history ofjaundice or pancreatitis (HIP), elevated liver
function tests (ELFF) and ultrasonography findings (USF), in 2 cases
(5.71%) by a HJP and the ELl:r[ in 11 cases (31.42%) by a HJP and the
USF, in 5 cases (14.28%) bythe ELF/" and the USF and in 11 cases
(31.42%) only by the USF. We concluded from those results that IC may
be performed selectively in laparoscopic cholecystectomy when indications
based oa HJP, ELFT or USF are present. From November 1990 until
November 1991 we performed 136 laparoscopic cholecystectomies and in
only 7 ofthose cases the procedure was converted into an ’open’
laparotomy. In 20 ofthose cases (15.5% ofthe laparoscopically performed
cholecystectomies) IC was performed and in 3 ofthem the existenc of
choledocholithiasis was confLrrned. In 2 ofthe 20 (10%) intraoperative
cholangiographies that were performed in laparoscopic cholecystectomies
choledocholithiasis was indicated by a HJP, ELFF and USF, in case (5%)
by the HJP and the ELFT, in case (5%) by a HJP and the USF, in 7 cases
(35%) by the ELb’T and the USF and in 9 cases (45%) only by the USF.
The 3 cases with choledocholithiasis were treated with ERCP and
extraction ofthe common bile duct stones, while there are no indications of
choledocholithiasis up to now for those patients that laparoscopic
cholecystectomy was performed without IC. Our experience from the
’open’ cholecystectomy and the up to date data from the performance of
laparoscopic cholecystectomy suggest that the HJP, the ELFT and the USF
are safe indications for the selective performance ofIC in both procedures,
although the IC is necessary in difficult cases where the biliary anatomy is
not clear.
74
P139
PROGNOSIS OF POST-OPERATIVE COMPLICATION IN
GERIATRIC PATIENTS WITH CHOLELITHIASIS
A.Ts BUTKEVICH
Department of General Surgery, 2rid Medical Institute, 10strovityanova Moscow, USSR
With the aid of Mathematic Classification methods on the basis of
Patient’s study group, table system ofprognosis and outcome of
operations carried out on Geriatric patients with bile diseases was worked
out. This was based on independent estimation of the Patient’ general
conditions and the gravity forthcoming intervention. Dosage Physical
Load (DPL) on Veloergometer, changes in ECG, haemodynamic and
functional indices were used during the preoperative period in the
estimation of functional reserves in 657 patients. Pneumotachograhic
indices pre- and during DPL were studied in order to estimate the
functional reserves of external breathing and prognosis of Pulmonary
complications.
Conclusions: In many Geriatric patients cardio-pulmonary functional
reserves will be found to be deficient under conditions ofhigh demands
(operations, narcosis). Index ofMyocardial Adaptations (IMA)
determined during DPL reflects more the adaptive of reserve state of
Myocardium. The correlative dependence of intra- and postoperative
cardiovascular complications with the result of IMA. ECG test during
DPL helps with a high degree of accuracy to prognosis the development
of arrhythmia during operations and in postoperative period.
Examinations of the index of external Breathing function under DPL
using the programme worked out by us helps to reveal Patients with high
probability of Postoperative Pneumonia. Worked out table ofprognosis of
operative risk helps in the choosing rational surgical tactics thereby
lowering postoperative mortality rate.
PI40
RECURRENT COMMON DUCT BROWN STONE: AN
IMPORTANT LONG TERM SIDE-EFFECT OF BOTH
SURGICAL AND ENDOSCOPIC SPHINCTEROTOMY.
CET-I’A F, LOMBARDO F
Institute of Surgical Pathology University of Siena, Italy
The incidence of long term side effects after the damage of the sphincter
of Oddi and, in particular, the occurrence ofrecurrent common duct stones
(RCS) of the brown subtype has been evaluated in a series of 63 consecutive
patients who underwent surgery for postcholecystectomy stones. Stones
were recurrent (i.e. primarily formed postcholecystectomy) in 51 cases and
retained i.e. missed at previous operation) in 12. Sixty-two per cent of
patients with RCS had a previous sphincterotomy (SPHT). In particular, in a
subset of 20 patients, who had stone and bile analysis, not only at the second
operation, but also at the time of cholecystectomy, 11 cases were found with
brown stones formed after SPHT in subjects with previous stones of other
type (cholesterol or black pigment stones). In 6 of these patients (with T-
tube drainage) stones also formed certainly after the onset of bile infection.
In addition, the occurrence ofbrown RCS was specifically evaluated in a
follow-up study of 145 patients with previous surgical SPHT or
sphincterooplasty (mean postoperative interval + 6.1 years), 5 with previous
ampullectomy and 55 with previous endoscopic
SPHT (and cholecystectomy) (mean interval + 4.3 years). It was found
that 11%
of patients with surgical SPHT, 9% those with endoscopic SPHT and
66.6% of patients with ampullectomy had common duct stones ofthe
brown subtype, always associated with bile infection.
It is suggested that, since brown RCS are secondary to bile stasis and
infection the duodenum is going to be colonized by bacteria with increasing
age, SPHT (and subsequent stricture), facilitating both bile contamination
and bacterial overgrowth, could be considered a basic factor for the
formation of these stones. Furthermore, since true RCS are mostly of the
brown subtype (37 of 51, i.e. 72.5%), it is also_suggested that while SPHT
can prevent the occurrence of retained stones, facilitating the flushing of
stones that could be missed at the time of cholecystectomy, it undoubtedly
increases the total incidence of RCS. In particular, evidence is also given
that recurrent common duct brown stones and retained stones (primarily
formed in the gallbladder) form according to different pathogenetic
mechisms.
P141
PREDICTIVE FACTORS FOR CHOLEDOCHOLITHIASIS
BEFORE PERFORMING LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
ARC, ARCIF AND A. FINGERHUT F. LACAINE, J.M. HAY, TH. MONTARIOL
Intraoperative cholangiograms (IOC) in biliary surgery is associated
with well-known performances (2% false negatives and 4% false
positives). Of the latter (latent choledocholithiasis), only 10% will become
symptomatic, i.e. 0.4% of the 80000 cholecystectomies performed each
year in France. Obtaining intraoperative cholangiograms, however, is time
consuming and costly with small benefits. Moreover, presently,
endoscopic treatment of residual choledocholithiasis avoids reoperation
and shortens hospital stay. In 1988, Huguier and Lacaine presented a
score based on preoperative sonographic and clinical findings which
measures the risk of latent choledocholithiasis (2% when the score is less
than 3.5, 47% when the score is greater than 3.5). The French
Associations for Surgical Research (promopted by the Ile de France
chapter) conducted a prospective study which compared this score as
established on sonographic findings, with IOC and intraoperative
anatomical findings. Pre and intraoperative scores were quite similar and
the conclusions of these quthors were thus validated. As this score has a
very high negative predictive valve, the risk of choledocholithiasis when
the score value is less than 3.5 is very small. Its positive predictive value,
however, is weak: a score of 3.5 or more indicates that a stone may be
harboured in the main biliary duct in 25 to 50% of cases. We therefore
propse that 1) IOC may be necessary in patients whose scores are less
than 3.5. These patients may be operated on under laparoscopy; 2) when
the score is 3.5 or more, IOC should be performed if traditional
cholecystectomy is chosen. If laparoscoppic cholecystectomy is
performed, there is a 25 cent chance that endoscopic treatment of
choledocholithiasis will be needed before (or after) surgery.
P142
CHANGES INBILE COMPONENT MAJORFACTOR OF
PIGMENT STONE FORMATION
z.Y. GU, K H. ZHANG
Department of Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
Abstract: The relationship between pigment stone (PS) formation and
changes in bile component has been studied in our laboratory over 15
years.
1. Animal experimental: 125 guinea pigs disvided into two groups fed
low protein chow with or without greenery. The incidence of PS
formation is 49% in group I, and 94% in group II, respectively. 2. Clinical
study: 61 samples ofbile were analyed, among them 18 were from PS
patients. Results: The major component of the bile after the stone
formation in the model found that the value changes of bilirubin and bile
acids were similar with those in the PS patients. Moreover, it was also
found that the model lower nourish situation, the incidence ofpigment
stone was higher than those with better nourishment. Stones in model
might be disappeared in the short time, if the nourishment of the animal
improved with normal chow.
It could be postulated that the medical or dietary interventions to
prevent the formation ofpigment stone might be enabled.
75
P143
A CLINICAL STUDY ON HEPATOBILIARY DYNAMIC
SCINTIGRAPHY IN 252 PATIENTS WITHBILIARYDISEASES
Hu Yize
Department of Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical College, P.R. of
China
Hepatobiliary dynamic scintigraphy with Tc-99m EHIDA was
performed in patients suffering from biliary diseases. Hepatobiliary
dynamic morphological imaging with the parameters oftime-activity curve
ofhepatobiliary region of interest were investigated. All patients had
ultrasound. Other examinations included PTG in 44, ERCP in 12 and CT
in 35. The operation was performed in 221.
Two hundreds and fifty-two patients (M, in 117, F, in 135, Mean age 50
(21-83) years) were studied. Among them, there are bile duct stones in 200
cases (including extrahepatic duct stones in 106, multiple intrahepatic and
extreahepatic duct stones in 82, and intrahepatic duct stones in 12), benign
bile duct strictures in 8, biliary tumor in 13, acute cholecystitis in 31.
The result of scintigraphy showed accuracy rate to be 86% in bile duct
stones, 100% in acute cholecystitis and benign bile duct strictures, and 62%
in biliary tumor. Scintigraphy showed accuracy rate of intrahepatic duct
stones companying with left liver fibrosis and atrophy in 87% (14/16).
The reliability of scintigraphy related to the serum bilirubin
concentration. When the bilirubin level is below 205 umol/L,
cholescintigraphy clear with high diagnostic evaluation. When bilirubin
level is more than 205 umol/L, the cholescintigraphy is poor and diagnostic
evaluation decrease.
Conclusion: Hepatobiliary dynamic scintigraphy is a simple, safe,
convenient and noninvasive imaging technique with a combination of
functional evaluation and morphological imaging. It is very useful for
patients ofbile duct stones, benign biliary structrues and acute cholecystitis.
Especially when combined with Ultrasound, scintigraphy can provide and
accurate rate of 92% in the investigation of obstructivejaundice.
P144
GALLSTONE HEPATITIS ANINDEX OF SYMIrFOMATIC
BILEDUCT STONF
M. ISOGAI. K. HACHISUKA, A. YAMAGUCHI
Department of Surgery, Ogaki Municipal Hospital
Ogaki, Japan
Gallstone hepatitis, high serum transaminase elevation due to an acute
inflammatory hepatic injury in the early stage of gallston impaction, has
turned our attention from hepatocellular to extrahepatic biliary
disease1).Attacks ofbile duct stones (symptomatic bile duct stones,
SBDS) may be caused by gallstone impaction. Accordingly, our
diagnostic criteria for SBDS are as follows: (1) gallstone colic, (2)
elevation of serum transaminase and (3) enlarged biliary tract.
During last 4 years, 132 patients were diagnosed as having SBDS and
underwent operation. The mean values of SGOT (N<40 Karmen unit),
SGPT (N<35 karmen unit) and bilirubin (N<l.2 mg/dl) were 302 K>U><
224 K>U> and 2.6 mg/dl, respectively. At operation, 116 patients
(87,9%) had bile duct stones, 42 (36.2%) of from had acute suppurative
cholangitis. In the remaining 16 patients (12.2%), bile duct stones were
not confirmed. They had either gallstone pancreatities or multiple small
stones less than 4 mm in diameter in the gallbladder alone.
In summary, gallstone hepatitis can be an index of SBDS.
Reference
1) Isogai M. et al. (1991) Etiology and pathogenesis of marked
elevation of serum transaminase in patients with acute gallstone disease.
HPB Surgery. 4,95-107.
P145
ROUX-EN-Y HEPATICOJEJUNOSTOMYFORLONG-TERM
BILIARY ACCESS AND PERCUTANEOUS TRANSJEJUNAL
INTRAHEPATIC STRICTURE DILATATIONAND STONE
EXTRACTION
JEJ KRIGE. SJ BENINGFIELD*, PC BORNMAN, TERBLANCHE.
Departments of Surgery and Radiology*, University of Cape Town
and MRC Liver Research Centre, Cape Town, South Africa
Seventeen symptomatic adult patients (12 women; 5 men mean age 34
years; range 22-64 years) with benign intrahepatic strictures and stones
underwent 62 postoperative percutaneous transjejunal biliary balloon
dilatations between 1986 and 1991. The intrahepatic strictures were
secondary to iatrogenic common hepatic duct injury (5 patients) Caroli’
disease (2 patients) choledocal cyst (2 patients) and primary intrahepatic
stones (8 patients). All aptients underwent intraoperative stone extraction
and stricture dilatation and construction of a Roux-en-Y side to-side
hepaticojejunostomy with a 12 cmjejunal access loop marked with silver
clips and attached to the anterior abdominal wall. Subdequent
postoperative percutaneous transjejunal biliary dilatation of residual or
recurrent intrahepatic strictures and stone extraction was performed using
a biliary guidewire, co-axial catheter and 7 Fr Gruntzig angioplasty
balloon catheter combination.
Five patients with iatrogenic strictures underwent 18 dilatations (mean
3, range 1-6) and are asymptomatic without residual stones, seven patients
who had Caroli’s, choledocal cysts or primary intrahepatic stones
underwent 44 dilatations (mean 2.9, range 1-9). Two patients have
residual intrapehatic stones and one has required a left lateral
segmentectomy for removal of stones. Minor local or ductal complications
related to percutaneous dilatation
and stone extraction occurred in three patients wihtout long-term
sequelae.
The combined radiological and surgical approach using a Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunstomy and biliary access loop with post-operative
percutaneous transjejunal biliary deilatation and stone extraction provides
an effective method of treating symptomatic patients with complex
residual or recurrent intrahepatic strictures and stones.
P146
CHOLEDOCHODUODENOSTOMY. IS IT JUSTIFIEDFOR
BENIGN DISEASE?
T. LIAKAKOS J. KOUFOPOULOS, D.KAKOULIDIS, D. MANDREKAS.
2nd Surgical Department ofAthens General Hospital.
152 Mesogeion Av., Athens, Greece
To evaluate the long term postoperative results of
choledochoduodenostomy (CDD) the records of 210 patients were
retrospectively analyzed. All the patients had undergone a side to side
CDD for a non malignant disease from Jaunary 1971 to December 1988.
13(6.2%) died in the immediate postoperative period and another 7(3.3%)
from malignacy not previousely detected. 35 patients were lost from the
follow up and the remaining 155 were followed for 3 to 13 years (mean
7.6 years). The indications for CDD were choledocholithiasis in 97
patients, ampullary stenosis in 32, echinococcosis in 15 and intrahepatic
stones in 11. The common bile duct diametre ranged from 18 to 43mm
and the length of CDD from 20 to 25mm. Overall morbidity was 24%.
The long term follow up revealed 13 (8.4) patients being symptomatic 6
months to 11 years after CDD was performed. 2 of them had 1-3 mild
pancreatic attacs and 11 had 1-25 episodes of cholangitis. In 3 cases
cholangitis resolved spontaneously, in 2 an ERCP showed impacted
stones and endoscopic sphincterotomy was therapeutic. Following a re-
operation in the remaining 6 patients, 4 sump-syndromes and 2 fibrous
anastomotic strictures were found. Two transduodenal sphincteroplasties
and four Roux en-Y covertions were performed. patient died and the rest
are symptoms free.
We believe CDD is a quick and safe procedure with few long term
complications and it should be always considered as a very good
alternative in the management ofthe complicated problems ofthe biliary
tract.
76
P147
POST-CHOLECYSTECTOMY STONES ASSOCIATEDWITHA
LONG CYSTIC DUCT REMNANT.APECULIARTYPEOF
RECURRENT COMMONDUCT STONF
LOMBARDO F, CETrA F
Institute of Surgical Pathology University ofSiena, Italy
Data are reported in 11 patients with postcholecystectomy common duct
stones associated with a long cystic duct remnant. They were found during a
prospective study ofgallstone composition and structure related to bile
analysis and to the clinical findings ofpatients in 1000 consecutive surgical
cases. Three ofthese patients had the first operation during the study, so
they had stone and bile analysis in both instances. In addition, 3 other
patients had saved previous gallbladder stones (GBS), so permitting a
comparison between recurrent common duct stones (RCS) and GBS in
more than 50% ofcases. Stones were cholesterol or mixed faceted, similar
to those removed at the first operation in all ofthe 6 cases in which stones of
both operations were available; mixed in 3 cases, and in the 2 last cases
stones also contained suture material: they were mixed in one cases and
pigriaent tones in the other. Four other patients with a long cystic remnant
and a recent history ofpancreatitis underwent operation, because ofthe
suspected presence ofmicrostones both in the common duct and in the
cystic remnant, but no stone was found at operation. In addition, 3 patients
with a history ofrepeated pancreatitis and a long cystic remnant were
observed (two of whom had the first operation in our institution), without
evident stones at ERCP. They were not operated. On the other hand, during
a follow-up study of450 patients, with previous biliary tract surgery (212
had i.v. cholangiography and/or ERCP), 21 patient were found with a long
cystic remnant (>10mm) with no stones in the common duct and no history
ofjaundice or pancreatitis.
The possible role ofthe cystic remnant in the occurrence of
postcholecystectomy symptoms is discussed and possible prevention and
therapy is supposed. The possible implications ofthis pathologic entity in
the long term results oflaparoscopic cholecystectomy is also suggested.
In addition, the mechanism offormation fo these stones is analyzed and
in particular, the possibility is stressed that these stones represent a particular
type ofpostcholecystectomy recurrent stones, i.e. formed after gallbladder
removal, but not primarily in the common duct, with a mechanism that is
different from recurrent stones primarily formed in the duct.
P148
ENDOSCOPIC PAPILLOFISTOLOTOMY FOR
PARAPAPILLARY CHOLEDOCHODUODENALFISTULAS
FOLLOW- UP
M, RYSKA, J. SKALA, F. BELINA
Surgery department the 3. Faculty ofMedicine
Charle University, Prague, Czechoslovakia
We have diagnosed endoscopically 25 cases ofparapapillary
choledochoduodenal fistulas within period 1986 1988.23 patients
underwent cholecystectomy or revision ofbiliary tract and 2 patients had a
gallbladder in situ men 7, women 18, average 60 years/. In 19 cases with
fistulas 1.type have suffered from choledocholithisis 16 patients. One has
had sthenosis ofpapillae ofVater. In 6 cases with fistulas 2. type were
found concrements fo common bile duct 3 times. 11 patients were treated
by endoscopic papillofistulotomy.
Follow-up was performed in 10 patients during 3-5 years after
papillofistulotomy. All ofthem were without complaints.
Endoscopic papillofistulotomy is recommended as a method ofchoice
ofthe treatment offistulas 1.type.
P149
THEMANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATED HEPATOLITHIASIS
WITHINTRAHEPATIC BILIARY STRICTUREBY THE
COMBINATION OF T-TUBETRACTDILATATIONAND
ENDOSCOPIC ELECTROHYDRAULIC LITHOTRIPSY
SHYR-MING SHEEN-CHEN, M.D., FONG-FU CHOU, M.D.
Division of General Surgery, Department ofSurgery
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Kaohsiung,
Chang Gung Medical College, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Hepatolithiasis is prevelant in South-East Asia and presents a difficult
problem to manage. Retention of stones behind the intrahepatic biliary
stricture is a frequent and troublesome complication. Dilatation of stricture
and removal ofretained stones are necessary to prevent later sequelae.
Therefore, we conducted a prospective trail in 15 patients with retained
stones and intrahepatic biliary strictures. Postoperative duct dilatation with
PTCS (percutaneous transhepatic cholangioscopy tube, Sumitomo, Japan)
tube stenting through matured T-tube tract was performed in these 15
patients. Choledochoscopic electrohydraulic lithotripsy was applied when
impacted or/and big stones were encountered. Complete clearance of
stones was achieved in 12 patients. The overall successful rate was 80%.
Two cases developed fever after ductal dilatation, and recovered by
conservative treatment. These 12 patients are well without recurrent
symptom with a mean follow-up of 18 months. Postoperative T-tube tract
dilatation, selectively combined with endoscopic electrohydraulic
lithotripsy, is an effective and safe mehtod for complicated hepatolithiasis
with biliary strictures.
P150
ULTRASONIC EVALUATIONOF COMMONBILEDUCT
(CBD) PATHOLOGY: PROSPECTIVE COMPARISON WITH
INTRAOPERATIVE CHOLANGIOGRAPHY,MANOMETRY
ANDERCP
P. SUNGLER, M. HEINERMAN, O. BOECKL
Ist Surg. Dept. and L.-Boltzmann-Ist. for Exp. and Gastroenterol. Surg., LKA Salzburg,
Austria
Ultrasonography is the modality of choice for the diagnosis of
cholelithiasis, but its role in the diagnosis ofCBD pathologies is still under
discussion. In the age ofminimal access surgery i.e. laparoscopic
cholecystectomy CBD stones, detected during surgery are a theapeutical
dilemma, either leading to laparotomy and CBD intervention or hopefully
successful postoperative ERCP. To avoid these problems, between
January 1987 and August 1991 we performed a prspective study on 612
patients with symptomatic gallstone disease. All patients underwent
biliary ultrasound preoperatively. Patients with a CBD diameter ofless
than 6 mm had a simple cholecystectomy with intraoperative
cholangiography and manometry. Out ofthis group (n 394), 10 patients
had CBD stones, missed by preoperative ultrasound. Patients with a CBD
diameter over 6 mm had preoperative ERCP (n 199). 90% of these
patients showed pathologies ofthe common bile duct such as CBD stones
or papillary stenoses.
All these patients also underwent cholecystectomy. Sensitivity of
preoperative ultrasound with regard to CBD pathologies amounted to
95.22% and specificity to 95.28%, residual stones were only found in
0.98%. In conculsion ofour data, biliary ultrasound is not accurate in the
diagnosis/exclusion ofCBD stones, but is a very sensitive and specific
tool in assessment ofCBD pathology, helping to avoid management
problems in laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
77
P151
CHOLEDOCHOLITHIASIS IN THE HIGH RISKPATIENT.
SURGICAL TREATMENT ORENDOSCOPIC
SPHYNCTEROTOMY LEAVING THE GALLBLADDERIN SITU
TRIAS, M, TARGARONA EM, PROS, I, MARTINEZ, J, GUEVARA, C, ROS,
E, BORDAS, J, TERES, J.
Dept. of Surgery, Gastroenterology and Endoscopy. Hosp. Clinic, Univ. of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
Morbidity and mortality after cholecystectomy and bile duct exploration
increased with age and associated disease. Endoscopic sphyncterotomy
leaving the gallbladder ’in situ’ (ES-GiS) has emerged as an useful
alternative. Nevertheless, studies comparing both therapeutic options are
lacking. The AIM ofthis study has been to compare the results of
endoscopic or surgical approach ofbile duct lithiasis in the elderly or high
risk patient. MATERIAL AND METHODS Betweenjanuary 1988 to
december 1990 we recorded 152 patients diagnosed of choledocholithiasis.
107 ofthem were surgically treated (Group I) and 45 received endoscopic
treatment leaving the gallbladder "in situ" (Group II). Age over 70 or a
systemic chronic illnes (SCI) were considered as risk factors.
RESULTS
Group (SURGERY) Group II(ENDPSCOPY)
>70y. SCI >70y+SCI >70v. SCI >70y+SCI P
N 55 59 34 36 30
Morbidity 22% 32% 27% 17% 27%
Mortality 9% 6,8% 11,8% 2,7% 3%
Eficacy (bile duct
clearance rate) 100/107(93.5%) 40/45(89%)
Biliary symptoms
(follow up 14+6m) 4% 13%
24 NS
17% NS
4,2% NS
NS
NS
There were no statistical differences between the groups, but a lower
morbi-mortality was observed in the endoscopic group. CONCLUSION.
ES leaving the gallbladder in situ is an useful alternative to the classic
surgical approach of choledocholithiasis. Prospective studies are needed to
know the specific clinical features determining the indication of every one
of these therapeutic options.
Study supported by grant 91/416 of FIS
P152
WHAT HAPPENS WITH THE GALLBLADDERAFTER
ENDOSCOPIC SPHYNCTEROTOMY?
TARGARONA EM, PROS I, MARTINEZ J, GUEVARA C, BIANCHI L, BASSA P,
ROS E, BORDAS J, TERES J, TRIAS M.
Dept, of Surgery, Gastroenterology, Endoscopy, Radiology and Nuclear Medicine. Hosp.
Clinic. Univ. of Barcelona, Spain
Endoscopic sphyncterotomy leaving the gallbladder "in situ" (ES-ViS)
has emerged as an alternative to surgery in the treatment of
choledocholithiasis in elderly or high risk patients. Nevertheless, little
attention has been paid to gallbladder function after ES, and several studies
report contradictory results1,2 .This aspect is of interest because it may
justify the use ofpharmacological dissolutive therapy for the residual
gallbladder stones. AIM: to investigate the gallbladder function after
endoscopic sphyncterotomy, studied by biliary scintigraphy and
ultrasonography. MATERIAL AND METHOD: 11 patients (6 f, 5 m,
Mean age 72_+10) were treated by ES-ViS between January 1989 October
1990 (follow-up: 16_+10 m). ES was performed to treat gallstone
pancreatitis (4 cases), acute cholangitis (6 cases) andjaundice (2 cases).
ERCP demonstrated a patent cystic duct in all patients. Previously to
ERCP, stones in the gallbladder were observed by ultrasonography in 6
cases (4 stones, 2 sludge). A biliary scintigraphy (HIDA) with late scan
(240’), hepato-biliary ultrasonography and biochemical hepatic function
tests (Bi, FA,GGt) were performed. 3 patients received urodeoxycholic
acid for 24 months after ERCP. RESULTS: Biochemical parameters of
biliary function were in normal range in all cases. Gallbladder filling with
HIDA was observed in 7 cases (64%), with a delayed presence of the
isotope in 6 cases (>240’). Ultrasonography observed that gallbladder
stones disappeared after ERCP in 2 cases. UDCA failed to dissolve
gallbladder stones in the 3 cases.
CONCLUSION: 1.ES do not abolish gallbladder function, and isotope
filling could be observed in most cases. 2. In spite of the preservation of the
gallbladder function, the efficacy ofpharmacological disolutive therapy of
stones after ES and ViS must be tested by prospective studies.
1. Desa et al, Br Med J. 300:1111, 1990
2. Holbrok et A1, Arch Surg, 125:738, 1991. Study supported by grant
91/416 of FIS
P153
A STUDY ON THE PROTEINS IN GALLSTONE
LIANG-FANG XIA GUO-FU ZHOU, LIN-DE ZHOU, YONG-FANG ZHAO
Dept. of Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical College, Guizhou Province
Institute of Geochemistry, Academia Sinica, P.R. China
The proteins in gallstone were studied by means of SDS-polyacylamide
gel electrophoresis after the gallstone solutions were dialysed and
concentrated, and several stainning methods were used to determine its
composition. The results of the experiment show that there are generally
five protein bands both for cholesterol and pigmental stones in the
electrophoregram stained by Coomasie Brilliant Blue, and it is also
basically identical that about a dozen of fine bands were possessed by
those 2 different types of gallstone when more sensitive staining method
of Coomasie Brilliant Blue-Silver was adopted. Moreover, glycoprotein
and polysaccharide were found by the use of PAS procedure. The result of
thin layer scanning shows that glycoprotein makes up some 50% of the
total amount of the proteins. Besides, it is proved that protein-pigment
complex does exists in gallstone. The experimental results suggest that it
might have similar external conditions when pigment in those 2 types of
gallstone is sedimented, and other proteins except glycoprotein may also
play a role in the formation of gallstone.
P154
LATE RESULTS OF A NEW STYLE OF APJICD-ANALYSIS
OF 150 CASES
CHAO-ZHEN WANG
Tianjin 2nd Central Hospital, Tiangin 300120, P.R.China
150 cases ofhepatolith were treated by APJICD and followed for 7
years. Improving old style of the operation: the length of artificial papilla
was added to 2 cm from 0.Scm, the length of JI was shortened to 15cm
from 20-25cm. 150 cases were followed for 7 years, infection did not
occur in any cases. In 12 cases the length of the artificial papilla were
proved by gastroduodenosy in a range of 0.8-1.Scm. The papilla was full
and wasn’t atrophy.
78
P155
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY: REPORT OF 260
CASES.
G. ALEXIOU S. RIZOS, P. ANTONIOU, B. PAPALOIS, A. KOURIS
2nd Surgical Dpt., Air Force General Hospital and Department of Surgery, St. Anargiri
Hospital, Athens, Greece
The new method of laparoscopic cholecystectomy is rapidly gaining
acceptance by the Greek surgical community. We present the experience
of 260 cases in which laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed in
two Greek surgical centers from November 1990 until November 1991.
There were 93 men and 167 women with a mean age of 55 and 53 years
respectively. The laparoscopic procedure was successfully completed in
249 cases while in 11 patients the procedure was converted to an open
laparotomy due to unforeseen technical difficulties. Operative time
decreased from an average of 130+/-51 min for the first 20 cases, to 80+/-
30 min for the last 20 cases, patients were kept overnight, given clear
liquids the evening of surgery, a regular diet the next morning and
prescribed oral analgesics (35%). All the patients received an IV dose of
amoxycillin/clavulanic acid intraoperatively and three doses after that. 20
patients underwent the procedure as outpatients. Cystic duct
cholangiography was selectively performed in 53 cases based on a history
ofjaundice of pancreatitis, elevated liver function tests and
ultrasonography findings. ERCP with extraction of the common bile duct
stones was performed either before laparoscopic surgery (1 patient), or in
the immediate postoperative period (5 patients). Mean hospital stay was
2.4+/-1.3 days. There were no deaths. 2 patients required delayed
exploration early in our experience: for a bile leak and for subhepatic
abscess. patient suffered a trocar injury resulting in a subcutaneous
haematoma. A minor infection was present in 3 cases at the area in which
one of the trocars was inserted. Subcutaneous emphysema was noticed in
3 patients. Shoulder pain was encountered in 11 patients. We conclude
that laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a minimal access safe surgical
procedure which results in significantly decrease length ofpostoperative
hospitalization, requirement for pain medication, faster return to work and
excellent cosmetic results
P156
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY IN THE
NETHERLANDS
G.D. ALGIE, P.M.N.Y.H. GO, D.J. GOUMA
University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been introduced during the past year
all over The Netherlands. The aim ofthis study was to evaluate the early
results of this new method introduced by 58 surgeons after attending a
practical course.
Data of 546 patients with a mean age of 50 years (range 20-80) were
collected. The indication was symptomatic gallstone disease without
evidence of common bile duct stones, or cholecystitis. 70% of the
surgeons performed less than 10 laparoscopic cholecystectomies. The
average operation time was 95 minutes. In 8.2% of the patients the
laparoscopic procedure was converted to laparotomy. Adhesions,
cholecystitis or difficulty in recognition ofthe anatomy was responsible
for the conversion in 31 of the 45 patients. In the remaining 14 patients
bleeding or bile leakage during the procedure compel the surgeon to
perform a laparotomy. One patient died because of bleeding from the
cystic artery. Eleven patients underwent a laparotomy postoperatively
because ofbleeding (3) and bile leakage. Minor complications were found
in 30 patients.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy diffuses rapidly in The Netherlands. The
early results are encouraging, although the experience is limited. Further
registration is necessary to be able to compare the results of the
laparoscopic cholecystectomy more critical to those of conventional
cholecystectomy.
P157
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY IN A DISTRICT
HOSPITAL THE FIRST FIFTY CASES
BROCKWELL Y P TAI, H B KONG, L WIJESURIYA, M K W LI
Department of Surgery, Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital, Bonham Road,
Hong Kong
Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital is a 365 bed district hospital
serving Hong Kong Island.
From May to November 1991 fifty one patients were planned for
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, all had ultrasound examination and thirty
six had pre-operative ERCP. Average age was 54 years (range24-81), and
weight 60 kg (35-93), there were 23 men and 28 women.
Two ERCPs revealed CBD stones which were dealt with by
papillotomy and stone extraction and followed by uneventful laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. In one case laparoscopy revealed unsuspected metastatic
liver tumour, and the cholecystectomy was not performed. Two cases
were converted to open operation, one due to inability to,identify the
anatomy because of chronic cholecystitis and one due to Mirizzi’
syndrome. Three cases had concomitant laparoscopic lysis of adhesions to
the anterior abdominal wall.
Mean operative time was 90 minutes (range 35-280), and postoperative
stay 2.8 days (1-9). There were no complications in the laparoscopic
cholecystectomy group.
Clinically there were 21 cases of gallstone disease, 11 of chronic
cholecystitis, 12 had adhesions from previous cholecystitis, 2 were acute
on chronic cholecystitis, there was one empyema and two mucocoeles, but
histology revealed one occult carcinoma of the gallbladder in one the
chronic cholecystitis cases.
We have shown that in a district hospital this is a safe and cost effective
procedure with dramatically less morbidity than open cholecystectomy,
and is an alternative which is much appreciated by our patients.
P158
NON-INVASIVE TREATMENTS FOR CHOLECYSTO-
CHOLEDOCHOLTHIASIS
H. HASEGAWA T. TAKADA, H. YASUDA, K. UCHIYAMA,
Y. MISU, J. SHIKATA,
First Department of Surgery, Teikyo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
More than 10 percent of the patients of cholecystolithiasis seem to have
been complicated with choledocholithiasis. Laparoscopic
cholecystectomy (LC) has become popular because of its non-invasive
surgical procedure. However, laparoscopic treatment for
choledocholithisasis has been insufficient and unsatisfactory. In this way
we could not make advantages of LC as a non invasion treatment. In our
department of surgery, we planned two stages oftreatments for
cholecysto-choledocholithiasis. For such cases, choledocholithiasis would
be treated with endoscopic shincterotomy (EST). Later, when the result of
the previous endoscopic treatment of choledocholithiasis is confirmed, LC
would be performed for cholecystolithiasis. Preoperative insertion of
endoscopic naso-biliary drainage (ENBD) tube would be helpful as a
prevention of intraoperative bile duct damages during operation.
79
P159
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION BYDIAGNOSTIC
MODALITIES FOR THE CASES OF LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
K. HAYASHI K. YANAGISAWA, M. NUMATA, Y. MUNAKATA, F. SHIMIZU,
S. HASHIMOTO, A. KAI
Department of Surgery, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) Corporation Nagano
Hospital, Nagano, 380 Japan
An aim of this study is to verify the presence of adhesion in the upper
abdominal cavity preoperatively for safer laparoscopic ch61ecystectomy
(LC). We diagnosed the presence of adhesion by ultrasonography (US)
and drip-infusion cholecystography (DIC). Respiratory movement was
examined at the point of hepatic wedge, surrounding gallbladder and
umbilicus by sagittal scan of US. Not only respiratory movement but also
postural movement were evaluated by DIC. Thirty-three patients with
gallstone and 4 patients ofpolyp of gallbladder underwent LC during 7
months. 14 patients were male, 23 were female, mean age was 48 years
and 16 cases had abdominal operations previously. From the point of the
respiratory movement by US, presence of adhesion between abdominal
wall and intraabdominal viscera were diagnosed exactly in all cases. The
presence of adhesion between gallbladder and surrounding viscera were
diagnosed in 73%, and that of the adhesion with previous operation scar
were diagnosed in 80%. More than 3cm postural and respiratory
movement by DIC had no adhesion at the upper abdominal cavity.
Preoperative precise diagnosis by dynamic US and DIC were effective for
safer laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
P161
BILIARY SLUDGE: COMPOSITION,PATHOGENESIS AND
CLINICAL ASPECTS
P. INNOCENT! R. COSTANTINI, A. D’AULERIO, A.M. NAPOLITANO
Istituto di Patologia Chirurgica Universita di Chieti, Chieti, Italy
Gallbladder sludge consists of a suspension of calcium bilirubinate
granules, cholesterol monohydrate crystals and other calcium salts in bile,
which is viscous because of its high mucus content. The cholesterol and
bilimbin components of sludge are derived from bile itself, but the mucus
component must have originated in gallbladder. In some instances sludge
appears to be a transient abnormality, but in others it is associated with
gallbladder disease.
Some patients with sludge are asymptomatic but most of them have a
clinical problem. In our study, we correlated the finding of gallbladder
sludge by ultrasonography, CT-Scan and miroscopic examination of
duodenal bile, with the patient’ clinical symptoms. Ofthe 8 patients with
sludge studied in the past three years, 4 had biliary colics, 2 had acalcolous
cholecystitis and 2 had pancreatitis. Therefore, gallbladder sludge in
symptomatic patients should be treated as a symptomatic gallstone
disease.
P160
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY: THE FIRST 200 PATIENTS
IN CATHAY GENERAL HOSPITAL
CHING-SHUI HUANG
Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital, Taipie Taiwan
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) has rapidly gained world-wide acceptance
in the last two years. The applicability, safety and efficacy ofthis new procedure
for the treatment ofcholelithias is in Taiwan however, needs evaluation. We
performed L C in 200 out of 323 cases ofcholelithias is treated surgically at
Cathay General Hospital from 28 Dec., 1990 to 28 Oct., 1991. We found that the
applicability rate was 62% ofbiliary stones, 78% ofgall stones. The reasons for
not selecting L C were: CBD stone in 44 (4 CBD stone patients underwent LC
after EPT), IHS in 17, concomitant intra-abdominal malignancy in 5, acute
gangranous cholecystitis, pancreatic abscess and multiple upper abdominal
incision etc in 57. In the L C group, there were 160 patients with symptomatic
chronic calculus cholecystitis, 31 patients with acute calculus cholecystitis and 19
patients with gall bladder polyps, the age ofthe patients ranged fron 27 to 83
(average 51). There were 78 males and 122 females. All of the patients had a
detailed preoperative workup including complete LFF test and sonographic exam
ofthe hepatobiliary system, additional pre-operative ERCP were done in 31
patients and intra-operative cholangiograms were done selectively in another 12
patients to confirm the absence ofCBD stone or to delineate anatomy. 198 ofthe
200 patients completed the LC procedures with only 2 converted to open
cholecystectomy (acute cholecystitis with severe adhesion). The average
operation time was 60 minutes, (22 to 195 minutes). Drain tubes were used in 62
ofthe 200 pts, Nd-YAG laser was used in 21 pts. The post-operative hospital stay
averaged 3 days, (18 hours to 14 days). The significant complications (3.5%) were
case ofdelayed presentation ofright subphrenic accumulation of sterile bile
stained fluid (sono-guided drainage), 2 cases of spontaneous passage of small
retained CBD stones, case ofneglected CBD stone treated post-operatively with
EPT, case ofCBD injury repaired by Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy, case
ofbile leakage from cystic duct stump repaired through laparotomy, one case of
multiple liver abscess treated with antibiotics. Complications oftransient shoulder
pain (16%) and mild nausea or diarrhea (10%), wound infection(1.5%),
subcutaneous emphysema (1.5%) were nonsignificant. All ofthe patients returned
to normal daily activity within week except for the 7 with significant
complications. The total cost ofhospitalization was about NT20,000 dollars less
than for an open cholecystectomy. From the results ofour initial 200 cases ofLC
in which the conversion rate was 1% and mortality rate were zero, the significant
complication rate was on 3.5%, and the applicability rate was 62% (78% for gall
bladder stones), we conclude that the laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a safe,
efficient, and useful procedure for cholelithiasis patients in Taiwan.
P162
THE LAPARASCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY A STANDARD
THERAPY OF FUTURE
JOSTARNDT L., G. BONHAG.
Johannes-Hospital Dept. Surgery, JohannesstraBe 7-13, 4600 Dortmund
W.-Germany
The conventional cholecystectomy is now the standard therapy of
symptomatic cholelithiasis with a morbidity rate of 6% and a lethality rate
below 1%. These results the laparascopic cholecystectomy has to exceed,
if it will be the standard procedure of future.
The risk and complications of endoscopic cholecystectomy for
untrained surgeons were analysed in 300 consecutively operated patients
from 01.12.90 until 30.11.91.
We found after a training phase of 50 operations a morbidity rate of
5%, and intraoperatively laparatomy of 1,5%. None of our patients died.
The laparascopic cholecystectomy has advantages because of less pain,
quicker mobility and reconvalescence and will therefore be the standard
therapy of choice with minimal morbidity.
80
P163
EXPERIENCE WITH LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY
N. KANO,T. YAMAKAWA, Y. ISHIKAWA, S. SAKAI, H. HONDA, A.
TACHIBANA, A. OHMURA*, M. SHA*, T. NAKAMURA*
Department of Surgery and Department of Anesthesiology*, Teikyo University Hospital at
Mizonokuchi, Kawasaki, Japan
Since the first successful laparoscopic cholecystectomy (lapcholy) has
been carried out on May, 1990, 200 patients were considered to be
candidates for lapcholy and 7 cases were converted to open
chlecystectomy up to the end of September.
Prior to deciding an indication of this procedure, ERCP or DIC (if
ERCP failed) was routinely carried out beside a standard preoperative
examination. The patients with acute gangrenous cholecystities, jaundice,
pancreatities, gallbladder cancer, portal hypertension and pregnancy were
exluded from the candidates for lapcholy.
On 4 patients with common bile duct (CBD) stone, lapcholy was
performed after removal of CBD stones by Endoscopic Sphincterotomy
(EST). In one patient in whom EST had failed in removing the CBD
stones, lapcholy with laparoscopic choledochotomy and T tube drainage
was successfuly carried out.
The causes of conversion to open chlecystectomy in 7 patients were
attributable to uncontrollable bleeding from the cystic artery in one case,
venous bleeding due to portal hypertension in one, extensive adhesion of
the omentum and the duodenum to the gallbladder in one and extensive
adhesion of the omentum around the gallbladder in 4 cases.
On the other hand, laparoscopic appendectomy and emergency
laparoscopy have been performed on 5 patients each.
Indication of laparoscopic biliary surgery is being broadened and its
technology can be applicable to other abdominal surgery. However we
surgeons should note that the skill ofthe conventional surgical procedure
will become more important to prevent major complications if
laparoscopic surgery will become more routine.
P164
EFFECTIVENF_S OF INTRAOPERATIVE EXAMINATION
DURING LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY
S. KOBAYASHI. S. SHIOMI, K. SAKAMOTO, T. MAEKAWA, N. SAKAKIBARA,
N. ARAMAKI*, First Department of Surgery and Department of Gastroenterology*,
Juntendo University, 2-1-1 Hongo bunkyouku Tokyo 113, Japan
The usefulness of intraoperative ultrasonography (US) and
cholangiography (CG) during laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) are
evaluated in this study.
Thirty patients, to whom successful intraoperative examinations (US
and/or CG) ofbiliary tract could be performed, are mentioned.
The conventional method of intraoperative CG was done. The
endorectal transducer probe was used for intraoperative US. The entire
length of the CBDs were visible patients by using US. None of the
patients revealed gall stones in the CBD. Biliary injury which could have
diagnosed precisely by intraoperative CG was not detected using US in
one patient who had suffered it. It could have been precisely diagnosed by
intraoperative CG.
In one patient, it was made sure that CBD was absent ofpathology by
US’since it was impossible to insert a catheter into a cystic duct to make
CG due to cystic duct occlusion. No complication related to the use of
both methods was encountered.
The outcomes of this study leads to the conclusions that most of the
cases with enough preoperative information about CBD do not need the
intraoperative examination of CBD. However, in some cases, small stones
should be examined with US and in some cases where bile duct can not be
recognised should be examined with CG.
So these two methods now should be used alternatively. The
improvement of ultrasonography will be an effective sustitute for
cholangiography as a screening method for CBD pathlogy during
laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
P165
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY: ITALIAN
EXPERIENCE
R. LA ROCCA, A CAPOMAGI G EMMA, A. DE SANCTIS, E. CROCE*,
L. NOVELLINO*
Dept. of Surgery INRCA Ancona, *Dept of Surgery FBF, Milan Italy
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy (LC) is rapidly evolving as a
therapeutic modality for the treatment of gallstone disease. The Authors
report the Italian experience in LC. The retrospective survey concerns two
Italian centers; Milan (M) and Ancona (A), which performed 500 LC (430
M, 70 A). Conversion to open cholecystectomy was necessary in 1.4%
patients (4 M, 3A), because of anatomical difficulty (2M, 3 A) and
presence of neoplasm (2 M). There were no deaths reported and the
cumulative postoperative complications rate was of 2.2% (11 cases) with
2 major complications requiting re-laparotomy. Most of these
complications occurred in cases of sclero-atrophic cholecystitis. 30 cases
of choledoco-cholecystic lithiasis were performed by endoscopic
sphincterotomy followed by LC and other 2 cases were treated by
laparoscopic choledocotomy. In the group of major complications the
incidence of common bile duct damage was 0.4%. Intraoperative
cholangiography was performed only by M group. Mean operating time
improved significantly with experience (M from 87 to 54 minutes, A from
109 to 76). The opening alvus occurred on averace after 20 hours. Total
mean postoperative stay was 3.5 days. There were no need of
postoperative narcotics in more than 85% of patients. In our experience,
LC can be performed safely on most patients who are candidates for open
cholecystectomy.
P166
THORACIC EPIDURAL ANESTHESIA FOR LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
C.J.M. LANGENBERG, F. HUYGEN, P.M.N.Y.H. GO D.J. GOUMA
University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands
The aim of the study is to evaluate the feasability to perform
laparoscopic cholecystectomy under locoregional anesthesia.
Twenty five consecutive patients who had given informed consent
received epidural anesthesia, mepivacaine 2% + adrenaline (1/200.000)
and sufentanil forte 1-1.5 mcg/kg through a catheter which was inserted 3
cm cephalad at Th6-Th7. The level of the block was controlled with
pinprick and temperature sensation. Pain sensation was scored with a
visual analog scale (VAS). The incidence of side effects such as priritus,
nausea, respiratory depression and hypotension were measured.
After fifteen minutes block levels varied rostral from C8-Th4 and
caudal from Th8-L2. In twenty patients the analgesia was adequate
(VAS=0). Five patients needed additional general anesthesia: (n=2) with a
VAS score of 8 and 9, and inadequate muscle relaxation for surgical acces
(n=3)
Three out of twenty patients had peroperative pruritis, one complained
of nausea, and two had a slight respiratory depression. In five patients
blood pressure decreased more than 20%. All side effects were easily
treated, and surgery was uneventfull in all patients. Thoracic epidural
anesthesia for laparoscopic cholecystectomy seems to be a safe and
adequate technique.
81
P167 P168
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT OF RETAINED AND
RECURRENT BILIARY STONF: THE RESULTS
LESZCZYSZYN J., DUREK W.,LAWINSKI M.
Endoscopy Division, PKP Hospital, Wroclaw-Poland
From 1987 to 1991 -631 ERCP have been done. We received the data
of 121 therapeutic ERCP procedures which were performed on patients
with recurrent or retained CBD stones during period January 1990 June
1991.
Successful stone removal after sphincteromomy alone was achieved in
82 cases (68%); mechanical lithotripsy was necessary in 27 cases (23%);
transdudenal cholangioscopy and electrohydraulic lithotripsy was
performed in 7 patients (5%); temporary biliary stent was inserted in 3
patients (3%); failure of any endocopic method in 2 patients (2%). This
two patients were referred to surgery after naso-bilaiary tubes had been
placed on.
Complications were found in four cases (3,2%). The bleeding after
sphincterotomy in two patients and after electohydraulic lithotripsy in one
patient; they all recovered by conservative treatment.
One patient, after stenting, had transistent fever and chills.
SAFE LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY INA
COMMUNITY SETTING,N=762
MATT B. MARTIN M.D. Biliary Surgeons of Greensboro
311 West Wendover Avenue, Greensboro, North Carolina, 27408 U.S.A.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) can be introduced into a
community with morbidity and mortality rates equal to that of open
cholecystectomy. The entire biliary surgical community (17) of
Greensboro (pop. 196,000) learned the technique of LC on animal models
prior to offering this innovation to the community, over the ensuing 12
months, they served as surgeons or assistant surgeons to each other on 762
LC with morbidity and mortality rates comparable to open
cholecystectomy.
This retrospective study examined the first one year experience
beginning 8/13/90. This work represents all of the LC performed in
Greensboro and all of the surgeons participated in this review. All of the
surgeries were done with an electrocautery and utilized a zero degree
forward viewing scope. Cases were performed at two hospitals with
surgeons as both operator and assistant and no effort was made to exclude
high risk or elderly patients from this procedure.
Patients averaged 50 years of age and ranged from 14-96 yrs. Static
cholangiograms were performed in 27% ofpatients. Conversion to open
cholecystectomy was seen in 4.8%. There were two cardiac
deaths(0.26%) and significant complications were seen in 3.4%. Seven
patients required reoperations. There were no major common bile duct
injuries.
This retrospective review indicates that this new procedure can be
introduced into a community setting by novice laparoscopic surgeons
acting both as operators and assistant with a morbidity and mortality rate
comparable to that reported for open cholecystectomy.
P169
GALL STONE ILEUS
M. HAMANO. K. OGINO, A. YAMADA, K. WAKITA, T. ICHIHARA, H.
FUJIWARA, T. ASATSU, T. ISHIDA, K. TSUJIMOTO, T. MITSUNO
Yodogawa Christian Hospital, Osaka, Japan
Gall stone ileus, due to the impaction of one or more gall stones within
the lumen of the bowel, is a rare complication of cholelithiasis and an
equally rare cause of mechanical intestinal obstruction.
Between 1987 and 1991 we accepted 4 cases of gall stone ileus. All
were women and the mean age was 68 years, three of four cases could be
clinically diagnosed preoperatively as having a biliary enteric fistula, X-
ray films showed air in the bile ducts (pneumobilia) and niveau, and stone
changing postion. Stone size averaged 4.0cm in diameter (range: 3.0-
5.0cm). Obstructing stones were located in the terminal ileum in 3
patients, in the proximal ileum orjejunum in patient. In one instance,
more than one stone (two) was involved. Cholecystoduodenal fistula was
the most frequent fistula type (75%) followed by
cholecystoduodencolonic type (25%). Surgical procedure consisted in
each case by enterolithotomy alone, and a one-stage prodcedure consisting
of the removal of the impacted stones, fistula repair and cholecystectomy
were performed in only one patient.
In conclusion, when conditions are poor and local findings are not clear,
a two-stage procedure should be planned consisting first of
enterolithotomy to eliminate ileus. This should be followed by elective
biliary surgery.
P170
GALLSTONE ILEUS
A. MYSTAKIDIS. F. SEFERIADIS, G. SVORONOS, J. KONSTADINIDIS,
L. CHRISTODOULOU, G. VELMACHOS
"SOTIRIA" General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Purpose of this presentation is to present four additional cases and to
evaluate the diagnostic and therapeutic procedures by reviewing the
literature. Our patients, 3 women and a man, aged from 69 to 82 years,
were admitted with symptoms and signs of small bowel obstruction. The
correct diagnosis was established preoperatively in two of our cases. The
gallstone was impacted in the duodenum in one case, in thejejunum in a
second and in the terminal ileum in the remaining two. One cholecysto-
duodenal fistula was repaired, with the addition of a gastrojejunostomy,
primarily, while enterolithotomy alone was performed in three cases.
Leakage from the site of duodenal repair was a major postoperative
complication, which was treated successfully by conservative measures,
while severe respiratory sepsis caused the death in one of our cases. Twp
patients had uneventful recovery. We conclude that gallstone ileus is a rare
and frequently misdiagnosed condition. High index of suspicion helps to
achieve the diagnosis preoperatively. Delay of the diagnosis and surgical
intervention increases the morbidity and mortality rate. One-stage
procedures may only be performed whenever the patients’ general
condition allows it. Early cholecystectomy should be carried out in
patients with cholelithiasis.
82
P171
MANAGEMENT AND CLICAL FEAS OF ELDER
PATIENTS WITH GALLSTONE
s. NAKAGAWA. A. KOSAKA, M. TANAKA
Department of Surgery, Matsusaka City Hospital, Matsusaka City, Mie 515, Japan
In order to clarify appropriate treatment selection in aged patients with
gallstones, we analyzed clinical features in 150 patients treated during the
past 3 years. The patients were divided, those over 70 years old (N=45,
Group A) and those under 70 (N-105, Group B).
1) Incidence of the CBD stone was higher in Group A (32.7%) than in
Group B(17.3%)> On chemical analysis, stones in Group A were
composed mainly ofpigment and those in Group B of cholesterol.
2) Bile culture yielded bacterial growth in the vast majority of patients
in Group A, and incidence of acute cholangitis was higher in Group A
(12.2%) than in Group B (4.5%).
3) Cardiovascular diseases and malignancies were more frequent in
Group A (32.7%, 20.4%, respectively) than in Group B (10.0% 4.5%)
4) Overall morbidity was the same in both groups.
5) Most of serious complications, such as AOSC, sepsis or MOF<
occurred in patients in Group A and mortality rate of Group A was 8.2%.
Timely surgical intervention and intensive care are necessary in the
management of elder patients with gallstone.
P172
COMPARISON OF SELECTIVE ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE
CHOLANGIOGRAPHYWITH INFUSION INTRAVENOUS
CHOLANGIOGRAPHY AS COMMON DUCT IMAGING
TECHNIQUE PRIOR TO LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
P.D. NOTTLE
Alfred Hospital, Commercial Road, Pranhran, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
A comparison ofpre-operative selective endoscopic retrograde
cholangiography (E.R.C.) and infusion intravenous cholangiography
(I.V.C.) was carded out in a consecutive series of 408 laparoscopic
cholecystectomies performed by one surgeon from June, 1990 to the
present time.
In the first three hundred patients, selective E.R.C. was used as the
method of duct imaging. The criteria for performing E.R.C. were the
presence or a history ofjaundice, altered liver function tests, gallstone
pancreatitis, a duct greater than 8.0ram as measured on ultrasound or a
stone in the duct seen on ultrasound. In the next one hundred patients, pre-
operative infusion intravenous cholangiography using Biliscopin
(meglumine iotroxate) was performed.
Using selective E.R.C., 43 (14%) patients had endoscopic imaging. Of
these patients, 24 (8%) were found to have common duct calculi. Three
(1%) further patients required post-operative E.R.C. to remove retained
common duct stones.
In the I.V.C. group, ten patients (10%) were found to have common
duct stones and all were removed pre-operatively. Only three patients had
unsatisfactory imaging of the duct.
Both selective E.R.C. and I.V.C. are satisfactory methods of duct
imaging, but I.V.C. appears to be a more accurate method of screening
allowing E.R.C. to be used therapeutically rather than as a diagnostic tool.
P173
ULTRASOUND AND RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION OF
PATIENTS FOLLOWING LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
R. PACE, R. SMITH, D. KOLYN, H. PYMAR, E. SAUERBREI,
Queens University, Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy has rapidly become the procedure of
choice in many centres for the treatment ofpatients with cholelithiasis.
Because of its rapid introduction, there has been little chance to study the
normal post-operative changes due to this procedure. We prospectively
studied the first 30 patients undergoing Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy at
our institution by means of abdominal ultrasound and X-rays 24 hours
after surgery. One patient required conversion to ’open’ cholecystectomy
because of adhesions and patient developed post-operative bile
peritonitis due to a leak from the gallbladder bed. Mean operative time
was 72 minutes (35-150 min), with a mean post-operative stay of 2.0 days.
The post-operative ultrasound of the upper abdomean was normal in 72%
(21/29) with tiny loculations of fluid in the gallbladder fossa in 6, an errant
residual stone near the porta in l, and a small amount ofperihepatic free
fluid in patient. The plain abdominal radiographs disclosed free intra-
abdominal gas in 50% (14/28), but was a significant volume in only 4 of
these patients. Abnormal gaseous distension of the large bowel was
present in 79% (22 of 28), with a mean colonic diameter of 6.5 cm (range
5-12 cm). The surprising lack of ultrasound abnormality and the frequent
finding of gaseous distension of the colon and small bowel on
radiographic evaluation of patients following Laparoscopic
Cholecystectomy must be borne in mind when assessing these patients
following surgery.
P174
ELIGIBILITY FOREXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE
LITHOTRIPSY IN 596 CONSECUTIVE PATIENTS ATTENDING
AN OUTPATIENT BILIARY CLINIC
P.W. PLAISIER, R.L.VAN DER HUL R.DEN TOOM, H.G.T. NIJS, O.T. TERPSTRA
Dept. of Surgery, Univ. Hospital ’Dijkzigt’, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
This study was designed to establish eligibility for Extracorporeal
Shock Wave Lithotripsy (ESWL) in all consecutive patients (N=596),
who visited our outpatient biliary clinic in the period April 1988 April
1991. From all patients a history was taken and a physical examination
was performed. Extended diagnostic work-up consisted of blood tests,
ultrasonography and oral cholecystography. Results were examined
retrospectively.
The studied population consisted of445 female (mean age 48 yr) and
151 male (53 yr) and 80 patients were asymptomatic (13.4%). Quetelet-
index > 27 was present in 33.4%. Ultrasound examination demonstrated
no stones in 5.2%, stone in 27.0%, 2-5 stones in 22.8%, 6-10 stones in
7.0%, >10 stones in 22.7% and unknown number of stones in 15.3%.
Visualisation on oral cholecystography was present in 73.3% and calcified
stones in 23.7% of the patients.
Exclusion criteria were: asymptomatic cholelithiasis, acute biliary
disease, collapsed gallbladder, non-functional gallbladder, calcifications of
stones >2mm, diameter of stones <5mm, and number of stones >10.
The ideal candidate for ESWL was considered an ASA I-II,
symptomatic patient with a functional gallbladder, and non-calcified
stone with a diameter <21mm).
Conclusion: 28.1% of the population was eligible for ESWL and 8.1%
could be considered ideal candidates.
83
P175
MANAGEMENT OF GALLBLADDERLITHIASIS
A. PRINCIPE A. MAZZIOTTI, M.L. LUGARESI, M. MORGANTI, A. FRENA,
G. GOZZETTI
Clinica Chirurgica 2,University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
The high social importance of gallbladder lithiasis leads to find the
definitive therapeutical solution, that should possibly be noninvasive, with
a low mortality and morbidity rate and low costs. The conservative
approach (dissolution with biliary acids per os or by direct contact or by
the fragmentation of stones) for its limited indications (10-20% ofpts) has
an high rate of failure and recurrence (70-90%). The therapy of choice
remains the cholecystectomy. Over the past 10 yes 676
cholecystectomies where carried out 166 pts had a complicated disease
whereas 510 where operated on electively. In the first pts the morbidity
rate was 15.6% with an operative mortality of 3.01% (mean hospital stay
14 days); in the elective pts the morbidity was 7.9% with an operative
mortality of 0.3% (mean hospital stay 7 days ). From March to November
1991 43 additional cholecystectomies where performed under
laparoscopic guidance (33 females and 10 males); mean age was 52 years,
ranging from 22 to 76. Fourty-one pts had symptoms (1 empyema) and
the remaining 2 where asymptomatic. There were no significant peri- or
post-operative major complications. CONCLUSIONS Cholecystectomy
represents the gold standard; the laparoscopic technique is to be preferred
for its the numerous advantages: shorter post-operative stay (mean 2
days), better aesthetic results and absence of morbidity and mortality.
P176
CHOLELITHIASIS INYOUNG PATIENTS.
PROUSALIDIS J., TZARDINOGLOU E., FAHADIDIS E., APOSTOLIDIS A.,
KATSOHIS C., ALETRAS H.
A’ Prop.Surg.Clinic Aristotelian University, Thessaloniki, Greece
The aim of this study is the presentation of 14 patients, 15-20 years of
age, with biliary lithiasis and chronic cholecystitis admitted from 1970 to
1990 in our clinic. In the same period 1906 adult patients with gallbladder
disease were also treated. Concomitant medicial or hematological
problems in these young patients were not reported. Associated
pancreatitis in one andjaundice in 2 cases were noted. The clinical picture
was generally mild. Four patients refused operation. Ten patients
underwent cholecystectomy. In addition, due to concurrent bile duct
lithiasis, exploration of the common bile duct in two patients and
billiodigestive anastomosis in one patient were performed. Operative
cholangiography in 7 cases and choledochoscopy in case were
considered normal. There was one postoperative death, attributed to
pulmonary embolism, concerning a 17 years of age lady suffering from
morbid obesity.
Conclusion. Our experience shows that lithiasis in young people is a
rare conditon and it has similar natural history with cholelithiasis in adults.
Propably no special pathogenesis is implicated.
P177
TACTICS FORPATlENTS WITH CHRONIC CALCULOUS
CHOLECYSTITIS IN EARLY STAGE
G.L. RATNER B.B. KALUGHSKICH
Department of Surgery, Samara Medical Inst. Samara, U.S.S.R
Increasing number of patients, active tactics in surgery and considerable
fraction of ones with postcholecystectomic syndrom-these are the reasons
that made us raise the question about the gallbladder is deformed and its
walls are sclerosed, if it dosen’t function properly or is filled with bile, it
should be ablated. However if the bladder is functioning and its walls
aren’t changed the operation should be only organopreserving. The results
after cholecystectomy for patients in early stage of disease were bad. Out
of 80 such patients we had only 17 good, 42 satisfactory and 21 bad cases.
Appearance, anorganism can’t sharply adapt oneself to existence without
a bladder. Unfortunately, the "ideal" cholecystostomy hasn’tjustified our
hopes, because it doesn’t eliminate a single reason of forming stones. We
made broad anastomosis of a bladder with choledoch after ablating all
stones. It facilitated good evacuation and lessened the concentration
function ofbladder. They have been observed from 2 to 13 years. The
results were good in 36 cases, in 7 were satisfactory and in 3- they were
bad. Thus the gallbladder is an important functional organ which should
be preserved for patients with early stage disease.
P178
RF_ULTS OF STANDARD ELECTIVE CHOLECYSTECTOMY
IN HIGH RISKPATIENTS A PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
D.P. SANAN P.K. JAIN, G. SINGH
Department of Surgery, .D.K. Hospital and G.N.D. Hospital. G.N.D. University, Amritsar,
India
For Cholelithiasis standard elective cholecystectomy (SEC) still
remains the operation of choice in high risk patients. However in high risk
patients alternative methods for treatment of cholelithiasis are advocated.
The present study evaluates the results of S.E.C. in high risk patients
treated over a period of two years(1988-1990).
Parameters used to include patients in high risk group are:
1) age>60 years. 2) Hypertension 3) Ischemic Heart Disease 4)
Diabetes Mellitus 5) Jaundice 6) Associated common duct stones 7) Acute
cholecystitis and its complications. A total of 211 patients underwent
S.E.C. Of these patients 70 were included in the high risk group because
of presence of one or more than one ofthe risk factors enumerated. All the
high risk group patients had medical evaluations and treatment to optimize
the medical status of the patients prior to surgery. Postoperatively these
patients were closely monitored.
Complications such as Arrhythmias (n=5) wound infection (n=9) and
incisional hernia (n=3); occured in 28.5% ofhigh risk S.E.C. cases but
with no in-hospital mortality in this series.
In our experience S.E.C. is a safe procedure when concomitant medical
problems are identified and treated preoperatively. Careful postoperative
monitoring and close medical cover are mandatory for good results.
84
P179
EFFECTIVENESS OF THENEEDLE SCOPE IN
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY
s. SHIOMI. S. KOBAYASHI, K. SAKAMOTO, T. MAEKAWA, N. SAKAKIBARA,
N. ARAMAKI*
First Department of Surgery and Department of Gastroenterology*, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-l- Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113 Japan
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) has been established to supersede
open cholecystectomy (OC) as a treatment of cholecystolithiasis.
However, there are limitations in the application of LC compared to OC.
In particular, there are many institutions which LC is not applied or is
contraindicated in patients with previous abdominal surgery (PAS).
In this study, we used the needle scope, for the purpose of safely
observing the peritoneal cavity and estimating the feasibility of LC in
patients with PAS. There were six appendectomy, two upper, and two
lower abdominal surgery of ten patients with PAS in thirty LCs. The
needle scope was used in two patients with PAS.
The method was that of inserting the needle scope manufactured by
Olympus Co. with a diameter of 3.4mm via 1/3 outside point of Monro-
Richter’ line in the
left lower abdomen, prior to inserting the main trocars.
The results showed that, in both cases, the peritoneal cavity could be
safely observed, and although adhesions of the peritoneal cavity were
observed, LC was possible.
It is concluded that when the needle scope is aggressively used, even in
patients with PAS, safe observations of the peritoneal cavity are possible,
and even when adhesions are present, the application of LC is possible in
some cases. Finally, it is considered that the needle scope is useful in
patients with PAS.
P180
RETROSPECTIVE COMPARISON OF LAPAROSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTECTOMY (LSK) VERSUS OPEN
CHOLECYSTECTOMY (CZT) ANALYSIS OF 202
CONSECUTIVE CASES
G. TOLKSDORFF, H.D. RAHN, H. PETERS, G. GAMST)TTER
Surgical Department, HSK, D-6200 Wiesbaden
202 elective cholecystectomies (LSK n=100, CZT =102) in 278
patients were carried out between October 1990 and October 1991. A
conventional cholecystectomy was on principle performed in previous
laparotomies, thrombopathies, pathologic cardiopulmonary findings and
in patients who did not care about LSK, although they had been informed
about the possibility of LSK. Life-threatening complications were not
found in the two collectives. In two cases LSK was followed by a
laparotomy (2%). 2 wound-healing impairments were detected after LSK
compared to 5 wound-healing impairments after CZT. After conventional
cholecystectomy a relaparotomy was necessary in 2 cases. Quick
painlessness and discharge of 87% of patients until 3rd post-operative day
after LSK were opposed to partly heavy pains and problems of
mobilisation until 5th postoperative day after CZT. 91.2% of
conventionally treated patients were hospitalised up to the 7th
postoperative day.
Our previous results clearly show advantages of the LSK. For the
moment we are in a phase of learning, in which we avoid this method in
acute cholecystitis and empyemas. Accidental opening of gallbladder and
difficult saving of gallstones show complications, which will be reduced
with growing experience and further development of the instruments.
Nevertheless the control of conventional cholecystectomy must be
condifision for the performance of LSK due to the cleaning of eventual
complications.
P181
THE INFLUENCE OF ROUTINE USE OF INTRAOPERATIVE
CHOLANGIOGRAPHY ON THE INCIDENCE OF
COMPLICATIONS AFTER CHOLECYSTECTOMY
TORDE L., ARSENIC V., RATKOV S., POPOV M., LATOVLJEV G., POPOV R.,
HESS DJ
Department of Surgery, General Hospital "Dr Dj.Joanovic" Zrenjanin
The aim of the study is to show that routine use of intraoperative
cholangiography may significantly reduce postoperative complications
after cholecystectomy. We made a prospective study on 200
cholecystectomised patients in the period IX 1988 III 1989. Patients are
divided in two groups: A- control group consisting of 100
cholecystectomised patients without intraoperative cholangiography and
B-also consisting of 100 patients with routinely used intraoperative
cholangiography. Results are given in the following table, where the
complications are separated by the time of appereance, specific signs and
symptoms:
Type of complication group A group B Total
.n % n % n %
Intra op. 5,26 0 0.00 3.57
Early 4 21.05 3 33.33 7 25.00
Intermed. 2 10.53 3 33.33 5 17.86
Late 12 63.16 3 33.33 15 53.57
Total 19 100.00 9 100.00 28 100.00
Conclusion: Routine use of intraoperative cholangiography
significantly reduces the number of complications (A:B 19:9) which is
statisticaly significant (chi-squared test, p<0.05).
P182
IS THEREANANSWER TO THEDILEMMA:
CHOLECYSTECTOMY WITH OR WITHOUT DRAINAGE?
G.V. VELMACHOS. I.TSAGARIDOU, V.SOTIROPOULOU, G.S.VORONOS,
D.BASTAS
"SOTIRIA" Gen. Hospital of Athens, Athens, Greece
The aim of the present comparative study, which was performed on
patients(pts) cholecystectomized for non-acute pathology of the
gallbladder was to investigate the incidence and the significance of post-
cholecystectomy fluid collections detected by ultrasound and to correlate
the occurence of these collections with or without drainage. A total of 235
consecutive pts underwent cholecystectomy for non-acute pathology.
132(56.1%) were women and 103(43.9%) were men. The age of the pts
range from 22-82 years (mean 56.8). The gallbladder was removed and
the gallbladder bed was sewn with polyglactin 910 in all cases. 85
pts(group A) were not drained and 150 (group B) were drained by a Latex
tube (Tmm wide) placed in Morrision’s pouch. The volume and nature of
the fluid drained was recorded, and the drain was removed after 48 h.
All pts were examined 24,48 h and 7 days after cholecystectomy by the
same ultrasonographers. Scans ofthe right upper quadrant were obtained
longitudinally and transversely. 47 of 85 ptsss (55.29%) ofthe group A
were found to have subhepatic fluid collections 20-60 ml the st
postoperative day and 0-25 ml the 2nd post .day. The other 38 pts were
found to have small loculated collections, less than 20 ml. Despite the
drainage 65 of 150 pts (43.3%) of the group B developed fluid collections
less than 25 ml of 1st and the 2nd post-operative day. The amount of fluid
drained the 1st day was 65 ml (5-90 ml) and the 2rid day 15 ml (5-30 ml).
The nature of this fluid was blood-stained serum. The 7st post. day the
fluid collections were not significant. No subphrenic collections were
found in all 235 pts. This study suggests that the surgical drainage after
every uncomplicated cholecystectomy is unnecessary.
85
P183
THE EFFECT OF CONTINUOUS INTRAVENOUS
INDOMETHACIN INFUSION ON POSTOPERATIVE PAIN
AFTER CHOLECYSTECTOMY
K. VELMACHOU. A. SOFIANOU, H. KOUTSOPOULOPU,
H. KOUYIOUMTZOYLOU, C. KOUTSODIMA, I. LEKATSAS,
Anaesthetic department, "KAT" General Hospital, Athens, Greece
The influence of indomethacin on the need for postoperative analgesia
was investigated in a double-blind study of 60 patients ASA & II, mean
aged 48_+9 years, scheduled for cholecystectomy under general
anaesthesia. The patients were randomly allocated in two groups. Group
received indomethacin 0,8mg/kg B.w.i.v. bolus ustbefore the induction
of anaesthesia, followed by continuous infusion of 5-7,5 mg/h over 20h.
Group II was the control group and received only Ringer’ Lactated.
Postoperatively in both groups supplement doses if D-propoxyphen HCL
I.M. were given as needed.
The total amount of D-propoxyphen HCL during the follow-up period
was registered for each patient as well as the incidence of side effects. The
postoperative pain was evaluated by Visual Analogue Score.
The D-propoxyphen HCL dose(mean_+s.d.) during the postoperative
observation was lower in the indomethacin group (52,5_+32,06 mg) than in
the control group (175_+53,3 mg) (P<0,001). In the indomethacin group
significantly fewer patients (14/30) needed D-propoxyphen HCL I.M.
more than once during the follow-up period compared with the control
group (26/30)(P<0,001). The pain score values were lower in Group
(P=O,05).
In conclusion postoperative pain after cholecystectomy cannot be
totally prevented by an invenous indomethacin treatment regimen.
However the need of additional analgesia diminished in the postoperative
period.
P184
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY THE INITIAL 54
CASES
M.D.YANG C.R. HUANG, C.C.WU, T.C.WU, T.J.LIU, AND F.K.PENG
Division of General Surgery, Dept. of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy quickly emerged as an alternative to
open cholecystectomy. Between April 1991 to November 199l, we
performed 54 laparoscopic cholecystectomies with no deaths and a
complication rate of 5.6%. There were 32 women and 22 men, with a
mean age of 56.3 years (range 23 78 years). Mean operative time was
l0 minutes. Mean hospital stay was 3 days. The time ofreturn to full
activity was 7.5 days after operation.
The hospital costs demonstrates a modest cost advantage over standard
open cholecystectomy. (NT$50,987 versus $76,460). There was no CBD
injury, one intestinal injury and one wound infection. Eleven patients had
prior low abdominal surgery. Six patients required conversion to open
cholecystectomy. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy appears to offer a
reduced hospital stay, a decreased recovery interval, diminished
postoperative discomfort and reduction in health care expenses. It can be
performed safely by experienced surgeons in properly selected patients.
P185
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SILENT
GALLBLADDER STONES
M. YOSHIDA. K. SHIMADA, T. SUZUKI, H. YOKOTA, G. KANEDA, S.
FUNAMOTO, N. KOBAYASI, K.ASO, H.MIENO, K.SATO, H.OHMIYA, T.HIKI. A.
KAKITA
Department of Surgery, Kitasato University, School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan
Clinicopathological chracteristis of 40 resected patients were studied to
evaluate the surgical indications of the silent gallbladder stone disease. Of
40, 38 patients underwent cholecystectomy during lapalotomy for other
abdominal diseases, and two patients were performed cholecystectomy
only aimed at removing the disease. Oral cholecystography showed
impaired visualization of the gallbladder in 13 patients (32.5%), which
meant gallbladder functions were absent. In histopathological study of the
resected gallbladder, chronic cholecystitis was found in all patients
(100%), with dysplasia in three patients (7.5%) and adenocarcinoma in
one patient (1.1%). The degree of imflammation of the gallbladder
correlated incidence of impaired visualization in oral cholecystography.
In conclusion, cholecystectomy is recommended for the patient with
impaired visualization of the gallblader in oral cholecystography.
P186
PERCUTANEOUS GALLBLADDER CHOLANGIOGRAM TO
DETERMINE BILIARYANATOMY AND DETECT DUCT
STONF PRIOR TO LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY
CD JOHNSON. CN HACKING, K DEWBURY
University Surgical Unit, & Department of Radiology, Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton
Operative cholangiography during laparoscopic cholecystectomy is
difficult, time consuming and may present the surgeon with a delicate
choice between leaving a possible stone in the duct, or converting to an
open operation for duct exploration. Alternatively laparoscopic duct
exploration may be attempted, but this can be time consuming.
Preoperative diagnosis of duct stones helps planning operation lists.
Cholangiography also helps to delineate biliary anatomy, but duct damage
may occur before operative cholangiography (OC) has been performed.
We report the preliminary results ofpercutaneous gall bladder puncture
for cholangiography (PGBC) prior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Under local anaesthesia within 24 hours of surgery, the gallbladder is
punctured transhepatically and bile is aspirated. Contrast is injected to
obtain a cholangiogram. Fifteen patients have been studied. PGBC failed
in three and clearly demonstrated the duct anatomy in 12. One patient was
found to have a definite common duct stone and underwent endoscopic
sphincterotomy prior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy. One patient with
possible stone on PGBC elected to defer intervention on the duct until
after postoperative assessment of symptoms and liver function. OC was
not attempted in one patient (after ES), and failed in five. Good films
were obtained in six patients, unsatisfactory in three.
In patients with a functioning gallbladder PGBC provides excellent
cholangiograms and can detect common duct stones prior to laparoscopic
cholecystectomy.
86
P187
THE POSSIBILITIES OF EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE
LITHOTRIPSY (ESWL) IN THE TREATMENT OF
CHOLEDOCHOLITHIASIS FOLLOWING FAILURE IN
ENDOSCOPIC REMOVAL
M.BULAJIC M. MILICEVIC, R. GRBIC, B. STIMEC, M. MARKOVIC, D. POPOVIC,
L. PANDEY
Institute of Digestive Diseases, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
Unsuccessful endoscopic removal of common bile duct stones can be
solved by means of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL).
During a period of 2 years, 20 patients (7 male, 13 female, mean age 68
years) with massive choledocholithiasis (multiple, casting and big solitary
stones) underwent ESWL treatment, using the Siemens Lithostar Plus.
Sixteen patients had previous endoscopic sphincterotomy. After an
unsuccessful mechanic extraction a nasobiliary catheter was placed in 13
patients. Six patients had external T-tube drainage. All the patients have
previously undergone Cholecystectomy. The extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy was conducted in the prone position. Fragmentation of stones
was achieved in 17 (85%) patients. Eleven patients spontaneously
eliminated the fragments during initial treatment, i.e. total clearance of
CBD was achieved; whereas in 6 patients the fragments were extracted
using a Dormia basket, after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. The
number of the applied shock beats and energy ranged between 3500-5000,
and 16-17.5 kV per patient, depending upon the size, shape and number of
stones. The average number of sessions per patient was 1.5. During
ESWL 17 patients (85%) received IV analgosedation, and there was no
need for general anaesthesia in any case. No complications were recorded.
In 3 patients where ESWL failed, surgical cholecystectomy was
performed without complications.
P188
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY- INITIAL
EXPERIENCE
M. KRAWCZYK, K. ZIENIEWICZ, W. PATKOWSKI
Department of General Surgery & Liver Diseases, Medical Academy, Warsaw, Poland
The aim ofthis report is a presentation of our own experience in
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. From June 1990 till now we have
performed 41 laparoscopic cholecystectomies in our department. There
were 39 female and 2 male patients with an average age 38.5 (range 23-
67 years). The indication for this procedure was symptomatic
cholecystolithisis. In 29 cases it was biliary colic, in 11 cases chronic
cholecystitis and in one case acute cholecystitis. The diagnosis was
confirmed by ultrasonography. Operation time ranged from 245 rain till
65 rain (average 95 min). There was no bleeding or bile duct injuries
during the procedure. None of the patients required conversion of the
laparoscopic procedure to an open cholecystectomy. Average
hospitalization was 3.5 days. There was no mortality. The morbidity was
7.3% (umbilicus wound infection was noticed in 3 cases). The median
time to full activity after discharge was 15.5 days.
It is concluded that laparoscopic cholecystectomy offers a new idea in
the treatment of cholecystolithiasis.
P189
NEW DRAIN PLACEMENT TECHNIQUEDURING
LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY
P. METZGER M. GAMAL, I. ROZSA, J. KISS
Postgraduate Medical University, Department of Surgery, Budapest-Hungary
During Laparoscopic cholecystectomy the placement of a suitable
subhepatic suction-drain is sometimes a difficult, time wasting
manoeuvre. Authors worked up a new quick method for the percutaneous
laparoscopic placement of the suction-drain to the abdominal cavity, and
they appled this technique successfully during 200 laparoscopic
cholecystectomies.
P190
MODIFIED PERCUTANEOUS ENDOSCOPIC
CHOLECYSTOPOLYPECTOMY
HUO FENG, LUO MING-YI MA YUAN-GUI, ZHANG ZHI-CHENG AND
QIU BAO-AN
Yanjing Hospital, 00037 Beijing China
From March to December in 1991, we have performed modifed
percutaneous endoscopic cholecystopolypectomy with primary suture of
the gallbladder in 32 cases. Twenty four patients have multiple polypoid
lesions of the gallbladder, eight have single polyp, nine have both polyps
and calculae. A total of 72 protuberant lesions measuring over 0.5 cm in
diameter were resected. The pathologic studies showed cholesterol polyps
in 22 cases, and adenomatous polyps in 10, including four inflammatory
polyps and two with active proliferation.
The modifed percutaneous endoscopic cholecystopolypectomy begins
with B ultrasound scanning of the gallbladder to locate the fundus, a
subcostal incision over the site of the fundus, lift the fundus with a
grasper and anchor with two to three stitches. Insert an Olympus A 5037
laparoscope into the gallbladder through a stab wound. Resect the
polypoid growth through the endoscope and send for frozen section. Do
an intraoperative cholecystography and see that the cystic duct is patent. If
the frozen section proved benign, close the gallbladder with 4/0
nontraumatic suture in two layers without drain. Patients can get up and
liquid diet given in the first postoperative day and after operation when
indicated.
All patients in the series have recovered uneventfully, 16 cases
followed over a period of three months showed normal function of the
gallbladder.
87
P191
A PRACTICAL AND COST-EFFECTIVE WAY TO BEGIN
LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY
LUO MING-YI MA YUAN-GUI, HUO FENG, QIU BAO-AN, ZHANG ZHI-CHENG
Yanjing Hospital, Beijing 100037, P.R. China
Sharing special instruments with other departments of the hospital and
using oxygen bag as phantom for training we began to practise
laparoscopic surgery since April 1991 and have succeeded in performing
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, percutaneous cholecystolithotripsy and
polypectomy on 72 patients. We invested only a Storz 26033 laparoscopy,
a TV monitor system and a few items of endoscopic instruments. The
other instruments, including a CO insuffiator (Olympus PNE-C) a
lithotriptor (Wolf 2135 Riwolith), a high frequency generator (Valleylab
Force 4) and a light source (Olympus CLE-F) were shared with other
departments of the hospital. Thus we were able to save 50% of the
investment and practise laparoscopic surgery earlier than expected.
To share costly and delicate instruments owned by different
departments mutual understanding and support are mandatory. To make a
reliable combination of sophisticated instruments for laparoscopic surgery,
it is necessary to check the functions and specifications of every
instrument, to replace with adequate set having similar function if
necessary, and to get adaptor fit for different types ofplug and socket on
instruments supplied by different factories or of different versions.
To master the technic of manipulating through tmcar sheath in an
inflated abdominal cavity while watching on the TV monitor, we used
oxygen bag as a phantom for drilling, which proved successful. The
problem of training became simple since an oxygen bag is readily
available in every hospital and anaesthesia is not required as in animal
experiment. The bag can be used repeatedly and the chance of
contamination is low.
In training for laparoscopic surgery, the team should learn to maintain
pneumopernitoneun properly, to get used to loss of stereo-vision, to
accommodate complicated orientation and coordination. The use of long
high frequency hook can be practised during routine dolecystectomy.
P192
FACTORS INFLUENCING TUMORRECURRENCE AFTER
RESECTION OF HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA IN
CIRRHOTIC LIVER
J. BALSELLS, H.ALLENDE, JL LAZARO, E.MURIO, R.CHARCO, I.DIAZ,
C.MARGARIT
Liver Transplantation Unit. Department of Surgery Hospital General Vall d’Hebron.
Universidad Autonoma, Barcelona, Spain
In the last 4 years, 33 hepatic resections for hepatocellular carcinoma
were performed in 31 patients with liver cirrhosis in our Unit. Mean age of
patients was 63+7 years. Etiology of liver cirrhosis was: alcoholic in 8,
postnecrotic in 15 and others in 8. Serology for Hepatitis C was positive in
55% of patients. Tumor size was 4.4+2.9 cm. Most patients were treated
with limited resection. Operative mortality was 13%. Follow-up ranges
from 2 to 47 months (mean 16+12). Tumor recurrence was diagnosed in
59% of the patients: 4 distant metastasis and 12 intrahepatic recurrences (6
adjacent to resected segments, 4 in a distant segment and 2 multiple or
diffuse recurrences). Nine recurrences were found within the first year and
seven after year. Two patients were reoperated in order to resect a
nodular recurrence.
Demographics and pathologic characteristics of cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma were studied for analysis of risk factor of
recurrence. Hepatitis B cirrhosis, macronodular cirrhosis, non trabecular
and undifferenciated tumor, tumor size bigger than 3 cm, presence of
satellites or more than one nodule and vascular invasion were associated
with a higher incidence of recurrence. Overall survival rate is 48% and
actuarial survival at and 3 years are 69% and 32%.
Conclusion: Recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic
patients is high with surgical resection alone. Therefore, adjuvant
chemoembolization might be indicated and liver transplantation may be
the best appraoch in young cirrhotic patients with small nodular
hepatocellular carcinoma.
P193
PRIMARY TUMOURS AND TUMOUR-LIKE CONDITIONS OF
THE LIVER
EMM.BANDOUVAS J. ALEXANDRIDES, J,PARHARIDOU, N.ALEXANDRIDOU,
E.PAPAEFTHIMIOU, A.TAGGALOS, J.KAPELLAKIS, GIANNIKOS, J.BISSODIS,
S.SERMAGIAS
"Helena Venizelou" Hospital, 2, E.Venizelou Sq., GR-11521 Athens, Greece
We present representative microscopic pictures belonging to
systematically classified primary tumours and tumour-like conditions of
the liver. Also, we intend to make correlations among related parameters
as: etiology, symptoms, microscopic findings, survival, therapy and
prognosis. We are referred to 230 malignant cases, 85 benign and 110
tumour-like conditions.
Almost all benign tumours and tumour-like conditions had been
curable, by excision except when uncurable associated syndromes were
being, e.g. cirrchosis. Many of thesebenign conditions did not require any
treatment. In malignant tumours, early surgery gave in favourable cases
survival of some years and rarely cures. In most cases, survival was
counted in weeks or months.
P194
THE SECOND SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR THE
RECURRENCE OF PRIMARY LIVER CANCERAFTER
CURATIVE HEPATECTOMY
CHEN JI-SHENG, OU QING-JIA, WANG YING
Laboratory Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University ofMedical Sciences, Guangzhou,
China
During the past 10 years we have treated 660 patients with primary
hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC). 124 of them were treated by liver
resection (18.8%). Thirty-two of the patients with resectable HCCs have
developed intrahepatic metastases after operation. 28 men and 4 women
average 42.5 years (range 9 to 65 years), 30(93.7%) with postnecrotic
cirrhosis and 5(15.5%) with portal hypertension. For the patients with
cancer recurrence, 3.2% (n=4) of them underwent a second resection. The
mean survival time was 26.8 mos after the second resection. 22 of the
patients had already been treated with injecting absolute ethanol directly
into the tumor under ultrasound guidance. 8 patients died after the
injecting. The mean survival time was 8.5 mos. Twelve of the patients had
been treated with transcatheter hepatic arterial chemotherapy and
embolization (THACE-Lipiodol, 5Fu MMC ADR) and/or hepatic artery
ligation and infusion chemotherapy. The mean survival time was 16.8
mos. Control group only 4.5 mos. It is concluded that repeat hepatectomy
for recurrent liver cancer as an important approach for improving the
surgical result has been proved. A typical resection are reasonable and
acceptable for HCC, especially, for recurrent HCC. Ethanol injection
therapy is an effective, palliative treatment for recurrent HCC, especial for
the single nodule. TAE/HAL+HA provides an effective, palliative
treatment for recurrent HC. But TAE did not improve the longterm
survival time.
88
P195
CRITERIA FOR CURATIVE RFECTION IN HEPATECTOMY
FORHEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA LARGERTHAN 5
CM IN DIAMETER
T. HARADA S. KODAMA, K. MATSUO, Y. WADA. S. IKEDA,
st Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan
The present study was designed to determine the criteria for curative
resection in hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma larger than 5 cm in
diameter. The extent of the resected liver was closely related to recurrence,
and the complete removal of the involved segments was found to be
essential for curative hepatectomy. Patients with satellite nodule showed
high incidence of recurrence; in particular, carcinoma recurred in every
patient with multiple satellite nodules scattered over unilateral lobe, in
spite of macroscopic tumour removal. On the other hand, curative
resection could be achieved in patients with portal tumour thrombi within
the 2rid branches of the portal vein when the tumour tissue including
tumour athrombi was removed en bloc. Negative resection margin, i.e.,
microscopic absence of neoplastic cells within 5 mm of the margin of
parenchymal dissection, did not affect the recurrence rate. On the basis of
these findings we define complete removal of involved segments
containing satellite nodules and portal tumor thrombi as curative resection,
though curative hepatectomy cannot be achieved in patients with satellite
nodules scattered over unilateral lobe and/or with tumour thrombi in portal
truncus.
P196
A CASE OF HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA IN A PATIENT
WITH APLASTIC ANEMIA TREATEDWITHANABOLIC
STEROID AND ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES
A. KOSAKA A.NAKAGAWA, M. TANAKA, F. KOMADA*, M.TSUDA*
Department of Surgery, Department of Internal Medicine* Mastsusaka City Hospital
Matsusaka City, Mie 515, Japan
We report hepatocellular carcinoma in a 35-year-old female, who had
undergone treatment with oxymetholone (60rag/day) for 24 months for
aplastic anemia which had developed when she was 32. She was also
receiving treatment with oral contraceptives (ethynodiol acetate ling,
ethynylestradiol 0.05 mg) to control menstrual bleeding. Computed
tomography and ultrasonography revealed three masses ranging from to
5cm in diameter in the left lateral segment of the liver and four masses less
than 2cm in diameter in the right hepatic lobe and medial segment of the
liver. HBs-antigen, AFP, and CEA were negative. Under the diagnosis of
hepatocellular carcinoma in the lateral segment and adenomas in the right
hepatic lobe and medial segment ofthe liver, lateral segmentectomy was
performed. The resected liver specimen was not cirrhotic. Histologically,
all nodules were confirmed to be hepatocellular carcinoma. The tumour
and liver tissue were positive for estrogen receptor. One month later, an
hepatic arterial access device was implanted to deliver chemotherapy to
remnant hepatic tumours. It is thought that the liver tumours in this case
may have been induced by long-term use of anabolic steroid and oral
contraceptives. We recommend that ultrasonographic and computed
tomographic examination be used to screen patients with undergoing
long-term anabolic steroid or oral contraceptive therapy for liver masses.
P197
RESECTION FORHEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA WITH
INVASION TO THE ADJACENT ORGANS
T.J.LIU, C.C. WU, C.J. HUANG, R.Y.HUANG, M.D. YANG, T.C. WU, F.K.P’ENG
Division of General Surgery, Dept. of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospotal,
Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
From January 1987 to June 1991, 78 patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) underwent resection. Combined resection of the
adjacent organs was carried out 19 times in 17 patients (21.8%) due to
direct invasion of the tumor. The organs which were resected
concomitantly were diaphragm in 13, stomach in 3, colon in 2, pancreas in
2, fight kidney in 1, fight adrental in 1, abdominal wall in 2 and fight lung
in 1. One patient underwent surgery three times for recurrent tumors. No
operative death occurred in any patient and 5(29.4%) patients had
postoperative complications. The primary tumor in all patients except one
was larger than 6cm (average 12.9cm, range 4-21cm). The location of the
main tumor in the fight lobe was found in 11 patinets, left lobe in patients
and both lobes in patients. Until November 1991, eight patients died
with a mean survival time of 9.5 months (range 5-18 months). Recurrent
disease was the cause of death in 7 patients. The other 8 patients without
recurrent disease survived for 6,8,8,9,12,18,24 and 59 months. One patient
has been alive for 12 months wigh recurrent liver tumor. We conslude that
when HCC invades to other organs the disease has reached an advanced
stage; however, aggressive, combined resection of adjacent organs can
provide some long term survivors.
P198
SURGICAL RESECTION OF LARGE HEPATOCELLULAR
CARCINOMA WITH CENTRAL LOCATION
T.J. LIU, C.C. WU, and F.K. P’ENG
Dept. of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
In Taiwan, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is usually combined with
chronic hepatitis and liver cirrhosis. The prognosis of large HCC (tumour
size >5cm) is poor. Resection of large HCC located in the central area of
the liver (such as liver hilum or dome region), therefore, remains
challenging. Since August 1989, intraoperative ultrasonography and
hepatic inflow blood clamping has been used during hepatectomy, any
economic resection of HCC becomes possible.
In the past 2 years, we resected 15 HCC patients whose main tumor
was located in the central area of the liver (defined as Coninaud’s segment
4,5,8). The size of the main tumor in all patients was larger than 6cm. Of
them, liver cirrhosis was found in 11 patients. The Child’s grading of their
liver function revealed 12 in Child’s A and 3 in Child’ B category.
However, normal ICG 15’ retension rate (<10%) was found in 7 patients.
No patient died after operation, but patients (33.3%) had postoperative
complication. During the follow aup periods till now, three patients died
ofrecurrent disease (survival time 4,6 and 12 months),one patient had
recurrent disease and has been alive for 14 months. The other 11 patients,
who have had no evidence ofrecurrent tumor, have survived for 6-26
months (average 17.6 motns). The follow up period is too short to jump to
any conclusion. Since surgical resection is the best way to treat large
HCC, aggressive resection in selected patient with large HCC over central
liver is till recommended.
89
P199
CLINICAL ANDPATHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS OF
TRANSCATHETER CHEMOEMBOLIZATION COMBINED
WITH HEPATECTOMY FORPRIMARY HEPATIC
CARCINOMA
LIU YONGXIONG et, al.
Dpt. Hepato-biliary surgery. Great Wall Hospital, China
Transcatheter chemoembolization (TCE) followed by laporotomy were
performed in patients with primary hepatic carcinoma (HCC). Each
patient received TCE of 1-5 times with an interval of4-6 weeks. The
embolizing reagents included: mitomycin C (20-40rag), adriamycin (20-
60rag) and 40% lipiodol (2-10ml), The clinical results showed marked
decrease or normalize in AFP levels and reduction in tumour size. Of the
12 patients, partil hepatectomy were carried out in eleven. In the another
one not operated, she is with extensive abdominal metastasis and Contact
matastusis with epiple. The histopathological study showed:tissues
necrosis and fibrosis at different stages in liver lesion especially in tumour
area. Apart form sclerotic lesion one or two liver daughter nodules were
found in two cases, residusla liver cancer were seen in all of th 11 cases.
One case with local recurrence and metastasis in abdomen one year after
liver resection was treated with hepatectomy once again; the other two
with right lung metastatic tumour four to six months after operation was
treated with transcatheter pulmonary arterial embolization; another one
had slight increase in AFP levels two months after resection.
We considered TC could not replace the surgery operation but only a
part of combined treatment of liver carcinoma. It is therefore suggested
that indication of TCE are: the unresectable HCC’ resectable HCCs with
poor liver function, those associated with portal hypertension and
recurrent HCCs to prepare for further surgery.
P200
EXPECTATIONS,POSSIBILITIES AND LIMITS OF SURGERY
FORHCC IN CIRRHOTIC PATIENTS
G. GOZZETTI, A. MAIOTTI, G.L. GRAZI, E. JOVINE, A. FRENA, W. GRIGIONI,
A. CAVALLARI A
Clinica Chimrgica 2,University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
The surgical approach in pts with HCC in cirrhotics has evolved over
the past ten years.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Over the period ’82’-’91’, 282
cirrhotics have been admitted at our Institution because of HCC. During
the pre-operative work-up 105 pts were excluded from surgical treatment
mainly for intrahepatic tumoral spread or portal vein thrombosis. One
hundred sixty pts were operated on: 100 curative resection, 5 palliative
resections and 12 transplantations were performed. In spite of the accuracy
of the pre-operative work-up, a large number ofpts (37.5%) where
excluded from resection at laparotomy.
RESULTS: The operative mortality ofthe resected pts is decreased
from 16.1% to the 7.4% of the last 5 years and it is strictly correlated to
the Child Pough score. The recurrence rate is 34.5% in the group of the
resected, while it is 25% in the transplanted pts. The incidence of
recurrence is correlated with the AFP level, presence of symptoms, no
preoperative TEA, perioperative blood transfusion, absence of tumoral
capsule, microvascular thrombosis. Five year actuarial survival is 41.6%
for the transplanted pts and 32.7% for the resected pts.
DISCUSSION Considering the long term results it remains
controversial which therapeutical choice, between transplantation and
resection, is more indicated in cases of HCC on cirrhosis.
P201
THE ROLE OF HEPATECTOMY IN THE TREATMENT OF
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
TAKESHI NAGAO FUYO YOSHIMIl, NOBUHIRO KAWANO2,
TETSUICHIRO MUTO2, SHIN OHNISHI3, AND MICHIO IMAWAREI
From the Onstitute of Medical Scinence the First Department of Surgery2, and the Third
Department of Internal Medicine3, University ofTokyo, Japan
The long-term results ofhepatectomy (Hx) for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) have not been satisfaxtory yet. The high incidence of
postoperative recurrence has been a major obstacle against its
improvement. In the current study, we compared the results of Hx to those
of transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE). The records ofpatients who
had undergone HX or TAE for their HCC from 1984-1990 were
investigated. The patients without cirrhosis or with Child C cirrhosis were
excluded because of the small number of patients in these groups. The
survival curves ofpatients eith Child A cirrhosis were not differnet
between Hx group and TAE group. The incidence of solitary tumour was
significantly higher in Hx group. However, we could not find any
differences in the other backgound factors, such as age, sex, HBs antigen,
and tumour size. The same results were obtained in patients with Child B
cirrhosis. The results of this study will cast a doubt about the role of
surgeon in the treatment of HCC.
P202
THE STIY OF NINETEEN CASES WITH
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA THREE CENTIMETER
ORLESS THAN THREE CENTIMETERIN DIAMETER
A.OGURO H.TANIGUCHI, K.MIYATA, Y.UESHIMA, K.TAKEUCHI, N.TSUKUDA,
A. HAGIWARA, T.YAMANE,T.YAMAGUCHI, K.SAWAI, O.KOJIMA &’
T.TAKAHASHI
First Department of Surgery, Kyoto Perfectural University ofMedicine, Kyoto, Japan
Nineteen patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 3 cm or less
than 3 cm in diameter were studied in order to ascertain whether it was
possible to discriminate HCC 2 cm or less than 2 cm in diameter from
HCC 3 cm or less than 3 cm and larger than 2 cm in diameter. From April
1989 to July 1991 hepatic resections were performed on 9 cases fo HCC
containing 12 tumours 2 cm or less than 2 cm in diameter (group A) and
10 vcases of HCC containing 11 tumours which were 3 cm or less than 3
cm and larger than 2 cm in diameter (group B). Preoperative serum alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP) level, findings of ultrasonography (US), computed
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography,
and pathological findings were compared in these 2 groups. The following
results were obtained: (1) serum alpha-fetoprotein level of group A
(129.4ng/ml) were lower than that of group B (426.9ng/ml); (2) group B
tended to be detected as hyperechoic lesion by ultrasound; (3) uninodular
tumors were more frequently seen in group A than in group B; (4) group
A tended to have lower grade of Edmondson’ classification than group B.
The conclusion was as follows; it was very difficult to discriminate group
A from group B.
90
P203
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA (HCC) IN CANADA;
CLINICAL FEATURF_ AND AMODELFORPROGNOSIS.
S.C. PAPPAS, D. HEMPHILL, A. PETER, C. LEVINTON, S. HANNA Sunnybrook
Health Sciences Centre, Toronto Canada
HCC as diagnosed in Canada may differ from that diagnosed in other
parts of the world. To further assess the clinical features and develop a
model for prognosis, a database of 70 patients with proven HCC was
reviewed. Clinical features present at the time of diagnosis were analysed
by Cox regression analysis with stepwise reduction methodology to
develop a model for prognosis; survival was estimated by the Kaplan-
Meire method, Median survival was 14.1 weeks; 7 patients survived
longer than 2 years. Survival was not related to age (mean 62.0 yrs), sex
(58M,12F), presence of cirrhosis (43/58,74%), etiology of liver disease
(46% ETOH, 27% cryptogenic, 20% hep B, 7% other), evidence of
extrahepatic spread (18/63;29%), size or location of tumour and singles
vs, multiple tumours. By univariate analysis, bilirubin, AFP levels, and the
presence of symptoms, ascites or encephalopathy at presentation were
predictive of survival; by Cox regression analysis, a model for prognosis
was developed using AFP levels and ascites as the two independent
predictive variables. Surgery was felt to be possible in 8 patients,
performed in 6 cases and was associated with a significant improvement
in survival (median survival 55.7 wks vs. 13 wks, p<0.05). These result
confirm that HCC in Canada, as in other countries, is associated with a
poor prognosis but differ in other aspects from prior reports, both outside
and within North America, with regards to prognostic factors. Further
cross-validation of the prognostic model is required; this may facilitate
thereapeutic trial planning.
P204
RADIOGRAPHIC FEATURF_ AND PROGNOSIS OF
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA (HCC) IN CANADA
D. SALONEN, C. LEONHARDT, D. HEMPHILL, S. HANNA, S.C. PAPPAS
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Canada
To determine the radiographic features of HCC as seen in Canada and
their relationship to prognosis, multiple imaging studies of40 patients
with proven HCC were reviewed; patients were selected from a larger
data base of 70 patients eith HCC on the basis of the availability of
imaging studies for review. Six radiographic features were analysed for
prognostric value in 35 patients by univariate and Cox regression analysis.
Cirrhosis was present in 27/35 patients (77%) with the etiology of liver
disease including ETOH (17), cryptogenic (9), hepatitis B (6) and,
miscellaneous causes (3). Median survival after diagnosis was 14.1 weeks.
HCC was detected by CT in 27/27 cases; in 6/40 patients HCC was not
detected by ultrasound (US) study. The appearance of HCC at US varied,
with 13/34 (40%) hypoechoic, 7/34 (20%) hyperechoic and 14/34 (40%)
mixed echogenic lesions. 6/35 (17%) cases demonstrated a diffuse
infiltrative pattern of tumour involvment without discrete lesions.
Tumours ranged in size from 2 to 16 cm with encapsulation suggested by
an imaging study 7/35 (20%) cases. Vascular involvement was present in
8/35 (23%) cases. Regression analysis indicated no relationship between
survival and tumour encapsulation, size, location, vascular involvement,
echogenicity, or discrete versus diffuse infiltrative appearance. No
radiographic feature, including tumour size, correlated with AFP levels
(elevated in 25/35 (71%) of cases). These results confirm the variable
radiographic appearance ofHCC but differ in other aspect from previous
reports, particularly those from outside North America. These differences
may be related to varying etiology or modes of presentation and further
studies are indicated.
P205
SELECTION OF TREATMENT MODALITIES OF
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA ON THE BASIS OF THE
GROSS ANATOMY OF THE TUMOUR
A. SUGIOKA. T. TSUZUKI
Department of Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjukuku, Tokyo, Japan
Long-term surv,ival ofpatients with hepatocellular carcinoma in now
the issue. It was disclosed in our series that 5-year survival rate of patients
undergoing potentially curative resection was 49% but 5-year disease-free
survival rate dropped to 19%. In order to increase disease-free survival, it
is necessary to elucidate predisposing factors to recurrence and to select
sutiable treatment modalities. Univariate and multivariate analyses of
disease-free survival of 137 patients, who underwent potentially curative
resection between July 1973 and December 1990, revealed that gross
anatomy of the tumour, tumour thrombus in the portal vein and/or
intrahepatic metastases, tumour thrombus in the hepatic vein, and width of
resected margin were significant factors. The gross antomy provides us
with information not only on the boundary of tumours but also on the
incidence of tumour thrombi. Consequently, we can know radicality of the
surgery and necessity of adjuvant therapy immediately after surgery. It is
anticipated that an improvement in disease-free survival is obtained by
this approach.
P206
BACTERIOLOGICAL STUDY ON HUMAN LIVER TISSUE
YOSHIFUMI TAKENAKA 1, YOSHIYUKI SHIMAMURA 2
1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Dental College, 6-7-1, Sugano, Ichikawa-City, Ciba-Pref.,
Japan 2) Department of Surgery, National Matsudo Hospital, 123-1, Takatsuka-Shinden,
Matsudo-City, Chiba-pref., Japan
It is generally known that bacteria are present in the tissues of mongrel
canines and bulls. But, so far as we have searched, there is no report on the
bacteria of the human liver tissue. We think it important to examine them
for hepatic resection or transplantation. Then we examined them in the
case of hepatic resection of 68 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma who
visited National Matsudo Hospital from July, 1986 to March, 1988.
Bacteria of the cancer-free area were cultivated immediately after
laporatomy, and those of the cancer area were cultivated as soon as
hepatic resection was over. Materials were entered to the anaerobic porter
and cultured by anaerobic chamber method. Out of 14 cases 22
microorganisms were detected, and out of them 10 cases were
PROPINIBACTERIUM ACNES which is anaerobic gram-positive
coccus. Other microorganisms were shown on the list below, But 14
patients who provided 22 microorganisms, compared with others, had no
special symptoms after operations. But P.acnes is known as the baterium
causing heptic failure to mouse byjoining with endotoxin. Then it is
important to work out measures against P.acnes for extending the
indication for hepatic resection or transplantation.
List of Bacteria detected from Liver Tissue of HCC Patients
Detected Lesions Cancer Non Cancer
Propionibacterium acnes 5 cases 5 cases
Staphylococcus group 3 2
Streptococcus group
Acinetobactor lwoffii
Enterococcus faecium
Torulopsis galabrata
Total 12 cases 10 cases
91
P207
ORTHOTOPIC LIVER TRANSPLANTATION FORPRIMARY
HEPATIC MALIGNANCY
V. VOUGAS, N.D. HEATON, R. MONDRAGON, J. O’GRADY, R. WILLIAMS,
K.C. TAN
Liver Transplant Surgery, King’s College Hospital, Camberwell. London SE5 9RS. United
Kingdom
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) has been used to treat patients
with small primary liver tumour associated with cirrhosis, or with tumours
in sites not amenable to resection by conventional surgery.
The early results of 23 patients (20 male: 3 female; mearn age of 50
years, age range 26-66 years) with parimary hepatic maligancy treated by
OLT are presented. During the same period (January 1989 November
1991) 250 OLT have been performed in this unit.
All 23 patients had cirrhosis (Child’s grade A in 4, B in 7, and C in 12).
Pre-existing liver pathology included hepatitis B in 6, alcoholic liver
disease in 5, cryptogenic cirrhosis in 5, chronic active hepatitis in 3,
NANB hepatitis in 2, primary sclerosing cholangitis in and al-antitrypsin
deficiency in 1. Tumour was localized to fight lobe in 16 patients, the left
lobe in one and 6 patients had bilateral involvement. The tumour size was
less than 4 cm in 14 patients, 4-8 cm in 8 patients and one patient had a
tumour of 10 cm. Histology showed hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in
19, mixed hepato-cholangiocellular in 3 and one patient had an HCC in
the fight and a cholangiocellular carcinoma (CHC) in the left lobe.
Satellite lesions were present in 14 patients and evidence of vascular
invasion was present in 10 patients.
Overall 6 patients have died. One patient died in the early postoperative
period (hospital mortality 4.3%), 2 patients died from tumour recurrence
at 5 and 6 months postoperatively. There have been three other deaths,
two from recurrent hepatitis B related liver disease 3 and 8 months
postoperatively and one from sepsis 9 months postoperatively. The overall
mortality at mean follow up of 12 months (range 1-32 months) is 26%.
Liver transplantation has a role in the management of selected patients
with primary hepatic malignancy and underlying cirrhosis. OLT is
associated with a low perioperative mortality.
P208
BILIARY RECONSTRUCTION IN ORTHOTOPIC LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION (OLT)
v. VOUGAS N.D. HEATON, R. MONDRAGON, J. O’GRADY, R. WILLIAMS,
K.C. TAN.
Liver Transplant Surgery, King’s College Hospital Camberwell, London. SE5 9RS. United
Kingdom
Different techniques have been utilised in biliary truct reconstruction
following (OLT). The incidence ofbiliary complications after OLT is
approximately 15%. The standard approach has been to insert a T-tube
into the recipient duct and leave it in situ for 6-12 weeks. However, the
use of a T-tube is associated with a significant number ofpostoperative
complciations. We recently used one with an internal silastic stent (IST) in
place of the T-tube.
A retrospective study has been performed between a group of 28
patients with IST and the previous 30 patients with a conventinal T-tube
(T-T) anastomosis. The mean age of patients in the IST group was 43
years (range 14-66 years) and 44 years (range 20-66 years) for the T-T
group. 6 out of 30 patients in the T-T group and 4 out of 28 patients in the
IST group, had fulminant hepatic failure. Complicatons were considered
as early (<3 months post-OLT) and late (>3 months post-OLT). 4 patients
from the IST group developed early complciations (1 leak, stricture, 2
obstruction by bile sludge) which were treated surgically (2 patients
having biliary reconstruction with a Roux-en-Y loop) or by endoscopic
dilatation. One patient presented with a late stricture and was treated by
endoscopic dilatation. In the T-T group 5 patients developed early
complications (4 leaks, stricture) treated by endoscopic stent insertion. 8
patients experienced late complications: 3 had biliary peritonitis, 2 had
failed first attempt for tube removal and 3 had local pain and fever. Three
patients had a laparotomy and 2 underwent biliary reconstruction iwth
Roux-en-Y loop and all the other patients settled with conservative
treatment which included antibiotic therapy.
Overall morbidity was 17.8% for the IST group and 43% for the T-T
group. Overall mortality was 6.9% (T-T group-l, IST group -3) and was
unrelated to the biliary complications. The use of T-tube was associated
with a higher percentage complication rate. The IST group tended to
develop early complication and the T-T group had more late
complications
P209
TEN YEARS EXPERIENCE OF PRIMARY LIVER CANCERIN
NORTHERN ENGLAND
P.D. WRIGHT. J. COLLIER, M.F. BASSENDINE, O F W JAMES
Medical and Surgical Liver Units, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom
Between 1981 and 1991 92 patients with primary liver cancer (P.L.C.)
were seen in the Liver Unit, 68% were male and 32% female, and the
mean age was 72 years. 96% were Caucasian and 91% from Northern
England. 5% ofpatients were diagnosed on screening, the remainder
presenting with symptoms of weakness (66%), pain (66%), anorexia
(60%), weight loss (56%) or nausea (43%), with a mean duration of 7
weeks (range 1-78). At admission 83% had hepatomegaly and only 27%
had previously documented cirrhosis, subsequently 60% had biopsy
proven cirrhosis. Investigation showed an elevated alpha-FP in 86% with
a level>500 ug/ml in 52%. HbSAg + we in 9%, and HBCAB + ve in 22%.
CT scan showed mutiple lesions in 33% and a single lesion in 23%. 16%
were offered no treatment, 16% had their tumours resected and 76% had
chemotherapy alone or in combinatin with surgery. Median survival was
11.5 weeks (range l-146 weeks). This data shows how the pattern of
P.L.C. differs in a Northern European population from that seen elsewhere
in the World.
P210
REPEAT HEPATECTOMY: ITS CONTRIBUTION TO
IMPROVEMENT OF PATIENT SURVIVAL IN RECURRENT
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
FUYO YOSHIMI TAKESHI NAGAO, SUMIO INOUE, TOSHIYUKI SUMITA,
HAJIMA SHIGA, MASAHIRO ISHIMARU, MOTOHIDE SODEYAMA,
YOSHIMICHI OMORI, NOBUHIRO KAWANO, AND TETSUICHIRO MUTO
First Department of Surgery, University ofTokyo, Tokyo, Japan
The contribution ofrepeat hepatectomy to improvement ofpatient
survival after initial hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was
investigated in 59 patients who underwent curative hepatectomy for
primary HCC over the past ten years and developed intrahepatic tumor
recurrence. Without repeat hepatectomy (48 patients), 1-, 3- and 5- year
cumulative survival rates were 89.4%, 39.8% and 21.2% respectively.
With repeat hepatectomy (11 patients, 14 repeat hepatectomies), these
values were 100.0%, 81.8% and 63.6%. The cumulative survival curve of
the repeat hepatectomy (+) group was significantly better than that of the
repeat hepatectomy (-) group (p<0.004). The cumulative survival curve of
the repeat hepatectomy group was better, although not significantly better,
than that ofthe transcatheter arterial embolization group. There was one
operative mortality in the repeat hepatectomy group.
92
P211
TREATMENT OF LIVER CANCER USING A TOTALLY
IMPLANTABLE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM
X.H. ZHANG G.N. XU,
Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Shanghai Hospital, Shanghai, R.R. China.
External catheter complications of hepatic artery infusion (HAl)
sometimes preclude it from wide application. Recently a totally
implantable drug delivery system (DOS) has been used to minimize those
complicaitons. This article describes the construction of home-made DDS,
properative preparation and operative technique. Since Dec. 1989, thirteen
patients with liver cancer have been treated with the DD$. In ten patients
with unresectable cancer (Therapeutic group), partial remission (PR) was
present in 50% of cases, minor remission (MR) in 30% and no change
(NC) in 20%. So the overall remission rate was 80%. In three patients
with palliatively resected cancer (Pre-ventive group), no recurrence was
found except one patient after 67 months ofprotal vein infusion. The
median survival time in the series was 9 months with the range of 3 to 13
months. It is concluded that the home-made DD$ has basically fulfiled
qualitative requirments with a reasonable price and might be widely
utilized.
P212
LONG-TERM SURVIVAL AFTER SURGERY FOR
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
Z.D. ZHOU, Z.Y.TANG, Y.Q. YU, z.c. MA, B.H. YANG, J.Z. LU, Z.Y. LIN,
C.L. TANG, D.B. XU
Liver Cancer Institute, Shanghai Medical University, Shanghai, China
Long-term survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
has rarely been encountered in the past several decades. Curutchet et al
collected the data from 45 authors for 65 years (1905 1970) and found
only forty-five 5-year survivors worldwide. We report 113 patients with
pathologically proven HCC surviving over 5 years after surgery during the
past 25 years (1961 1986), Of them, 104 patients underwent resection of
HCC and nine patients underwent hepatic artery ligation (HAL) and/or
infusion chemotherapy (HAI) for unresectable HCC. Subclinical stage
amounted to 49.6% (56/113) and moderate stage to 50.4% (57/113).
There were 55 aptients with small HCC (<5cm). Cirrhosis was present in
81.4% (92/113). Radical resection was performed in 96.2% (100/104).
Reoperation for subclinical recurrence and solitary pulmonary metastasis
was done in 23 patients, and second-look resection of huge tumors, in six
patients. By end of May 1991, 37 of the 113 patients survived for more
than 10 years; 16 patients, more than 15 years; and seven patients, more
than 20 years. One patient has survived for 29 years and 8 months after
resection of HCC. These results indicate that early detection and radical
resection are the principal factors influencing long-term survival;
reoperation for subclinical recurrence and solitary pulmonary metastasis
remains an important approach to prolong survival further after radical
resection; HAL and HAI may provide a hope for unresectable huge HCC.
P213
SHORT-TEAM RESULTS OF RESECTION FOR
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA: PREOPERATIVE
COMBINATION THERAPY
I)H. SEKIDO, 1)A. NAKANO, l)S. FUKAZAWA, 1)T. FUKUSHIMA, 1)Y. FUJII, 1)T.
FUKUSHIMA, 2) K. TANAKA, 2)S. NAKAMUR
Second Department of Surgery and Third Department of Medicine, Yokohama City
University, School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of most malignant tumour in
Asia. Surgery is the only method potentially curative of HCC. However in
Japan particularly a high incidence of cirrhosis associated with HCC has
resulted in limitation of hepatic resection and even if carcinoma was
completely resected, recurrent disease is not infrequent. Various
therapeutic modalities including transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE)
therapy and intramural percutaneous ethanol injection (PEIT) therapy has
been developed. In present paper, we performed preoperative
combination therapy of TAE and PEIT and show that these therapies are
able to prevent a recurrence of HCC. (PATIENTS AND METHODS) For
past 5 years, twenty five patients (18 men and 7 women) with HCC were
operated in our department. The mean age was 55.2 years. Eleven patients
were treated with TAE preoperatively. Six patients were treated with TEA
and PEIT preoperatively Risk ofposthepatectomy recurrence was
evaluated with respect to various clinical parameters. Macroscopical and
histological features were assessed. The presence of recurrent HCC was
analyzed and disease free survival rates were 42% of patient treated with
TEA, 75% of patient with TAE and PELT. Histological findings showed
complete necrosis of the tumour. After treatment of TAE and PETI,
however, a few carcinoma cells remained.
CONCLUS|ON: After treatment of TAE and PEIT, postoperative
disease free survived rate was markedly improved.
P214
SIGNIFICANCE OF MEMBRANE FLUIDITY OF
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA (HCC) ON PROGNOSTIC
FACTORS
TAKAYUKI KASAMATSU, JUNJI TANAKA, WANG BEN SHANG, MITSUAKI
KOHMOTO, MASANORI YOSHIDA, JUN TAMURA, KEN-ICHI FUJITA, SHIGEKI
ARII
The First Department of Surgery, Kyoto University School of Medicine
Prognostic factors of HCC after hepatectomy have been well
established in Japan. However, the mechanism of malignancy expression
still remains unclear. On the other hand, the membrane fluidity has been
understood to play an important role on cellular biological activity. The
present study was aimed to clarify the possible effects of membrane
fluidity on prognostic factors. Patients and Mehtods; The membrane
fraction was obtained from 37 resected HCC cases by gradient
centrifugation. Membrance fluidity was determined by measuring
fluorescence polarization (P-value) with DPH dye. Results: P-values of
normal livers were 0.189 +0.024(mean + SD). In contrast, those of
cirrhotic liver and HCC were 0.225+0.045, n=28, 0.221+0.024, n=37,
respectively, p<0.01. P-values of non-cancer tissue ofresected liver were
0.223+0.016. Portal tumor thrombosis (Vp) was found in 23 of 37 cases,
of which P-values were 0.208+0.019 and significantly higher than
negative group (0.234_+0.017,p<0.01). When grouped by Edmondson’
criteria, well differentiated HCC showed lower P-values than poorly
differentiated groups, 0.211 vs 0.236, p<0.05. Also, AFP positive(>200
ng/ml) HCC showed higher P-values than negative group, 0.239 vs 0.214,
p<0.01). Conclusions: Above results suggest that membrane fluidity of
hepatocellular carcinoma may modify the malignancy expression.
93
P215
DNA PLOIDY AND CELL ACCUMULATION ON G2/M PHASE
IN HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA INRELATION TO
ORPROGRESSION AND PROGNOSIS
JUN TAMURA JUNJI TANAKA, KENICHI FUJITA, MASANORI YOSHIDA,
MITSUAKI KOHMOTO, TAKAYUKI KASAMATSU, WANG BEN ZHANG, LIU
GANG, AND TAKAYOSHI TOBE.
The First Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
The analysis of DNA ploidy patterns in various malignancies have been
performed recently, for the purpose of detecting DNA aneuplodiy, which is
significantly correlated to prognosis in some of the cases. On the other hand,
there may be some other parameters as to cell kinetics oftumour cells in
DNA histograms. On this viewpoint, the quantification of S phase fraction
using various mathematical models has been developed, but it is not so
generally accepted because ofpoor reliability. To evaluate the significance of
DNA histograms as a parameter of malignancy in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), we analyzed the DNA ploidy patterns and the proportion of cells in
G2/M phase, investigating the correlation to prognosis and other
clinicopathological data (T, fc-inf, Edmondson’s grade, AFP doubling time)
in patients with HCC. Seventy-two cases ofHCC at the 1st Department of
Surgery, Kyoto University, from 1983 to 1986, which were available for
flow cytometric analysis formed the materials ofthis study. DNA histograms
of HCC were obtained from paraff’ln embedded tissues using flow
cytometry. Among all cases, 43(59.7%) showed diploid cases, 29(40.3%)
aneuploid. The coefficient of variation was 6.46% on average, the DNA
index in aneuploid cases was 1.641_+0.535(mean+S.D.). A significant
correlation was observed between the proportion of G2/M phase cells and
AFP doubling time(p<0.05, r=-0.384), indicating the accumulation oftumour
cells on G2/M phase cells and AFP doubling time(p<0.05, r=-0.384),
indicating the accumulation of tumour cells on G2/M phase suggests that the
tumour is slow-growing. A significantly better prognosis was seen in diploid
cases than aneuploid, that is, 5 year survival rate were 39.5% in diploid cases
and 9.7% in aneuploid. In conclusion, there are some HCC cases of which
the tumor cells are accumulated on G2/M phase in cell cycle, and the cell
cycle may possible be delayed or blocked in such cases, judging from the
AFP doubling time. On the other hand, DNA ploidy pattern has a significant
correlation to prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.
P217
THE PURINERGIC REGULATION OF HEPATIC ARTERIAL
VASCULAR TONE
B. ALEXANDER. PT MATHIE1, V. RALEVIC2, G BURNSTOCK2.
Dept of Surgery, King’ College, London, UK.
Dept of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, London, UK.
Dept of Anatomy, University College, London, UK.
Patient prognosis may be directly related to the magnitude of the
hyperaemic response ofthe hepatic artery (the buffer response) following
portal flow deprivation. Pharmacological enhancement of this response
could offer improved patient prognosis during periods of hepatic portal
deprivation. In vivo observations in dogs with mesocaval shunts suggested
some purinergic (A2) regulation of the buffer response. A series of in vitro
isolated dual-perfused rabbit perfusions were conducted to characterise the
nature of the purinoceptors present in the rabbit hepatic arterial
vasculature. At normal tone, dose-related increases in vasoconstriction,
with maximal increases in perfusionpressure of 8.7 _+ 1.3 mmHg were
demonstrated to ATP. At raised tone (achieved by addition of 10-SM
noradrenaline to the perfusate) dose-related vasodilatations to adenosine
and ATP were demonstrated, with maximal decreases in perfusion
pressure of 16.5 + 2.8 mmHg and 31.3 + 8.7 mmHg respectively. The A2-
purinoceptor antagonist, 8-phenyltheophylline, and the nitric oxide
inhibitor, methylene blue, reduced these values to 6.8 _+ 0.6 mmhg and
10.5 _+ 2.2 mmHg for adenosine and ATP respectively. Finally, these
inhibitors confirmed the hyperaemic signficance of adenosine and ATP
purinoceptors in the regulation of hepatic arterial vascular tone.
P216
EVIDENCE FORINTRA-HEPATIC PORTAL SHUNTS IN THE
RAT LIVER
B. ALEXANDER*. V. JA-E, PT MATHILE.
Department of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Du Cane Road, London, W12
ONN.
*Department of Surgery, King’ College School ofMedicine and Dentistry, Denmark Hill,
London, SE5 9NU
Portal hypertension was induced in male Wistar rats (275-450g), by the
injection of microspheres into the caecal vein via a 3 FG cannula (1.5mm
i.d). Aliquots of up to 106microspheres of 15, 25, 50 and 90gm diameter
were injected. The results shown below are mean +_s.e., n=6, of portal
venous pressures (PVP) before and after injection (inj), of microspheres.
Post-injection PVP results were measured only when steady state
conditions were achieved.
diameter Pre-inj PVP Post-inj PVP ncrease in
gM (mmHg) (mmHg) PVP (mmhg)
15 10.1 _+ 0.6 15.1
__0.6 5.0 0.5
25 9.8 +_ 1.0 13.9 _+ 1.0 4.1 _+ 1.1
50 9.3
__0.3 13.3 _+ 0.5 4.0 _+_ 0.6
90 8.7 _+ 0.5 13/4
_0.9 4.7 _+ 0.7
Total occlusion of the main portal vein resulted in an average increase
in PVP increase following injection of different sized microspheres and
the general failure to induce a greater percentage than 23.2 + 0.6% of the
total PVP availabe (60 mmhg on occlusionof the portal vein) suggests the
existence of intra-hepatic shunts > 90m in diameter. It is proposed that
under ’normal’ conditions these become patent during acute episodes of
increased portal venous pressure and perhaps cease to function during
pathological conditions.
P218
PORTAL VENOUS PRESSURE CHANGE BY NONSHUNTING
OPERATION AND ITS INFLUENCE ON PROGNOSIS OF
PATIENTS WITH LIVER CIRRHOSIS
YASUSHI HARIHARA HIROAKIIMANISHI, HIROSHI IMAMURA,
KAZUMASA OHASHI, YASUTSUGU BANDAI, KENSHO SANJO,
YASUO IDEZUKI,
Second Department of Surgery, University ofTokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Nonshunting operation for Oesophageal varices has developed as the
procedure in which the portal venous blood flow to the liver can be
maintained as compared with ordinary shunting operation. However, the
portal venous pressure (PVP) after the nonshunting operation was not
always the same as that before the operation. The purpose of this study is
to elucidate the influence of PVP change by nonshunting operation on the
prognosis ofpatients with liver cirrhosis. Seventy-nine patients with
esophageal varices and liver cirrhosis who underwent the nonshunting
operation (University of Tokyo method, consisting of esophageal
transection, devascularization and splenectomy) and intraoperative PVP
measurement berfore and after the procedure at our department from 1975
to 1982 were studied. Sixty-two were male and seventeen were female,
with the mean age of 50.2. Actuarial survival rates were compared among
the groups divided according to PVP changes by the procedure. The
intraoperative PVP before and after the procedure was 349_65 mm saline
(180-480) and 317+59 mm saline (200-480), respectively, Significant
decrease in PVP was observed after the procedure by the mean value of
32 mm saline (9.2%) (p<0.01). Actuarial survival rates were significantly
low in the groups in which PVP decreased by more than 125 mm saline
(n=3) or at the rate of more than 25% (n=6) (both p<0.05). In conclusion,
these results suggest that total liver blood flow after the nonshunting
operation can be compensated by the increase of arterial flow in patients
with liver cirrhosis, unless PVP was extremely reduced by the operation.
94
P219
REVIVAL OF SHUNT CONCEPT IN BLEEDING VARICES A
PROSPECTIVE STUDY
A MULLER A.HIRNER, P. DECKER
Bonn University, Surgical Department, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, D-5300 Bonn 1,
Germany
Our theory: The most valuable acute treatment of variceal bleeding is
emergency sclerotherapy (rate of hemostasis in Bonn 94%: 1980 1990,
700 patients). For prophylaxis of further bleeding, the porta-systemic
shunt is having a revival because ofthe disadvantages of long-term-
sclerotherapy: complication rate in Bonn 21%, and rate of rebleeding
41%: 1980 1990, 1000 patients. These data are corresponding to the
literature.
Our concept (planned prospectively): Emergency endoscopy, if
possible immediate sclerotherapy, and angiography. Indications for early
shunt operation: major initial bleeding (>4 blood units), early rebleeding
in spite of sclerotherapy, bleeding of fundic varices, and hypertensive
gastropathy. We prefer 2 different types of shunt: portacaval end-to-side
shunt (PCA: 60%) and distal splenorenal shunt (Warren: 40%).
Indications for PCA are massive bleeding, small splenic vein, and low
portal liver perfusion.
Our results: From II 1989 to VIII 1991 87 patients were admitted in the
study protocol. 62% underwent surgery for shunting, 38% had long-term-
sclerotherapy, respectively devascularisation procedure (Sugiura). The
survival rate of all shunt patients after 30 months was 65%, including the
initial hospital mortality rate of 23%. Differentiated according to the initial
Child-classification, patients with Child A have better long-term-survival
rate of 85% than those in B and C with 46%: the difference is caused only
by a higher initial hospital mortality rate. According to a study concerning
life quality 88% of all operated patients are satisfied with the result; 57%
are able to continue their formerjobs. The out-patient follow-up-
examinations showed: 15% (frequently only episodal) encephalopathy,
29% (partially progressive) liver insufficiency.
P220
APROSPECTIVE RANDOMISED CONTROLLED CLINICAL
TRIAL COMPARING SANDOSTATON (SMS) AND INJECTION
SCLEROTHERPY IN THE CONTROL OF ACUTE VARICEAL
HAEMORRHAGE: AN INTERIM REPORT.
S A JENKINS,G COPELAND, A KINGSNORTH & R SHIELDS
UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL DEPT. OF SURGERY, LIVERPOOL L69 BX.
Recent studies have indicated that somatostatin is a safe effective
treatment for the control of acute variceal haemorrhage (AVH). Since
SMS a synthetic analogue of somatostatin is relatively inexpensive
compared to the naturally occuring hormone, the aim of this study was to
compare the efficacy of SMS with injection sclerotherapy (IS) in the
control of AVH. Forty consecutive patients admitted with endoscopically
proven severe AVH were randomised to either IS or a continuous infusion
of SMS (50)ug/h) for 48 hours. The aetiology of the portal hypertension
was similar in the two groups as was the distribution of the patients among
the categories of the Child’ Classification. Twenty patients received SMS
twenty IS. Overall contro of bleeding was achieved in 18/20 patients
randomised to IS (p 0.70 Fischer’ Exact Test ). SMS was equally
effective as Is in controlling AVH in patients with mild, moderate and
severe disease and those actively bleeding at the time of their diagnostic
endoscopy. Mortality was not significantly different between the two
groups of patients. The results of this trial suggest that SMS is: 1) a safe
and effective stop-gap treatment for the control of AVH and 2) may be as
efficacious as IS although at this stage a type 2 error cannot be excluded.
P221
RENAL IMPAIRMENT FOLLOWING INTRAVENOUS
INJECTIONOF ETHANOLAMINE OLEATE (EO)
S A JENKIN H KYNASTON, M O’DRISCOLL, YATES, K F PARSONS AND
B A TAYLOR
Departments of Surgery and Nuclear Medicine, Royal Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool UK.
It is becoming clear that injection sclerotheapy (IS) of oesophageal
varices (OV) can result in systemic complications, the aim of this study
was to investigate the relationship between platelet aggregation and renal
blood flow (RBF) and function (FR) after administration of EO to rats and
in patients after IS. Organ blood flow (microsphere technique) was
measured lh and 24h after i.v. administration ofEO(0.5ml/100g) to portal
hypertensive rats, and RBF and RF determined by plasma clearance of
Mag 3, a renal tubular agent. Mag 3 renography and platelet counts were
also measured in cirrhotic patients before and after IS. In rats intravenus
EO resulted in a rapid fall in the platelet count
(822+36x10/1 ;meal+SEM)which was associated with microscopic or
macroscopic haematuia. RBF was unchanged after or 24h. RF was
significantly impaired 24h (after EO administraton)
(o.65_+0.08ml/min100g;mear+SEM) compared to controls
(1.67_+0.19ml/min/100g;mear+SEM). Similar but less dramatic changes
were observed in patients after IS, haematuria (10-20%) and alterations in
renal function in the majority.However the very low platelet counts in
these patients is a confounding factor. These observations suggest that
hepatic and renal necrosis and impairment of RFafter administration of
EO are not associated with alterations in RBF but may be secondary to
platelet microembolisation.
P222
FREE OESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION AFTERFIBREOPTIC
ENDOSCOPIC VARICEAL SCLEROTHERAPY IN PORTAL
HYPERTENSION
JEJ Kfige, PA Goldberg, PC Bornman, Terblanche. MRC Liver Research Centre, and
Dept of Surgery, University of Cape Town and Groote Schuur Hospital
This analysis sought to establish the incidence and risk factors for
oesophageal perforation after injection sclerotherapy (IST) for
oesophageal varices (OV).
231 consecutive patients (mean age 49.3 yrs [147 males]) with OV
were studied prospectively from 1984 to 1990 after IST using
ethanolamine oleate with an intra- and paravariceal technique. 1138 IST
sessions during 2037 fibreiptic endoscopies were complicated by 5 free
oesophageal perforations resulting in death in 4 patients. The incidence of
perforation was 2.16% ofpatients or 0.44% of variceal injection sessions.
All injections in the perforated group were performed between 7 and 25
days of the index bleed. For comparision, analysis in both groups only
considered the first 25 days.
Number patients
Child’s A
Grade B
C
Injection n mean (SD)
Total vol injected (SD)
Vol per injection (SD)
Sengstaken used occasions
inpatients
not used in patients
Perforation
No
226
29
100
97
2.5 (1.8)
36.5 (21)
13.7 (5.4)
81
57
169
Yes
5
0
3
2
2.6(.9)
44 (25)
15.4 (7)
3
4
n.s,
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Conclusions: The incidence ofperforation is low after fibreoptic IST
and the risk of perforation is greatest early after the acute index
bleed.Technical and operator dependant factors rather than amount of
sclerosant may be responsible for oesophageal perforation after IST.
95
P223
OESOPHAGEAL STRIC FOLLOWING VARICEAL
SCLEROTHERAPY IN PORTAL HYPERTENSION.
JEJ KRIGE. PA GOLDBERG, R ARRELL, PC ORNMAN & TERBLANCHE.
MRC Liver Research Centre, Surgical Gastroenterology, Groote Schuur Hospital and
Department of Surgery, University of Cape Town.
Injection sclerotherapy (IST) is established treatment for bleeding
oesophageal varices, but may cause oesophageal stricture (OS). This study
sought to determine the incidence of OS and identify possible
predisposing factors and response to therapy.
Patients and Method: 205 patients received IST on 1022 occasions at
1860 visits using a combination of intra and para-variceal techniques with
ethanolamine oleate via flexible endoscopy in a prospective study between
1985 and 1990 and were followed up until September 1991. Varices were
graded to 5 at endoscopy.
Results: 23 patients (11%) developed OS after a mean interval of 6.5
month (range to 35 months). 9 did not require oesophageal dilatation
and 14 required a mean of4 dilatations (range 1-8). No. patient who
developed stenosis bled from the oesophagus after obliteration of varices.
There was no difference in the 2 groups ofpatients in the number of times
they bled from the gastro intestinal tract both before and after obliteration
of varices.
No Stricture Stricture P
number 158
initial grade of 4
varices
slough* 128
number of IST 4 _+ 3
Total vol (ml) 58 _+38
Vol per inj 13.4 _+ 4.9
23
4
22
6_+4
84 +47
11.7 + 3.8
n.s.
noS.
<.001
<.004
n.$o
number of patients with slough after IST.
Conclusion: Oesophageal stricture is more likely to occur in patients
who receive repeated IST and large cumulative volumes of sclerosant.
Stenosis is usually easily managed with dilatation.
P224
THE EVALUATION OF THORACIC DUCT LYMPH
DECOMPRFSION IN EXPERIMENTALLYPRODUCED
ASCITES INDOGS
F.LUKIC, V. SIMCIC, M.SNOJ.
The Institute of Oncology, Zaloska 2, 61105 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
The diameter ofthe supradiaphragmal part of the vena cava was
reduced by polyethylene wrapping for about 75% through right
thoracotomy in endotracheal anesthesia. The animals developed ascites 3-
4 weeks following surgery. The ascites persisted for 4-6 months, and
disapperared spontaneously later on. The animals were normal, excpet for
their swollen abdomens. The protein level of such ascitic fluid from 0.3 to
4.7%. At the time of surgery the pressure in the place of vena cava
stenosis was 15.5 20 cm of water (average 17.8 cm) and above the
stenosis 4 -5.5 cm of water (average 4.5 cm). The pressure of the thoracic
duct lymph 3 weeks after surgery was 20 -40 cm of water (average 31
cm), and the pressure in the vena cava was 17-20 cm of water average
17.8 cm). After 8 weeks the pressure in the thoracic duct was 2-10 cm of
water (average 5.9 cm) and in the vena cava 21-25 cm of water (average
22 cm). Ascites depletion by puncfion normalised the pressure in the vena
cava and thoracic duct in a few hours.
Three weeks after the appearance of ascities, thoracic duct tojugular
vein anastomosis was performed for decompression of the thoracic duct
lymph flow. Ascites disappeared 3-4 weeks later. The thoracic duct lymph
flow represents a by-pass for portal hypertension in the first 8-10 weeks;
later on the pressure in the thoracic duct becomes normal, which renders
the by-pass questionable.
P225
SCHISTOSOMAL VARICEAL BLEEDING IN BLACK SOUTH
AFRICANS: Tc DTPA HEPATIC PERFUSION INDEX AND
GALACTOSE ELIMINATION CAPACITY
MCM MODIBA D PANTANOWITZ, ESSER, SEGAL, A MYBURGH
Department of Surgery, Medicine, Nuclear Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand
Forty-four patients were treated for schistosomal variceal bleeding at
Baragwanath Hospital over 3 years.
HYPOTHESIS: In schistosomiasis the hepatic artery is encased in a
periportal fibrosis, this may limit hepatic arterial compensation for portal
venous flow loss after distal splenorenal shunting (DSRS).
METHODS: Galactose elimination capacity (GEC) and Tc99m DTPA
hepatic peffusion index were measured in schistosomiasis patients
requiring treatment of bleeding oesophageal varices. Arterial supply was
estimated by measuring T (1).
RESULTS: T was 0.17 + 0.08 in 13 patients with schistosomiasis as
compared to 0.33 + 0.16 in 13 patients with portal vein thrombosis (Mann
Whitney p=0.005). In 8 patients with Hep B Sag +ire chronic active
hepatitis associated with schistosmiasis T increased to 0.36 _+0.13 at 10
days (Wilcoxon p=0.01) but fell to 0.22 _+ 0.15 at 6 to 12 months (NS).
GEC was 338 _+ 50mg/min in schistomiasis and 298 _+ 38 in portal vein
thrombosis (p=0.12).
CONCLUSION: In schistosomiasis the hepatic arterial response to
DSRS is impaired.
Reference: J A Myburgh. Selective shunts: the Johannesburg
experience. Am J Surg 1990; 160:67 74
P226
SHUNTS FORPORTAL HYPERTENSION: POSTOPERATIVE
ASSESSMENT WITH COLORDOPPLER SONOGRAPHY (COS)
AND MR-ANGIOGRAPHY (MRA)
A. MULLER. A. STEUDEL, C. REICHEL, A. HIRNER
Dept. of Surgery and Dept. of Radiology, University Medical School Bonn, Germany
Two noninvasive imaging modalifies were used for perform shunt
patency of42 partocaval (PCA) or splenorenal (Warren) shunts.
Angiography only evaluated cases that showed different results of CDS
and MRA.
38 patients with liver cirrhosis were studied after shunt surgery. Colour
Doppler Sonography (CDS) were performed using standard techniques of
vessels insonation and commercially available equipement (Quantum
Angiodynography (MRA) was performed on a 1.ST, Philips) using the 2
D-inflow gradient echo sequence (FFE) with 50/15/60 (TR/TE/ffpulse
angle). All CDS and MRA images were assessed for shunt patency and
flow direction in the main portal vein.
Shunt patency was proven considered in all but one patient in the
synopsis ofboth imaging modalities. MRA showed shunt stenosis in
another patient which was confirmed by angiography and shunt revision.
All MRA were of diagnostic sufficient quality. In 18% of CDS studies
shunts were not sufficiently available.
CDS and MRA give reliable and accurate information to determine
shunt patency. Angiography is only necessary in special cases.
96
P227
LONG TERM FOLLOW-UP OF PORTO SYSTEMIC SHUNTS
A. Mf.)LLER A. HIRNER, P. BLAUERT
Department of Surgery, University Medical School
Porto systemic shunts as well as sclerotherapy play a major role in the
treatment of esophageal varices hemorrhage in portal hypertension of
patients with liver cirrhosis. Especially in emergency situations shunt
operations can lead to a definitive hemostasis. Main points of discussion
are the disadvantages like hepatic encephalopathy of the portocaval shunt.
87 patients were treated with acute bleeding at our department during
the last 2 1/2 years, 54 patients (62%) underwent a porto systemic shunt.
The hospital mortality rate was 22% (12 pat.), 7 patients died during the
follow-up.
The follow-up included 35 patients who were investigated for recurrent
bleeding, liver function, shunt patency and flow direction.
A focus of interest was the hepatic encephalopathy especially in
patients with portocaval shunt.
Encephalopathy was found in 15% of our patients, liver insufficiency of
minor degree in 29%. More than half of these patients were working in
their former profession, 88% lived a normal life. Two third ofthe
alcoholics were abstinent in the postoperative period.
Our results show that the disadvantages ofporto systemic shunts can
prevented by a consistent outpatient management.
P228
LONG TERM RESULTS OF DISTAL SPLENORENAL SHUNT
A. PIETRABISSA A. DI VITO, P.C. GIULIANOTTI, F. D’ELIA, E.SCARCELLO,
M. FERRARI, M. OLEGGINI, F. MOSCA
Istiuto di Chirurgia Generale Sperimentable, Universita di Pisa, Italy
The place of distal splenorenal shunt (DSRS) in the management of
portal hypertension is controversial. Data on 65 patients subjected to this
procedure was collected over a 12-year period. A standard DSRS was
carried out in 54 cases, while hemodynamically equivalent shunts were
performed on 11 occasions. Eighty four per cent of patients were Child A;
16% B or C Alcoholic cirrhosis was the cause of portal hypertension in
15% 5 patients DSRS was done on emergency: Operative mortality was
4.6% Rebleeding after surgery occurred in 6.7%. Fifty six patients
operated on before 1987 were elegible for 5-year follow up analysis with a
mean follow up time of 82 months. Overall 1-to 5- years survival rates
were 93%, 89%, 84%, 73%, and 70% respectively. Some degree of post
shunt encephalophaty was detectable in 19% of patients. Portal and
splenic vein hemodynamics were studied by Duplex sonography in 23
patients at an average of 88 months post shunt. A reduction of the
diameter of the portal vein as compared to early postoperative values was
detected in all cases and was significantly narrower in those with alcoholic
cirrhosis. Portal vein thrombosis occurred in 7 The mean blood flow was
307 ml/min in the protal vein and 825 ml/min in the splnic vein. In
conclusion this study confirms that the long term results of DSRS are
strongly affected by the evolution of underlying disease and by the loss of
shunt selectivity over the time. Our approach to selection ofpatients for
DSRS is currently done taking into account the reported good results of
injection sclerotherapy, which remains our first choice, particularly in
emergency. Our indications to DSRS are failure of sclerotherapy, varices
of the gastric fundus and patients unsuitable to chronic sclerotherapy
management.
P229
ULTRASTRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS OF GASTRIC MUCOSA
INPORTAL HYPERTENSIVE RATS,AFTERUSE OF
PROPRANOLOL
SHEN YAO ZONG MU YI, HAN BIN
Research laboratory of hepato-biliary surgery
Xuzhou Medical College, Jiangsu, China
The ultrastructure of gastric mucosa was observed by transmission
electron microscope in rats with experimental portal hypertension (PHT)
and those treated by tetrandrine, salvia miltiorrhizae and propranolol. In
addition, a comparative study with normal and liver cirrhosis with PHT
control group had been made. In PHT rats, capillaries in gastric mucosa
were remarkably dilated, cytoplasm of endothlial cells were very thin,
endothelial cells damaged and blood plasma in caplillaries leaked out;
blood in capillaries was stagnated; the interspace between capillaries and
gland cells transformed, organelles, secretion decreased; cells joint was
destroyed to become an edema cavity. The secretory function ofpartietal
cells decreased, organelles dissolved to form an empty cavity. In all
treated rats with PHT, the above-mentioned pathologic alterations
disappeared, the ultrastructure of gastric mucosa appeared to be normal.
These results proved that the destruction of microcirculation in gastric
mucosa is the foundation of gastric mucosal lesions (GML) and the
tetrandrine, salvis miltiorrhizae and propranolol are effective in treatment
for GML.
P230
FACTORS AFFECTING INCIDENCE OF ENCEPHALOPATHY
POSTPORTACAVAL SHUNT
K. R. SIRINEK AND B.A. KEVINE,
The University ofTexas Health Science Centre, San Antonio, TX, U.S.A.
Proponents of selcetive and small diameter (Smm), interposition-graft
portosystemic shunts maintain that encephalopathy post-total
portosystemic shunt is secondary to loss of hepatic portal flow across a
low pressure gradient anastomosis. This study assessed incidence ofpost-
op encephalopathy in 72 patients undergoing a side-to-side portacaval
anastomosis (25ram) who had had portal hemodynamic stuidies pre-op,
intra-op, and post-op.\Sixteen patients (22%) developed clinically-evident
post-op encephalopathy: 9/16 were not encephalopathic pre-op, 6/16
occurred early (<30 days), 10/16 were late (sepsis 4, dietary indiscretion 3,
multipe and incapacitating 3), and 4/16 died post-op. There was no
differnce in measured portal hemodynamic parameters in these 16 patients
compared to 56 patients without encephalopathy. Encephalopathic
patients had worse hepatic function (Childs’ class C 70% vs 46%) and
higher incidence of emergency shunts (38% vs 9%). Encephalopathy
occurs post large diameter portacaval anastomosis as a result of failure to
acutely control bleeeding in patients with poor hepatic reserve and is not
secondary to the size of the anastomosis or the post-shunt anastomotic
pressure gradient. A large diameter (25ram) side-to-side portacaval shunt
with an 8% mortality, a 22% encephalopathy rate (new 12%,
incapacitating 4%), and no recurrent variceal bleeding remains the "gold
standard" for the treatment of variceal hemorrhage in patients with
alcoholic cirrhosis.
97
P231
THE FIBRINOLYTIC ACTIVITY OF ALCOHOL-INDUCED
ASCITES
DM SCOTT-COOMBES, SA WHAWELL JN THOMPSON
Department of Surgery, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, England
The relative contributions ofprimary fibrinolysis and disseminated
intravascular coagulation towards the aetiology of coagulopathy following
insertion of a peritoneo-venous shunt remains controversial. The aim of
this study was to measure the overall fibrinolytic activity and individual
fibrinolytic system mediators in alcohol-induced ascites.
Samples of ascites were aspirated from ten patients (9 male, female;
age range 37-62 years) who had chronic alcoholic liver disease.. The
concentration of tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) was a median
28ng/ml (range 13-99) and the concentration ofplasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), the potent inhibitor of t-PA, was 17ng/ml (<2-43). All
the samples posessed plasminogen activator activity (median 0.gIU/ml,
rnage 0.3-1.5) and this correlated with the excess of t-PA (in molar terms)
over PAI- (r=0.71, P<0.05).
These results demonstrate that alcoholic ascites posesses substantial
fibrinolytic activity and that its magnitude is largely determined by the
balance oft-PA and PAI-1. This fibrinolytic activity could be responsible
for a coagulopathy following peritoneovenous shunting mediated by
primary fibrinolysis. This activity may also contribute to the
intraperitoneal haemorrhagic complications that are encountered
following procedures such as percutaneous liver biopsy and laparotomy.
P232
THE LIVERMICROCIRCULATION INPORTAL
HYPERTENSION
J.D. WILLIAMS P. MACK
Department of Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Using the technique of in vivo microscopy for qualitative study, striking
changes were noted in the dynamic microcirculation in the livers of
cirrhotic rats. After carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic cirrhosis, the
appearance of the hepatic microvasculature was noted to have undergone
distinct morphological changes when compared to normal controls. The
hepatic and portal venules assumed a crooked and meandering
appearance, and the blood flow was decreased in many. There was less
branching of the vessels and fewer number of vessels per microscopic
field when compared with normal rat livers. Since portal hypertension is
present in both cirrhosis and biliary obstruction, rats with common bile
duct ligation were also studied with the intravital microscope. In both
conditions, the microvasculature assumed a similar bizarre tortuous
appearance. Cirrhosis and biliary obstruction of varying durations were
studied under in vivo microscopy and correlated with liver function tests
and histology. We conclude that the morphological derangement in the the
hepatic microcirculation in cirrhosis and biliary obstruction is similar in
appearance and may be related to portal hypertension.
P233
ENDOSCOPIC SCLEROSIS FORBLEEDING ESOPHAGEAL
VARICES
xu MAN-YUAN
Hospital of Xin Zhou Prefecture, ShanXi, China
Hemorrhage from esophageal varices is one ofthe major complications
in cirrhotic paients with portal hypertension, which associates with a high
mortality. For many years, the treatment has consisted of Ballon
tamponade and/or the use parenteral vasopressin infusion. But the results
of this therapy have been consistly unsatisfactory. In order to evaluate
sclerotherapy, since 1982, we have treated 102 cases of acute hemorrhage
from esophageal varices with endoscopic sclerotherapy. All the patients
underwent emergency fiberoptic endoscopic sclerotherapy with Olympus
Giftypek fiberogastroscopy. A self-made 5 gauge injector needle of 3ram
long was passed through the channel of the scopy, and about 2 mm of 5%
sodium morrhuate was injected into paravariceal submucous tissue.
Several varices were injected on different plane at each procedure. The
total dose was below 30ml. Sclerotherapy was repeated 7 days later. All
the patients have been followed for one year. By using self-made 5 gauge
injector needle of 3mm long, we have prevented esophageal wall from
necrosis and perforation due to injection of sodium morrhuate into
mascular layer. Also by injection of sodium morrhuate on different plane
of varices, we have prevented esophagus from stricture. The results of our
study are shown in table one. It demonstrates that sclerotherapy for
bleeding esophageal varices is effective and safe.
Table Morbidity and mortality after sclerotherapy
No.
Age, Yr.
M/F
Rebleed
Mortality
Child A Child B Child C Total
16
43
14/2
1(6.2%)
1(6.2%)
32
48.5
27/5
3(9.3%)
54
53.5
47/7
14(25.9%)
4(12.5%) 17(31.5%)
102
50.1
98/14
18(17.1%)
22(21.5%)
P234
ASSOCIATION OF PREOPERATIVE ACUTE RENALFAILURE
ANDFIBROSIS ON LIVERBIOPSIES IN BUDD-CHIARI
SYNDROME (BCS) A SEVERE PROGNOSIS FACTORIN
SHUNTED PATIENTS
G. ZEITOUN, L. ESTEVES-LIMA, M.J. BOUDET, J.M.HAY, G, PARMENTIE,
A, KATZ, J.COHEN-SOLAL, V. LABORIE
Hospital Louis Mourier, Paris, France
The standard surgical treatment of BCS is still a shunt procedure
between the portal and the caval system. Depending on whether or not the
inferior vena cava (IVC) is obstructed, the presence of a negative or
weakly positive porto-IVC gradient precludes a shunt bypass toward the
IVC system. In that feature, a shunt bypass toward the superior vena cava
(SVC) system is needed. In our experience, meso artrial shunt, that is an
intrapericardial shunt (IPS) can lead to severe pericardial complications.
This prompted us to design extrapericardial shunts (EPS) avoiding
opening the pericardium.
From 1.1973 to 6.1991, we performed 69 shunts on 60 patients. In 36
cases (33 pts) the portal flow was shunted toward the IVC. In 33 cases (27
pts), the portal flow was shunted toward the SVC using 17 IPS and 16
EPS. All pts had pre and intra-operative biopsies and in most ofthem a
liver biopsy (LB) was performed on the left, the fight and the caudate
lobes. LB were classified as follows: centrilobular necrosis (CLN) alone,
CLN and severe fibrosis (F), F alone. There were: 16 CLN, 26 CLN + F,
27 F. On laboratory studies, 12 pts had a preoperative acute renal failure
(POARF) defined by a blood creatinine level > 120 umol/l. Of these 12
pts, 9 had F.
Results The overalll mortality was 29%: 9 out of the 12 pts with
POARF died (75%); 8 ofthese 9 patients had F on LB (90%); patient
over9 with POARF and F survived (10%). The 2 pts with POARF and no
F survived. Statistical analysis showed the following results: POARF vs
no POARF (p<001); F and POARF vs F and no POARF (p<001).
Conclusion: 1) Shunt is indicated in patients with BCS when patient has
no POARF or POARF but no Fibrosis on liver biopsies. 2) Shunt is not
indicated in patients with POARF and Fibrosis on liver biopsies.
98
P235
AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF E. COLI INDUCED
IDIOPATHIC PORTAL HYPERTENSION (IPH) IN RABBITS
YUQUAN TAN AND MINJIE ZHANG
Surgery Department, No. College of Clinical Medicine, Norman Bethune University of
Medical Sciences. Changchun, P.R..China
Animal models of IPH were performed in 23 rabbits by injection of E.
Coli suspension through portal vein. The animals were divided into 4
groups: Group I, E. Coli suspension. Group II, mixture of E. Coli and
rabbit anti-serum.. Control I, saline. Control II, rabbit anti-serum were
injected every 3 wks, 3 times. The animals were killed month after the
last injection. In comparison to the control group, animals ofgroup and
group II gave a picture of portal hypertension both clinically and
hemodynamically. We believe intraperitoneal infection is one of the
etiological factors of IPH, which induce inflammatory reaction, cellular
infiltration and fibrosis of the portal triad, which finally results in the
obliteration of intrahepatic terminal portal branches. So actually it’ a type
of presinusoid portal hypertension like that due to schistosomiasis.
P237
CYSTIC NEOPLASMS OF THEPANCREAS
G. BELLI, G.ROMANO, A.MONACO, A. D’AGOSTINO and M.L. SANTANGELO
Istituto Chirurgia Generale Trapianti II Faculty
University of Naples, Naples, Italy
Cystoadenomas and cystoadenocarcinomas are rare but not exceptional
tumours of the pancreas. The serous cystoadenoma is benign, the
mucinous cystoadenoma has to be considered as potentially malignant.
The cystoadenocarcinoma is malignant by definition. At our Institution
between 1984 and 1990, 20 patients with cystic pancreatic lesions were
treated. Of these 15 were pseudocysts and 5 tumours. The location of
cystic neoplasms was tail 3, head 2. Three distal pancreasectomy and
two cephaloduodenopancreasectomy were performed including one
patient with previous internal drainage for a misdiagnosed pseudocyst.
One pancreatic fistula and one epigastfic collection were observed, both
treated conservatively. Histologically there were two serous
cystoadenomas, two cystoadenocarcinomas and one mucinous cystic
neoplasm. The resection of benign lesions is justified for malignant
degeneration cannot be ruled out by CYST biopsy. Therefore, we
strongly advise any cystic neoplasm be totally excised even as prognosis
of cystoadenocarcinoma is much better than adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas.
P236
ENDOCRINE TUMORS OF THE PANCREAS AND
PERIAMPULLARYAREA
R. BELLANTONE G.B. DOGLIETTO, D. FRONTERA, A. FERRANTE, G. VIOLA,
F. CRUCITTI
Department of Surgery, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy
We observed 7 cases of neuroendocfine tumors out of 220 pancreatic and
periampullary neoplasms admitted from 1981 to 1991. There were 4
pancreatic insulinomas (head:1, body-tail:3), 2 carcinoids (ampulla: 1,
pancreatic tail: 1) and duodenal somatostatinoma. The patients’ average
age was 53 yrs. (range 30 64). Only insulinomas were clinically
functioning and these patients underwent specific endocrine evaluation
(positive results in 3 cases). Site diagnosis of Insulinomas was obtained with
ETG in case, with CT scan in another; angiography was useful in 2
patients. Three pts. had a preoperative biopsy (echo-assisted FNB or
endoscopic biospsy) but only in case the histology showed
neuroendocfine neoplasia.
Surgical treatment was performed in all patients as follows: 4 distal
pancreatectomies (3 insulinoma, carcinoid) with concomitant left
nephrectomy and colic resection in one case because of local diffusion;
enucleation (insulinoma), Whipple procedure (carcinoid), explorative
laparotomy (duodenal somatostatinoma with unexpected liver metastases),
Operative mortality was 0%. We observed a pancreatic fistula which healed
spontaneously following distal pancreatectomy.
The 4 patients operated for insulinoma are alive and disease free more
than 24 months postoperatively. The patient submitted to distal
pancreatectomy for carcinoid is alive 42 months after surgery; she had CT
scan evidence ofhepatic metastases but refused further surgery. The patient
with ampullary carcinoid (Whipple) developed hepatic and diffuse
lymphnidal metastases 4 months postoperatively. The patient explored for
duodenal somatostatinoma had 7 cycles of chemotherapy (5-FU) with
partial response; she is alive and in good conditions 9 months after the
laparotomy.
We think surgery is the only effective therapy for neuroendocrine tumors,
especially in benign and functioning types. Resection seems justified also in
malignant tumors, although with a cytoreductive aim only, in order to
improve the effects of adjuvant therapies and relieve symptoms associated
with functioning tumors.
P238
PANCREATIC CYSTIC NEOPLASMS
G.R. FRONDA, S. ENRICO, M.P. CAPOZZI, M. TOPPINO, R. LENZO, U.
CATTANEO
Department of Surgery. University of Torino (Italy)
(Head: Prof F. Morino)
Malignant and benign pancreatic cystic neoplasma represent gererally
10% of cystic lesions of this gland. Macroscopically, these tumors
manifest themselves as well capsulated circumscribed lesions. As far as
the anatomo-pathological aspect is concerned we can distinguish them as
cystoadenomas of the serous type or mucinous type (based on the
glandular activity) and cistoadenocarcinomas in which the neoplastic
proliferation could transpass the cupsula. The symptomatology, quite
aspecific, is represented essentially by abdominal pain, anorexy and loss
of weight, symptons related to the compression of the duodenum (of
biliary tract more frequent and precocious in malignat forms). In more
advanced cases there could be present pancreatic insufficiency (endocrine
and esocrine). The diagnosis is based on US and CT; angiography
permits to evaluate the invasivity ofthe neoplasm. The three patients that.
came to our observation presented an advanced clinical situation with
pancreatic insufficiency (eso and endocrine) loss of weight, jaundice and
pain. US and CT both significative have’evidenced two malignant cases.
In the case of cephalic localization we carried out a
duodenopancreatectomy the patient after 13 months did not show signs
ofrecurrence. In the second case the gland appeared globally affected,
with vascular involvement: a total pancreatecomy with splenectomy was
performed; the patient did not show recurrences after three years. The last
patient underwent chemotherapy for inoperability and died after 15
months. The therapy of choice must aim at the total exeresis ofthe tumor
with glandular resections, more or less extended depending on the site
Because this type of neoplasia is slow-growing and it usually remains
localized for a long time, the total pancreatectomy is reserved to those
cases in which most of the gland is affected by the neoplasia.
99
P239
MUCIN-PRODUCING OUR OF THE PANCREAS:
REPORT OF TWO CASES
KOJIMA,Y 1), KINAMI y1, 2., AKIYAMA, T1)., SAITO, H1)., KOSAKA, T.,
KITA, II., TAKASHIMA, $1)., KONISHI,F3)., MATSUNO,H4
The Second Department of Surgery1), The first3 and the Second4)
Department of Pathology, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute.Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan
Mucin-producing carcinoma of the pancreas is characterized by marked
dilatation of the main pancreatic duct due to the overfilling of mucin
secreted from carcinoma cells. It was first reported in Japan as a new
variant of the pancreatic cancer, and now all tumors of the pancreas
characterized by the above-mentioned findings are called mucin-
producing turnouts, because benign lesions can also show a similar
appearance on imaging examinations.
This paper reports two cases of mucin-producing tumour ofthe
pancreas. Both patients had a markedly dilated main pancreatic duct
detected by ultrasound (US) and computed tomography (CT). In addition,
an enlarged papilla of Vater with a widely open orifice was shown by
endoscopy. Pancreatectomy was performed in both cases and resected
specimens were opened along the line of the main duct for examination.
The tumours featured the intraductal proliferation of tall, mucin-
producing, columunar epithelium. The histological diagnosis of the first
case was intraductal papillary adenoma, while the second was a
multicenteric papillary adenocarcinoma with microfocal periductal
invasion. Both patients are currently in good health 7 and 5 months after
the operation.
The diagnosis of this tumour can be made definitely by endoscopic
retrograde pancreatography. Thus, when marked dilatation of the main
pancreatic duct is encountered on US and/or CT, this examination is
mandatory to confirm or exclude a mucin-producing pancreatic tumour.
P240
CYSTIC NEOPLASM OF THE PANCREAS: CYSTADENOMA
AND CYSTADENOCARCINOMA
M. MORENO: J.M. JOVER; M. LIMONES; L.M. DIAZ; J. ALVAREZ y C. MAILLO
Hospital Universitario de Getafe. Getafe. Madrid.
Cystic pancreatic neoplasms are not frequent and represent 10-15% of
pancreatic cysts and 1% ofthe exocrine tumours. In this poster five cases
treated in our Department are presented.
The cases correspond to four females and one male with an average age
of47.2 years. Symptomatology was inexpressive except in the malignant
one in which an abdominal mass was palpated in the left hypocondrium.
All cases were diagnosed preoperatively with ultrasonography, CT scan
(3), angyogram (2) and aspirative cytology (1))
Malignant cyst (mucous cystadenocarcinoma) was located in the body
and tail and was non resectable because of liver secondaries and
retroperitoneal infiltration. Benign cysts (serous cystadenoma) was located
in the head (2) (Whipple procedure one with piloryc preservation), body
(1) (resection of body’and tail with preservation of the spleen with its
vessels) and tail (1) (distal esplenopancreatectomy) respectively. The
average size was 5 cms.
The postoperative course was uneventful. They were treated with
continuous perfusion of somatostatine (as is our protocole for pancreatic
surgery).
The hospital stay was 9.2 days and in the follow-up (average 10.3 m.)
all cases with benign cyst are asymptomatic.
Surgery is curative in benign cysts, and although malignant one have
better prognosis than adenocarcinoma, they must be diagnosed at an early
stage for resection.
P241
THE RESULTS OF SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR
PANCREATIC CYSTIC DISEASES
T. SUZUKI M. YOSHIDA, K.SHIMADA, K.FURUTA, Y..ITOH, H.IZUMIKA,
H.YOKOTA, G.KANEDA, S.FUNAMOTO, N.KOBAYASI, K.ASO, H.MIENO,
K.SATO, H.OHMIYA, Y.HIKI, A.KAKITA
Department of Surgery, Kitasato University, School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan
This study is to evaluate the propriety of our surgical treatment for
pancreatic cystic disease.
We have experienced 72 patients with pancreatic cystic disease
including 49 with pseudocyst, six with cystadenoma, seven with
cystadenocarcinoma, 10 with retension cyst. Twenty five cases underwent
surgical treatment. (51.0%). The indications of surgery were abdominal
pain, dysphagia due to compression of gastrointestinal tract, suspicion of
malignancy, intracystic bleeding, pleural effusion, etc.
The surgical procedures for pseudocyst were mainly resection and
cystjejunostomy. Twenty two patients were doing well after surgery. Six
cases with cystadenoma, all were resected and still alive. Of seven cases
with cystadenocarcinoma, two were resected, and one of them is still alive
five years after surgery. Of 10 cases with retention cyst, one was resected
and nine were followed without surgery.
In conclusion, complete removal or cystjejunostomy are the faorable
proceduers for pancreatic pseudocyst. Cystadenocarcinoma should be
resected and early detection is important to improve the result.
P242
THE "DUCT-ECTATIC" VARIANT OF MUCINOUS CYSTIC
NEOPLASM OF THE PANCREAS CLINICAL AND
RADIOLOGIC STUDIES OF SEVEN CASES
TAKEDA T, NAGAKAWA T, NAKANO T, MORI K, KAYAHARA M, OHTA T,
UENO K, MIYAZAKI
Department of Surgery (II), School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920,
Japan.
Seven cases of the "duct-ectatic" variant of mucinous cystic neoplasm
of the pancreas are presented. In the present study, the "duct-ectatic"
variant of mucinous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas was defined as the
pancreatic cyst having the following characteristic radiologic and
pathologic findings:(1), Pancreatic cysts are present which are at most 3-4
cm in size, and are in a diffusely duct-ectatic configuration, and are
visualized as multilocular cysts communicating with the main pancreatic
duct on ERP;(2)< Histologically, the cysts are multilocular and the
epithelia of the cysts are composed of tall, mucin-producing columnar
cells with atypia which are arranged in a single row or stratified pattern,
and are indistinguishable from those of the classic "megacystic" type of
mucinous cystic neoplasm. This new entity likely masquerades as
pancreatic pseudocyst clinically and radiologically. However, it has the
characteristic pathologic findings ofthe classic "megacystic" type of
mucinous cystic neoplasm. If there are cysts visualized on
pancreaticogram which are in a diffusely duce-ectatic configuration and
are in communication with the main pancreatic duct, the "duct-ectatic"
variant of mucinous cystic neoplasm should be strongly suspected rather
than the pancreatic pseudocyst.
100
P243
CYSTIC NEOPLASMS OF THE PANCREAS
T. YANO, T.Iida, K. TANIGAWA, H.KIDA, T.SUZUKI, K.FUJIMORI
Department of Surgery, Saiseikai Matsusaka Hospital Matsusaka City, Mie 515, Japan
Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are rare, accounting for 10% of
pancreatic cysts. During the past 11 years, we treated 4 patients with
cystic neoplasms ofthe pancreas.
Clinical Features of Patients with Pancreatic Cystic Tumour
Patient# Age & Sex Symptoms Imaging Dx Preop. Dx.
65 Male
39 Female
72 Male
57 Male
epig. pain
abd. mass
symptom (-)
nausea
US, CT, ERP
US, CT, ERP
US, CT, ERP
CT
cystadenoma
cystadenocarci
mucinous ductal
ectasia
pancreas cancer
Patient# Operation Tumor Size Histological Prognosis Diagnosis
PD
distal Px
PD
PD
x1.2cm
7x6cm
2x3cm
9x6cm
serouscystadenoma
mucinous cystadenoma
atypical ductal
hyperplasia
pleomorphic carcinoma
alive (4Y)
alive (3Y)
alive (1Y)
died (3M)
Cytic neoplasms of the pancreas encompass a variety of tumours. While
the pathological features of cystadenoma have been well described,
mucinous ductal ectasia is a newly recognized premalignant lesion.
Pleomorphic carcinoma is a very rare tumour, presenting cystic
appearance.All of these tumours have shared clinical features that make
preoperative discrimination difficult, and we believe cystic tumors of the
pancreas should be removed.
P244
GEPNEUROENDOCRINE NEOPLASMS WITHBIOLOGICAL
INACTIVITY:A NEW CLASSIFICATION
v. PERCOPO L. COBELLIS, M.N.D. MAGLIO, F.P.
D’ARMIENTO, B. TESAURO
1st Surgery Dept., 2nd Medical School, University of Naples, Italy
Neuroendocrine tumours can be classified, on the basis ofpresence or
absence of typical endocrine syndrome, in Neuroendocrine Neoplasms
with Biological Activity (NNBA) and Neuroendocrine Neoplasms with
Biological Inactivity (NNBI). It is very difficult to classify the NNBI: we
introduce a new subclassification. We have observed 70 patients with
GEP neuroendocrine neoplasms: 55 (78.2%) with biological activity
(NNBA), 15(21.8%) biologically inactive (NNBI). Only (6.6%), a
gastrinoma, was a secreting NNBI: it is likely that this tumour produces an
inactive hormone or has a receptorial lack or block. Fourteen non-
secreting NNBI have been observed: among these we can distinguish
forms with positive immunoistochemistry for specific hormone (11
carcinoid observed), and forms with negative specific
immunoistochemistry, but with positivity to NSE and/or chromogranine.
We have observed 3 of these forms (2 pancreatic, gastric): they represent
the 4.2% of GEP neuroendocdne tumors of our experience. This gastric
tumour was been classified as anaplastic carcinoma, but because of a
surprising survival it has been defined neuroendocdne carcinoma. These
forms, positive to NSE and chromogranine, have a better prognosis than
carcinomas, but the prognosis is generally poor if compared to the
neuroendocrine differentiated tumours.
We know that frequently the anaplastic carcinomas can be confused
with non-secreting NNBI. Therefore this subclassification is very useful
to define the prognosis, because of the NNBI has a low proliferative
index. In conclusion, our observations suggest that a routine dosage of
NSE and chromogranine in neoplastic tissue might be useful for the
prognostic evaluation and therapeutic strategy.
P245
PANCREATIC EXOCRINE AND ENDOCRINE FUNCTION
AFIR OPERATIONS FOR CHRONIC PANCREATITIS.
RP JALLEH & RCN WILLIAMSON
Department of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom
Operations for chronic pancreatitis can radically affect pancreatic
function. Exocrine and endocrine functions were assessed in the early
postoperative period (< 2 too) and at long-term follow-up (mean 25 too,
range 3-120) in 103 patients (69 males, 34 females; age=42_+l years)
undergoing operation for this condition. Alcohol was the main
aetiological agent (69%). Drainage procedures (n=23) did not alter
pancreatic function, even on long-term follow-up. In the early
postoperative period, distal pancreatectomy (n=42)compromised
endocrine but not exocrine function. Although only 7 patients (17%,
p<0.01) became diabetic, mean GTT values in 28 cases showed
substantial elevation of blood glucose (p<0.05). On follow-up, another 10
patients developed endocrine failure (p<0.01) and 11 exocrine failure
(p<0.01).
Proximal pancreatectomy (n=38) precipitated clinical exocrine
insufficiency in 14 patients (37%, p<0.01), but pancreoluaryl tests (n=l8)
did not confirm any measurable change. Endocrine function was initially
spared, but 6 additional patients (16%, p<0.05) required treatment for
diabetes at a mean of 19 months (range 3-34) after operation. Residual
pancreatic function was often preserved therefore after these major
procedures, although distal resection greatly impaired glucose tolerance
and proximal resection unmasked a low enzyme output. Progression of
disease probably accounts for subsequent deterioration. Drainage
operations appear to delay this decline in function.
P246
SECONDARY EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY
FOLLOWING DIFFERENT TYPES OF GASTRECTOMY
H.KOHLER R.NUSTEDE, M.BARTHEL, F.E.LDTKE, A.SCHAFMAYER
Dept. of General Surgery University of Goettingen, Goettingen, FRG
In a follow-up study 19 patients after Billroth-I, 22 patients after
Billroth-II resection and 38 patients after total gastrectomy (15 with
Longmire-Gutegmann and 23 with Roux-en-Y reconstruction) underwent
a stool fat determination, an indirect pancreatic function test with
fluorescein dilaurate in serum and urine, and determination of CCK and
neurotensin plasma levels. Results In 9 of 19 cases after Billroth-I
resection and in 12 of 14 patients after Billroth-II resection there were
pathological PLT test results. In 9 of 15 patients after total gastrectomy
and reconstruction ofthe duodenal passage and in 20 of 23 patients with
exclusion of the duodendum PLT results were pathologic. CCK and
neurotensin levels were elevated in all groups ofpatients. Highest level of
the peptides were measured in gastrectomized patients with reconstruction
of the duodenal passage.
101
P247
SEVERE DIABETUS MELLITUS ANGIOGRAPHIC
ASSESSMENT OF THE EFFECTS OF SURGERY
V.V.PORTNENKO A.A.KLEMBOVSKY, N.F.KUZOVLEV, T.G.DUZHEVA
The Sechenov Medical Academy, Moscow, Russia
Angiographic and clinical assessment of the effeciency ofpancreatic
deportalization was performed in 35 patients with severe diabetes mellitus.
Six months after the intervention, the obtained data were compared with
the changes in blood glucose, acetonemia predisposition, the degree of
polyneuritis. The study demonstrated that clinical improvement occurs
with satisfactory blood flow in the shunt > 60 ml/min and the absence of
collateral blood flow to the portal system in the left gastric vein. The
collateral flow in the major curvature veins has no crucial importance in
patients with satisfactory shunt dynamics. In patients with unsatisfactory
results, an additional binding of the left ventricular vein, performed after
six months, leads to the stablization of the condition. Thus performing
surgical pancreatic deportalization in patients with diabetes mellitus, it is
necessary to attain the satisfactory blood flow in the splenic vein, and, if
possible, to block the development blood flow in the portal system
through the binding of the left ventricular vein.
P248
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF EXOGENOUS INSULIN
CAUSING GUINEA PIG GALLSTONE FORMATION AND
EFFECTING ON ITS BILEACID METABOLISM
J.S. SHI, Q.J. MA, S.G. LIU.
Hepato-Biliary Research Lab, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Medical University, Xi’an
P.R. China
Thirty guinea pigs were divided into two groups group A and group B.
In group a, 15 guinea pigs were injected general insulin 4g twice a day
subcutaneously, and in group B, 15 guinea pigs were injected normal
saline 0. ml twice a day. The injection continued 6 weeks, Blood samples
were collected by heart puncture before start of the experiment, 3h after
the injection and closely prior to the animals being killed respectively.
RESULTS 1. There were 12 versus 15 animals which lived to the end of
the experiment in group A and in group B respectively. There were 7
versus animals that have had gallstone formation in group A and in
group B respectively (the morbidity were 58% versus 6.7%). There are a
significant difference in morbidity of gallstone formation between group
A and group B (P<0.05). 2. The volume of the tourchenodeoxycholic acid
(TCDCA) are 0.597+0.39mg/ml in group A and 0.757+0.43mg.ml in
group B. The volume of the glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDCA) are
2.4702+l.59mg/ml in group A and 3.296+2.47mg/ml in group B
(P<0.01). 3. The volume of serum insulin is 120.07+40.38(micro-until/ml)
and 213.50-2_35.90 before and after the injections respectively in group A
(P<0.01). The results suggested that the exogenous insulin could reduce
the volume ofthe bile acids in guinea pig bile and promote gallstone
formation successively.
P249
LITHOGENOUS BILE IN SUBJECTS WITHOUT
CHOLECYSTIC CALCULOSIS.
M. VELEGRAKIS. G. PERPIRAKIS, N.NIKOLAKAKIS, G. DOLAPSAKIS,
A. APALAKIS.
Surgical department of Venizelio Gen. Hospital, Heraklion Creta
The aim of this study is to determine the lithogenous composition of
bile in subjects without cholecystic calculosis and the search ofbile with
potential lithogenous composition. We studied bile samples of 14 patients
without gall bladder calculi and with normal extrahepatic biliary tract.
Bile speciments was taken by puncture from gall bladder during
laparotomy for extra hepatobiliary disease. In those speciments
cholesterol, phospholipids and bile salts was determinated quantitatively.
The results was registred in triangular order. The mean value of
percentage ratio of those components was 7.1%, 12.01% and 80.86%
respectively. Values of cholic lipids in 9 bile samples was in the limits of
highest cholesterol solubility. In the other 5 speciments the values of
cholic lipids were found out of limits of cholesterol saturation, which
indicates that those speciments have potential lithogenous composition. In
conclusion we found that it is possible to have lithogenous bile in non
chololithiasic subjects. There is a high possibility in these cases to form
bile calculi in the future.
P250
FREE RADICAL APPEARS IN GALLSTONES IN VIVO*
T.SHEN, C.LIN, X.B.FU, X.S.ZHOU
Department of Surgery, Third Teaching Hospital, Beijing Medical University, Beijing
100083, China
Using electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, Free radical (FR)
signal was detected from either bilirubin or pigment gallstones (PS) dried
in air. This study was designed for clarifying whether FR signal appears
in gallstones in vivo. Gallbladders of 18 patients with stones in it were
resected intactly. Under anoxic condition, fresh gallstone aliquot (anoxic
sample) from each case were subjected to FR signal inspection at once.
Another fresh aliquot exposed to the air served as control. Calcium
bilirubinate (CaUCB) contents in stones were assaied with Fourier
transform infra-red spectroscopy. FR signal with g=2.0038 was detected
from the anoxic samples containing CaUCB, and a linear correlation
between the intensity of FR signals and CaUCB contents revealed
(r=+0.95; p<0.0005). The FR signal intensity in controls were many times
stronger than that in the corresponding anoxic samples. During
desiccation in air, FR intensity of anoxic samples increased faster than that
of control did, eventually reached the intensity of controls and became
stable.
DISCUSSION: FR signal initially appeared on CaUCB in PS in vivo
and strengthed by the action of air oxygen on bilirubin. Most CaUCB in
PS is present as its polymer, polymerization is often initiated by FR, and
FR signal appeared in PS in vivo. This series of facts implied that FR
might play an important role in pigment gallstone formation. We have
confirmed this in animal modle and reported eleswhere. [* Supported by
National Natural Science foundation of China]
102
P251
CLASSIFICATION AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
MACRO-GALLSTONES
ZHANG REN LI JIN-CHI
Dept. of Surgery, The 2rid Central Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China
We collected and observed some macro-gallstones from 25 patients
from Jan. 1980 to Jan. 1991.
According to their cross-section structure and outward, the 25
specimens can be categorized into 5 patterns.
1. Stratified-Nucleus Stone: It’ color is deep brown. It’ section can
be clearly divided into two parts-stratifications and nucleus.
(1) One kind of the nuclei is like piled sand.
(2) The other kind is collected crystalline grain.
Typical specimen: 9.Sx6x5 cm weight 102 g. (Fig. 1)
2. Silt-like stone: It’ color is dark or deep grey and silt-like.
Typical specimen: 10x9x7 cm weight 130 g. (Fig. 2)
3. Concretion stone: It’ color is light yellow. A certain number of
stones formed a kind of macro-stone tightly bounded up by adhesive
aggregation.
Typical specimen: 7x5x5 cm3, weight 60 g. (Fig. 3)
4. Shrapnel-like stone: It’ color is brown or yellow-green.
It’s shape is just the same as usual gallstone, but it’ substance consists
of several small stones.
Typical specimen. (Fig. 4)
Partly Shrapnel-like stone (Fig. 5)
5. Integument stone: A certain number of stones are encapsulated by
fibrous integument. (Fig. 6)
In our opinion, besides the well-know macro-gallstones, the concretion
stone and the integument stone can be included in this kind.
P252
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE REGIONAL
ENVIRONMENT AND THE GENESIS OF GALLSTONF_
LIANG FANG XIA*, LIN-DE ZHOU, MING-JU XIANG
*Dept. of Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical College, Guizhou Province
Institute of Geochemistry, Academia Sinica P.R. China
The relationship of regional environment and pathogenesis of
gallstones in Guiyang City and Congjian Country had been studied. The
geologic, geographic and climatic situations of these 2 places are different.
Guiyang seats in alpine basin of middle Guizhou covered by limestone
with a temperate climate, Congjian in south-east of Yunnan-Guizhou
Plateau covered by slate with a subtropical mild-humid climate. The
differences are also shown in gallstone types. There are 77.56%
cholesterol stone in Guiyang while 68.89% pigmental stone in Congjian.
The content K Na Mg Mn C1Fe Cu Cr Co A1 and P of stone in Guiyang
and higher than those in Congjian. The drinking water of Guiyang is
alkali hard water, pH 7.9, rich in Ca Mg ions and dissolved oxygen while
Congjian is acidic soft water, pH 6.03, rich in Na K C1 ions. The content
of Pb Ni and Cr in soil of the former are 21, 18 and 84 times greater than
those in the latter respectively. On conclusion, it seems that cholesterol
stones are mostly formed in alkali hard water area and pigmental stones in
acidic soft water area.
P253
NUTRITIONAL AND IMMUNOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF
PATIENT WITH OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE; EFFECT OF
BILIARY DECOMPRFSION AND ABDOMINAL SURGERY
YUICHI ISHIDA, CHIKASHI WADA, KAZUHIKO MEIGATA, KENSHI
WATANABE, YOSHIFUMI BECK, KUNJI MITA, FUYO YOSHIMI, SUMIO INOUE,
SHINJI TOMIKAWA, HISAYUKI SUGIMOTO, TAKESHI NAGAO, AND
HISANORI UCHIDA.
From the Institute of Medical Science, The University ofTokyo, Tokyo, Japan
A clinical study was undertaken to evaluate nutritional and
immunological status ofpatient with obstructive jaundice who had had
serum bilirubin level of 5 mg/dl or above (N=5). Non-icteric control was
patient with cholecystolithiasis or gallbladder polyp who had undergone
abdominal surgery (N=14).
Nutritional status was assessed by prognostic nutritional index (PNI),
biochemical liver function, rapid turnover protein. Cellular and humoral
immunity were assessed by natural killer assay, lymphocyte stimulating
test, antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and serum
immunoglobulines. Obstructivejaundice, benign or malignant, was
associated with deterioration ofboth nutritional and immunological status,
which were further depressed immediately after laparotomy. In
postoperative convalescence, these indices started improving but not in a
parallel fashion; recovery of nutritional indices was delayed relatively to
the immunological ones. Considering known effects of nutrition on
immunity, intensive nutritional support is thought to be mandatory for
better perioperative management of patients with obstructivejaundice.
P254
NEUTROPHIL RESPIRATORY BURST AND PRIMING BY IL-1
AND IL-6 IN OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICED PATIENTS
WG JIANG MCA PUNTIS and MB HALLETT
University Department of Surgery, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, UK
Excessive production of neutrophil oxidative products are harmful, in
sepsis and ARDS. We studied neutrophil respiratory burst and priming by
Intefleukin & 6(IL-1,6) in obstructivejaundice patients.
10 patients with obstructivejaundice were studied with a matched
control group. Respiratory burst was detected by a luminol-dependent
chemiluminiscence (CL). Cells cultured with or without IL-1, IL-6 for 10
minutes and then stimulated with fmlp in the presence cytochalasin B. CL
shown as mean-+SEM CPS (count per second).
With medium With IL-1 With IL-6
Control 572.9_+94.2 772.3_+59.0* 685.8_+51.6"
Jaundice 1147.1_+213# 1319.2_+207.6# 1253.8_+199.6#
*p<0.05 vs with medium, #vs control by Student T test.
Neutrophils fromjaundiced patients show a greatly increased
respiratory burst. Cells from controls can be primed by IL-1 and IL-6, but
jaundiced patients cells failed to be further primed by these cytokines.
We conclude that neutrophils from obstructivejaundice are pre-primed
in vivo and fail to be further primed by IL-1 and IL-6 in vitro. The
increased production of oxidative products by these cells may therefore
related to patients in vivo IL-1 and IL-6 level and may be related to
patients clinical prognosis.
103
P255
ROLE OF LEFT HEPATICOJEJUNOSTOMYIN MALIGNANT
HILARBILIARY OBSTRUCTION
T.K.MALIK, S.MADAN, R.MALIK
Dept. of Surgery, M.A.M. College, New Delhi
Analysis of the palliative biliary-eneteric by pass in 34 patients with
unresectable malignant obstruction at the confluence of hepatic ducts was
carried out. There were 16 men and 18 women, aged 31-73 years. The
site of obstruction was shown on percutaneous transhepatic
cholangiography. Left hepatic duct was used for anastomosis by lowering
the left hepatic ductal system from the under surface of the quadrate lobe
in l0 patients and the round ligament approach being used in 21 patients.
In three patients, hepaticojejunostomy by the technique of longmire and
sand ford was preferred. Overall hospital mortality was 21% and the
mean survival was 10 months. Although tumor removal with adequate
biliary-enteric repair is preferred treatment, but in patients with advanced
disease, palliative biliary-enteric bypass is a suitable procedure because it
avoids the problems of indwelling tubes which may become blocked and
require replacement.
P256
HEPATIC DYSFUNCTION INBILE SECRETION FOLLOWING
THE RELIEF OF OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE
JUN MATSUMOTO TOMOHITO MINAMI
Department of Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Fuchu Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
Hepatic functional recovery, as indicated by bile secretion, after
percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) was investigated in 20
patients with obstructive jaundice with PTBD and 10 patients with bile
duct stones with T-tube drainage as the control group. No differences
between the PTBD and T-tube groups were found in bile flow and
bilirubin output in the bile. However, the bile acid output in the bile was
significantly less in the PTBD group than the the T-tube group. In the
PTBD group the serum totoal bilirubin level was less than 5 mg/dl, the
capacity ofbilirubin output and indocyanine green secretion in the bile
were not different from those of the T-tube group but the capacity of the
bile acid secretion in the bile and the ursodeoxycholic acid tolerance test
(UDCA-TT) were lower than in the T-tube group. The preoperative
values in the UDCA-TT reflected the postoperative increase in serum total
bilirubin in the PTBD group. The suppression ofbile acid secretion still
occurred in the patients with obstructivejaundice with serum total
bilirubin levels of even less than 5 mg/dl after PTBD. This hepatocellular
dysfunction could be a factor in hepatic failure following major surgery
including hepatectomy. The UDCA-TT could be a predictive test for the
capacity of bile acid secretion after PTBD.
P257
NEUTROPHIL OXIDATIVE RESPONSE AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP TO CLINICAL OUTCOME IN JAUNDICED
PATIENTS
MCA PUNTIS WG JIANG and MB HALLETT
Department of Surgery, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.
Neutrophil oxidative products are known to cause tissue damage and
they have been reported to be increased in trauma and sepsis. We have
studied the neutrophil respiratory burst in surgical obstructivejaundice.
20 jaundiced patients were studied with matched controls. Neutrophils
were purified and their respiratory burst studied by using luminol-
dependent chemiluminiscence. Cells were stimulated by f-met-leu-phe
(fmlp 1.0 gM) in the presence of cytochalasin B (5.0 tg/ml). The bursts
were recorded before and after stimulation and are shown as counts per
second (mean+SEM with 95% confidence intervals in brackets).
Before fmlp After fmlp
Control 130.0+20.2 9444.8_+1317.2
(87.2-172.8) (6651.9-12237.8)
Jaundice 187.4_+41.7 26698.9_+2997.8
100.1-274.7) (20422.9-32975.0)
p value 0.22 <0.0001
Jaundiced neutrophils showed a slightly increased base line response
and a massively increased oxidative response to fmlp. The three patients
with the shortest survival time (2 to 50 days) in the group we studied had
significantly higher levels of respiratory burst after fmlp stimulation
(43097_+6192, p<0.05)compared with the rest.
Conclusion: Neutrophils from obstructivejaundiced patients are
activated, having a massively increased oxidative response the magnitude
of which is related to the patients’ outcome.
P258
OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF PRIMARYDUODENAL
MALIGNANT TUMOR-31 CASES REPORT
MENG SHAOQING, ET AL
Dept. of H-B Surgery, First Affiliated, Hospital of Xi’ Medical University
This paper analyses and summarizes 31 cases of primary duodenal
malignant tumors during 1957-1986. The diagnosis being confirmed by
operative findings and pathologic characteristics (radical operation in 17
cases, local or palliative resection in 4 cases, internal drainage in 10 cases).
The longest postoperative survival reached 11 years. It is difficult to
differentiate the diagnosis of primary duodenal malignant tumor from the
cancer of periampulla and the head ofpancreas. The purpose of this paper
is to analyse and discuss the incidence, diagnostic methods and the effects
of the operation on primary duodenal malignant tumor. It was
emphasized that the early diagnosis was the key procedure to prolong the
postoperative five-year survival. It was also proposed that local resection
and palliative. Operation be taken for the old and weaken patients or the
patients with localized lesions to prolong the survival time.
Key words primary duodenal malignant tumor; operative treatment;
incidence
104
P259
IMPAIRED GALLBLADDER FUNCTION FOLLOWING
ABLATION OF TIlE SPHINCR OF ODDI.
RP JALLEH LA DESA, M RODDIE, RCN WILLIAMSON & JN THOMPSON
Departments of Surgery & Radiology, Royal postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
A poorly functioning gallbaladder is susceptible to stone formation,
infection and carcinoma. Gallbladder function may be impaired by the
various operative and endoscopic procedures that destroy or remove the
lower bile duct sphincter. Gallbladder function was studied, using HIDA
scanning and real-time ultrasonography, in 12 patients without a
functioning sphincter of Oddi (previous operation n=6, endoscopic
sphincterotomy n=6).
Gallbladder filling was not seen on HIDA scan 11 patients (92%).
Ultrasound examination was performed with fatty meal stimulation
(Lipomul 0.7 ml/kg body weight) and/or cholecystokinin stimulation (1
Ivy dog unit/kg body weight). Abnormal gallbladder emptying was
detected in eight of these patients (73%) no contraction n=3, paradoxical
relaxation n=2 and suboptimal (<50%) contraction n=3. Normal (<50%)
contraction was observed in three patients, two of whom had gallstones.
Our data demonstrate that both gallbladder filling and emptying are
markedly impaired in patients without a functioning sphincter of Oddi.
P260
SURGICAL TREAMTENTFOR PERIPAPILLARY SYNDROME
IN THE AGED
YAN SEN HUA YANG YI CUN,
Department of surgery, Chengdu Third People’s Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
Peripapillary syndrome (PPS) requires surgical treatment, and its
reasonable operative procedure is worth-while to study. Since 1982, 4
cases of PPS, aged 64- 73 have been performed electively with
gastrectomy, gastrojejunostomy, cholecystectomy and end-to-side
choledochoduodenostomy. They have been followed up from to 9 years
with good results. We suppose for a large diverticulum of the desending
part of duodenum and the terminal part of the bile duct with disturbed
function exelusions ofboth ofthem would be suitable. Besides, this
combined operations could have a wide bilary-intestinal drainage and
prevent the unavoidable biliary reflux and "sumpling" of the commonly
used side-to-side choledochoduodenostomy.
P261
A CLINICAL STUDY OF POLYPOID AND WALL
THICKENINGLESIONS OF THE GALLBLADDER
T. AOKI, K. KIMURA, Y. KOYANAGI, A. TSUCHIDA, H. OZAWA, T. OZAWA, D.
YASUDA, K. KASUYA,
Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical College, Tokyo, Japan.
We analysed 81 cases of polypoid and wall thickening lesions of the
gallbladder which were resected surgically at the view point of
ultrasonography and clinicopathology.
The cases consisted of 29 cholesterol polyps, 3 hypertrophic polyps, 3
adenomas, 19 adenomyomatosis and others. They were 74 benign and 7
malignant lesions. In 49 polypoid lesions, 22 cases which measured under
5 mm indiameter were all benign, though 2 cases which measured above 5
mm in diameter were maligant. With respect to the shape ofpolypoid
lesions cholesterol polyp predominated in type and 2, adenoma and
cancer in 2 (multiphyllous papillary) and 3, adenomyomatosis in 2 (simple
papillary) and 4. 5 of 32 wall thickning lesions were malignant, though it
was very difficult to distinguish between chronic cholecyctitis and them.
We concluded that it was necessary to take surgical treatment in
polypoid lesions which measured above 5 mm in diameter except
cholesterol polyp and wall thickening lesions not to be distinguished from
chronic cholecystitis.
P262
PERCUTANEOUS TRANSHEPATIC BILIARYDRAINAGE
(FID): INDICATIONS AND LIMITS (14 YEARS EXPERIENCE)
F. COLTURANI. G. TAGLIABUE, E. FALESCHINI, G. NERVETTI ANDN. ROVATI
Istituto Scienze Biomediche L. Sacco -Catt. Patologia Chirurgica Universita di Milano
Italia.
We present our experience of PTBD in patients with prolonged
jaundice. In our Department, from 1976 to 1990, 527 patients underwent
PTC. They were referred with prolonged obstructivejaundice with
billirubinemia 10 mg/dl and dilated ducts. PTBD was performed in 468
pts. (88,9%). Malignant tumours were present in 349 pts. (62,2%):
pancreatic carcinoma: 202 pts. (57.8%)-gallbladder cancer: 21pts. (6%)-
ampullary cancer: 11 pts. (3,1%)-liver metastases: 48 pts. (13,7%)-
miscellaneous causes: 4 pts. (1,1%). Non malignant diseases were present
in 119 pts. (33,8%): -bile duct stones: 71 pts. (59,6%) -iatrogenic injury to
biliary ducts: 18 pts. (15,1%)-chronic pancreatitis: 18 pts. (15,1%)-
inflammatory stenosis of Vater’s papilla: 10pts. (8,4%) -acute cholangitis:
2pts. (1,6%). The PTBD was kept for an average period of 10 days (range
4-21). Major complications occurred in 23 pts. (4, 9%):-septic
complications: 7 pts. (1,4%)-bleeding: 12 pts. (2,5%)-displacement: 35
pts. (7,4%) -miscellaneous causes: 4 pts. (0.8%). 3 pts. underwent
emergency surgery (0.6%). Displacement of the drainage, promptly
restored, occurred in 35 pts. We believe that PTBD should be the
treatment of choice forjaundiced patients when immediate surgical
procedure is not available. Low incidency of complications confirms this
choice.
105
P263
MAY THE T-TUBE BE THE CAUSE OF ANATOMICAL
ALTERATIONS OF THE COMMON BILE DUCT, THROUGH
THE TIME ?
P. CARBOGNANI, L. SPAGGIARI, P.DELL’ABATE ,P. SOLIANI,
R. SABBAGH, A. MISELLI AND E.FOGGI.
Department of General, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
The aim of the work is to assess if the T-tube used to drain a
choledochotomy, performed for different pathologies, has caused
anatomical alterations of the common bile duct after a long period of time.
We have recalled, in September 1991, 40 patients, 15 males (37%) and 25
females (63%), (mean age 48 years, range 29-74 years), that, from January
1985 to October 1986, have undergone a choledochotomy, for
choledocholithiasis in 37 cases (92%) and cholangitis in 3 cases (8%),
leavng a T-tude in the common bile duct. In all the patients was
performed a supraduodenal choledochotomy closed with an interrupted
suture of absorbable monofilament. The main diameter of the common
bile duct on preoperative ultrasound was of 14mm. (range 8-20mm). The
drains were removed after 10 days from the operation, previous x-Ray and
manometric control. In one patient was performed an endoscopic
sphincterotomy for a residual stone, and the drain was removed after 20
days from surgery. In the last September (mean 70 months from surgery;
range 59-81 months) all the patients have undergone an ultrasound
examination, performed by the same radiologist with specific experience.
We have noticed that in 36 cases (90%) the common bile duct was
normal in diameter (>4mm. and <9mm.) with regular walls; in one case
(2%) the diameter was of 3mm. without signs of pericholedochal
inflammation; in the remaining 3 patients the common duct was slightly
dilated (1 lmm.), with a stone in only one patient. These data show that,
unlike different experiences, there aren’t, after years alterations of the
common bile duct caused by the the T-tube.
P264
INFECTIVE COMPLICATIONS OF BILIARY SURGERY.
N.DORAIRAJAN
Department of Surgery, Madras Medical College, Madras
Abstract In a series of 120 patients under going cholecystectomy with
or without Common bile duct (CBD) exploration, bacteriological study
was carried out on gall bladder (GB) tissue and bile, CBD bile and blood
and post-operatively on T-tube bile, T-tube limb and blood. GB tissue and
bile culture was positive in 27.3% and 40% respectively. The CBD was
explored in 18% and its bile was positive in 68.2% of cases. Pre-operative
blood cultures were positive in 10.3%. The commonest organism isolated
was E.Coli. Post-operative T-tube bile was positive in 60.1% on the 3rd
day, 45.6% on the 7th day and 40.5% on the 10th day with decrease in
E.Coli and corresponding increase in exogenous Staph aureus. T-tube on
removal showed 50.8% positive cultures with predominance of Staph.
aureus. Post-operative blood culture was positive in 3.3%. 1.5% cases had
wound infection. Septicaemia occured in 0.6% cases. The study suggests
that the T-tube is a constant source of infection and a cause for post-
operative morbidity.
P265
REPLACEMENT OF THE T TUBE AFTERBILIARY
SURGERY: OURPERSONAL METHOD.
G.R. FRONDA S. ENRICO, M.P. CAPOZZI, M. TOPPINO, U. CATTANEO
Department of Surgery,. University ofTorino (Italy)
(Head Prof. F. Morino)
The T tube (Kehr) is an excellent solution following choledocotomy
although subsequent removal of the tube presents a number complications.
In order to reduce the risks involved, an easily applied method has been
used, which has giver good results in our experience. This method has
been applied to eight patients in which a T tube had been inserted
following choledocotomy for removal a choledocal stones. After an
average period of 10 days, an x ray examination of the biliary tree was
made through the Kehr tube. Having excluded any type of alteration
affecting the biliary tree,, a metal guide was inserted through the Kehr
tube, the T tube was removed and external biliary drainage was inserted.
After this replacement, no biliary collection was noted in the following
days while a good flow ofbile from the drainage was observed. After an
average period of 24-48 hours, with an absolute assurance about the
absence of any biliary fistula, the drainage was removed. The advantages
of this method can be summarised as follows fairly early removal of the
T tube, the possibility of draining the biliary tree, thereby promoting easier
closing due to the more reduced collection bile permitted by this method,
easier closing of any laceration, or disruption of the choledocotomy
without requiting positioning of percutaneous or endoscopic biliary
drainage.
P266
STUDY OF LABELLING INDEX OF BROMODEOXYURIDINE
AND ORNTFHINE DECARBOXYLASE ACTIVITY IN HUMAN
GALLBLADDER MUCOSA.
TAKASHI FUJITA HIROSHI SHIMADA, GLZO NAKAGAWARA, The First
Department of Surgery, Fukui Medical School, 23 Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka-cho,
Yoshida-gun, Fukui, 910-11, Japan.
To investigate the pathogenesis of gallbladder cancer labeling index of
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU LI), which indicate DNA synthesis rate, and
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity, which indicate promotional
activity of oncogenicity were examined in 20 cases ofhuman gallbladder
mucosa with reference to its relation to pathological findings or biliary
biochemical elements. The high value of BrdU LI & ODC activity of
gallbladder mucosa were seen in order: in cancerous mucosa,
noncancerous mucosa with gallbladder cancer, mucosa with
cholecystolithiasis, mucosa with pancreaticobiliary malfunction, mucosa
with no choledocal disease. With relation to pathological findings high
frequency of metaplastic change showed high values of BrdU LI & ODC
activity in the cases with gallbladder cancer, pancreaticobiliary
maljunction and cholecystolithiasis (LI>5%).
The rate of lithocholic acid was most related to high values of BrdU LI
& ODC activity in the cases with cholecystolithiases.
In conculusion, high frequency of metaplastic change in gallbladder
mucosa and the rate of lithocholic acid in bile were thought to be
important as pathogenic factors of gallbladder cancer.
106
P267
CHARACTERISTICS OF AMINO ACID COMPONENT IN TWO
TYPES OF GALLSTONE
LIANG-FANG XIA, ET AL
Guiyang Medical College
Amino acid components and their contents in 8 gallstones collected
from Guizhou Province had been analyzed. The total content was
determined to be 1158.08-78141.7ug/g, and there were 17 kinds of amino
acids in these stones, such as GLY, ALA, YAL, ILE, LEU, SER, THR,
CYS, MET, ASP, GLU, ARG, LYS, PHE, TYR, HIS and PRO, of which
11 kinds of amino acids occured in all samples, while ARG, HIS and
MET were only found in different single samples. Obvious differences
between bilirubinate and cholesterol stones were observed as follows (1)
The total amino acid content ofthe former was higher than that of the
latter; (2) GLU and ASP were the principal components in the former, and
on the contrary, GLY was the major one in the latter; (3) CYS was absent
in all samples of the former but was found in all samples of the latter; (4)
Although the neutral amino acid was the principal component in both
types of gallstone, yet the ratio of acid to alkaline in the former was
greater and higher than that ofthe latter. As acid-salts are only stable
under alkaline conditions, bilirubinate gallstones might be formed under
alkaline environment, and cholesterol stones under weak-alkaline to acidic
environment.
P268
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE LITHOTRIPSY IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF RECURRENT COMMON BILE DUCT
STONE
CHI-REN HWANG. CHENG-CHUNG WU, MEI-DUE YANG, TAIN-CHENG WU,
TSE-JIA LIU, AND FANG-KU PENG
Division of General Surgery, Dept. of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
The use of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) in the
management of 16 patients with acute cholangitis and recurrent common
bile duct stones is described. Using a SIMENS Lithostar lithotfiper,
fragmentation of the stones was done without general anesthesia. In all
cases, naso-biliary catheters were established before the procedure to
allow access for radiographic localization during the procedure and ensure
free drainage of infected bile.
Fragmentation of the stone was successful in 13 patients by ESWL and
the extraction of the stone was done by endoscopic mechanical lithotfipsy.
Clearance of the bile duct stone was confirmed by cholangiography and
sonography. Morbidity was minimal and ESWL can be a valuable
adjunct in the management ofpatients with recurrent CBD stones.
P269
A STUDY OF THE MINERAL COMPONENT OF GALLSTONES
LIANG-FANG XIA et al
Guiyang Medical College
The results of mineralogical study on gallstones are presented in this
paper. Six kinds of minerals, native zinc, native aluminum, magnetite,
pyrite, gypsium and aragonite have been found in them. Except for the
last one, all the others are first discovered in gallstone. Although the
minerals are minor components in it, yet they may carry some valuable
information about the formation environment of gallstones.
P270
PROSPECTIVE RANDOMISED STUDY COMPARING
AUGMENTIN AND CEFAMANDOLE IN PREVENTING
WOUND INFECTION IN HIGH RISKPATIENTS HAVING
ELECTIVE SURGERY FOR GALLSTONF.
JEJ KRIGE, EJ IMMELMAN.
Department of Surgery, University of Cape Town and Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape
Town, South Africa.
In a prospective randomised single blind study, we compared the
efficacy of Augmentin and Cefamandole in preventing wound infection in
150 high risk patients undergoing elective surgery for gallstones. Each
patient had at least risk factor for biliary sepsis. Randomisation to
receive one of the two study drugs was by computer-derived random
numbers in sealed opaque envelopes with 75 patients in each group.
Augmentin (1.2gm) was given q8 hrs for 3 doses beginning 30 rains
before operation and 4 doses of Cefamandole (lgm) were given q6 hrs.
Mean age (A57.8 vs C 58.0 years) and ratio of men to women (A21:54 vs
C 22.53) were similar. Risk factors for post-operative infection in each
group included acute cholecystitis <1/12 (A 32 vs C 34) recent rigors (A
23 vs C 16) CBD stones (A 17 vs C II) diabetes (A 7 vs C 12) and were
similar. Mean pre-operative biochemical parameters in each group were:
alk phos: A 286 vs C 209 (normal <100), WBC A 8.7 vs C 8.6 and ESR
(mm/hr Westergren) A 51 vs C 42. The number ofpositive bile cultures
were A 48 vs C 34. In the Augmentin group, 51 patients underwent
cholecystectomy alone compared to 55 in the Cefamandole group, CBDE
(A 11 vs C 9) CDD (A 11 vs C 5) revision biliary drainage (A vs C 1)
hepaticojejunostomy (A vs C 5). Similar number ofpatients had an
uncomplicated post-operative course (A 70%) vs C 73%). The incidence
of post-operative fever were similar. Four patients in each group had
wound infection. The number of days in hospital: Augmentin 10.1_+4.7
and Cefamandole 9.7_+5.6 were similar.
We conclude that the efficacy of Augmentin and Cefamandole in
preventing wound sepsis in high risk biliary surgery is similar. Economic
factors may favour the use of Augmentin.
107
P271
HEPATIC ARTERY ISCHAEMIA IN RATS WITH
CHOLESTASIS. DIFFERENT RESPONSE OF THE LOBES.
L. LORENTE M.A. ALLER, S. ALONSO, J. ARIAS, H. DURAN, J.L. BALIBREA.
Department of Surgery I. Hopsital Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
The tolerance of the rat to the cholestasis could be influenced by the
different distribution of the hepatic artery. Wistar rats were divided in
three groups: Groups was the sham operate rats (14), Group II (14) the
bile duct was ligated and divided, Group III (22) underwent ligation and
section of the bile duct and hepatic artery. In Group II: 35.7% of the rats
died during the first sixteen postoperative days, 35% had sepsis and 7.1%
local infection. In Group III, 60% of the cases, the macroscopic aspect of
the liver was homogeneous (subgroup C1), while the rest of the animals
(subgroup C2), some of the lobes had a yellow coloration and were
enclosed in a big bile duct cyst. In this subgroup 44.4% of the animals
died, 33% had sepsis and the serum bilirubin were normal. In subgroup
C1 there were no deaths, 7.6% had sepsis and the serum bilirubin was
increased. The different evolution of the animals suggests different
responses of the liver lobes when associated with bile duct and hepatic
artery ligation.
P272
TREATMENT OF COMMON BILE DUCT INJURIES VIA
LAPAROSCOPIC PROCEDURES
F.E. LODTKE H. KOHLER, T. NEUFANG, A. SCHAFMAYER, G. LEPSIEN
Dept. of General Surgery, Univ. of G6ttingen
Iatrogenic injury to the common bile duct during laparoscopic
cholecystectomy has previously necessitated an immediate laparotomy to
alleviat bile leakage. In the course of 171 laparoscopic
cholecystectomies at our hospital, an intraoperative common bile duct
injury occured in two patients that, in each case, was successfully treated
utilizing a laparoscopically placed T-tube. A laparotomy was therefore
not necessary. This novel intraoperative procedure was sufficient in
treating common bile duct injury without the occurence of postoperative
complications.
P273
TUMOUR NECROSIS FACTORPRODUCTION BY
MONOCYTES IS NOT INCREASED IN PATIENTS WITH
OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICE
D MCCRORY HALLIDAY, M HOPER, S STEPHENS, B ROWLANDS
Dept. of Surgery, The Queen’s University of Belfast.
Introduction: Endotoxin and its cytokine mediator Tumour Necrosis
Factor (TNF) are thought to play a major role in the complications
associated with biliary obstruction. We hypothesize that monocytes from
jaundiced patients may produce increased basal levels of TNF and may be
over-responsive or refractory to stimulation by exogenous endotoxin due
to prior exposure
Methodology: Peripheral blood monocytes (PBM) from 15 jaundiced
and 10 control patients were isolated by centrifugation over histopaque
and percol gradients. 2x10 monocytes were aliquoted into duplicate
wells and into each pair either 0 or 10 ng/ml lipopolysacchafide (LPS) was
added. Supernatants were harvested at 5 and 24 hours. TNF was
measured by an ELISA. Cytospins were analysed and TNF quantified per
106 monocytes.
Results: TNFpg/ml/106 monocytes (Median+interquartile range)
Ong/ml LPS Ong/ml LPS 10ng/ml LPS 10ng/ml LPS
5 hours 24 hours 5 hours 24 hours
Jaundice 342 74 3092 714
Control
(124-687) (29-174) (1520-6134) (224-3805)
244 118 3905 1026
(86-1432) (77-375) (2633-9952) (528-2180)
No significant differencejaundice vs controls at both time points and
LPS concentrations (p>0.05 Mann Whitney)
Conclusions The similar response to endotoxin of PBM fromjaundiced
and control patients refutes our hypotesis and indicates the need for further
study of the mechanisms of production and significance ofTNF in
obstructivejaundice.
P274
PROLIFERATIVE ACTIVITY OF BILE DUCT EPITHELIUM
FOLLOWING BACTERIAL INFECTION INDOGS
OHTA T, NAGAKAWA T, TSUKIOKA Y, TAKEDA T, MORI K, NAKANO T,
KAYAHARA M, UENO K, AND ITSUO MIYAZAKI.
Departments of Surgery (II), School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
In order to clarify the relationship between proliferative activity in bile
duct epithelia and bacterial infection, we induced obstructive cholestasis
with a bacterial infection in two lobes of the liver. The bile duct branch
draining the left lateral lobes ofthe liver was cannulated in all mongrel
dogs. The dogs were divided into three groups and treated as follows:
Group 1, the cannula was clamped after the injection of 107 E-coli cells;
and Group 3, the cannula was clamped without the injection of any
bacteria. Three months and nine months later, dogs from each group were
sacrificed and their livers were examined. In the Group dogs, papillary
hyperplasia and severe dysplasia werenoted in association with chronic
cholangitis on 3 months and 9 months, respectively, after their operation.
In the Group 2 dogs, periductal fibrosis was severe, but epithelial papillary
hyperplasia was found to be less pronounced than in the Group dogs at
each period. In the Group 3 dogs, there was no periductal fibrosis or
epithelial papillary hyperplasia. These findings suggest that papillary
hyperplasia and/or severe dysplasia of the bile duct epithelium may be
caused by aerobic and anaerobic bacterial infection in combination with
bile stasis.
108
P275
COMPARATIVE VALUE OF ULTRASONOGRAPHY (US), PRE-
AND INTRAOPERATIVE X-RAY STUDIES IN EXAMINATION
OF PATIENTS WITH GALLSTONE DISEASE (GD).
H. POOLA. A. VIIKLEPP, J. TROOST, P. ALAS
Dep. of Surgery, Estonia Seamen’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia.
The aim of the study was to analyse the role of preoperative (PO) US in
diagnosis of GD, to compare the results to PO biligraphic examinations
and to find out the necessity of intraoperative (IO) roentgenological
telecholangioscopy and -graphy (ORTCG). 600 patients were operated on
for GD from 1986-1990. US was performed in 95.5% of cases (in recent
3 years 100%). PO infusion cholangiography was used in 14.7% of cases
(in 1986-40.4%). In US there were 6 false-positive (1%) and 15 false-
negative cases (2.5%). In these cases we found the gallstones by
intravenous cholangiography. The value of US was 96.5%. ORTCG was
made through the cannulated cystic duct in 45.5% ofpatients, in 1990-
23.7%. ORTCG was performed in cases ofjaundice or pancreatitis,
dilated CBD, unclear findings in US and PO cholangiography. ORTCG
was also made in cases of dilated cystic duct in connection with a great
number of small gallstones. Choledochotomy was performed in 12.3% of
cases. The number of CBD exploration decreased in connection with
increased number of planned operations and with improvement of PO and
IO examinations. We conclude that US is the most informative method in
the diagnosis of GD. PO infusion cholangiography is a complementary
method in cases of unclear findings in US> Indications to ORTCG must
be individualized according to the case histroy, PO and IO findings.
P276
INTRA-OPERAT1VE ULTRASOUND OF THE BILIARY TREE
ATA MIDSIZED COMMUNITY/MILITARY HOSPITAL
JEFFREY D. SEDLACK M.D., AND BRIAN F. STAINKEN, M.D.
United States Naval Hospital, Camp Pendleton, CA, USA
We studied the feasibility of intra-operative ultrasound examinations of
the biliary tree at a 100 bed hospital and examined our own philosophy of
intra-operative management of a finding of tissue at choledochotomy.
Four patients came under our care in one year with distal ductal
obstructivejaundice and were taken for scheduled, daytime exploration.
In all cases, the ultra-sound machine and radiologist were called for intra-
operative examination. In two cases with pancreatic head masses, the
expected wait for the machine exceeded hour and the request was
withdrawn. In two cases of ductal pathology the time from call to
complete set-up was less than 1/2 hour and evaluation was obtained. In
each of the cases, incision of a dilated common bile duct had an
expression of obstruction tissue (1-carcinoma, 1-blood clot). The patient
with hemobilia had normal fiberoptic choledochoscopy and intra-
operative ultrasonography; the blood was felt to be from hemorrhagic
cholecystitis. The other patient had a proximal 1/3 common duct tumour
identified by the intra-operative ultrasound. He underwent high ductal
resection but had metastases by 7 months.
We have concluded that in a smaller hospital without a dedicated
ultrasound in the operating area, the routine use of intra-operative
ultrasound is not expedient. However, with tissue expressed at
choledochotomy, intra-operative ultrasound is a useful tool for intra-
operative decisions.
*The views expressed in this abstract by Navy authors do not reflect the
official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of
Defense, nor the U.S. Government.
P277
ARF (ACUTE RENAL FAILURE) AS SEVERE COMPLICATION
IN PATIENTS WITH OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE.
C. SIMOPOULOS A. POLYCHRONIDES, A. BOUNOVAS, A. PAPAVASILIOU.
Propedeutic Surgery Clinic, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece.
ARF as a postoperative complication injaundice.
Patients with obstructivejaundice are a group ofhigh mortality and
complication after operation. The post-operative ARF in patients with
obstructivejaundice is the scope of this study.
We refer to (112) patients 62 males and 50 females (average age 62,4
years).
The patogenesis ofjaundice in 52 cases was benign and in 60
malignant. After surgery there was an increase ofblood urea and
creatinine in 38 patients (33,9%) and severe ARF in 8 patients (8,9%) 6 of
those died (5,3%).
The main Risk factors are:
a) Ht>30%
b) Bilirubin >10g.
c) Age>65 years
Conclusion: A.R.F. in a severe complication in patients with obstructive
jaundice and these patients must be treated with great care.
P278
THE FIBRINOLYTIC SYSTEM AND THE BILIARY TREE
DM SCOTT-COOMBES, SA WHAWELL, JN THOMPSON
Department of Surgery, Hammersmith Hospital,
Du Cane Road, London, England
The aim of this study was to investigate the firbinolytic properties of
bile and gallbladder tissue.
Paired biopsies of gallbladder serosa and mucosa and aspirations of
gallbladder bile were obtained from eight patients undergoing routine
cholecystectomy Tissue homogenates and bile were assayed for
plasminogen activator activity (PAA) and the concentrations of the
fibfinolytic mediators; tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), plasminogen
activator inhibitor and 2 (PAI-1, PAI-2) and urokinase (u-PA).
Both bile and gallbladder tissue possessed PAA (median; bile:0.3IU/ml,
serosa:3.3IU/cm:, mucosa: 1.4IU/cm:). The bile PAA was predominantly
due to t-PA (median 24.0ng/ml) rather than u-PA (median 0.3ng/ml).
Fibrinolysis in the bile may be controlled by the presence ofPAI-
(median 6.4ng/ml) and PAI-2 (median 370.0ng/ml). Both t-PA (serosa
3.6ng/ml, mocosa 2.4ng/ml) and u-PA (serosa 1.gng/ml, moucosa
1.gng/ml) were detected in the tissues but the concentrations of PAI-1 and
PAI-2 were below the level of detection.
we have demonstrated the presence of PAA within the biliary system.
This fibrinolytic activity may be responsible for anastomotic biliary leaks
may also act to prevent deposits of fibrin acting as a nidus for gallstone
formation.
109
P279
POLYPOID LESIONS OF THE GALLBLADDER: CLINICAL
ANDPATHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS
G.N.XU, ET AL,
Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Changhai Hospital,
Shanghai, P.R.China
Fourty patients (21 males, 19 females; mean age 43.95+11.58 years)
and had polypoid lesons of the gallbladder, which were confirmed
surgically and pathologically. The incidence of the disease was 15.8% in
patients undergoing cholecystectomy and 1.4% in patients having
ultrasonography. In the 40 patients,23 (57.5%) had cholesterol polyps,5
(12.5%) inflammatory polys,4 (10%) adenocarcinomas,3 (7.5%)
xanthomatous polyps,2 (5%) papillary adenomas, mixed polyp,1
neurofibroma, and adenomatoid proliferative polyp. The mean age of
patients with nontumorous polyp 41.27+10.16 years. In these patients,
78.8% had polyps less than 5 mm in diameter, and 69,7% had multipe
lesions. However, the mean age of patients with tumorous polyp was
56.71+9.79 years and 71.4% of the patients had polyps more than 5 mm in
diameter and 85.7% single lesions.72.5% of the patients had clinical
symptoms. Polyps were detected ultrasonographically, but one third of
them were overlooked by either cholecystography or CT.
P280
CHOLESTEROLOSIS OF THE GALLBLADDER: DYSPEPTIC
SYNDROME OR SURGICAL DISEASE?
M. SIANESI, F. CETTA*, A.M.FARINON*, P.TARASCONI, E. ZANELLA*
Patologia Chimrgica Universita’ Di Parma *Patologia Chimrgica II Universita’ Di
Roma
In order ro evaluate the clinical significance of cholesterolosis, a
particular chronic gallbladder disease, 41 patients, 32 females and 9 males
(F/M ratio, 3.5:1), aging 19 to 61 years (mean age: 43.3 years), who
undergone cholecystectomy between 1982 and 1991 were considered.
Patients with concomitant presence of stones or adenomyomatosis were
excluded. In 18 cases a strawberry gallbladder, in 15 a single cholesterol
polyp, in 8 two or more cholesterol polyps were discovered. It is not an
unusual clinical problem, being present with an incidence of 5-25%, but in
symptomatic patients without gallstones it is not always clear when
surgical treatment is indicated. Each dyspeptic symptom and biliary pain,
colic or not, have been considered. The most useful methods for the
detection of these lesions are ultrasonography and oral cholecystography;
cholecystokinin test for pain reproduction was used in 8 patients only,
because of undesired effect on colonic motility. Cholescintigraphy,
gastroduodenoscopy and sometimes laparoscopy are useful in differential
diagnosis. Follow-up after cholecystectomy was satisfactory in all but one
patient. Therefore we recommend the surgical treatment in all
symptomatic patients when there is no evidence of other gastrointestinal
disease.
P281
MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE BILIARY TRACT BLEEDING
WITH BALLOON CATHETER
ZHANG CHANGGONG ET AL
The hepatobiliary Department of Surgery, The Second Hospital of Chongqing, China
To treat severe biliary tract bleeding (SBTB), hepatocholangiostomy,
ligation of hepatic artery and lobectomy of liver are often used clinically.
Here, we introduce a new method, balloon tamponade, with which 12
patients suffering from SBTB have been treated with good results.
A modified single balloon with tri-cavity catheter (4mm outside
calibre) was used. In the front and the back of the balloon, there are two
separated drainageways and openings through which we can observe the
characteristics of the drain and hemostatic result. It is also useful for us to
perform other procedures, such as local drainage, lavage, drug injection
and cholangiography, and thereafter further diagnosis and treatment.
During exploration, duct incision is somewhat superior in order to
expose the branch ofbilateral hepatobiliary duct. Bleeding site is
identified after cleating hematocele. Tamponade is then complished by
inserting a balloon catheter to control hemorrhage temporarily. After that,
another similar catheter is inserted through the papilla to take the place of
the former one. The balloon is inflated to press the bleeding area. The
catheter is fixed after adjusting at the best site. The end of the catheter is
brought out through the abdominal incision out of the body. Six hours
later, the balloon is deflated for 30 minutes. If there is no persistent
hemorrhage, the balloon is not inflated any more. If there is a little oozing
of blood, wash and inject some hemostatics. Other surgical maneuver
should be performed if severe bleeding is not controlled.
Using this method, we have treated 12 patients with acute SBTB, four
of whom were preoperative hemorrhage, severe anemia in three, medium
anemia in one. Another eight cases developed acute SBTB operatively,
the lost blood was 400-1,200ml each, with an average of 580ml. Nine
patients’ bleeding was controlled immediately, two after eight hours, one
after forty hours, based on drain observation. None needed further
operation nor died. All patients recovered and were discharged from
hospital in 25 35 hospital days.
The balloon catheter not only can be used to control SBTB but also has
a function of choledochostomy which is superior to T-tube in drainage of
bile duct except hemorrhagic area. While tamponading, the drain from
two drainageways can be compared and examined, and different bile duct
segments can be given drugs irragated and cholangiographed. It is of
important significance in further treating and predicting prognosis
afterwards. The balloon presses directly the bleeding area, exerting an
acute hemostatic effect because it decreases blood perfusion, slows the
blood flow ofthe tissue around the hemorrhagic area, and tend to form
embolism. The method is so simple, less damaging, safe and easy to
perform that any basic hospitals which hold condition for ordinary biliary
surgery can popularize it.
110
P282 P283
MEMBRANEFATTYACID SATURATION RISES IN
OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICE
MW SCRIVEN. JCM STEWART*, DF HORROBIN*, MCA PUNTIS
Dept Surgery, University Wales College Medicine,
University Wales Hospital, Gardiff, UK and *Efamol Research Institute, Kenttville, Nova
Scotia, Canada.
We investigated the effect of obstructivejaundice (OJ) on the saturation
of membrane fatty acids (FA).
FA in red cell (RBC) phospholipid were measured by gas
chromatography in 42 patients with OJ (mean age 65, 19F:23M, mean
bilirubin 247gmol/1, 12 benign:30 malignant) and 42 matched controls.
The results were compared by Mann-Whitney U tests.
Total saturated FA (SFA) (p<0.001) and total monounsaturated FA
(MUFA) (p=0,001) were raised in the OJ patients. There was a
corresponding fall in total polyunsaturated FA (PUFA) (p<0.001), total n-
6 PUFA (p=0.001) and total n-3 PUFA (p<0.001). These changes were
reflected by a fall in the mean number of double bonds per FA (p<0.001)
and a rise in the ratio ofMUFA+SFA:PUFA (p<0.001), indicating an
overall rise in saturation.
Certain aspects of membrane function, in particular phagocytosis by
reticuloendothelial cells, are abnormal in OJ. Changes in membrane FA
can have the same effect. Ifreflected in other cells these highly significant
changes in RBC FA saturation may thus explain some of the defects in
membrane function in OJ and open new afenues of therapy.
PLASMA AND MEMBRANE EICOSANOID PRECURSORS ARE
ABNORMAL IN OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE
MW SCRIVEN JCM STEWART*, DF HORROBIN*, MCA PUNTIS
Dept Surgery, University Wales College Medicine, University Hospital Wales, Cardiff, UK
and *Efamol Research Institute, Kentville, Nova Scotia, Canada
This study investigated the effect of obstructive jaundice (OJ) on
plasma and membrane polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) prescursors of
eicosanoids.
Plasma and red cell (RBC) phospholipid PUFA were measured in 42
patients with OJ (mean age 65, 19F:23M, eman bilirubin 247gmol/1, 12
benign 30 malignant) and 42 matched controls, by gas chromatography.
The levels of the 3 major 20 carbon PUFA eicosanoid precursors
arachidonic acid (20:4n-6), dihommogammalinolenic acid (20:3n-6) and
eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5n-3), and total 20 carbon PUFA (c20-PUFA)
were compared using Mann-Whitney U tests.
C20-PUFA was lower in the OJ group (p<0.001 in each fraction), and
each precursor was lower in both fractions (p<0.005 in each case). The
balance of the individual precursors was abnormal, with a rise in 20:4n-6
as a proportion of c20-PUFA (p<0.001 plasma, p<0.05 RBC) and
corresponding falls in the proportions of 20:3n-6 and 20:5n-3,
Substrate availability is a major determinant ofeicosanoid production.
As the eicosanoids are an important influence on immune and
reticuloendothelial function, the changes demonstrated by this study, in
particular the shift towards the immunosuppressive 20:4n-6, may thus
explain some of the cell defects in these systems and allow new modes of
therapy.
P284
INTEGUMENT STONE ON BILIARY TRACT
ZHANG REN WANG CHONG
Dept. of Surgery, The 2nd Central Hospital, Tianjin, China
In clinical practice, we discovered a special kind ofcholelithiasis. It, was
confirmed by the information retrieval, DIALOG ON-LINE, for the first report in
the world. According to its characteristic we name it "Integument or Encapsulation
Stone."
CLINICAL MATERIAL
Integument stone may lie in gallbladder or choledoch in flowing state. Among
1,500 gallstone specimens, the author himself analyzes and observes only two
specimens ofintegument stone.
1. Typical Case
Woman, aged 55, suffered from chronic cholelithiasis for ten years. Because of
choleperitoneum, she was treated with operation, from which we discovered
choledoch perforation, gallbladder seriously inflammed and existence of a stone.
Twenty days after operation, she recovered.
Specimens
By dissecting gallbladder, we noticed that gallbladder was full ofgreen liquid
and flowing a conical body, very irregular, 7cm in height and 2.5cm base diameter.
Integument looked pale, and not of strong tissue.
Dissecting integument,we found there were seven stones, round or oval in shape,
large and small, the surface ofeach stone was dry and smooth, without membrane.
Inside the body, there were no separations, nor any liquid filling the space
between the stones. (Fig 1)
After pathologic examination ofintegument, it is concluded as fibrous tissue.
(Fig 2)
By Masson’s staining analysis, it mainly contains myofibrilla and small quantity
ofcollagenous fibres. (Fig 3.4)
DISCUSSION ON THE CAUSES, MECHANISMS OF INTEGUMENT
STONE
1) Integument tissue may be made from stratum fibrous tissue.
(a) when biliary tract is inflamed or collisions by stones, mucous membrance of
gallbladder may be injured, broken or destroyed. By meaned ofcell implantation
or transmigration integument stone may be gradually formed.
(b) large slices ofmucous membrance fibrous tissue flap in gallbladder fall offif
just meet the stone and cover on it.
2) Occult hemobilia on biliary tract.
(a) The injury of gallbladder may cause bleeding in small quantity, and finally,
clot binds up stone. Because clot cannot be diluted by bile in time, thus it may stay
in stable state, making clot fibrosis and forming membrane.
(b) Occult hemobilia on Biliary duct forms integument stone. For the above-
mentioned reason integument stone can be formed in biliary duct.
Similarly, it can also be in gallbladder, ifblood frequently flow into it.
3) The two causes as mentioned above acting together may cause integument
stone.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS ON INTEGUMENT STONE
1) Pseudocapsule stone often inlays at the neck ofgallbladder, mostly a single
stone. It may be tightly bound up, partly or wholly, by the wall ofgallbladder, But
its appearance is quite different from integument stone. (Fig 5)
2) Diverticular or pressure diverticulum ofgallbladder may inlay stones which
may be partly bound around the wall ofgallbladder tissue. (Fig 6)
3) Concretion. A certain number of stones are tightly bound up by adhesive
aggregation. After pathologic examination only some scattered, decayed cells can
be seen, but it is quite different from pyogenic infection. At present, this
phenomenon cannot be explained. (Fig 7)
4) A single stone, as large as a gallbladder, inlays inside, and is bound tightly and
completely up by the walls ofgallbladder where it is in, forming gallbladder a solid
body. (Fig 8)
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTIC AND SIGNIFICANCE
1) Patient usually has long case history due to the opposition against operation
treatment, so that serious biliary tract affection repeatedly relapse.
2) Ifa number of stones are encapsulated in one, integument stone practically
becomes a big stone with integument protected. Its big volume may easily cause
obstruction in the biliary tract. Therefore, the appropriate method to be adopted
should be operation.
3) Careful diagnosis must be taken, as clots in the biliary tract may often be mis-
diagnosed as gallstone.
After all, the cause ofintegument stone, we believe, is due to bleeding in the
biliary tract. Because its appearance is so much like that fibrous menbrane
remaining from old ectopic pregnancy found in a later operation, its leads us to
believe it to be tree, although Masson’s staining confirms it is mainly of
myofibrilla. But the definite causes need further discussion.
111
P285
THE RESEARCH OF MICRO-EXPLOSION OF BILIARY
CALCULI
YANGDE ZHANG. et al
First Affilited Hospital, Hunan Meical University City, Country Changsha, Hunan 410008,
P. R. China
The achievement of this research is a successful application of the
technique of micro-explosion to the disintegration of biliary calculi (stones
in the intrahepatic bile ducts) ofpatients withour surgery. Up to the
present, two hundred and fifty cases of biliary duct and gallbladder calculi
have been successfully treated. The success rate of blasting stones was
100% by use of the directional micro-explosive instrument made by us,
the once success of micro-explosion was 95.2% and the result of treatment
are satisfactory.
Considering the density of the blood vessels in the human liver,
limitation of space in the hepatic duct, the security and adaptation, we
have designed two type of micro-explosive equipment by different ways
to initiate explosion by electric initiation and nonelectric initiation. The
diameter of the explosive head is only 1.5-1.7mm so as to fit with the
diameter of the chaledscope. We have performed 2850 sample
experiments on each of the designed condition parameter and the products
of explosion by means of micro-pressure transducer of 1.8mm head and a
week signal amplifier which was manufactured by us. In addition, we
used the technique of high speed photography, hologram and so on. We
observed and analysed the course of explosion of biliary stones, the
pressure of struck wave and the gaseous products of explosion.
Because these equipment have satisfactory properties and reliable
detective and monitoring device, they have been widely used clinically. In
addition, they have been used widely in many industrial fields. It has been
proved that the directional property of the micro-explosive instrument is
safe and reliable by animal tests and 1805 clinic cases.
P286
EXTENDED HEMIHEPATECTOMY WITH USING ND YAG
LASER RADIATION
V. P. BASHILO. V.V. UTKIN, M.U. BOBROVSKY
Central Clinical Hospital, Moscow, USSR
The purpose of our investigation is profylaxis of intraabdominal
complications following liver resection. We solve this task by perfecting
the surgical technique by way of implementation of Nd: YAG Laser.
7 fight-side extended hempatectomy and 9 left-side ones were
performed, 12 ofthem were performed in case of single cancer metastasis
and 4 in case ofhepatocellular cancer. The specifics of the operation is
disfocusing Nd: YAG Laser ray treatment of operated liver surface. The
method provides fuller hemostasis and cholestasis. As a result the amount
ofpostoperational discharges decrease.
There were no postoperational complications.
P287
SERUM BILE ACIDS IN LIVERRESECTED PATIENTS
U. BOLDER. J. TACKE, M. IMHOFF, D. LOHLEIN
Dept. of Abdominal Surgery, Klinikum Dortmund, Beurhausstr. 40, 4800 Dortmund 1, BRD
Liver resection is an accepted surgical option in the treatment of liver
secondaries of colorectal cancer or other malignant diseases. Nevertheless
the surgical trauma is hardly to evaluate. The main factors that may
contribute to surgical trauma are the mass of resected functioning liver
parenchyma and the extension of the perioperative ischemic period due to
the pringle procedure. Also the patient’ age may be a reason for reduced
tolerance to any kind of trauma. The aim of this study was to evaluate
whether there is a parameter that parallels to the perioperative trauma.
Patients 43 liver resected patients were investigated. 16
trisegmentectomies and hemihepatectomies (group 1; major resection) and
27 bisegmentectomies or segmentectomies (group 2; minor resection)
were compared to 10 controls with major upper GI-operations. Methods:
Besides standard serum profiles the course of serum lactate, ammonia and
bile acids were correlated to extension of resected parenchyma, ischemic
trauma, and age.
Results: Bile acid levels were highest in group followed by group 2
and the controls. A significant distinction correlated to the amount of
resection (p<.05) could be made untill postoperative day 7 in the
Wilconon test. Values of serumlactate were significantly different only on
the operative day. No differences were found in the postoperative
ammonia levels. For investigation of the ischemic trauma 3 groups with
different ischemic periods (0-30rain, 31-50min,>50min) were regarded.
Results of serum bile acids and lactate were significantly different (o<.05)
untill the first postoperative day only. Ammonialevels were equal in all
groups. When correlated to patients age (<45y,46-65y,>65y) no parameter
showed any difference.
Conclusion:
-Levels of serum bile acids are correlated to the extension ofparenchyma
resection in the first postoperative week.
-The investigated parameters do not represent reliable the ischemic
trauma due to the pringle procedure.
-A specific course related to the patients age could not observed in any
of the traced parameters.
P288
THE VALUE OF INTRA OPERATIVE ULTRASOUND (IOUS) IN
HEPATIC SURGERY
S.S. HANNA
Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Sunnybrook Health Science Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
A prospective study of all patients undergoing IOUS during hepatic
surgery was initiated with the goal of determining its value.
Between October 19, 1989 and November 19, 1991; 29 patients
underwent IOUS during the conduct of liver procedures. In 7 of the 29
patients (24.1%) undergoing IOUS there was a change in the operative
plan because of the findings of IOUS. In 6 cases the planned liver
procedure was abandoned. In one case the procedure was extended from a
segment (seg) 2,3 excision to a seg 2,3, 4A and 4B excision in order to
obtain a better tumour margin as a result of IOUS findings. Two of these 7
patients wre cirrhotic; in patient an additional metastasis was seen and in
another tumour invasion of the portal vein by a hepatoma precluded
resection. 5/7 were not cirrhotic; in invasion of the left hepatic vein was
seen; in 2 patients additional metastases were seen in seg 1. In one patient
an additional metastasis in seg 3 made resection impossible.
In conclusion, IOUS was found useful in 24% of patients undergoing
this examination during hepatic surgery. In this subgroup of patients, it
prevented us from proceeding with liver resections that would have been
oncologically useless.
112
P289
HEPATIC SEGMENTECTOMY USING A MICROWAVE
TISSUE COAGULATORAND GUIDED BY INTRAOPERATIVE
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
S. HE, Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Research Unit,
The First University Hospital, West China University of Medical Sciences, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China
The aim ofthis study is the application of Microwave Tissue
Coagulator (MTC) in hepatic segmentectomy to minimize perioperative
bleeding. 26 patients were selected in this study among whom 20 were
primary hepatocellular carcinoma and the rest consisted of angioma of the
liver, cancer of the gallbladder and intrahepatic stone. The performance of
the hepatic segmentectomy was done by the application of microwave
hyperthermia cancer-therapy system with the insert applicators made in
Sichuan University and was guided by Intraoperative Ultrasounography
(IOU).
The results showed: the amount ofblood lost ranged from 100 to 2,000
ml per patient with as average of420 ml per patient and the amount of
blood transfusion needed per patient ranged from 200 to 2,400 ml with an
average of 500 ml.
Complications: Hemoglobinuria occured in 8 cases and bile leakage in
case. No intraoperative death or other complications related to this
operation whatever.
It was, therefore, concluded that Hepatic Segmentectomy using a MYC
guided by IOU is considered to be a safe and effective operational
procedure for liver cancer management.
P290
BACTERIAL TRANSLOCATION INTO PORTAL BLOOD
FROM GUT DURING PORTAL TRIAD OCCLUSION IN RATS
LX LIU, B JEPPSSON, S BENGMARK
Department of Surgery, Lund University, S-221 85 Lurid, Sweden
Occlusion of the portal triad (PTO) is used during liver resection and
liver transplantation. This study was undertaken to evaluate if bacterial
translocation occurs during PTO and to explore any relationship with
portal blood flow and endotoxemia.
METHODS: PTO was performed in rats for 15, 40, 60, 90, 120’.
Bacterial translocation was studied in portal and systemic blood after
intraluminal instillation of 131I-E.coli. Blood flow in the intestinal wall and
portal vein was studied by laser Doppler flowmetry and portal pO as well
as endotoxin levels were measured.
RESULTS: Bacterial translocation into the portal blood could be
detected already 15’ after PTO. This increased with increasing length of
PTO. Blood levels of E.coli were 3-4 times higher in portal than systemic
circulation. Plasma endotoxin levels in portal and systemic blood were
significantly increased. Laser blood flow in the gut mucosa and mean
portal pO were decreased in all experimental groups during PTO. The
appearance ofbacteria was proportional to increased endotoxin levels and
inversely proportional to decreased blood flow in the gut.
SUMMARY: There may be an intimate relationship between increased
bacterial translocation to portal blood and decreases blood flow of the gut
mucosa. Increased bacterial translocation may play a role in postoperative
infections after PTO in hepatectomy and after liver transplantation.
P291
PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTORANTAGONIST (PAF) WEB
2170 BS IMPROVES REPERFUSION INDEX OF THE LIVER
AND INCREASES SURVIVAL AFTERHEPATIC INFLOW
OCCLUSION IN RATS
LX LIU, B JEPPSSON HO HEUER, S BENGMARK LUND
Department of Surgery, Lurid University, S-221 85 Lund Sweden; Department of
Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim KG, Rhein, Germany
Ischemic organ injury is associated with microcirculatory failure. PAl:
has been proposed as a potential key- mediator of this. It is released from
endothelial cells, platelet and neutrophils. We tested a new potent platelet
activating factor antagonist, WEB 2170 BS in the prevention and
protection of the liver from ischemic injury in rats.
METHODS: Normal rats had portal triad occlusion (PTO) for 90’
during normothermia. WEB 2170 BS was administered in a dose of
mg/kg body weight or 3 mg/kg body weight intravenously in thejugular
or portal vein 10’ before PTO and 3’ prior to reopening of PTO. Perfusion
fo the liver was determined by laser Doppler flowmetry.
RESULTS: Administration of WEB 2170 BS before and after PTO
significantly increased the survival rate from 8% in control rats to 86%.
The reperfusion index of ischemic liver was also significantly elevated to
95% from 55% in control animals lh after declamping ofportal triad. On
histological examination the ischemic damage was also reduced in groups
treated with WEB 2170 BS.
SUMMARY: It seems that the platelet activating factor antagonist
WEB 2170 BS is effective in prevention and protection of the liver from
warm ischemic damage.
P292
LIVER REGENERATION AFTERHEPATIC RESECTION FOR
BENIGN ANDMALIGNANT LIVERDISEASE
U.KANIA, J.KALFF, M.ZIEGLER
Department of Surgery, Bonn University Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 5300
Bonn 1, Germany
24 patients were investigated before and after elective hepatic resection
in a prospective trial. 16 of these patients had malignant liver lesions, the
remaining 8 suffered from benign liver tumors. Due to inoperability and
other reasons the follow-up could only be achieved in 11 patients, 6 with
malignant and 5 with benign liver disease.
The results showed a total regeneration of the removed functional liver
tissue within 3 months. The volume of the removed tumor mass was not
regenerated. A significant difference between benign and malignant
tumors could not be demonstrated. The extent of the hepatic resection
showed no influence on the regenerative process.
113
P293
SURGICAL INDICATION AND RFULT OF HEPATIC
RESECTION
s. T. KIM, K. U. LEE, G. P. KIM
Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Korea
Between 1981 and 1990, a total of402 hepatic resections were
completed including 319 primary malignancies (279 hepatocellular
carcinoma(HC); 29 cholangiocellular carcinoma(CC); 3 mixed
carcinoma; and 5 other primary malignancies), 42 intrahepatic
cholelithiasis, 35 benign masses, 4 secondary malignancies, and 2
gallbladder carcinomas. Other primary malignancies included
hepatoblastoma, malignant lymphoma, biliary cystadenocarcinoma,
undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma, and leiomyosarcoma. Benign masses
included hemangioma (12), abcess(8), cyst(7), adenomatous
hyperplasia(3),armatoma(2), adenoma(1), cystadenoma(1), and
pseudolymphoma(1).
214 patients experienced 241 nonlethal complications. Spesis was the
most frequent complication, manifested primarily as wound infection(71)
or intra-abdominal infection(25). Nonfatal hepatic failure occured in 9
patients with cirrhosis and patient without cirrhosis.
Overall operative mortality was 9 %. Factors contributing to the death
were hepatic failure(25), intra-abdominal sepsis(5), hemorrage(3),
esoageal varix beldding(3), renal failure(i), and severe chest infection(I).
28 were patients who had pre-existing cirrhosis. Details of mortality after
various kinds ofresection are fight trisegmentectomy, 1/4; left
trisegmentectomy, 1/1; fight lobectomy, 9/73; left lobectomy, 0/36;
central bisegmentectomy, 0/3; fight segmentectomy, 9/49; left
segmentectomy, 2/72; subsegmentectomy or partial resection, 15/164.
The mortality after resection for HC, CC, intrahepatic cholelithiasis,
and benign mass, respectivelym was 32/282, 4/24, 1/42, and 1/35.
Mortality rate of HC with and without cirrhosis were 11.3% and 11.5%,
respectively.
P294
EARLYPOSTOPERATIVE CHANGES INDENSITYAND SIZE
OF THELIVERAFTERPARTIAL HEPATECTOMY
G. KRUPSKI1>, R. MAAS2, U. MEYER-PANNWITT1
University ofHamburg. Dep. for General Surgeryl and Radiology 2
Modern CT not only offers imaging but metric tools as well. Because
we noticed postoperative swelling and chnages in density after partial
hepatectomy we were interested is using these technique to quantify our
observations in a prospective approach. We performed CT-scans in 20
patients who underwent partial hepatectomy for benign and malignant
lesions 2 weeks, 3 and 6 months after resection in order to prove these
findings statistically.
Results: We can demonstrate a statistically significant postoperative
liver-volume increase of 232 ml (16%) (p<0,001; T=5,92) compared to
the remaining parenchyma. Parallel there is a decrease in liver density
from 59 H.U. to 53 H.U.
Possible reasons for these changes like e.g. narcotic drug effects, extent
of resection, duration ofoperatin, duration of ligation of the
hepatoduodenal ligament will be discussed.
P295
FLUID AND AIR COLLECTION AFTERPARTIAL
HEPATECTOMY: PRELIMINARYRFULTS OF
PROSPECTIVE STUDY
G. KRUPSKI1),R. MAAS2, U. MEYER-PANNWITT
University of Hamburg. Dep. for General Surgery) and Radiology
Due to the increasing frequency of liver surgery both radiologists and
surgeons more often have to face with postoperative liver imaging.
Particularly to differentiate between ill defined fluid collections (abcesses)
and seroma is difficult.
We performed CT-sscans in 20 patients who underwent partial
hepatectomy for benign and malignant lesions 2 weeks, 3,6 and 12 months
postoperatively to rule out what still is "normal".
In 75% (15/20) 2 weeks postoperatively large fluid collections and in
90% air in the fluid collection were visible. Abcesses could be proved
using clinical data, laboratory findings and microbiological fluid sample
examinations in 5 out of 15 patients (33%) initially presenting with large
fluid collections and air content.
Examination fluid(*) free air
>4cm 2-4cm <2cm no
after 2 weeks 15 3 18
after 3 months 5 6 7 2 5
To conclude our results: fluid and air collections are common
postoperative findings after partial hepatectomy. Only laboratory and
clinical findings in combination with CT-imaging can lead to the likely
diagnosis of an abcess.
P296
BAND TECHNIQUE FOR RESECTION OF THE LIVER
CHUNG-HAN LEE KYUNG-HYUN CHOI, SUNG-DO LEE, JAE-KWAN SEO AND
YOUNG-HOON PARK
Dept. of Surgery Kosin Medical College, Pusan, Korea
Now today liver resection can be performed quiet safety. Nonetheless,
hemorrhage from a raw liver is the most common problem during hepatic
resection. Therefore new instruments and methods for hepatic resection
were designed and developed for controlling of the hemorrhage and
shortening of the operation time. This study is a result of use to band
technique of the liver resection for disease of the liver during 2 years from
1990 to 1991. The band (Panduit (R)) is a polyrophylene strip with a self
locking key that measures 70cm in length, 0.Scm in width, 0.2cm in
thickness and can be formed a loop with 20cm in a maximum diameter.
The indication ofresection were primary liver cancer in 12 patients,
secondary liver cancer in one patient, benign tumor in 4 patients and
trauma in one patient. Of the hepatic resections performed, extended fight
lobectomy was done one case, fight lobectomy in 14 cases, left lateral
segmentectomy in 2 cases and partial resection in one case, with total 18
cases.
The average time of operation, amount of cut marginal bleeding,
volume of total hemorrhage and volume ofblood transfusion were 3 hours
50 minutes, 200cc, 3000cc and 7 units in whole blood, respectively. Thirty
day-postoperative death was one case (5.6%) and due to hepatic failure.
The method ofband technique has good results compare to conventional
hepatic resections at our hospital in same period.
So that this study suggested that is a useful operative method for major
hepatic resection.
114
P297
ANALYSIS ON 286 CASES OF HEPATIC LOBECTOMY
LIU ZI-XIEM AND ZHENG JIANG-HUA
Department of General Surgery, People’ Hospital of Guangdong Province
286 cases ofhepatic lobectomy have been operated from 1965 to 1990
(192 males, 94 females). Among them 154 cases were undergone hepatic
lobectomy or removal of segements and 132 cases with hemihepatectomy
or more than that. The operations were performed mainly by irregular
lobectomy. Hemostasis was carried out by intermittent ligation of
hepatoportal blood flow, manual compression (with fingers) or cutting
with microwave blade during the operation. Post-operative complications
were observed in 41 cases, 12 died within one month postoperatively.
None died during the operation.
Primary and secondary hepatoma, hepatolithiasis are the major
indication for surgical treatment. Most patients having hepatoma
complicated with hepatic cirrhosis. Special attention should be paid to
retain the functional hepatic tissues during the operation. Rupture of
hepatoma causing severe bleeding can be stopped successfully by means
of hepatic lobectomy. The results are good in short term. While multiple
hepatoliathiasis having indication for hepatic lobectomy, a better
prognosis was seen in partial hepatectomy compared with merely taking
stones out through hepatic duct. Short term hepatic failure after hepatic
lobectomy may be due to temporary imbalance (decompensation) of
hepatic function. Active action should be taken immediately.
P298
SIGNIFICANCE OF HEPATIC VEIN RECONSTRUCTION IN
HEPATECTOMY
s. NAKAMURA. R. NISHIYAMA, Y, YOKOI, Y. OONUKI, S. SAKAGUCHI,
S. BABA
Second Dept. of Surgery, Hamamatsu Univ. Sch. of Med. Hamamatsu, Japan
Hepatectomy combined with reconstruction of hepatic vein was
performed in 8 patients who had carcinoma located close to the
confluence of the hepatic vein and the inferior vena cava. Reconstruction
of the right hepatic vein was performed in three patients, that of the middle
hepatic vein was done in four, and that of the left hepatic vein was done in
one. Iliac veins, superficial femoral veins and great saphenous veins were
used for autografting. Follow-up periods ranged from 2 to 36 months.
There was no operative death. Patency rate of the veins was 75% one
month after operation. Prothrombin activity and serum AST level were’69
+ 8.7% and 285_+166 IU on the 1st POD, respectively. Hepatic
scintigraphy of the two patients who had an occluded graft revealed a
reduced uptake one month after operation. Eight patients are all doing well
without evidence of recurrence of carcinoma.
In such patients, hepatic vein reconstruction contributed to preserving
the residual liver function and achieving a more radical operation. Hepatic
vein reconstruction is to be a new surgical option in hepatectomy.
P299
INTERACTION BETWEEN VAGAL AND
IMMUNOSUPPRF_SIVE CONTROL ON LIVER
REGENERATION IN RATS
M OHTAKE T. SAKAGUCHI*, K. NAKADAIRA, T. AONO, K. YOSHIDA,
T. MUTO
Departments of Surgery and Physiology*, Niigata University School of Medicine, Niigata
951, Japan
The vagus nerve has been shown to stimulate liver regeneration (LR).
Recentl, it was revealed that an immunosuppressive agent FK-506 (FK)
also stimulates LR> This study was examined the interaction betwen the
vagal and immunosuppressive control on LR in rats. The animals
weighing about 180g were used. The 2/3 hepatectomized rats were
classified into four groups; control, hepatic branch vagotomized, FK (0.1
mg/kg) administered, and FK with vagotomy. LR was evaluated by the
liver weight as a percentage of body weight (RLW), and the mitotic index
of the hepatocytes (MI). Plasma scores showing hepatic or renal function
were estimated. The control and hepatic branch vagotomized had no
difference in RLW following 3 days after hepatectomy. FK increased
RLW and FK 3 days after hepatectomy compared to the control.
However, no increase in RLW and MI was seen when vagotomy and FK
administration were combined. Seven days later, the vagotomy reduced
RLW compared to the control but there was no difference in RLW
between the control and FK with vagotomy. The plasma scores
maintained within normal range in all grups of animals. These
observations indicate that LR by vagal control is predominantly active
than by immunosuppressive control within several days after
hepatectomy, but the latter becomes active thereafter.
P300
SIMPLIFIED INTRAABDOMINAL VENOUS BYPASS DURING
HEPATIC TOTAL VASCULAREXCLUSION IN CANINE
LIVER SURGERY
Q_._._._._._._._._, K. Y. HOU, X.S. ZHOU, H.H. CHEN, J. YUAN, C. LIN, W.X. ZHANG, Y.Z. LI,
J. N. LU, J. SHI
Department of Surgery, 3rd. Hospital of Beijing Medical University, Beijing, P. R. China
An intraabdominal venous bypass was performed in 10 dogs for liver
surgery during hepatic total vascular exclusion with the use of a modified
method without pump and vascular anastomosis. A special catheter was
designed and adopted to settle in the intrahepatic vena cava and to shunt
the portal vein with a branch of the catheter while occluding the total
hepatic blood flow. During 4-6 hours period of bypass, the hemodynamic
alterations were monitored and multipe hematological biochemical indices
were observed at periodic intervals. Biopsies were taken from the small
intestine, pancreas and kidney at the end of the operations. Portal and IVC
pressure were measure to evaluate the amount of blood flow through
catheter according to a pressure-quantity curve obtained from
extracorporal experiment. The results signify that the hemodynamic
alternations were promptly returned to approximate prebypass level and
the hematological biochemical indices were stable. It also shows there was
no evidence of the congestion in the splanchnic system. This study proved
to be a technically simple and satisfactory procedure in complicated major
liver resection and transplantation.
115
P301
LIVERREGENERATIONAFTERPARTIAL HEPATECTOMY
IN RATS: A QUANTITATIVE ULTRASTRUCTURAL STUDY
C.G. SCHULZE U. N. RIEDE
Departments of Surgery and Pathology University of Freibury, Germany
Hepatic regeneration in rats was examined by quantitative electron
microscopy, Liver biosies were performed on 25 rats 7, 14, 30, and 60
days after partial hepatectomy and compared with those made on 20 adult
male Sprague-Dawley rats. Specific ultrastructural chandes occur in the
mitochondria, in comparison to the control group the hepatocytes of all the
rats subjected to partial hepatectomy showed a larger number of smaller
mitochondria and an increase in the amount of cristae membranes per cell.
The volume density of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (PER) was
greater in all rats after resection than in the controls. These changes in the
ultrastructure increased up to day 30 after resection. On day 60 the values
were below those recorded on day 30, but above those of the controls. The
increase in the amount of cfistae membranes and increase in density of
RER indicate raised respiratory activity in the hepatocytes as well as an
increase in the rate of protein synthesis during liver regeneration following
partial hepatectomy.
P302
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA IN CIRRHOSIS.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS FORLONG-TERM SURVIVAL
AFTERSURGICAL RESECTION.
G.P. SPINA.L.CAPUSSOTTI*. E. OPOCHER R. SANTAMBROGIO, B. ONGARI,
H.BOUZARI*. University of Milan: S. Paolo Institute of Biomedical Sciences;
*Department of Surgery, Mauriziano Umberto Hospital-Torin, Italy
The purpose ofthe study is to determine the prognostic factors for long-
term survival after heptaic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma (HHC).
72 patients who underwent resection between 1983 and 1989 were
included inthis retrospective study. In a first step 15 variables were
chosen, as indicated by the literature and our own surgical experience, and
divided in 3 groups: clinical, tumoral and surgical. The variables were
then studied with a univariate and Cox’ multivariate analysis. The
favoring conditions determined by Cox’ analysis were: 1) patient’s age
over 60 years, 2) presence of a capsule, 3) monfocal lesions. Vascular
infiltration, well differentiated carcinoma and a resection margin >1 cm.,
significant only by the univariate analysis are recommended buth not
determining factors.
In conclusion from this study ofprognostic factors in HCC we can say
that tumoral anatomopathologic features are the most important factors in
determining long-term survival.
P303
FACTORS RELATING TO DIC AND COAGULOFIBRINOLYSIS
AFTERHEPATIC RESECTION
H. T. TANJGUCH! A. OGURO, K. MIYATA, Y. UESHIMA, K. TAKEUCHI,
N. TSUKUDA, K. SEIKI, M. HONDA, A. NOGUCHI, K. KITAMURA, A.
HAGIWARA, T. YAMANE, T. YAMAGUCHI, K. SAWAI, O. KOJIMA, AND
T. TAKAGASHU
First Department of Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
The changes of factors relating to DIC and coagulofibrinolysis after
hepatic resection were examined. In a blood survey of 24 patients who had
undergone hepatic resection, the serum levels of thrombin-antithrombin
Ill complex, :2-plasmin inhibitor-plasmin complex, prostaglandin E2, D-
dimer, fibrinogen, and FDP increased in the early postoperative stage. The
level of 6-keto-prostaglandin F1: increased after the operations. The level
of thromboxane B and platelet count decreased at first, and then gradully
increased and returned to its preoperative level on postoperative day 7.
Superoxide dismutase activity increased at first, and then gradually
decreaded, postoperatively. That is, biodefensive ractions which protect
patients against the shift to disseminated intravascular coagulation and
superoxide dismutase activity, despite the induction of a predisseminated
intravascular coagulation state after liver resection, due to overacceleration
of coagulofibrinolytic function.
P304
THE EFFECT OF PROSTAGLANDIN E1 ON HEPATIC
FUNTION AFTERLIVER RESECTION
Y.UESHIMA H.TANIGUCHI, K.MIYATA, K.TAKEUCH, A.OGURO, N.TSUKUDA,
T.TAKAHASHI,
First Department of Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Whether prostaglandin E (PGE1)might support hepatic function or not
after liver resection was examined. Materials were 34 patients who
underwent liver resection inour department. Thirteen were given given
PGE1 intravenously (PGE1(+)group) and 21 were not (PGE1(-)group).
PGE1 was infused in a dose of 0.03gg/kg/minute during surgery and
0.01gg/kg/minute for 72 hours after surgery. The hepatic function was
estimated by sGOT, sGPT, total bilirubin level and prothrombin time
measured on postoperative day 0, 1, 3 and 7. To further evaluation, they
were classified into 4 subgroups as follows: (1)non-cirrhotic PGE1(+)
group, (2)cirrhotic PGEI(+) group, (3)non-cirrhotic PGEI(-) group and
(4)cirrhotic PGEI(-) group. There were 17 patients with liver cirrhosis.
Patients’ characteristics were similar among each group. The sGOT and
sGPT levels on postoperative day 3 were lower in the PGE1(+) group.
The sGOT levels on postoperative day 1, 3 and the sGPT level on
postoperative day 3 were lower in the non-cirrhotic PGEI(+) group than
the non-cirrhotic PGE1 (-) group. In the cirrhotic PGEI(+) group, the total
bilirubin levels were lower than the cirrhotic PGE1 (-) group. Particularyly,
there was a significant difference on postoperative day (p<0.05).. It was
concluded that continuous intravenous administration of PGE1 seems to
be benefical for the liver function after hepatic resection.
116
P305
LIVERFUNCTIONAFTERRESECTION FORHCC ON
CIRRHOSIS
BRESADOLA F., UZZAU A., CARCOFORO P., INTINI S., MICHELIZZA T.
General Surgery, University of Udine Italy
Following pre-surgical volumetric measurements (Okamoto 1983),
cirrhotic patients were monitored for evidence that liver resection induces
early post-operative functional deficits. Subjects were 44 patients of
whom a) 13 with HCC (84.6% cirrhotic), b) 21 with metastases and c) 10
with benign lesions. In surgical cirrhotic patients Okamoto’ index was
less than 50%. Following surgery conditions were monitored by
haematochemical tests on post-operative days 1, 3, 5, and 7. Results were
compared by Student’s t-test. The 3 groups ofpatients were homogeneous
for age, duration of anaesthesia, blood and plasma transfused during
surgery, and post-operative diet. Significant differences were observed
between metastases and benign lesions vs. HCC in the values of
gammaGT, bilirubinaemia, glycaemia, cholesterolaemia, albuminaemia,
transferrinaemia and fibrinogenaemia. Results were interpreted as
indicating decreaseed protidosynthetic and glucuronic activities, reduced
insulin response and decreased proteins of the flogistic response, and
alteration of the lipidic metabolism in cirrhotic vs, healthy livers.
P306
STIMULATING EFFECT OF THEEXTRACT OF SMALL
INTFTINAL MUCOSA ON RAT LIVERREGENERATION
1) A.Nakano, 1)T.Fukushima, 1) H. Sekido, 1)S Fukazawa, l) U.Fujii 1) T.Fukushima,
2)N.Takashashi
1)Second Department fo Surgery, Yokohama City University, School of Medicine,
Yokohama Jam=pan
2)Division of Agricultural chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji University.
Many studies have been done on the hypothesis that factors present in
blood of the portal vein greatly participate in liver regeneration. We
hypothesized that there are liver regenerating factors in the epithelial
mucosa of the small intestine, the present studies were carried out whether
extracts of the intestinal mucosa can stimulate the live regeneration in
vitro and in vivo.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: I) 1.Preparation of the extract of the
intestinal mucosa: Wistar adult rats were sacrified and the epithelial
mucosa of intestine was separated. The specimens were homogenized,
ultracentrifuged and heated at 100 c.2.Isolated hepatocyte: Primary
hepatocyte cell culture was made by the modified method of Seglen.
William’ medium is suitable as a basic medium. 3. Cell culture: Rat
hepatocytes were incubated in dishes. Extract of intestinal mucosa was
added to the standard medium (5%). Numbers of cells and enzyme
activities in the medium were measured. II) 2/3 intestinal resection and
hepatectomy was carried out and anastomosed by interrupted suture. After
operation extract of intestinal mucosa was injected intrapeitonelly every
day for 4 days. We measured regerated rate of liver by histochemical
method by using BrdU monoclonal antibody.
RESULTS: Hepatocytes developed to form the functional micro-liver
by the action of small intestinal mucosa in the media. After intestinal
resection, hepatic regeration was improved if the extract of intestinal
mucosa was injected.
CONCLUSION: Studies of effect of intestinal mucosa may provide
new insights into mechanisms ofliver regeneration.
P307
BILIARY ANASTOMOSIS FOLLOWING LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION DOES NOT BENEFIT FROM T TIE
SPLINTAGE
K. J. DAWSON, J. R. NOVELL, A.K. BURROUGHS K. ROLLES
Liver Transplantation Group, The Royal Free Hospital School ofMedicine, Hampstead,
London, United Kingdom
Different techniques of biliary anastomosis were assessed in 90
consecutive liver transplants, performed by one surgeon. In 80 patients a
direct end-to-end anastomosis was fashioned between donor and recipient
common bile ducts. The first 16 anastomoses were splinted with a T tube;
no splint was employed in the remaining 64 patients. In two patients early
in the series a biliary conduit was fashioned from the gallbladder, and in
seven patients biliary drainage was via a Roux-en-Yjejunal loop. One
patient succumbed to pulmonary hypertension during surgery and no
anastomosis was performed. There were no biliary leaks from the two
conduits or from the sixjejunal loops. Three of 16 patients with splinted
duct-to-duct anastomoses sustained leakage, requiring Roux loop
conversion in two and removal ofthe T tube in one. Seven of 64
unsplinted anastomoses leaked, necessitating Roux loop conversion in 6
and percutaneous drainage in the remaining patient. Biliary leakage was
invariably due to donor duct necrosis. Three strictures occurred following
duct-to-duct anastomosis without t-tube drainage. All were successfully
managed by endoscopic dilatation. There was no significant difference in
leak rate between splinted and unsplinted anastomoses. The groups were
well matched for age, sex and indications for transplantation. It is
concluded that T tube splintage confers no advantage in direct duct-to-
duct anastomosis following liver transplantation.
P308
BLOOD TRANSFUSION REQUIREMENTS IN LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION
K. DAWSON, O. SMITH, G. HAZLEHURST, B. BROZOVIC, A. BURROUGHS,
S. MALLETT, A. MEHTA, K. ROLLES
Royal Free Hospital and School of Medicine, London NW3 2QG, United Kingdom
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) has become an established
therapeutic option in the treatment of end-stage liver disease resulting
from a wide variety of congenital and acquired disordrss. However, it does
impose sustantial logistical and financial burdens on the transfusion
service. Clinical features predicting greater blood product requirments
include: (i) cirrhosis; (ii) ascites; (iii) coagulation abnormalities; (iv)
previous upper abdominal surgery.
High blood product requirments have been associated with significantly
increased mortality rates. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
haematological support needed to support a liver transplant programme
and to determine if intraoperative aprotinin (an inhibitor of fibrinolysis)
administration had a significant impact on blood product usage in liver
transplantation. Ninety consecutive patients underwent OLT performed by
the same siargeon using a standard anaesthetic procedure. The blood
products monitored were red cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelets. Our
data suggest that the use of aprotinin significantly reduces blood
component usage for OLT (p<0.05). High risk cases, in terms ofpotential
blood loss, have their risk reduced to normal levels by the use of aprotinin.
In addition both ITU stay (p<0.05) and the time taken to achieve operative
haemostasis (p<0.05) were significantly reduced.
117
P309
QUANTITATIVE VOLUMETRIC STUDY OF THE LIVER
L.F. FRIGERIO. C.SPREAFICO, A.M ARCHIANO’, G.COLELLA, C. SEGURA,
M.L. TATONETT, F.ZUCCHI AND B.DAMASCELLI
All patients undergoing liver surgery are studied to assess the exact
staging of the disease. All imaging techniques now available (US, CT,
CT-LUF, CT-AP) are applied for determining the number, site, diameter
and vascular relationship of the tumor and its satellite nodules. When
performing a CT-Arterial Portography (CT-AP), we usually evaluated the
hepatic volume of the whole liver and of the tumor nodules. This
procedure is very important in liver transplantation as it allows an
optimization for using the donors’organ and in hepatic surgery as it is
likely to correlate the percentage of resceted non neoplastic parenchima to
the pre-surgical functional tests so to give a predictive index of the
remaining liver function and the rigenerative index. In all cases of liver
transplantation we compared our measurements with the actual weight of
the explanted liver which was provided by the anatomo-pathologist.
P310
CT-ARTERIAL PORTOGRAPHYFOR STAGING THE
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA IN PATIENTS
UNDERGOING LIVERTRANSPLANTATION: ANATOMO-
RADIOLOGICAL CORRELATION
C.SPREAFICO, L F FRIGERIO, A. MARCHIANO’ S.ANDREOLA,
F. GARBAGNATI, V.MAZZAFERRO, M.L. TATONETTI, AND B. DAMASCELLI
Special Radiologic Procedures Dept. Istituto Nazionale Tumori 1, G. Venezian
20133 Milano Italy
All patients scheduled for liver transplantation are avaluated by a
complete radiologic study of the liver (US, CT, DSA and CT-AP). In
particular, before the angiographic study the catheter is postitioned into the
superior mesenteric artery and a CT study is carried out by opacifying the
liver through the portal system. This method allows a higher sensitivity in
detecting both the primary tumor and its satellite nodules. The site,
number and diameter of the lesions as well as their relationship with the
venous system (both portal and suprahepatic) are compared with the
anatomo-pathologic findings obtained on the explanted liver.
The work is in progress and comparison and statistical evaluation of the
results will be available later on.
P311
TREATMENT OF PRIMARY GRAFT NON FUNCTION AFTER
OLT WITH PROSTAGLANDINS PGE
G. L. GRAZI E. JOVINE, G. F. STEFANINI, C. SAMA, A. MAZZIOTTI, G.
GOZZETTI
Clinica Chirurgica 2,University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Primary liver graft non function (PNF) remains one of the most life-
threatening complications after orthotopic transplantation (OLT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Over the 96 OLTs performed at our
institution, diagnosis of PNF has been assessed in 5 cases. In the latter
three cases PNF has been treated with Prostaglandins PGE (Prostin VR,
Upjohn, Puurs, Belgium). Two of these OLTs were carried out without
major technical problems and blood losses were minimal, whereas in the
third a subcapsular hematoma complicated surgery. Liver enzymes and
bilirubin suddenly increased in all the three cases, with a parallel fall of the
coagulative profile. No other morphological failures could be
identificated. PGE were started at 10mg/hr and increased by 10gg/hr
until a maximum does of 0.6 gg/Kg/hr was achieved. No cardiovascular
symptoms appeared. In all pts a marked improvement in liver enzymes
was observed after a 12 hours infusion. PGE were discontinued after 6, 8
and 10 days respectively. All the pts recovered from PNF and the first two
were eventually discharged: they are currently alive after 11 and 7 months
from OLT respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In the absence of a well-defined alternative for the
therapy of PNF, the infusion of PGE should be started as a first-aid
treatment during the waiting period before retransplantation.
P312
SEGMENTAL LIVING LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
MEHMET HABERAL, NEBIL BYOKPAMUKCU, HASAN TELATAR, NEVZAT
BILGIN, GLNAZ ARSLAN, MUALLA KARAMEHMETOGLU
Transplantation unit,Transplantation and Burn Foundation Hospital, Ankara, TURKEY
In order to overcome the highly critical shortage of cadaveric liver
organs that has been the cause of death of 50% of the chronic liver disease
patients on our Center’ waiting list, who were unable to wait out the long
term for receiving a cadaver liver, we have turned to another alternative,
namely our technique of "Semental Living Liver Transplatation (tx).-
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Our technique of "Segmental Living
Liver Tx." differs from the technique of segmental living related liver tx.
performed by other teams, due to the fact that dissection of the left hepatic
duct is perments II, III, the falciform ligament, together with 2 to 3cm. of
tissue from segment IV. Finally, withoul[ any means of alteration or
interruption in the graft and remaining liver, the following implantion of
the falciform ligament is sutured to the recipient’ falciform ligament
preventing rotation of the implanted segements-as in trisegmentectomy.
RESULTS: From Dec.9,’1988 to May 9,1991, 7" segmental living livel
tx. "has been performed at our Center. Of these recipients. 5 were adults
with the mean age of 32.8 years and 2 were children with the mean age of
10.5 years. The donors were 2 fathers, sister, husband and wife
(mean age 41.9 years). One of the adult recipients has given birth to a
completely healthy baby. Both the mother and the baby are doing well
with normal liver functions. The remaining donors are also doing well
with normal liver functions.
CONCLUSION: Our method of "segmental living liver tx."has shown
to be completely harmless for both the donor and the recipient. It has no
side effects upon the donor during or after hepatectomy.
118
P313
THE EFFECT OF THE SIZE OF THE DONORLIVER ON THE
REGENERATIVE RESPONSE AFTERLIVER
TRANSPLANTATION.
G. MAHLATI D.KAHN, MARILYN TYLER, ZOE LOTZ, SUE BIRD,
ROSEMARY HICKMAN.
Department of Surgery & Medical Research Council Liver Research Centre, University of
Cape Town
The transplanted liver is known to undergo hepatic regeneration in
response to the various injuries which occur in the perioperative period. In
this study we investigated the effect of the size of the donor liver on the
regenerative response after liver transplantation.
Large White X Landrace pigs were subjected to orthotopic liver
transplantation using different sized donor and recipient animals as
follows: Group donar larger than recipient; Group II donor and
recipient similar in size; Group III donor smaller than the recipient. Liver
biopsies were taken pretransplant and at 6,18,24,48,72 and 96 hours after
the transplant and used to determine thymidine kinase activity, ornithine
decarboxylase activity and mitotic index.
Using the above indices of hepatic regeneration, there was no
regenerative response when a large donor liver was transplanted into a
smaller recipient and a small response when the donor and recipient were
of similar size. A significant regenerative response was noted in the livers
transplanted from a small donor into a large recipient.
These studies show that the size of the donor liver does modify the
regenerative response in the transplanted liver. These findings may have
important implications in the matching of the donor and rcipient in clinical
liver transplantation.
P314
OUREXPERIENCE IN LIVERRE-TRANSPALANTATION
(RE-TX)
MORENO G.E.; GOMEX S.R.; LOINAZ S.C.; MAFFETTONE V.; GARCIA G. I.;
GONZALEZ-PINTO I.; JIMENEZ R.C.; PALOMO .J.C.; PA;MA C.F.; MARCELLO
F.M.
Digestive Surgery Department. Hospital 12 de Octubre. Madrid. Spain
We present our experience on liver RE-TX during 5 years from starting
of the program. The poor clinical condition of the patients and the need of
urgent procedure can be a very serious medical and surgical problem.
Between 1986 and November 1991 we hay eperformed 238 orthotopic
liver transplantation (OLT) in 193 patients. In 37 patients we carried out
45 RE-TX (2 RE-TX in 7 patients and 3RE-TX in one). The indications
for RE-TX were: chronic rejection (22), primary graft failure (10), hepatic
artery thrombosis (6), acute rejection (2), hepatitis and/or cirrhosis
recurrence (4( and acute massive hepatic necrosis (1) The mean time for
RE-TX was: chronic rejection 11.2 +_ 9.54 months, primary graft failure
6.5 _+ 9.7 days, hepatic arterial thrombosis 3.1 +_ 3.2 months, acute
rejection 32 + 16 days, hepatitis and/or cirrhosis recurrence 15.3 _+ 5.6
months and acute massive hepatic necrosis 45 days.
The overall mortality was 32.4% (12 Patients); 8 patients (21.6%) of
them died in per-operative period (6.8 + 7.3 days) and the causes were;
sepsis (4 pts), acute pancreatitis (lpt), brain death (2 pts) and for
haemorrhage from partial graft. The others 4 patients (13.7%) died at the
follow up (5.5 _+ 3.3 months) from sepsis (2 pts). The actuarial survival
rate at 1, 3 and 4 years is 88.2%, 80.2% and 80.2% respectively.
RE-TX is sometimes an unavoilable rescue procedure for liver
transplant patients with irreversible graft failure.
P315
RF_ULTS OF ORTHOTOPIC LIVER TRANSPLANTATION IN
FULMINANT HEPATIC FAILURE
MORENO G.E.; GARCIA G.I.; LOINAZ S.C.; GOMEZ S.R.; GONP.; RIA,IO C.D.;
DAVILA M.P.; VERCEDO M.J.
Digestive Surgery Department. Hospital 12 de Octubre. Madrid. Spain
Twenty-four orthotopic liver transplants were done on fulminant
hepatic failure (FHF), among 232 liver transplants performed from April
1986 to September 1991.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Age limits were 3 to 60 (average 31.5). The ethiology of FHF was
unknown in 19; HBsAg+ in 4 and toxicity of isoniazide in the last. Blood
group (donor/recipient) were identical in 15, compatible in 6 and
incompatible in 3. The graft was total liver in 18 and "reduced liver" (left
lobe) in 6 (one case of split liver). 5 patients received a second graft and 2
a third graft.
RESULTS
Mortality: Four patinets died during the 30 days postoperative period
(16%). Seven patients received a second graft (chronic rejection, 3
patients; primary nonfunction, 2 patients; cirrhosis, one;’ arterial
thrombosis, one). Two patients of this group need a third graft for chronic
rejection and postnecrotic cirrhosis.
Follow-up: Four patients died between 4 months to 19 months as result
of multiorgan failure, pneumoniae and subacute neumoniae.
Survival: Ten patients are still living between 3 months to 4 years.
From the 7 retransplanted patients, three survived between 2.5 to 19
months, and three are surviving between 22 months to three years.
119
P316
FINE NEEDLEASPIRATION CYTOLOGY IN THE
MONITORING OF LIVERALLOGRAFTS IN THE PIG
M.F. NIELSEN1’2, M.HOKLAND2, M.H. SHOKOUH-AMIRP, L.S.JENSEN
P.WARA AND S.L. JENSEN
Department of sugery L, Transplant Unit, Aarhus University Hospital, Section KH,
2Institute of Medical Microbiology, Department of Immunology, University of Aarhus,
Aarhus Denmark
The diagnosis of acute liver allograft refuction is difficult to establish,
as clinical signs and biochemical findings of liver dysfunction are rather
nonspecific. The diagnosis of allograft rejection is mainly based on needle
biopsy histology. However, the core needle biopsy (NB) may be
associated with complications such as bleedings or infections. Recently
fine needle aspiration cytology has been applied for monitoring liver
transplants and it has proven useful for the diagnosis of acute liver
allograft rejection. In the present study, fine needle aspiration
biopsy(FNAB) was performed in pigs undergoing orthotopic liver
allotransplantation and the results compared with histology in specimens
obtained concomitantly by NB. Special emphasis was focused on
cholestasis, fatty changes, necrosis, glycogen and RNA synthesis as well
as on the relation between inflammatory cell pattern in FNAB specimens
and the severity of inflammatory cell infiltration on cryostat sections using
the indirect immunoperoxidase assay. Our results indicate onset of acute
cellular rejection on the 4th day agter transplantation with lymphoid blasts
and lymphocyte infiltration, later accompanied by monocytes and
macrophages. Maximal intensity of inflammation detected as total
corrected increment values was recored in FNAB on day 10 to 14 after
transplantation. Histological evaluation of the graft based on NB specimen
demonstrated distincr inflammation in the portal area on day 4 eventually
followed by mononuclear cell infiltration of the intralobular parenchyma.
With the indirect immunoperoxidase, technique, lymphoid cell
subpopulation analysis of FNAB and NB demonstrated an increase of
both T Helper/inducer, T suppressor/cytotoxic and B lymphocytes during
actue cellular rejection. In additon, an increase of class II and IL-2 positive
lymphoid cells could be detected in the graft during rejection episodes.
Thus, we conslude that FNAB is a safe, reliable and atraumatic method
for detecting early episodes of acute liver allograft rejection without any
risk to the graft or the graft recipient, However, FNAB gives no
information about the degree of vascular rejection and when additional
information about parenchymal degeneration and location of pathological
processes in needed, NB has to be applied.
P317
HISTIDINE-TRYPTOPHAN-KETOGLUTRATE (HTK)
PRESERVATION SOLUTION IN PORCINE LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION. INFLUENCE ON THE HEPATIC
CIRCULATION
K.J. OLDHAFER G GUBERNATIS, J. HAUSS, R. PICHLMAYR
Hannover Medical School, Department of Surgery, F.R.G.
The HTK solution has been successfully used for kidney preservation.
We have now investigated the HTK solution in experimental liver
transplantation. The purpose of the investigation was to study the hepatic
blood flow and vascular resistance in HTK stored livers.
METHODS; Orthotopic liver transplantation has been performed in 12
pigs. The cold HTK solution was flushed simultaneously via aorta and
portal vein for 8 min. The cold ischemic tiem was 5.9-&_ 0.48 hours.
Hepatic arterial and portal venous flows wedre measured with an
electromagnetic flowmeter (Cliniflow II, Model FM701D) in the donor
and at least hour after reperfusion in the recipient. Pressures were
obtained directly form the portal and hepatic vein and arterially.
RESULTS: The flow of the hepatic artery was 143.0 + 33.5 ml/min in
the donor and 198.4 + 68.2 ml/min after reperfusion. The arterial vascular
resistance was 79.3 + 22.9 Pa min/ml in the donor and 65.9 + 19.8 Pa
min/ml in the recipient. The flow of the portal vein was 490.5 + 173.7
ml/min in the donor and 649.1 + 185.3 ml/min after reperfusion. The
vascular resistance was 2.04 + 1.7 Pa min/ml in the donor and 1.62 + 0.69
Pa min/ml in the recepient.
CONCLUSION: From histological analysis it is known that swelling of
sinusoidal lining cells and hepatocytes after cold preservation and
reperfusion is likely. So, the result that the vascular resistance after
reperfusion did not increase in HTK stored livers was unexpected. It may
be interpreted as a sign of an intact microcirculation. However, shunts
bypassing the sinusoids or even the influence of denervation could not be
excluded. This remains to be further clarified by simultaneous monitoring
of the microcirculation.
P318
PROSTAGLANDIN E (PGE1) THERAPY DURING
ORTHOTOPIC LIVER TRANSPLANTATION (OLT)
PROTECTIVE EFFECTS ON PLATELET FUNCTION
H. RIESS, G. HIMMELREICH, K. HUNDT, G. BLUMHARDT, R, ROISSANT,
P. NEUHAUS.
Departments of Internal Medicine, Surgery and Anaestesiology, University Hospital
Rudolf Virchow, D-1000 Berlin 19.
We recently showed that in addition to the well-known drop in platelet
count platelet function decreased after revascularisation fo the graft in
OLT. This may be important for the development of bleeding
complications in OLT. PGE has been shown to have platelet protective
effects in extracorporal circulations.
In an open, prospective and randomized study we studied the effect of a
continuous PGEl-infusion on platelet count and platelet function in 10 vs."
10 patients during OLT.
As compared with the control group PGEl-infusion (10-40ug/h)
resulted in a better maintenance of ex vivo platelet aggregability in
response to ADP (1, 2 umol/1), ristocetin (1, 2 mg/ml) and collagen (0.5,
ug/ml). Furthermore PGEl-infusionprevented the drop in platelet count
observed in the controls after reperfusion.
Blood product requirements during OLT and in th first three
postoperative days were comparable.
In conclusion, PGE therapy during OLT preserves platelet function
and prevents the drop in platelet count observed in controls after
revascularisation. If these effects may result in less bleeding complications
or less transfusion requirements has to be defined in clinical trials.
P319
PROSTAGLANDIN E1(PGE) THERAPYDURING
ORTHOTOPIC LIVERTRANSPLANTATION (OLT) EFFECTS
ON PLASMA HEMOSTASIS
G. HIMMELREICH, P. BREINDL, W.O. BECHSTEIN R. ROISSANT, P. NEUHAUS,
H. RIESS
Departments of Internal Medicine, Surgery and Anaestesiology, University Hospital
Rudolf Virchow, D-1000 Berlin 19.
We and others showed that bleeding complications in OLT most likely
are due to the deterioration of an already disturbed hemostasis by the
influx of mediators released in the graft liver during reperfusion. PGE has
been shown to have beneficial effects in the treatment of ischemic injury
of the liver.
In an open, prospective and randomized study we studied the effect of a
continuous PGE1- infusion on several parameters of hemostasis in 10 vs.
10 patients during OLT.
As compared with the control group PGE1- infusion (10-40ug/h)
resulted in an increase of t-PA-activity paralleled by more pronounced
plasminogen and antiplasmin consumtions during the anhepatic phase.
There were no differences in parameters of the intrinsic fibrinolytic system
(scuPA, u-PA) nor in the incidence of hyperfibrinolysis in
thrombelatography (0/10 vs. 0/10).
Parameters of the coagulation system (scuPA, u-PA) nor in the
incidence of hyperflbrinolysis in thrombelatography (0/10 vs. 0/10).
Parameters of the coagulation system (fibrinogen, fibrinmonomers, D-
dimers, antithrombin III, protein C, and C1-inhibitor) did not differ
between both groups.
Blood product requirements during OLT and in the first three
postoperative days were comparable.
In conclusion, PGE therapy during OLT results in minor changes in
plasma parameters of hemostatis. The clinical role of PGE in OLT
remains to defined.
P320
AUTOTRANSPLANTATION OF LIVER TISSUE IN ISLOATED
SEGMENT OF SMALL INTESTINE IN PIG
M.H. SHOKOUH-AMIRI A.O. GABER, L.W. GABER, M. BAYAT, S. RAHIMI-
SABER, S. RUSTO, S.L. JENSEN, H. GREWAL, L.G. BRITT
Department of Surgery, Division of Transplantation, University of Tennessee, Memphis,
USA, and Department of Surgery L, Aarhus Kommunehospital, Aarhus University Aarhus,
Denmark
Liver trasnplantation is an excellent but expensive treatment for acute
liver failure and end stage liver diseases. However, its use is limited by a
donor shortage. In order to develop a bridging procedure model, especially
in patients with acute fulminant liver failure, autotransplantation of sliced
liver tissue in isolated segment of small bowel was performed in pigs. Six
pigs were submitted to left hemihepatectomy. Twenty gr of the removed
liver tissue to left were cut into slices of 2-3 mm thickness. A twenty cm
long isolated segment of small intestine with intact circulations was
prepared in the midjejunum. Mucosal layer was removed and the liver
slices were placed in this isloated segment of bowel evenly, and fixed with
5/0 abosrable sutures. Both ends of the bowel segment were closed and
the whole segment was fixed to the nearby bowel. The animals were
observed for six months. In one animal moderate regeneration of the
implanted liver tissue was observed, whereas no regeneration was found
in the other 5 animals. We conclude that implantatation of liver tissue in
an isolated segment of small intestine does not result in a satisfactory
regeneration of implanted tissue. Addition of some trophic agents such as
pancreatic tissue may enchance the regeneration of liver tissue in this
ectopic site.
120
P321
CHANGES IN HEPATIC BLOOD FLOW ANDPLASMA
CATECHOLAMINES AFTERREDUCED LIVER TRANSPLANT
STAPLETON GN. METS B*, JANICKI P#, HICKMAN ROSEMARY.
Departments of Surgery, Pharmacology, Anaesthetics# and The MRC Liver Center,
University of Cape Town.
Because hepatic blood flow has been inadequately studied after
orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) and not at all after reduced liver
transplantation (RLT) which is now increasingly employed in paediatric
OLT, where hepatic artery thrombosis is a common problem, blood flow in
the Portal vein (PV) and Hepatic artery (HA) have been studied before,
during and for 3 hours after experimental RLT under carefully controlled
anaesthetic conditions, with measurement of plasma adrenalin (ad) and
noradrenalin (NA).
METHODS: 6 pigs had RLT, 6 had autografts (AG) and 6 had sham
operations. RLTs and AGs were performed with passive portosystemic
bypass. Anaesthesia was induced with 750ng thiopentone i.v. and
maintained with 2.5g thiopentone i.m. Na0 and Ozby volume cycle
ventillator, and pancuronium bromide 4rag i.v. as required for muscle
relaxation. Cardio-resporatory status was constantly monitored by
intraarterial pressure readings and ECG and measurement of central venous
pressure (CVP), pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), cardiac
output and arterial bolld gases at 13 predetermined stages of the
experiment, when blood samples were also taken for catecholamine levels.
At the same stages blood flow was measured in the HA and PV by
Ultrasonic cuffs placed around the vessels and computed by a Transonic
flowmeter.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS: Haemodynamic changes after RLT were
similar to those after AG. Hepatic blood flow was decreased after both
procedures compared with shams. Portal flow recovered quickly whereas
HA flow took longer. There was, however, no difference in flow per gram
of liver between autografts and RLTs. Noradrenalin remained significantly
higher after revascularization ofreduced grafts than autografts
CONCLUSION: Hepatic blood flow after RLT adapts to the same flow
per gram of liver as the intact liver autograft.
P322
THE BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE RIGHT AND LEFT HEPATIC
DUCTS OF HUMAN LIVERS
G.N. STAPLETON R.HICKMAN, J. TERBLANCHE
M.R.C. liver Research Centre, Department of Surgery, University of Cape Town, RSA.
AIM: To determine the anatomy of the blood supply of the right and
left hepatic ducts to establish whether right or left hepatic lobes should be
preferred for reduced liver grafts, which are now widely employed for
treating end stage liver disease in paediatric patients.
METHODS: Livers were removed from human cadavers within 18
hours of death. Corrosion casts were made of the hepatic arterial and
portal venous systems with Batson’ no 17 corrosion compound. The casts
were microscopically dissected to reveal the peribiliary plexuese (PBP).
The dissections were sketched with the major arteries coloured differently.
Vessels entering the PBP were coloured according to the main artery of
origin. The diameters of all main arteries and branches to PBP were
measured with a reflex microscope. Diameters of arteries feeding PBP
from fight and left hepatic and gastroduodenal arteries were summated
and expresses as a ratio of the parent vessel diameter.
RESULTS:
9 casts were analysed
GDA GDbr RHA
Mean 2.67 1.17 2.8
SD 0.63 0.89 0.99
RHAbr LHA
4.12 2.47
1.47 0.62
LHAbr
2.51
1.66
Mean ratios of total branch diameter/main vessel diameter were: GD
0.42; RHA 1.5 and LHA 0.97. The segment IV artery, main suppler to the
PBP on the left, arose from the RHA in 2 of the 9 casts.
CONCLUSIONS
Right hepatic artery was a more consistent supplier to the peribiliary
plexus than the left hepatic or gastroduodenal arteries.
P323
COLD PRESERVATION OF CANINE LIVER GRAFTS UNDER
HYPERBARIC OXYGEN OR COMPLETE LACK OF OXYGEN.
T.M. VAN GULIK C.R. NOI, A.J. VAN DER KLEIJ, D.J. BAKKER, P.J. KLOPPER,
M.N.VAN DER HEYDE. Dept. of Surgery, Academic Medical Centre, 9 Meibergdreed,
1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
After in situ flush with cold UW-solution, canine donor livers were
transferred to a pressure chamber and pressurized (1.5ATA) with either
100% oxygen or 100% nitrogen. Following 24h or 48h of cold storge
(CS) (4C), the liver was orthotopically transplanted. Graft function was
assessed by peak SGOT values and survival of the dog. The results were
compared with CS under room air and normal ambient pressure
(Reference group 24hrs CS; mean peakSGOT 2463 u U/I (SEM 897,n=4)
48 hrs CS: mean peakSGOT 4575 U/I(SEM781,n=6); Survival >6 days).
Dog Storge Gas /pressure Peak SGOT Survival
24hours 100% 02/1.5ATA 1584 U/I 6 days
2 3718
3 48hours 100% 02/1.0ATA 3566 9
4 100%02/1.5ATA 5615 13
5 5720 9
6 100% N2/1.5ATA 5000 8
7 1960 8
8 3234 6
Increased oxygen concentration (100% 02, 1-1.5ATA) did not result in
better preserved livers, up to 48 hrs CS. Livers which were deprived of
oxygen by saturation with 100% nitrogen (1.5ATA) also showed life-
supporting function with peak enzyme values comparable with the
reference group (48hrs CS). It can be concluded that neither the lack of
oxygen of its excess (up to 100% 02, 1.5ATA0, does act upon the quality
of preservation or the injury sustained on reperfusion of liver grafts, in
terms of functional outcome after transplantation.
P324
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIONAND LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS (PTLD) AFTERLIVERTRANSPLANTATION
Z.YILMAZ, V.McALISTER, A. ROY, D.R.GRANT, C.GHENT, W.J.WALL
Multi-organ transplant unit, University Hospital, London, Ontario, Canada. N6A 5A5.
The price of powerful immunosuppression has been an inceasing
incidence of sepsis and post transplant malignancy. We reviewed our
esperience since 1977 to document the incidence of PTLD after liver
transplantation and possibly changing risk factors. Prior to 1988,
immunosuppression was induced with anti-lymphocyte glogulin(ALG);
subsequently, OKT3 was used. All patients after 1980 received
cyclospofine.
Ten of 330 patients developed PTLD; four are alive 2-65 months after
diagnosis. Patients who developed Ptld received OKT3, ALG or high does
steroid for longer, 18 days (+/-7.6), than those who did not, 6 days (+/-5.3)
P<0.01. Similar total doses of ALG, OKT3, steroid and azathioprine were
used. No differences were seen in age, sex or preoperative diagnosis. Pre
and postoperative. Epstein Barr virus IgG titres were the same in both
groups.
We conclude that it is not the type of profoundly immunosuppressive
agent but the length of time for which it is used that is the risk factor in the
development of PTLD.
121
P325
LIVER GROWTH, BLOOD FLOW ANDFUNCTIONAFTER
PARTIAL ORTHOTOPIC TRANSPLANTATION IN THE RAT.
E.ZOUCAS, A FOSS, R ANDERSSON B AHRIN & S BENGMARK
Department of Surgery, Univ Hosp, S-221 85 Lund, Sweden
Orthotopic liver transplantation after 34% resection of the total liver
weight was performed in Sprague-Dawley rats. A microsurgical technique
for the end-to-end anastomosis of the supra-, infra-hepatic vena cava and
the portal vein was used. The transplanted liver was fully arterialized.
Untreated animals, as well as liver resected (34%) rats were used as
controls. All animals were followed up for 28 days after operation. Liver
growth was studied by repeated measurements of the organ, using
Vomprterized Tomo-graphy (CT0. Blood flow was measured by Laser
doppler flowmeter immediately after operation, as well as four weeks
later. Liver function was assayed by Protrombin-Time (PT) and by the
antipyrine clearance test. Tests were obtained 3,7,14 an 22 days after
organ uptake of I13-labelled E. coli bacteria.
All animals survived 34% liver resection. In the transplanted group
survival rate was 60%. There was a significant increase in transplant
weight and volume compared to the weight of the resected liver post
operatively. Liver blood flow was increased immediately after liver
resection and after liver transplantation compared to untreated controls.
Upon sacrifice a significant increase of blood flow was observed in the
median lobe, while blood flow to the caudate lobe was decreased. P{T and
antipyrine clearance were decreased 7 and 14 days after transplantation.
RES function was similar in all groups.
In conclusion, partial liver transplantation with arterialization of the
graft may be used for the study of liver transplantation in the rat. Using
microsurgical techniques, blood flow was readily resrtored in the graft.
Growth in the volume of the transplant was evident, as early as 3 days
after was superssed up to 14 days after transplantation. RES function of
the transplant was intact.
P326
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION IN THE ELDERLY
K.-W.JAUCH E. PRATSCHKE, M. STANGL, M. ANTHUBER, F.W. SCHILDBERG,
J. GROH, G. PAPE
Liver Transplant Group, Clinic GroBhadern, Munich, FRG
LTx has become a standard procedure in end stage liver disease and
usually upper age limit is set by 60 years. We compared the outlook in our
first 125 Ltx patients since 1985 over 60 years (n=16) with the younger
patients below 59 years (N=85).
In the elderly, liver tumours were responsible for nearly 50% of all
indications in comparison to 25% in younger people. Postoperative
complications didn’t differ except primary Tx-failure which was observed
in four patients (25%) of the elderly during the first three years when we
didn’t use a venous bypass. Length of ventilatory support and ICu-Stay
wasn’t different too. The long term survival was nearly identical with 62%
vs 71% first-year survival in all indications.
In properly selected elderly patients LTx may be performed with the
same success as in younger patients.
P327
HEPATIC TRANSPLANTATION AS SEEN BY CT AND MRI
M McPHILLIPS R, FEHR AND B. MARINCEK
Department of Medical Radiology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland
A study was performed to assess the usefulness of computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in diagnosis
and management after liver transplantation.
We reviewed the CT scans and MR examinations of 24 patients. The
imaging was done between 2 days and 28 months after transplantation.
In all patients a periportal and pericaval oedema was seen, due to
disruption of lymphatic drainage. This resolves, sometimes very slowly.
The evolution and resolution ofpost-operative complications such as peri-
hepatic fluid collections, hepatic perfusion defects and haemorrhage of the
fight adrenal gland were documented. Several patients had biliary leaks, of
which no evidence was seen on CT or MRI, confirming that these should
not be the primary imaging modalities for biliary pathology. Two of our
patients received livers from child donors and another a ’reduced-size’
liver. Hepatic hypertrophy was visible as earlu as the seventh post-
operative day.
Many of the complications seen post-transplantation will resolve, but
monitoring with CT or MRI helps to confirm resolution or to reveal the
need for intervention.
P328
RIGHT LOBECTOMY FORLIVER TRAUMA.
G.DE SENA G.M. BUONANNO, G. AMATUCCI, P.FESTA, S.BORRIERO? F.
CHIANESE, A. BRIGANTE, L. DE RIENZO, A. SANTA MARIA, L. CROCCO, L.
MANSI, C. LOMBARDI, G. FIORDIENZI.
Department of Surgery "G. Moscati" Hospital Avellino-Italy
The authors relate about a case of hepatic trauma found in a young man
of fortyseven that, falling from a scaffolding, suffered a fracture of the
right liver. The himely aid and the ready diagnosis by an hepatosplenic
scintigraphy at Tc99 allowed the immediate operation that showed a
massive haemoperitoneum. It was generated by a frontal fracture of the
right liver involving the right hepatic vein and the pedicles of the anterior
and posterior segments. The good reanimation happened before the
operation and during it, that based itselfprevalently on "Emagel" and
blood transfusions, and Pringle’ clampage that reduced partly the
bleeding during the operation allowed the execution of a right lobectomy.
The patient lived the hospital 24 days after. The very high mortality (50%
Walt; 60% Blumgart et Defore) for extended hepatic resections for
traumatic lesions (this operation is already very rareCalne 0,5-7%)
justifies the interest in these cases crowned with success. Furthermore,
Lorimer and Kraft report, respectively, a 75% and 82% mortality in the
hepatic trauma with lesions ofbig vessels.
122
P329
THE MANAGEMENT OF TRAUMATIC HEPATIC INJURIES
D.M.K.S. KAULESAR SUKUL E.J. JOHANNES, P.H. HARRBRINK
Department of Traumatology/general Surgery, University Hospital Rotterdam, Dijkzigt,
3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands
To contribute to accurate diagnostics and treatment of patients with
hepatic injuries, we reviewed the medical records of 120 consecutive
patients, who were treated in our hospital, for traumatic hepatic lesions in
the period of 1980 to 1991.
Of all patients the mechanism of the injury, the diagnostic methods, the
associated injuries, the location of the hepatic injury, the presence of
vascular and bile duct lesion, the treatment and the final results and
complications are discussed.
The high mortality rate ofpatients with hepatic trarma, is in our opinion
not due to the hepatic injury per se, but due to the severe concomitant
injuries resulting from a high energy trauma, which could be confirmed in
our analysis.
Early consideration of packing the liver might be advantageous in those
cases where an anatomical restoration fo the liver proved to be impossible.
It seems that the best results are achieved in the group where
hemodynamic stability is obtained at an early stage.
Based on the literature and our own experience we designed an
algorithm for the management of hepatic injuries.
P330
ULTRASOUND PERCUTANEOUS MANAGEMENT OF INTRA-
ABDOMINAL BILOMAS
MEKKY F. SHEHAB W., IBRAHEM E., GAMAL M. SALEM M., KHAHIL MS.
Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt
In a two-years period, 13 bilomas developed in 10 patients. Seven of
the patients had solitary biloma. While the other 3 patients had two
bilomas. The major two causes, which equally shared in the formation of
bilomas, were liver trauma and biliary tract procedures. Five bilomas were
managed by US guided percutaneous repeated needle aspiration, while 8
bilomas were managed by US guided percutaneous, pig-tail 8-french,
catheter drainage. Culture was positive for organisms in 9 patients, of
them was E.coli. Amikacin was the most sensitive antibiotic to be used.
Cure was achieved in 7 patients with a mean cure time of 18.2 + 3.4 days,
while partial cure was achieved in the other 3 patients. No failure,
mortalities or morbidities were met with among these patients.
P331
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY ON ENERGY METABOLISM OF
ISCHAEMIC LIVER WITH OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICE USING
31p.MRS
AKIYAMA, Tl)., KINAMI, y,2)., KOJIMA, y1)., KITA, I)., TAKASHIMA, S
The Second Department of Surgery )., Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research
Institute 2) Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan
Energy metabolism of ischemic liver with obstructivejaundice was
investigated in rats using 31 P-MRS. In the jaundice group the common
bile duct was artificially obstructed for 3 weeks, while in the control group
sham operation was performed. In both group hepatic artery and portal
vein were clamped for 15 minutes, and 3 P-MRS was werially
investigated before clamp, during clamp, and 10, 30, 60, 120 minutes after
declamp, then B-ATP/Pi was examined. In the control group the value of
B-ATP/Pi before clamp was 0.848+0.143 (mean + SD), and then during
clamp decrease to 0.133 + 0.009. After declamp B-ATP/Pi was recovered
rapidly as follows: 0.530-2_0.196 (10 minutes after declamp), 0.735+0.043
(120 minutes). On the other hand, in the jaundice group the value of B-
ATP/Pi before clamp was 0.686+0.183, lower than the control group.
Recovery after declamp was delayed compared with control group as
follows: 0.228+0.070 (during clamp), 0.422+0.310 (10 minutes after
clamps), 0.492+0.298 30 minutes), 0.629+0.251 (60 minutes),
0.732+0.224 (120 minutes). From these results, it is suggested that on
energy metabolism the hepatic cellular damage may be induced by liver
ischemia in obstructivejaundice.
P332
THE INFLUENCE OF HEPATIC PERFUSION UPON THE
SURVIVAL OF THE ISOLATED PERFUSED RAT BRAIN.
B ALEXANDER. M ASLAM1, IS BENJAMIN.
Dept. of Surgery, King’s College, London, UK. Dept. of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate
Medical School, London, UK.
The Pathogenesis of portal-systemic encephalopathy is complex and
still remains poorly understood. The multifaxtorial nature of the diseases
and the effect which other organs may have upon brain metabolism may
complicate and perhaps overshadow malfunctioned subtle biochemical
interrelationshipos which may exist between the liver and brain Geiger
and Magnes (1947) first suggested that such an interrelationship could
exist: this they concluded from a series of isolated perfused cat brain and
liver perfusions which have never been repeated or confirmed. Modem
technological developments enabled us to construct an isolated rat brain
perfusion circuit which could also accommodate an isolated perfused rat
liver perfused concomitantly. Brains which were perfused at a
physiological perfusion pressure of 120 mmhg (aflow rate of 2.5-3.0
ml/min) were shown to remain alive for a median of 35 minutes (range 22
to 53 minutes, n+12) as measured by the gradual reduction in spontaneous
EEG activity to a background nose of less than 5hz. Concomitant
perfusion with an isolated perfused rat liver, extended this survival time to
a median of 210 (range 172 to 480 minutes). These results suggest the
liver may produce a substance or substances normally required for brain
homeostasis.
Geiger A., Magnes M (1947:): Am J Phusiol 149:517-537
123
P333
THE EFFECT OF PORTAL HYPERTENSION ON
BACTERIALTRANSLOCTAION IN THE RAT
R.ANDERSOON X.D. WANG, V. SOLTESZ*, S. BENGMARK
Departments of Surgery and Midical Microbiology*, Lurid, Sweden
Intraabdominal infectious complications are frequently encountered
following major liver resection, In pervious experimental studies we have
demonstrated an increased incidence in enteric bacterial translocation
following major liver resection. The influence of alterations in portal
venous pressure on bacterial tranlocation following major liver resection
is, however, not known.
70 or 90% liver resections or portal venous ligation were performed in
the rat. Mortality was encountered, as well as the incidence of bacterial
translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes, portal and systemic blood and
visceral organs (liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs) at various time-points after
operation. Systemic arterial and portal bolld pressure and subserosal blood
flow int eh intestine were determined.
The incidence of bacterial translocation significantly increased in
animals with 90% hepatectomy. Portal pressure increase both in group
treated with 90% hepatectomy and portalligation alone. Subserosal blood
flow in the small intestine diminished in animals
with both major liver resection and portal hypertension alone, while
diminish in the colon was only seen in 90% hepatectomy.
We conclude that the increase in portal venous pressure per se
following major liver resection could hardly be a major contributory factor
explaining the increased incidence ofbacterial translocation following
major liver resection.
P334
THE INFLUENCE OF ACUTE LIVERFAILURE ON THE
R. ANDERSSON S.D. WANG, A. AR’ RAJAB, V. SOLTESZ1, WENQI WANG2,
M.L. SVENSSON3, C. SVANBORG S. BENGMARK
Departments of Surgery, Medical Microbiology1, Internal Medicine and Clinical
Immunology3, Lund, Sweden
Bacterial infections are frequently encountered following acute liver
failure (ALF). We have previously demonstrated the occurrence of
bacterial translocation in ALF. The influence on the intestine has,
however, not been evaluated.
ALF was induced by 90% hepatectomy in the rat. Systemic and local
portal circulation as well as intestinal microcirculation was evaluated at
various timepoints following 90% hepatectomy. Changes in intestinal
morphology was estimate by light microscopy and morphometric system.
Mucosal mass, protein content, bile secretion and bacterial content and
overgrowth was also determined.
90% hepatectomy resulted in an immediate decrease in systemic arterial
blood pressure and an increase in portal venous prssure. Subserosal micro-
circulation and small arterial circulation in proximal and distal small
intestine and colon significantly diminished by time following 90%
hepatectomy. Microvillous height significantly decreased from lh and on,
and villous height and area in the distal small intestine form 2 h after
operation Small intestinal mucosal mass decreased 2 h after hepartecromy.
Protein content in enterocytes and bile secretion from the liver remnant
were markedly reduced in hepatectomized rats. Overgrowth and
colonization of E.coli occured in the distal small intestine from lh and on
after hepatectomy.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates intestinal alterations that
can contribute in explaining the enteric bacterial translocation occuring in
surgically induced acute liver failure.
P335
BACTERIAL TRANSLOCATION IN ACUTE LIVERFAILURE
INDUCED BY 90% HEPATECTOMY IN THE RAT
R. ANDESSON X.D. WANG, V SOLTESZ*, S. BENGMARK
Department of Surgery and Medical Microbiology*, Lund, Sweden
Bacterial infections and bacteremia are quite frequently observed
following major liver resection and in patients with acute liver failure
(ALF). The exact source of the bacteria, as well as the pathophysiological
mechanisms explaining the development of infection remain unclear.
ALF was induce by 90% hepatectomy in the rat. Mesenteric lymph
nodes (MLN), visceral organ, (liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs) and blood
were aseptically harvested for bacteriological cultures before and at
various time points after 90% hepatectomy. Liver function tests, arterial
blood pressure as well as whole body and gut oxygen extraction were
assayed. Reticuloendothelial system (RES) function was determined by
blood clearance and organ localization of intravenously injected
25Ilabeled E. coli.
Translocation of enteric bacteria to MLN was evident 2 h
postoperatively and significantly increased to the various organs and blood
by time following hepatectomy. Overgrowth of E.coli in the distal
intestine started 2 h postoperatively. RES function decreased immediately
after 90% hepatectomy, although uptake rates per gram tissue in the
various organs significantly increased. Also gut oxygen extraction
decreased following hepatectomy.
In clnclusion, bacterial transloction occurred in the early phase after
hepatectomy-induced ALF, associated with a decrease in RES function
and gut oxygen extraction and an intestinal overgrowth of E.coli.
P336
PRIMARY LYMPHOMA OF THE LIVER TREATEDVCITH
LEFT HEPATIC LOBECTOMY
C.W.BIERMANN; G. FR)SCHLE; H. J. WHH; U.MEUER-PANNEITT;
CH.E. BROELSCH
Department of Surgery and Oncology; The University of Hamburg; Germany
1976 Kim et al were the first, who described primary lymphomas in the
liver. Until now 48 cases have been publicated in the international
literatury. We report about a 71-years old patient who was diagnosed a
spaceoccupy of the left liver lobe through routine ultrasound. The
extensive diagnoses by DSA and Angio-CT confirmed a 5 x 5 cm solide
space-occupy in the left liver lobe as well as kidney cysts right and a liver
cysts in the right liver lobe. Except gamma-GT (62 U/l) and AP (107 U/l)
all laboratory findings had normal value. An explorative laparotomy with
left lobectomy and segmentectomy (VII) was done. Postoperative course
with CHOP-cycles followed as well as regular staging. Two years after
primary surgical thereapy no relapse was diagnosed and the patient is in
good condition. Although the number of these patients are small, the data
suggest aggressive surgical resection where possible, in conjunction with
chemotherapy.
124
P337
CHARGES IN HEPATIC CIRCULATION IN CONSCIOUS
DOGS: EFFECT OF GASTROINTESTINAL HORMONES
K INOUE, MKOGIRE, S SUMI, S HIGASHIDE, K TRAKAORE, K UCHIDA, T TOBE
First Department of Sugery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto university, Kyoto 606
Effects of vasoactive intestional peptide (VIP), Epidermal growth factor
(EGF) and glucagon on hepatic circulation were studied in the conscious
state.
Under pentobarbital anesthesia, probes of an ultrasonic transitime
volume flowmeter (T201, Transonic System Inc)were applied on the
portal vein and hopatic artery in beagle dogs. After seven says recovery,
measurement of hopatic circulation in the conscious state was started. The
basal blood flows of the portal bein and hopatic artery in the conscious
were 345 + 52ml/min and 59 + 10ml/min, respectively (n=7). VIP,EGF
and glucagon stimulated dose-dependent increases in in portal venous
flow, showing the maximal invrement of 61 + 10% (n=7), 61 + 16% (n=5)
and 61 +16% (n=5), respectively.
Hepatic arterial blood flow was significantly increased, showing the
maximal increment of 572 + 158% (n=7) and 61 + 14% (n=5),
respectively, in response to VIP and EGF. Glucagon exerted no effect on
hepatic arterial flow. This study suggests that fastrointestinal hormones
may influence hepatic circulation throug different mechanisms.
P338
SANDOSTATIN PROTECTS AGAINST ENDOTOXIN-INDUCED
LIVERAND KIDNEY NECROSIS AND THEIMPAIRMENT OF
RENAL FUNCTION
s A JENKINS. H KYNASTON, N DAVIES, M O’DRISCOLL, YATES, K PARSONS,
AND B A TAYLOR
Departments of Surgery and Nuckear Medicine, Royal Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool
Previous studies have demonstrated that sandostation (SMS)
ameliorates hepatic necrosis and renal tubular damage following E. Coli.
endotoxin adminstration in rats. The aim of the present study was to
establish whether the beneficial effects of SMS on the liver and kidney
could be explained by alterations in blood flow to these two organs.
Groups of male Wistar rats (n=10) received either intraperitoneal
endotoxin (2mg/100g) or saline. A further group received SMS
immediately prior to and 12 hours after adminstration of endotoxin.
Hepatic and renal blood flow were measured by the microsphere method
and renal function was assessed by plasma clearance of Mag 3, a renal
tubular agent. SMS prevented the hepatic necrosis and renal tubular
damage observed in rats treated with endotoxin alone. Cardiac output was
significantly reduced in the two groups that received endotoxin (p<0.001,
ANOVA). There was no significant difference in hepatic or renal blood
flow between the groups. Mag 3 clearance was significantly reduced in
the group that received endotoxin (0.76 + 0.05ml/min/100g;mean + SEM)
compared to controls (1.11+ 0.09ml/min/100g; mean +SEM) and SMS
treated animals (1.23+0.09ml/min/100g mean + SEM). endotoxaemic
hepatic necrosis and renal tubular damage appears to result from a direct
effect on the liver and kidney rather than alterations in haemodynamics.
Renal tubular function is protected by prior administration of SMS
although the precise mode of action is unclear.
P339
EFFECT OF TOTAL INTRAVENOUS ANESTHESIA WITH
PROPOFOL ON HEPATIC FUNCTION
E. KARAMICHALI A. STOUMBOU, B. CHRISOVERGI, N. PAPARIZOU,
E. KURGIOU.
Department of Anaesthesia. Evangelismos Hospital Athens, Greece.
There is a need to study the potential toxic effects of each new anaesthetic
in circumstances similar to which they will be used in clinical practice. The
aim ofthe present study was to demonstrate the influence ofpropofol on
liver function.
Methods: Twenty patients physical status, or II ASA, with normal liver
function, scheduled for non haemon’agic surgery whose duration was 91+4
min., were studied in tow groups. The groups were comparable with regard
to age and weight. All patients received for induction of anaesthesia propofol
single bolus injection 2.5 mg/kg. Maintenance of anaesthesia was with N20
66% in 02, supplemental A group received fentanyl 4gg/kg plus diazepam
0.15 0.2mg/kg and B group received continuous infusion ofpropofol at a
rate 6-12 mg/kg/h plus fentanyl 4gg/kg. Muscle relaxant was pancuronium.
All patients were premedicated with droperdiol 2.5mg and fentanyl 100gg.
We selected to monitor liver function the following laboratory testings:
transaminase (SGOT, SGPT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gamma glutamyl
transferase (YGT), 5-nucleotidase, chloesterol, albumin (A), globulin (G),
ratio A/G and total protein. The measurements were received direct before
(control) and after the use of propofol at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd post operative days.
The statistical analysis was performed by Student’s test for paired or
unpaired values. P values of less than 0.05 were considered significant.
Results: The incidence of changes was low and not significant in all
measurements in two groups and was not statistically different between
groups.
Discussion: It is important to establish that there is no evidence of liver
dysfunction following exposure to new intravenous agent propofol. It has
been shown that continuous intravenous anaesthesia may cause liver enzyme
changes particularly with althesin and ketamine during operations of
intermediate duration. Recently it is observed that the pharmacocinetics of
propofol might be affected by the presence of cirrhosis when prolonged
infusions are used. Our results demonstrate no adverse effects by using
normal induction and continuous infusion dose ofpropofol and also indicate
no significant changes in liver function.
P340
REDUCTION OF THE TOXICITY OF CONTINUOUS HEPATIC
ARTERY INFUSION OF INTERLEUKIN-2 WITH CIRCADIAN
PATTERNING
M.M.KEMENY G.ALAVA, J.OLIVER, F.B.SMITH
St. Vincent’s Hospital and Medical Centre, New York City, New York, USA
Toxicity with continuous infusions of IL-2 have limited the usefulness
and efficacy of this therapy as an antineoplastic agent. A new approach to
try to reduce the toxicities with circadian patterning of the hepatic artery
infusions is presented in this study. Hepatic artery catheters were placed
into Sprague Dawley and Fisher rats. Different cycles and doses of IL-2
were tried to examine the toxicity and tolerability. When a constant
continuous infusion was used only a dose of lmg/kg/d could be tolerated
without mortality. The mean survival times for 2,5, and 10mg/kg/d were
14.2,7, and 4 days respectively. Ifthe IL-2 was given in a "day cycle"
which was a continuous infusion but with maximum flow from 3 PM to
9PM and minimum flow from 3AM to 9AM the animals tolerate up to
10mg/kg/d with no mortalities. Ifthe IL-2 was given in a "night cycle"
with maximum flow from 3AM to 9AM and minimum flow from 3PM to
9PM then the animals could tolerate doses as high as 5mg/kg/d. But at
10mg/kg/d all the animals died with a mean survival of 8.0 days.
Circadian patterning with a "day cycle" allowed up to 10 times the doses
of IL-s to be given with no mortality and a reduced pathologic liver
toxicity.
125
P341
OXIDATION DAMAGE ANDACTIVITIES OF
ANTIOXIDATIVE ENZYMES IN THE LIVEROF SENFCENCE
ACCELERATED MOUSE
J.S. KIM*. S.T. KIM
Dept of Surgery, College of Medicine, Hallym Univ*., Seoul National Univ., Seoul, Korea
A role of oxygen free radical (OFR) has been suggested in aging
process, but most evidences are limited in the studies of non-mammalian
animals. So we used Senescence Accelerated Mouse (SAM-P) as a
mammalian model, because this mouse ages earlier and has about two-
thirds of life span of normal mouse (SAM-R), Degree of aging, oxidant
damage, and the activities of OFR-scavenging enzymes were measured
and compared in various organs of both groups (n=6, each group).
RESULTS: A significant increase of fluorescent age pigment (FAP), a
biochemical index of aging, was seen in the liver and the kidney of SAM-
P. Conjugated dienes (CD), peroxidation products of membrane lipid, was
also increased in the liver and the kidney of SAM-P. The contents of FAP
and CD in the liver were highly correlated (r=-0.0885). The activity of
OFR-scavenging enzymes was measured in the liver of two groups of
animals. The activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione
reductase were markedly reduced in SAM-P, but no difference was
observed in those of catalse and glutathine peroxidase. SOD in the
mitochondrial fraction of the liver was assayed by the electrophoresis and
indicated as Cu-Zn type. These date suggest that SAM-P appeared to be
damaged more by OFR and the liver was damaged most prominently.
Such higher degree of aging and oxidant damage may be related to
decreased activity of some OFR-scavenging enzymes.
P342
HEPATIC PROTEIN SYNTHESIS AND CYTOKINES IN
OBSTRUCTIVEJAUNDICE
F. KIMURA M. MIYAZAKI*, T. SUWA, K. HAYASHIDA, S. KAKIZAKI
Department of Surgery, Omiya Red Cross Hospital, Yono-Shi, Saitama-Ken, Japan
*The First Department of Surgery, Chiba University School of Medicine, Chiba-shi, Chiba-
Ken, Japan
Hepatic protein synthesis and cytokine activities were investigated in
obstructivejaundice. The contents of the following in the peripheral blood
were determined in 21 patients with obstructivejaundice before and two
weeks after percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD):
interleukin- (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor
(TNF),endotoxin (Et), acute-phase protein (APP)[Ctl-antitrypsin, Ctl_acid
glycoprotein, and fibrinogen] and negative acute-phase protein (NAPP)
[prealbumin and retinol binding protein]. The results: (1) IL-1 and I1-6
were significantly high (p<0.05) but was reduced after PTBD; no TNF
was detected; (2) Et was not detected; (3) APP was significantly higher
(p<0.05) but showed a tendency to decline after PTBD; (4) NAPP was
significantly low (p<0.01) but the content was restored to a normal level
after PTBD; (5) obstructivejaundice was associated with rised in the
peripheral blood IL-1 and IL-6 levels, increased hepatic production of
APP and reduced synthesis of NAPP.
P343
HAEMOBILIA: MANAGEMENT BY PERCUTANEOUS
SELECTIVE HEPATIC AFIRYEMBOLIZATION
JEJ KRIGE SJ BENINGFIELD*, TERBLANCHE
Departments of Surgery, Radiology* and MRC Liver Research Centre, University of Cape
town and Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa
Fourteen patients (10 men, 4 women, mean age 36.6 years, range 18-36
years) with major haemobilia originating in either the liver (13) or
gallbladder (1) were treated between 1977 and 1986. Bleeding was due to
penetrating (4) or blunt (1) liver trauma, iatrogenic (3) [percutaneous
transhepatic endoprosthetic stent placement (2) liver biopsy (1)],
arteriovenous malformation (2) fight hepatic artery aneurysm (2),
pyogenic liver abscess (1) and chronic cholecystitis with gallstones (1).
All patients had melaena, 5 had haematemesis and RUQ opain was
present in 8 patients. Only 2 patients werejaundiced. Bleeding from the
ampulla was identified in 2 patients during ERCP. Endoscopy identified
fresh blood in the second part of the duodenum in 7 pf 10 occasions. A
liver lesion was identified in 6 of 10 patients who underwent either CT
scanning or liver ultrasound. Selective hepatic angiography demonstrated
an intrahepatic bleeding source in 13 patients. An arteriobiliary fistula in
the gallbladder in patient was not identified by angiography. Selective
hepatic arterial embolization using either gelfoam pledgers or Gianturco
coils controlled bleeding in 10 of 12 patients. Embolization failed in 2
patients (1 with segmental liver necrosis required a fight hepatic
lobectomy and a second patient underwent surgery and ligation of the left
hepatic artery). Bleeding from the gallbladder in patient was treated by
cholecystectomy. Selective hepatic artery embolization was not attempted
in patient who underwent a left hepatic lobectomy. Selective hepatic
artery embolization was successful in 10 of 12 patients (83%) of whom
patient developed subsequent complications.
Selective hepatic artery embolization provides definitive control of liver
bleeding with a low incidence of complications and should be considered
the primary treatment of choice for intrahepatic haemobilia.
P344
EFFECTS OF THE UPPERABDOMINAL OPERATION ON
HEPATIC BLOOD FLOW
K.MIYATA H.TANIGUCHI, Y.UESHIMA, K.TAKEUCHI, A.OGURO, N.TSUKUA
and T.TAKAHASHI
First department of surgery, Kyoto prefectural university of medicine, Kyoto, Japan
The changes of hepatic blood flow during upper abdominal operation
were measured. Twenty five patients who had upper abdominal operation
were classified into the following three groups. Fourteen had subtotal
gastrectomy with resional lymphnodes dissection (10males and 4 females,
mean age: 62 years old), six underwent total gastrectomy with resional
lymphnodes dissection (2 males and 4 females, mean 61 y.o.), and five
had cholecystectomy (3 males and 2 females, mean age 51 y.o.). The
hepatic blood flow was measured using laserdoppler blood flow meter
(Peri Flux 3, Perimed Inc. Sweden), soon after laparotomy and organ
resection. The changes ofhepatic blood flow were compared among three
groups, and correlations to distribution of age, duration of operation, blood
loss, blood transfusion required, and the grade of dissection were tested.
There were no correlations between changes ofblood flow and range of
age, duration of operation, blood loss, requirement ofblood transinfusion,
and the grade of dissection. Hepatic blood flow after total gastrectomy
(mean 77.3%) is significantly decreased than after subtotal gastrectomy
112.7%) or after cholecystectomy 101.1% (p<0.05). In conclusion,
methods of operation were thought to affect hepatic blood flowduring the
operation.
126
P345
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING AS A
COMPLICATION INJAUNDICEDPATIENTS
A. POLUCHRONIDES C/SIMOPOULOS, D. BAXEVANIDES, G. HANOS
Propedeutic Surgery Clinic, Democritus University ofThrace, Alexandroupolis Greece
This is a retrospective clinical study which deals with upper
gastrointestinal bleeding as postoperative operation injaundiced patients.
This study concerns 80 patients (45 males 35 females) with
obstructivejaundice (hilirubin 3 gr.) who have been treated for the last
five years (average 64,2 years) the cause of thejaundice was genign in 36
patients and malignant in 24 patients.
The patients received Vit. K and 35 of them prophylactic antibiotics.
Patients out of 71 (7,5%) developed hemorrage from the uppper g.i. in
the early postoperative period.
P346
ARGON BEAM COAGULATIONAND HEPATECTOMY IN
THEPIG
R.R.POSTEMA, P.W.PLAISIER, F.J.W. TEN KATE*, O.T.TERPSTRA
The departments of General Surgery and Pathology*, University Hospital ’Dijkzigt’,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background: Argon beam coagulation is a new device for hemostasis
after surgery on parenchymatous organs. To conduct radiofrequency
current to the tissue it uses the flow of argon gas while the conventional
electrocoagulator uses air for electrofulguration. Little or no data is
available on its efficacy and tissue effect after hepatic resection.
Methods: In 52 liver lobes of 13 pigs we assessed the blood loss, the
time needed to achieve adequate hemostasis, the number of additional
sutures and the histology after argon beam coagulation compared with
suture ligation only, mattress sture technique and tissue glue applicatiofi.
The treatment was randomly assigned to any of the liver lobes in each pig.
Results: The blood loss after argon beam coagulation was 15 ml
(median; range 2 47 ml) while after simple suture ligation this was 68 ml
(2 260 ml, p<0.02). The time needed to achieve adequate hemostasis
after the argon beam coagulation was 4 min. (2 7 ), (control group 18
rain. (2 48), p<0.005), there was no difference in these parameters
between argon beam coagulation and the tissue glue technique. Both were
also superior to the use of mattress sutures. Argon beam coagulation
resulted in less tissue reaction than the use of tissue glue or mattress
suturing.
Conclusion: Argon beam coagulation is an efficient device to achieve
hemostasis after partial liver resection in the pig.
P347
ALTERATIONS OF SERUM PROTEINS IN LIVER
REGENERATION AFTERPARTIAL HEPATECTOMY IN RAT
AL.MARGELI, S.SKALTSAS S. TEOCHARIS AND B.KEKIS
Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Athens
Department of Surgery. Athens Medical Centre, Athens.
In the rat, partial hepatectomy (PH) with removal of approximately
70% of the liver mass, induces a rapid cell proliferation in the remaining
hepatic tissue. Male rats in groups of seven of the Quinster strain were
partial hepatectomised. Liver regeneration was estimated at time intervals
of 4,8,12,16,20,24,28,32,36,40,44,48,60 and 72 hours. The incorporation
of 3H-thymidine into DNA was determined at the time intervals, as an
index of liver proliferative activity. The Helena Serum Protein was
intended by electrophoresis on cellulose acetate.
DNA synthesis presented a peak within 24 and 32 hours and a second
one at 40 hours. Albumin values presented a decrease, more evident 20 to
72 hours, presenting a minimum at 48 hours, alglobulin was decreased
during the time examined except of48 and 60 hours, where the a2
globulin was increased. [and y globulins decreased form 4 hours,
presenting the lower values between 20 and 28 hours, while for [ globulin
another low value was observed also at 40 hours.
In Summary: the parameters examined, albumin al, a2, [and y
globulins presented more intense variations during the time intervals of
the maximum liver regenarative process.
P348
THE INFLUENCE OF SURGICAL TREATMENT TO THE
LIVERFUNCTION
K.TAKEUCHI H.TANIGUCHI, Y.UESHIMA, A.OGURO, K. MIYATA,
N. TSUKUDA, AND T.TALAHASH!
The First department university of medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Materials were 140 patients without any liver disease or severe
postoperative complications like as DIC orMOF. They underwent
operations under general anesthesia, excluding esophagectomy,
liverresection or pancreatoduodenectomy. The values of AST, ALT and
T-Bil on post-operative day 0,1,3,7 and 14 were measured. These patients
were classified into following 3 group; A: patients with operation of the
upper abdomen, B: patients withoperation of the lower abdomen, C:
patients given operation without laparotomy. There is no significant
difference among these groups in age, duration of operation, blood loss,
duration of anesthesia or preoperative AST, ALT and T-Bil. On the 1st
post-operative day, AST and T-bil elevated significantly in all groups, but
ALT elevated significantly only in group A. The values of AST and ALT
ofpatients in group A were significantly higher than those ofpatients in
other groups. It is thought that this elevation is mainly due to the surgical
treatment such as procedure to the liver by retractor or lymphnodes
dissection which made a change ofhepatic blood during and after
operation. In conclusion, it can be said that the surgical treatment of upper
abdomen is responsible for the liver disfunction in early post-operative
days.
127
P349
SIGNIFICANCE OF ALTERED MEMBRANE FLUIDITY IN
MECHANISM OF MULTIPLE ORGAN FAILURE
WANG BEN ZHANG JUNJI TANAKA, MITSUAKI KOHMOTO,
MASANORI YOSHIDA, TAKAYUKI KASAMATSU, JUNTAMURA,
KEN-ICHI FUJITA
The First Department of Surgery, Kyoto University School Of Medicine
Multiple organ failure (MOF) is one of most important problems in
surgical field. On the other hand, memebrane fluidity is recently suggested
to play a major role on cellular function. The present study was aimed to
investigate membrane fluidity in ccirrhotic andjaundiced patients as
prerequisite MOF. Patients and methods: 28 cirrhotic, 8 jaundiced and 13
normal liver patients, a small pieace of livers were taken and membrande
fraction was collected by gradient centrifgation. Membrane fluidity was
determined by measuring fluorescence polarization (P-value) with DPH as
probe dye. Results; Cirrhotic andjaundiced livers had higher P-values
than that of normal (0.225+0.025, 0.231+0.020, p<0.01, compared to
0.189+0.017 of normal). Among them, 3 major complications and 5
operative death cases revealed, all of which P-values were higher than
0.225. In seperate experiment, serum from MOF patients was incubated
with normal memebrances to investigate direct effect of the serum on
memebrances. Normal serum induced an increase in integrated intensities,
but without changes in P-values. In contrast, MOF serum induced a drastic
decrease in integrated intensifies with an increase in P-values. conclusion:
The increased fluorescence polarization (decreased membrane fluidity) is
indicative ofrisk factor for postoperative complications and MOF serum
may have direct factor(s) on membrane fluidity.
P350
MORPHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES IN THE LIVER OF
GUINEA-PIG FOR CHEMOI’I-IERAPY OF EXPERIMETNAL
TRICHINELLOSIS
T.K. RAISOV. M.R. MIZHANOV
Semipalatinsk’ Medical Institue, Kazakhastan, U.S.S.R.
The treatmetn of trichinellosis is very difficult problem for our region.
We have stutied the disturbens ofthe function ofthe liver in 32- guinea
pigs with experimental trichinellosis by morphological, biochemical and
electronic microscope methods.
The results of our experimental investigation has shown dystrophycal
and inflammatory process in the liver ofguinea-pigs with trichinellosis.
We have found out dystrophycal changes ofhepatocytes.
We worked out combined chemotherapy by infusion mebendazol,
mebendazol and voltazen or mebendazol with T-aktivin. It was very
effective for treatment of trichinellossis. The aamelioration of the function
of the liver was more marked after combined chemotherapy.
On the basis ofthis investigation we can say, thet combined
chemotherapy is very effective and available for practice.
P351
VALUE OF DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES IN BUDD-CHIARI
SYNDROME
LANG H.,K. OLDHAFER, B. RINGE, R. PICHLMAYR
Klinik fur Abdominal und Transplantationschirurgie, Medizinische Hoschschule Hannover
The Budd-Chiari Syndrome (BCS0 is caused by occlusion ofhepatic
veins which otften leads to ascites, hepatomegaly and abdominal pain as
initial clinical symptoms. Though BCS often appears to be a rapidly
progressive disease there is sometimes a long period between first
presentation of symptoms and final diagnosis. Clinical signs and laboratory
findings are usually very unspecific and of little diagnostic value. To
evaluate different diagnostic methods, a retrospective analysis of diagnostic
procedures in patients with BCS was performed. Patients and Methods:
Data of 30 patients (24 female, 6 male) with a mean age of 31 years (range
12-450 were analysed. In all aptients BCS was confirmed by pathology after
liver transplantation. Diahnostic methods were: Cavography (n=22), hepatic
venography (n=20), CT-scan (n=20), NMR (n=4), hepatic scintiscan (n=13)
and ultrasound (n=29)
Results: Cavography showed stenosis ofthe retrohepatic inferior vena
(IVC) in 16 cases. In two patients there was a complete thrombosis of the
IVC, in four cases no pathologic result was found. Hepatic venography
revealed thrombosis or obstruction of liver veins in all cases and in 20% a
"spider-web". There was no false negative result in hepatic venography.
CT-scan presented compression ofthe IVC (n=6), rarefication fo liver veins
(n-4), a hypertrophic caudate lobe (n=7) and thrombosis ofthe IVC (n-3).
NMR demonstrated stenosis of the IVC and obstruction ofliver veins in all
cases. Hepatic scintiscan revealed reduced arterial perfusion (n-11),
inhomogeneous uptake (n-7) and focal accumulation fo tracer (n=2).
Ultrasound showed obstruction of liver veins in 20, a hypertrophic caudate
lobe in 16 and a stenosis of the IVC in 7 patients. In two cases ultrasound
was not suggestive ofBCS initially, but demonstrated obstruction ofthe
hepatic outflow tract when repeated. Combination fo ultrasound,
cavography and gepatic venography were suggestive ofBCS in 29
patients.Catheterisation ofthe IVC and hepatic veins presented pathologic
changes typical of BCS in 100%. In one case NMR lead to diagnosis.
Conclusions: Ultrasound, cavography and hepatic venography proved to
be most important and reliable diagnostic procedures in detecting
thrombiosis and obstruction fohepatic veins or the IVC, CT-scan and
scintiscan seemed to be ofminor diagnostic value, wheras NMR might be
helpful in some cases.
128
P352
HEPATECTOMYWITH Nd: YAG LASERAN EXPERIMENTAL
AND CLINICAL STUDY
xu MIN, WU ZAI-DE, CHEN XIO-PING
Department of General Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical University, WuHan,
Hubei (430030) P.R.China
We conducted an experimental and clinical study of hepatectomy with
Nd: YAG laser. The results showed that outing effect artificial sapphire
contact Nd:YAG laser scalpel was better than that of quartz fiber contact
and noncontact Nd:YAG laser. The tissue damage was minimal in the
former group whereas, the blood loss was similar in both groups. Seven
patients were operated on, with quartz fiber and 12 with artificial sapphire
laser scalpel. No complications were related to the use of laser, we
consider that partial liver resection can be performed effectively with
artificial sapphire contact Nd:YAG laser scalpel because of its better
outing, coagulation effects, and less tissue damage.
P353
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS ANDDIAGNOSTIC METHODS
IN HYDATIDOSIS DISEASES OF THE LIVER
LOINAZ C, G-URElqA, JIMENEZ C, BERCEDO J, PALMA F, GOMEZ SANZ R,
MORENO C, MORENO E.
The experience of our service in diagnoses of the hydatidosis and its
clinical presentation is studied.
Since 1974 to 1989 410 patients with 561 cysts were operated. We
divided the period of time in two groups GROUP A: since 1974 to 1984
(322 patients), and GROUP B: since 1985 to 1989 (88 pts). We compared
both groups.
Previous surgery for hydatidosis: Lung (A=4.9% B=3.4%), Liver
(A-8.6% B=9.1%); Hepatopulmonary (A=0.3% B=82.3%); Multiple
(A=0 B+4.5%). Signs and symptoms: Hepatomegalia (A=49.3%
B=22.7% p<0.05); Tumor (A=38.1 & B=19.3% p<0.001). Diagnosis:
Echograpfy (A=32.2% B=90.9% p 0.01); Liver gammagraphy (A=72.7%
B=18.2% p<0.01); CT (A=I 1.5% B=19.3% p<0.01) Laparoscopy
(A=10.8% B=I.1% p<0.05); Arteriography (A=8.4% B=10.3%). The
number of cysts were similar in both groups and so was the content of the
cysts: biliar (A=25.5% B=19.3%); clear (A=36.1% B=6.6%); Pus
contamination (A=I8.1% B=10.1% p<0.1); Hematic (A=0.2% B=0.7%);
Non specific (A=14% B=34.6%). The need for urgent operation or
elective were similar in both groups.
Nowadays there are an increase of the number of patients without
symptoms. Ecography and CT are the best diagnostic procedures in the
hydatid liver disease.
P354
SPHINCTEROTOMY & SPHINCTEROPLASTY IN
COMPLICATED HYDATIDDISEASE OF THE LIVER
JIMENEZ C, BERCEDO J, G-URENA M., LOINAZ C., PALMA F., VEGA V.,
MORENO E.
The surgical treatment in the biliary tract and its complications in patients with hydatid
hepatic cysts is studied
69 patients with hepatic hydatidosis are analysed. Sphincteroplasty was
made in 56(81.2%) and sphincterotomy in 13(18.8%). The average age
was 44.2(16-76). 36 were male and 33female. The indications for one or
other technique were choledocholitiasis in 3 (4.4%), biliary fistula 46
(66.6%), hydatidic memebranes inmain biliary duct 25 (36.250 and
oedoma of papila 13(18.8%).
Intraoperative mortality was 0%. In the postoperative time 4 patients
died (5.8%) from hepatic failure (1), hepatorenal failure (I), and
pneumonia (2). Two ofthem had to be reoperated for subphrenic abcess.
There were 25 (36.2%) cases of transient biliary fistula required no
surgical management Postoperative complication were: subphrenic abcess
11 (15.9%); intrahepatic abcess 2 (2.9%); pneumonian 2 (2.9%); hepatic
failure (1.5%); ascitis (1.5%); erosive gastritis (1.5%).
The sin terotomy and sinteroplasty are useful procedures in the
prevention ofbiliary complications in hydatidic liver disease.
P355
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HEPATO-SPLEEN
PREGNANCY
ZHANG REN LI JIN-CHI
Dept. of Surger, The 2nd Central Hospital, Tianjin, China
After consulting all medicine literature in China published from Jan.
1980 to Oct. 1991 we collected 9 reports and our hospital put forward one
report. We are going to make following analysis.
Age. 26-30 years 2, 31-39 years 7, 40.48 years 1. Menoschesis. 39-59
days 6, 60-70 days 3, (-) (the form of lithopedion).
Typal acute abdomen. The onset of symptoms is sudden left
epigastralgia, sometimes this initial attack of pain may be associated with
radiating left omalgia but quickly spreading throughout the whole
abdomen.
Acute manifestation of abdominal cavity hemorrhage.
BUS. This is the only one BUS Fig. of spleen pregnancy (Fig.1) Nidus
locus. Left lobe of liver case. Spleen 9 cases. Mortality 2 cases. Fig. 2
specimen of spleen pregnancy.
1. the reason can not be diagnosed correctly before the operation. (1)
The lack ofknowledge about this disease. (2) Not in detail of the medical
history. (3) At the onset imminence or in no condition to necessary
examination.
2. The diagnosis ofhepato-spleen pregnancy depends, in the main, up
the recognition of its clinical feature. For such dubiousness patients,
quantitive analysis and ultrasongraphy should be routine.
3. The causes of hepato-spleen pregnancy are related to lay up
intrauterine device and pelvic inflammation.
P356
TACHOCOMB,ANOVEL COMBINATION OF A COLLAGEN
FLEECE WITHFIBRIN GLUE A NEW APPROACH IN THE
RISK MANAGEMENT PARENCHYMAL SURGERY
SAMHABER EM
Triester Strape 50, A-1100 Vienna, Austria
An absorbable wound dressing in a ready-to-use combination of a
collagen fleece coated with the components of fibrin glue, i.e. fibrinogen,
thrombin and aprotinin, will be presented.
In case of medical emergencies involving splenic or hepatic rupture,
immediate hemostasis is often live-saving and can be achieved using a
new product in parenchymal surgery: TachoComb.
The TachoComb fleece actively promotes the coagulation process at
the wound surface. Complete, fast and reliable hemostasis can be achieved
by firmly pressing the coated collagen fleece against would surfaces due
to e.g. hepatic and pancreatic resections, cholecystectomies and traumatic
ruptures, for 3-5 minutes. Precious time can be saved in parenchymal
surgery on liver, spleen, pancreas, lungs and kidneys.
The fleece is subsequently resorbed and converted into connective scar
tissue within appr. 3-6 weeks.
TachoComb is an efficient and uniquely disigned product helping the
surgeon to minimize risk in parenchymal surgery.
129
P357
TACHOCOMB,A NOVEL COMBINATION OF A COLLAGEN
FLEECE WITH FIBRIN GLUE: ANEWAPPROACH INLIVER
SURGERY
SAMHABER EM
Triester Strape 50, A-1100 Vienna, Austria
Acombined application of sheets of collagen covered with freshly
prepared fibrin glue improved local haemostasis to a great extent. Large
areas of capillary bleedings can be treated successfully. But due to the
relatively complicated preparation required at the operation site, this
method has not been used on a large scale, these drawbacks have been
overcome with the latest development in this field a sheet of collagen
covered with a fixed layer of the solid components of fibrin glue
(fibrinogen, thrombin and aprotinin).
In a prospective study, 225 cases of liver resections due to metastases
(43%), primary liver carcinomas (16%), intraoperational injuries of
Glisson’ capsule (10%), liver ruptures, benign tumors, bleeding
subsequent to punch biopsies, echinococcus cysts and others were
included. The assessment ofthe haemostyptic properties of TachoComb
was "very good" and "good" in 95%, "satisfactory" in 4 % and
unsatisfactory in 1% of the cases.
In several cases, particularly difficult bleeding situations could be
controlled, e.g. those with massive coagulation disturbances or hepatic
stasis. No complications attributable to TachoComb occurred.
So far, more than 280 patients with liver resections have been treated
successfully with TachoComb in clincal trials. In a liver transplantation
study with 27 patients, haemostasis with TachoComb was assessed as
"very good" and "good" in 96% of the cases.
P358
SUBTOTAL PANCREATECTOMY WITH INTRAOPERATIVE
RADIATION THERAPY PRELIMINARYRESULT
R. BELLANTONE G.B. DOGLIETTO, D. FRONTERA, A. FERRANTE, G. VIOLA,
F. CRUCITTI
Department of Surgery, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy
Although few cases have been reported, intraoperative radiation therapy
(IORY) seems to be an interesting technique for integrated treatment of
pancreatic cancer in assoication with resective surgery.
Recently, our Institution, a protocol for integrated therapy ofresectable
pancreatic neoplasms has been started. The protocol includes a subtotal
pancreatectomy (or total when necessary) with pyloric preservation and a
IORT (10 Gy) of the celiac area, the hepatic hilum, the upper mesenteric
vessels, the suprarenal vena cava and aorta. The irradiated area does not
include the pancreatic stump; the intestinal loops and the right kidney are
kept out of the cylinder. External beam radiotherapy is given
postoperatively in doses of 50 Gy with a 3-fields technique along 4-5
weeks. Six patients underwent the above described treatment: there were 4
women and 2 men, from the age of 58 to 74 years, all affected by
resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The overall average time required
for IORT (which includes transport of the patient to the Radiation Therapy
Department, selection and placement of the cylinder, irradiation and return
to the operatory room) was 54 minutes.
We had no operative mortality. Two patients had an infected abdominal
wound adn three cases presented a transient gastroparesis (average 14
days). Symptoms of acute radiation intoxication have not been observed in
any patient.
Four patients died because of liver metastases after six, ten, eleven and
fifteen months, respectively; the average time before recurrence of disease
was 6 months. Twp patients are still alive and free of disease after five and
fifteen months. We did not observe, in the CT scan of the abdomen, local
recurrence in all cases.
Therefore, we think IORT may be an effective tool to reduce local
recurrence rates, although our experience is still limited an further cases
are requested to obtain more definitive results.
P359
GRADED FLOW RATES THROUGH THEPORTAL-SYSTEMIC
BYPASS DURING ACUTE PORTAL OCCLUSION
K. KASAHARA Y. FUKUMOTO, Y. YASUDA, T. YASUDA, Y. KONDO, H. NAGAI
Department of Surgery, Jichi Medical School, Minamikawachi-machi, Tochigi, 329-04,
Japan
Using graded flow rates through portal-systemic bypass, effects of
portal congestion per se on splanchnic hemodynamic and metabolic
conditions, liver tolerance to interrupted portal flow itself, and critical
bypass flow were evaluated in dogs. To exclude the effects caused by
reduction in the circulating blood volume, preocclusion levels of cardiac
output were maintained constant throughout the study by means of
increasing intravenous infusion rate. With decreasing bypass flow rates
during portal occlusion, portal pressure increased up to the maximum of
some 10% of the basal level without bypass, and hepatic arterial flow
increased up to more than two times of the basal level without bypass. In
dogs with 50% and 10% bypass during two hours’ portal occlusion, there
were no remarkable decrease of energy charge and TAN of the liver
tissue, and serum transaminase levels remained low postoperatively.
However, in dogs with 50% bypass during one hour’s hepatic inflow
occlusion, there were significant decrease of energy charge and TAN of
the liver tissue and remarkable rise ofpostoperative transaminase levels.
P360
IS THERE APLACEFOR"SPLIT"
PANCREATICOJEJUNOSTOMYIN THE SURGICAL
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC PANCREATITIS?
M. MULDER, T. M. VAN GULIK, L.TH.DE WUT, D.J.VAN LEEUWEN,
P.C.M. VERBEEK, E.DE JONG, N.J. LYGIDAKIS, M.N.VAN DER HEYDE
Dept. of Surgery, Academic Medical Center, 9 Meibergdreef, 1105 AZ Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
In 1967, Marvin James described an operation for the treatment of
chronic pancreatitis (CP) which he called "split" pancreaticojejunostomy
(PJ). This procedure consisted of a vertical, partial transection of the
pancreas with a double anastomosis of the sectioned pancreatic duct to a
Roux-en-Y limb ofjejunum. We used a modified version ofthis method
for the treatment of CP in which the main pancreatic duct appeared to
have a normal caliber. Herein we report the long term results ofthis
method in 8 patients (4 alcoholic CP, 3 familial CP, idiopathic CP).
ERCP in these patients showed irregular, but non-dilated main pancreatic
ducts, precluding the use of a lateral, side-to-side PJ. The pancreas was
totally transected in teh region ofthe corpus allowing prompt
identification ofthe sectioned pancreatic duct. Both sides ofteh duct were
anastomosed face to face, to a Roux-en-Yjejunal limb using a mucosa-to-
mucosa technic. Double, transanastomotic silicon stents were left during
10 days. Port-operative complications consisted of intra-abdominal
abscess (lx) and sepsis/ARDS (lx, in conjuction with a simultaneous
cystoduodenostomy. Follow-up was 20-25 months. Clinical outcome was
rated good/fair/bad, according to relief of pain. 5 out of 8 patients had a
long lasting improvement of symptoms (4 good, fair, 3 bad). From these
results we conclude that "split" PJ is a valid alternative for the treatment of
CP, when a conventional, lateral PJ is not feasible.
130
P361
FUNCTIONAL RFULT AFTERPYLORUS PRESERVING
PANCREATODUODENECTOMY
DR B. RADOVANOVIC, DR N. RADOVANOVIC
Hirursko odeljenje bolnice Pozarevac;
Institut za digestivnu hirurgiju KC Beograd, Yugoslavia
Poster represent functional result of gastric secretion and motion five
years after pylorus preserving pancreatoduodenectomy for carcinoma of
ampulla Vatery. This case have longest survival between another eight, of
which four died, and another four had shorter survival period. The
performed operation was standard version recommended by Traverso and
Longmire. Complete gastric examination includes standard X-ray,
radioactive meal following, endoscopic biopsio. Standard BAO, MAO
tests were performed. Weight of the patient was measured regularu, and
subjective feeling too.
In conclusion we can say that this type of operation give good
functional postoperative results, with minimal patients inconveniences.
This results confirm the usage of this method in select cases.
P362
PRFSERVATION OF THE PORCINE PANCREAS WITH HTK
AND EURO-COLLINS SOLUTION, STUDIES INA
REPERFUSION SYSTEM
H.KOHLER F.E.LUDTKE, R. NUSTEDE, A. SCHAFMAYER
Dept. of General Surgery University of Geottingen, Gottingen, FRG.
The present study compares the preservation of the porcine pancreas by
the standard Euro-Collins solution or the cardioplegic histidine-
tryptophan-ketoglutarate solution (HTK). The explanted pancreas was
stored at 40 C for 6 and 24 h respectively, following which organ quality
was assessed in areperfusion chamber measuring physiological and
biomedical parameters. After a 6 h ischaemia, the amount of lactate was
significantly lower when HTK was used for protections. Other parameters
like insulin release, amylase release, vascular resistance and oxygen
consumption of the pancreas did not indicate a significant difference.
Protection with HTK significantly improved pancreas preservation after
24 h ischaemia: lactate content in the reperfusate was lower (HTK:
5.7+0.91 ml min-1 v.EC: 3.0-L-_0.26rnl rain-1
), and the pancreatic oxygen
consumptions was increased (HTK: 2.15+0.22 ul 02 min-lg-1). We
conclude that pancreas preservativion can be improved in vitro by
protection with HTK solution.
P363
TRAUMATIC PANCREATIC PSEUDOCYSTS
GM LEWIS, JEJ KRIGE, PC BORNMAN
Surgical Gastroenterology and Department of Surgery, Unviersity of Cape Town and
Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town South Africa
Fifteen of 64 patients treated for pancreatic trauma between 1980 and
1989 developed pseudocysts and were evaluated to determine outcome in
relation to the nature and site of the pancreatic duct injury. The 13 men, 2
women, had a mean age of 35 (r 24-68) years. 11 had blunt and 4
penetrating (3 gunshot, stab) trauma. Pseudocysts occurred in 8 patients
after operation for abdominal trauma and in 7 patients who were treated
conservatively. In none was ductal injury diagnosed during the initial
management. Median presentation was 20 (mean 59; range 8-360) days
after injury. In 14 patients pseudocysts (mean diameter: 9 cm; range 3-
16ram) were confirmed on CT or US and at laparotomy in patient. The
site and nature of the ductal injury was demonstrated in 13 patients using
ERCP(n=8), operative pancreatography (n=l) and surgery (n=4). Two
patients with peripheral duct injuries on ERCP were successfully treated
conservatively. Pseudocysts arising from distal duct injuries (n=4) were
treated by percutaneous aspiration or catheter drainage. Duct injuries in
the body (n=3) underwent distal pancreatectomy. Proximal duct injury
with mature pseudocysts were drained internally. There were no major
complications. In 3 patients complications of the pseudocyst
(haemorrhage 2; sepsis: 1) necessitated emergency laparotomy and
external drainage of whom died of sepsis.
On the basis of this study, we recommend that pseudocysts that follow
peripheral pancreatic duct injuries can be treated conservatively, distal
injuries by percutaneous aspiration or drainage, but proximal injuries
require surgery.
P364
MANAGEMENT OF PANCREATIC TRAUMA
T. YAMAMOTO T.SEKOGUCHI, Y. KATSUMINE, S. INAMORI
Department of Surgery, Ise Municipal Hospital
Ise-city, Mie, 516, Japan
During the past 10 years, we treated 10 patients with pancreatic trauma.
Cause ofpancreatic trauma was traffic accident in 8, and other kinds of
accidents in 2. Severe abdominal pain and increase of serum amylase
level were observed in all patients, nausea in 4, and hemorrhagic shock in
one. CT scan revealed pancreatic swelling or peripancreatic fluid
collection in all patients. Of 6 patients who underwent conservative
treatment, in 3 pancreatitis healed uneventfully and in the other 3
pseudocyst developed.
Spontaneous resolution was observed in one patient with pseudocyst,
and cystgastrostomy or cyst resection was performed in the other two.
Emergency surgery had been performed in 2 patients;
pancreatieoduodenectomy (PD) was performed in one with extensive
crush injury around the pancreas head, and primary suture of the
pancreatic parenchyma with duct stenting in the other, who had complete
disruption of the pancreatic body. The remaining 2 patients had
undergone drainage at another hospital and were referred to our hospital
because of external pancreatic fistula and pyloric stenosis; distal
pancreatectomy and partial gastrectomy was carried out in both.
Favourable outcome was obtained in all paients except one who had
undergone PD, who died of MOF followed by anastomotic leakage.
In conclusion, conservative treatment in conjunction with serial CT
scan is appropriate choice of treatment for most patients with pancreatic
trauma. However, patients with crush injury or complete disruption of the
pancreas require emergency surgery.
131
P365
THE MANAGEMENT OF PANCREATIC INJURIES
D.M.K.S. KAULESAR SUKUL E.J. JOHANNES, H.E. LONT
Department ofTraumatology/General Surgery, University Hospital Rotterdam, Dijkzigt,
City, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
To contribute to accurate diagnostics and treatmen ofpatients with
pancreatic injuries, we reviewed the medical records of all patients, who
were treated in our hospital, for traumatic pancreatic lesions in the period
of 1971 to 1987. Off all twenty-four male patients the mechanism ofthe
injury, the diagnostic methods, the associated injuries, the location of the
pancreatic injury, the presence ofpancreatic duct lesion, the treatment and
the final results and complications are described. The high mortality rate
of patients with pancreatic trauma, is in our opinion not due to the
pancreatic injury per se, but due to the severe concomitant injuries
resulting from a high energy trauma. Based on the literature and our own
experience we designed an algorithm for the management ofpancreatic
injuries. If anamnestic and physical examination indicate that intra-
abdominal injury might be present, roentgenorgraphic and ultrasound
investigation are the diagnostic methods of choice. Patients without
pancreatic duct lesion can be treated with debridement and external
suction drainage. If pancreatic duct lesion is present and is located to the
fight of the superior mesenteric vessels, treatment should consist ofpartial
pancreatic resection and pancreatico-jejunostomy or a Whipple procedure.
If the pancreatic duct lesion is located to the left of the superior mesenteric
vessels, treatment should consist of distal pancreatectomy and
splenectomy with pancreatico-jejunostomy.
P366
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF SEVERE PANCREATIC TRAMA
QIAN GUANG-XIAN
Institue of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, P R China
Pancreatic trauma constitutes one ofthe most serious abdominal
trauma. It carries a mortality of 20 %, or even as high as40 50% when
associated with duodenal perforation. A series of complications may
follow. Its treatment is rather difficult. Experiences in the management of
21 cases of severe pancreatic trauma (3 penetrating and 18 blunt injures)
were analyzed. Associated intra-abdominal injures existed in all patients
including duodenal perforation (6 cases) and colon perforation (5 cases).
Patients could be classified into 4 groups: mild contusion (1 case), serious
lacerative contusion (11 cases), destructive injury (3 cases), combined
pancreato-duodenal injury (6 cases). The following operations had been
performed: pancreaticoduodenectomy (2 cases) distal pancreato-
jejunostomy (3 cases), pancreatorrhaphy (7 cases). There was no mortality
in this series. According to the location, severity and with or without
duodenal perforation, the classification and diagnosis were discussed.
Elevation of amylase in blood and abdominal cavity fluid, B-US, CT and
ERP were helpful in diagnosing pancreatic trauma. Miss in diagnosis of
pancreatic and duodenal trauma during laparotomy must be avoided.
Appropriate operative procedure, fully effective intraabdominal drainage
and a good nutritional support were the primary importance in treating
pancreatic trauma and preventing complications.
P367
PHARMACOKINETICS OF CIPROFLOXACIN IN
PANCREATIC JUICEAFTERPANCREATIC SURGERY
i. BACA, T. BOMMER, H.G. SCHAFER, I. KLEMPA
Allgemein und Geffi[chirurgische Klinik, ZKH St. Jtirgen-stra[e, 2800 Bremen,
Germany
Ciprofloxacin has remarkably good activity against many
microorganism known to cause pancreatic infection. The aim of this
study was to establish the penetration of ciprofloxacin into pure human
pancreaticjuice after pancreatic surgery.
In a prospective trial the pentration of ciprofloxacin into pancreatic
juice following a single parenteral dose was investigated in 10 patients
who had undergone pancreatektomy (whipple procedure) for cancer. A
small catheter, which was placed into the duct of pancreatic remnant gave
access to the pancreaticjuice. Blood and pancreaticjuice samples were
taken prior to the administration of the day and then 0.5, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.5,
8 h after drug intake. The samples were frozen and stored at -20 C until
examination. The concentration of ciprofloxacin in blood and in
pancreaticjuice as well as amylase, lipase and protein were analysed.
Following a single i.v. dose of 200 mg of ciprofloxacin peak serum
concentration were 3.2+ 0.6 rag/1(M+SEM). The mean half live was 5 h.
The mean pancreaticjuice/serum concentration ratio were 0.61.
The concentration of ciprofloxacin achieve the-rapeutic concentration
for most of organism cousin infection in pancreas after an i.v. dose.
P368
OCTREOTIDEAND PANCREATIC FISTULA
G. CAMPANELLI. P. CAMPAGNOLI, M. ROVATI, E. LEOPALDI
Clinica Chirurgica I, University of Mila, Luigi Sacco Hospital, Italy
In 1973 Brazeu and coll. succeeded in identifying and extracting from
ovine ipotalamus a peptide endowed with an inhibitory action on GH
secretion, called somatostatina. The somatostatina spreads throughout the
organism, particularly in the ipotalamus. The main biological actions of
somatostatina are represented by an inhibitory function of some organs
and apparatus: hypophysis, alimentary tract. Besides it should inhibit the
gastroduodenal motility including the one relative to the biliopancreatic
secretion. Ovviously the similar synthetics ofthe somatostatina revealed
their great utility in regulating hormonal secretions and the proliferation
phenomena in many pathologies. Actually an important limitation to the
therapeutic use of somatostatina depends on the short life of its effects that
condition its high and continuous administration. The elaboration of a
synthetic preparation similar to somatostatina as octapeptide has allowed
the use of a more lasting and equally active molecule in vivo, the
octreotide, that allows the utilization ofthis molecule for long therapies.
Among other advantages octreotide can be used as a subcutaneous
injections. Considering these pharmacologic acquisition and the clinic
experience found in literature, the Authors have treated two cases of
enterocutaneous fistula, complications of operations on the digestive tract,
with octreotide (LONGAsTATINA). In this work, the Authors present
the therapeutic course essentially based on the total parenteral nutrition
(TPN) and one the employment of Longastatina. In both cases, in the
course of four months the clinic status cleard up.
132
P369
GAMMA LINOLENIC ACID POTENTIATES TRANSFORMING
GROWTHFACTORBETA INHIBITION OF EPITHELIAL
CELL PROLIFERATION
WG JIANG and MCA PUNTIS
University Department of Surgery, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, U.K.
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF[) is a growth inhibitor for
epithelial & some malignant cells. We studied the effects of gamma
linolenic acid (GLA) on TGFinhibition of epithelial cell. A epithelial
cell line: mv lu (CCL64) was used in the study. Cells were treated with
either TGF[ alone or in combination with GLA at different
concentrations. After 3 days of culture cells were quantified. The
inhibition is shown as median numbers ofremaining cells as a percentage
of its own control, statistics is Mann-Whitney U test. (RU=Intemational
Reference Unit)
TGF10RU TGF2.5RU TGF0.6RU TGF0.3RU
Medium 61.0% 74.5% 86.3% 93.6%
GLA(25gM) 65.3% 73.9% 91.3% 98.2%
GLA (50IaM) 49.7%* 61.6%# 76.7%# 89.5%
GLA (100tM) 44.7%* 55.6%* 73.4%* 85.2%
GLA (150gM) 34.9%* 43.7%* 58.3%* 77.9%*
GLA (200gM) 22.4%* 34.4%* 50.6%* 73.8%*
#p<0.05 *p=0.01 against control
GLA from 25-200 gM increased TGF inhibition of epithelial
proliferation and this was in a dose dependent manner (r>0.96 for the
concentrations tested, p<0.01).
Concludsion: Gamma linolenic acid potentiates transforming growth
factor inhibition of epithelial proliferation. This suggest that GLA has a
role in the control of the growth of epithelial cells which may have
therapeutic implications.
P370
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL AND IMMUNOHISTOLOGICAL
STUDY OF ACINAR CELL NODULES IN HUMAN PANCREAS
K. SAKAMOTO T. INAYOSHI, S. SHIOMI, T. KAMANO, T. MAEKAWA,
N. SAKAKIBARA,
Juntendo University School of Medicine, First Department of Surgery, 2-1-1
HongoBunkyoku Tokyo, 113, Japan.
To explicate a role of acinar cell nodules(ACN) in human pancreas,
specimens of surgically-excised pancreatic tissue were examined
histopathologically and immunohistochemically in this study. The paraffin
sections derived from 65 pancreatectomy cases were examined. The ACN
was defined well circumscribed from the surrounding acini cells by HE
stain. ACN-constituting cells were examined in histopathological study.
Furthermore anti-human amylase antibody and anti-human trypsin
antibody were used in immunohistochemical study.
Among examined series of sections, 62 ACN were found in 18 cases.
ACN-constituting cells were compared with the surrounding acini cells,
but no data indicated atypia of ACN cells in histopathological study. By
anti-lipase staining, 14 ACN were positive, 37 ACN showed no tonal
difference from surrounding acini cells, and the remaining 11 ACN were
negative. By anti-amylase staining, 3 ACN were positive, 11 ACN
showed no tonal difference, and the remaining 48 ACN were negative. By
anti-trypsin staining, 7 ACN were positive, 45 ACN showed no tonal
difference, and the remaining 10 ACN were negative. It is suggested that
ACN are not pathological changes leading to pancreatic acinar cell
carcinoma, but are possibly yielded as degenerative products which might
be reveresible. It was revealed that the cells of ACN are functional
nodules in which a certain pancreatic exocrine activity have been
specifically decreased.
P371
THE SURGICAL TREATMENT OF INSULINOMA AND LONG
TERM FOLLOW UP
XIE WEN-JIN AND LI CHI-CHENG
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital
Guangzhou 510080, China
The Surgical treatment of 15 cases of insulinoma from 1972 to 1990 is
reported. 8 male, 7 female; aged 25 56. 33 insulinoma were resected and
all proved to be benign in nature pathologically. 14 patients recovered and
one died due to the complication of acute pancreatitis after operation. 13
of them (92.8%) had been followed up from 4 months to 19 years after
operation, average 7 years. The symptom of hypoglycaemia disappeared,
and blood guscose test was normal in all 13 cases. These 13 patients now
run a normal life. Our experience indicates that the surgery is the most
effective treatment ofinsulinoma. The presence and location of the
tumour larger than cm in diameter can be detected by selective celiac
angiography accurately in all 5 of our cases. Probing the pancreas with
care during operation should be emphasized, thus the insulinoma can be
detected and resected. The determination of the blood glucose level during
operation has practical significance injudging a thorough resection of
insulinoma. It is usually difficult to detect the minute adenomas which
often constitute the major cause of the failure of a surgical treatment.
Patient having relapse of symptoms after the surgery may be operated
again. In our series, one patient with recurrence eventually recovered after
second operation.
P372
PARTIAL DISTAL PANCREATECTOMY WITHNd:YAG
LASERIN THE DOG: ANEXPERIMENTAL STUDY
XU MIN, WU ZAI-DE, CHEN XIO- PING
Department of General Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tonji Medical University, Wuhan, Hubei
(430030), P.R. China
This study reported that partial distal Pancreatectomy was perfqrmed in
dogs with Nd:YAG laser. Results were compared with that obtained with
use of scalpel and sutures. The curing edge of the pancreatic tail was
coagulated effectively until hemostasis was achieved. The Nd:YAG laser
can cut pancreatic tail quickly and effectively. Postoperative normal
amylasemia and blood suger appeared in all the animals. Histological
study of laser groups showed thermal injury at the curing section with
damage to the nearby parenchyma. Pancreatography showed a sealed
pancreatic duct in laser groups although no duct ligation was perfored.
133
