[page 28] [Hematology Reports 2010; 2:e4]
The biology of myelodysplastic
syndromes: unity despite
heterogeneity
Azra Raza,1 Raymond Cruz,2 Tahir Latif,3
Siddhartha Mukherjee,1 Naomi Galili1
1Columbia University, New York;
2Washington Hospital Center,
Washington DC;
3University of Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Abstract
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) tradition-
ally have been grouped together as a disease
entity based on clinical phenomena seen in
association. Despite the similarities, there is
great heterogeneity among the syndromes.
Recent insights have shown, however, that
there exists a biologically cohesive theme that
unifies and thereby validates the conceptual
interconnectedness. The first suggestion that
such a relationship existed where biology could
directly explain the observed cytopenias was the
finding of excessive premature apoptosis of
hematopoietic cells in MDS marrows. This
apoptosis was mediated by paracrine as well as
autocrine factors implicating both the seed and
the soil in the pathology of the disease. Pro-
inflammatory cytokines in the marrow microen-
vironment were mainly the paracrine mediators
of apoptosis, but how the clonal cells committed
suicide because of autocrine stimulation had
remained a mystery for more than a decade. It
has been shown now that deregulation of ribo-
some biogenesis can initiate a stress response
in the cell through the p53 signaling pathway.
Congenital anemias had been associated with
mutations in ribosomal protein genes. The sur-
prise came with the investigation of 5q- syn-
drome patients where haplo-insufficiency of the
ribosomal protein gene RPS14 was found to be
the cause of this MDS subtype. Similar riboso-
mal deregulation was shown to be present in all
varieties of MDS patients, serving as another
unifying characteristic. In addition to these
findings, there are other DNA-related abnormal-
ities such as uniparental disomy, mutations in
the TET2 gene, and epigenetic phenomena that
are associated with and occur across all types of
MDS. This paper summarizes the themes unify-
ing this heterogeneous group of diseases.
Introduction
While an improved understanding of the
biology helps us comprehend disease
manifestations better, the converse is also true
in that clinical observations can sometimes
provide critical clues into the underlying biology
of the disease. MDS exemplify this. These syn-
dromes, which predominate in the elderly, are
characterized by the presence of a variable
cytopenia, with a third of the cases progressing
to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The initial,
as yet poorly understood lesion strikes an early
hematopoietic stem cell that develops a growth
advantage over its normal neighbors and leads
to clonal expansion and eventual monoclonal
hematopoiesis. Detailed studies of cell cycle
kinetics revealed that the marrow is quite
actively proliferative with more cells in S-
phase and cycling faster than even normal
marrows. The presence of cytopenias in the
background of such active proliferation was
difficult to explain initially. This paper
summarizes the mechanism of the underlying
cytopenias in MDS, which turned out to be
caused by a premature intramedullary apoptot-
ic death of hematopoietic cells. Apoptosis,
therefore, was the first biologic characteristic
to be found in different sub-categories of MDS
patients, albeit in varying degrees, thus unify-
ing the disparate group of diseases through
biology for the first time. Since then, several
additional unifying biologic features have
been described and are discussed here.
Excessive apoptosis in the
myelodysplastic syndromes cell
or the seed
It was recognized early through a number of
sophisticated studies performed in female
African-American patients heterogeneous for
the enzyme G6PD that MDS is a clonal disease.
Cell cycle studies using in vivo infusions of the
thymidine analogues bromodeoxyuridine and
iododeoxyuridine further demonstrated the
highly expanded nature of the clone to be the
result of excessive proliferation of hematopoi-
etic progenitors in the marrow.1-3 How such an
expanded clone could produce peripheral
cytopenias remained a mystery for some time.
It was only in the 1990s when the phenomenon
of programmed cell death through the peculiar
mode of apoptotic cellular suicide had been
described that the paradox of cytopenia in the
presence of a cellular marrow of MDS patients
was resolved finally. It appeared that the exces-
sive proliferation in the marrows of MDS
patients was matched by an equally excessive
intramedullary apoptosis of hematopoietic
cells.4-6 This apoptosis was seen in all FAB cat-
egories of patients, although it was higher in
those with lower risk disease and proportion-
ately lower in patients with increasing per-
centage of blasts. Furthermore, it was shown
that the excessive apoptosis was largely
cytokine mediated with a number of pro-
inflammatory cytokines being over-expressed
in the marrows of these patients; such as
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), trans-
forming growth factor beta (TGFb), and inter-
leukin 1 beta (IL1b).6-9 A second important
paradox at this point was the presence of clon-
al expansion and monoclonality in cells that
appeared to be prone to premature apoptotic
death. A model was proposed to explain this
second paradox in which an unknown, poorly
understood, initial lesion in a pluripotential
hematopoietic stem cell leads to this cell devel-
oping a growth advantage.6 The cells are stim-
ulated further to proliferate through the effects
of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNFa. This even-
tually leads to a monoclonal hematopoiesis.
Interestingly, as the daughter cells mature, the
very cytokines driving the proliferation of the
progenitors can exert a dual action in that
apoptosis is induced in the maturing progeny.
The propensity to undergo apoptosis is not
inherited uniformly by all the daughter cells;
rather there is a spectrum of sensitivity to the
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The cells most
sensitive to apoptosis are the ones undergoing
premature death in the marrow while those
most resistant to it are the cells that actually
make it out to the blood. This has been sup-
ported by showing that granulocytes in MDS
patients, although clonal in nature, are more
resistant to apoptosis than granulocytes
obtained from normal, healthy donors.10
To summarize, it seems that an early
hematopoietic progenitor develops a growth
advantage for a poorly understood reason and
clonal expansion results, eventually leading to
monoclonality. Daughters of this transformed
clone have an unequal tendency for premature
apoptotic death in the presence of increased
amounts of a cascade of pro-inflammatory
cytokines whose master switch appears to be
TNFa. Thus the clinical manifestations of the
disease arise from the contributions of both the
Hematology Reports 2010; volume 2:e4
Correspondence: Azra Raza, Columbia University
Medical Center, Milstein Hospital Building, 6N-
435, 177 Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY
10032, USA. E-mail: azra.raza@columbia.edu
Key words: myelodysplastic syndromes, hetero-
geneity.
Received for publication: 16 June 2010.
Accepted for publication: 21 June 2010.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 License (by-nc 3.0).
©Copyright A. Raza, et al., 2010
Licensee PAGEPress, Italy
Hematology Reports 2010; 2:e4
doi:10.4081/hr.2010.e4
[Hematology Reports 2010; 2:e4]
cell (seed) and its microenvironment (soil).
MDS must be viewed, therefore, as a disease of
the seed and soil, a concept which is now gain-
ing credence in other malignancies as well and
which becomes critical when designing thera-
peutic approaches, especially those directed at
changing the natural history of the disease.
Apoptosis, therefore, was the first biologic
characteristic present in all subtypes of MDS.
Abnormal soil or a pro-inflam-
matory bone marrow micro-
environment
While a molecular or genetic lesion can con-
vert a hematopoetic cell into an MDS seed, it
cannot thrive in vivo unless it is received by a
complementary soil that is especially prepared
to nourish it. There is ample evidence from
many sources that the bone marrow microenvi-
ronment in MDS mimics a pro-inflammatory
milieu with increased angiogenesis, infiltration
by immune regulatory cells, and most impor-
tantly, an abundance of pro-apoptotic cytokines
such as TNFa, IL1b, TGFb, etc.6-9 Once again,
these changes have been described with vary-
ing intensities in all different types of MDS
patients, be they low or high risk, and constitute
a second unifying theme for these disorders.
Defective biogenesis
A third unifying theme that has been discov-
ered in the last few years relates to defective
ribosomal biogenesis. This interesting story
started with a study of the most common
chromosomal abnormality in MDS patients
that affects chromosome 5 with two regions of
deletions in the long arm. Patients with 5q-
syndrome have been recognized as a distinct
clinical entity for 35 years. These individuals
present with the more telomeric of the two
deleted regions on 5q, anemia, normal or high
platelet counts, no increase in blasts, a marrow
filled with clusters of hypolobated micro-
megakaryocytes, rarely transform to AML, and
have long survival. While the deletion on 5q
can be variable in length, a 1.5MB region
flanked by marker D5S413 and the gene
GLRA1, and containing 40 genes, called the
Commonly Deleted Region (CDR), is missing
universally in these patients.11 Not surprising-
ly, a search for candidate genes that could be
the cause of 5q- syndrome has focused on the
CDR. Two ribosomal genes, RBM22 and RPS14,
are located within the CDR but while no muta-
tion in the normal allele was found, Boultwood
et al. noted that their expression was reduced
(haplo-insufficiency).11,12 Ebert et al. used
RNAi to silence one gene at a time in the CDR
in normal bone marrow CD34+ cells,13 and
showed that it was the knock-down of a single
gene, RPS14, which resulted in the apoptosis
of erythroid cells while preserving megakaryo-
poiesis. Equally impressive was the finding
that when the expression of RPS14 was forced
in the diseased cells of 5q- syndrome patients,
it rescued the phenotype. RPS14 is a universal
structural protein of the 40S ribosomal subunit
that is essential for the cleavage of the 30S
precursor rRNA molecule into the 18SE/18S
rRNA molecule. Haplo-insufficiency of RPS14
in MDS with del(5q) leads to impaired process-
ing of the 18S ribosomal RNA with subsequent
disruption of the small 40S subunit.
Furthermore, haplo-insufficiency of RPS14
also explains the paradox of anemia and high
number of platelets in that rapidly dividing
cells such as erythroid precursors apoptose
with the slightest disruption in ribosomal bio-
genesis, causing anemia, while slowly prolifer-
ating ones like megakaryocytes could accumu-
late the 50% reduced dose and continue prolif-
eration (high number of platelets). One caveat
in this defective ribogenesis story is that it
does not explain the initial clonal expansion,
only the apoptosis in the progeny of the MDS
stem cell.
More recently, expression of multiple genes
associated with ribosome biogenesis was found
to be decreased in CD34+ cells from del(5q)
patients when compared to that from refractory
anemia (RA) patients with normal karyotypes,
as well as with healthy controls.14 Another study
shows that a proportion of non-del(5q) patients
have low RPS14 expression when compared to
normal controls and that these levels are simi-
lar to that of 5q- syndrome MDS patients.15
These findings clearly indicate that defective
ribogenesis is not limited to the 5q- syndrome
MDS patients but is a more widespread finding
across the various subtypes and therefore con-
stitutes another theme that links the syn-
dromes of MDS through biology. The generality
of defective ribogenesis described here is sup-
ported by the finding of congenital anemias
such as dyskeratosis congenita, cartilage-hair
hypoplasia, Diamond-Blackfan anemia, and
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.16-20
The molecular basis of excessive
apoptosis in myelodysplastic
syndromes: role of p53
The most prominent clinical characteristic
of MDS, a variable cytopenia, has been
explained by a propensity of the maturing
hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow to
undergo premature apoptosis. While apoptosis
is at least partially mediated through pro-
inflammatory cytokines found in the microen-
vironment, the clonal cells themselves also
manifest the tendency to apoptose outside of
the abnormal soil. Thus both paracrine and
autocrine factors contribute to the excessive
apoptosis in MDS. While the cytokines repre-
sent the paracrine influence, an interesting
new genetic candidate has emerged as the
autocrine mediator of apoptosis, as a result of
the defective ribogenesis story. The tumor sup-
pressor gene p53 is well recognized as exerting
nodal control over multiple pathways including
apoptosis. The ribosome stress response refers
to the increased expression of p53 as a direct
result of defective ribogenesis.21-23 Barlow et al.
found that elevated levels of p53 drive the
excessive apoptosis and dysplastic morphology
in the erythroid compartment of mice lacking
the RPS14 gene through deletion of 5q.24 The
cytopenias in MDS thus may be the result of
deregulated ribosomal biosynthesis leading to
activation of p53 and excessive apoptosis.
Mutations in TET2 in myeloid
diseases
It was hypothesized that the earliest lesion
that leads to the initial clonal expansion may
be common across several myeloid diseases
including MDS, myeloproliferative disorders
(MPD), and AML. It was found that somatic
mutations in the TET2 gene were present in
15% of patients with various myeloid cancers
(19% in MDS, 12% in MPD, and 24% in
AML).25,26 This gene is present on chromosome
4q and its precise function is unknown; how-
ever, wild-type TET2 appears to control the bal-
ance between survival, apoptosis, and differen-
tiation in normal hematopoiesis. In a study
published in 2009, mutations or defects in
gene structure were identified in 23% of MDS
patients.27 While patients with mutated TET2
did not differ significantly in clinical or hema-
tological presentation from patients with wild-
type TET2, the five-year overall survival was
77% in mutated versus 18% in un-mutated
patients, indicating that TET2 mutations are
associated with a good prognosis. A lower rate
of transformation to AML in mutated patients
might account for this survival advantage. In a
multivariate analysis, TET2 mutation emerged
as an independent good prognostic factor
while the absence of TET2 mutation was asso-
ciated with a five-fold increase in the risk of
death.27 Prospective studies might establish
the value of TET2 mutational status as an
important parameter for prognostic stratifica-
tion in MDS. Thus TET2 mutation unifies not
only the syndromes of myelodysplasia but also
several myeloid malignancies.
Article
[page 29]
[page 30] [Hematology Reports 2010; 2:e4]
Uniparental disomy
Small genetic lesions such as uniparental
disomy (UPD) could not be detected until high
density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
arrays were developed. When MDS patients
were studied, it was found that 10-15% of those
with apparently normal karyotypes had regions
of DNA that were derived from only one parent.
This phenomenon has been termed UPD.28-30 In
addition, small genetic lesions such as amplifi-
cations and deletions, which had remained
undetected by cytogenetics or FISH analyses,
were also discovered. While UPDs were consti-
tutional and not limited to the clonal cells, the
amplifications and deletions turned out to be
acquired. These data suggest that individuals
who are born with constitutional UPDs may be
predisposed toward genetic instability and an
increased risk for developing MDS. Once
again, this biologic feature transcends the var-
ious subtypes of MDS and is found in patients
with both low and high risk disease.
Epigenetics
Genetic mutations and structural changes
are not the only causes for a cell to become can-
cerous. The last few decades have demonstrat-
ed the extraordinary role played by epigenetics,
so that today it is believed that a mixture of
both genetic and epigenetic changes partici-
pate in the transformation process.31,32 Thus
while epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor
genes through hypermethylation is found in a
variety of cancers, epigenetics plays a more
prominent role in MDS where only 10% of
patients actually present with identifiable
genetic lesions and ~50% respond to hypo-
methylating drugs. MDS is known to be a dis-
ease of the elderly, and repetitive stem cell div-
ision that occurs during aging leads to an accu-
mulation of epigenetic damage to the DNA,
making the cell susceptible to neoplastic trans-
formation. Unlike genetic damages, it is some-
times possible to reverse epigenetic changes,
be they hypermethylation or histone deacetyl-
ation. Two hypomethylating agents are FDA
approved for the treatment of MDS and provide
support for the contribution made by epigenet-
ics in the pathology of these disorders.32
Concluding remarks
Unity despite heterogeneity
As the name itself implies, MDS is not a sin-
gle disease entity but consists of a collection of
syndromes that generally have been divided
into those that are at high risk of transform -
ation to acute leukemia versus those that
prove fatal through an increasing profundity of
cytopenias. Biologic heterogeneity naturally
parallels the clinical diversity. Over the years,
however, the principle underlying the need to
collect these syndromes under one title has
been vindicated as more and more biologic fea-
tures common to all types of MDS have been
identified. Apoptosis, the first link in this the-
matic cohesion, accounts for the cytopenias
that underlie the clinical manifestations of the
syndromes. Paradoxically enough, this propen-
sity to undergo a premature programmed
death is not a property of the MDS progenitor,
because if it were, there would be no clonal
expansion to begin with. Rather, most of the
apoptotic signals are mediated through the
cytokines in the marrow microenvironment. It
has been shown that it is only when the daugh-
ters of this MDS progenitor cell mature and
begin to express the appropriate cytokine
receptors that premature apoptotic death is
induced in the hematopoietic cells.33 These
insights led to the novel translational approach
of using anti-cytokine therapy to improve the
cytopenias by protecting the maturing cells
from dying. This strategy was attempted with-
out a serious concern for causing leukemic
transformation as the apoptosis did not affect
earlier progenitors. Because the rate of apop-
tosis is inversely related to the risk of
transformation, this strategy worked best in
patients with lower risk MDS where anti-TNF
agents like thalidomide, lenalidomide, inflix-
imab, and etanercept have been found to be
effective in improving the cytopenias in a sub-
set of patients. It is important to note that even
high risk patients have the same incidence of
apoptosis in the maturing cells as lower risk
patients; it is only the immature blasts that are
not dying, which accounts for the lower overall
incidence of apoptosis in this group.
A totally unexpected area of research has
been inaugurated with the discovery of defect-
ive ribogenesis in both congenital and
acquired anemias. In MDS, it was RPS14
haplo-insufficiency that was found to be
causative for the 5q- syndrome. This was
quickly followed by studies identifying
abnormal ribosomal gene expression in all
subtypes of MDS. Defective ribogenesis has
been known to cause the stress response
inducing apoptosis via p53 up-regulation.
Finally, we have a molecular explanation for
the autocrine-induced apoptosis in MDS clonal
cells. Both TET2 mutations and UPD are
indicative of genetic instability whose pres-
ence renders the affected cell prone to both
initiation as well as progression of MDS.
One of the hottest areas of research in can-
cer is epigenetics, which clearly affects the
ability of a cell to differentiate and die. It
acquired a particular significance in MDS
because of the effectiveness of hypomethylat-
ing drugs in improving the cytopenias in these
patients. Initially it was thought that silenced
methylated tumor suppressor genes were
being reactivated through hypomethylation
resulting in apoptosis of clonal cells and regen-
eration of normal hematopoietic cells.
However, despite multiple attempts to identify
both specific genes targeted by the hypomethy-
lating drugs as well as global methylation pat-
terns, it has not been possible to correlate
gene methylation status with therapeutic out-
come. Nonetheless, the observation that these
agents are effective in all subtypes of MDS
once again underscores the biologic unity
despite the clinical heterogeneity of MDS.
References
1. Raza A, Preisler HD, Mayers GL, Bankert
R. Rapid enumeration of S-phase cells by
means of monoclonal antibodies. N Engl J
Med 1984;310:991.
2. Raza A, Spiridonidis C, Ucar K, et al.
Double labeling of S-phase murine cells
with bromodeoxyuridine and a second
DNA-specific probe. Cancer Res 1985;45:
2283-7.
3. Raza A, Maheshwari Y, Preisler HD.
Differences in cell cycle characteristics
among patients with acute nonlymphocyt-
ic leukemia. Blood 1987;69:1647-53.
4. Raza A, Gezer S, Mundle S, et al. Apoptosis
in bone marrow biopsy samples involving
stromal and hematopoietic cells in 50
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Blood 1995;86:268-76.
5. Raza A, Mundle S, Shetty V, et al. Novel
insights into the biology of myelodysplas-
tic syndromes: Excessive apoptosis and
the role of cytokines. Int J Hematol 1996;
63:265-78.
6. Raza A, Gregory SA, Preisler HD. The
myelodysplastic syndromes in 1996:
Complex stem cell disorders confounded
by dual actions of cytokines. Leuk Res
1996;20:881-90.
7. Mundle SD, Ali A, Cartlidge JD, et al.
Evidence for involvement of tumor necro-
sis factor-a in apoptotic death of bone
marrow cells in myelodysplastic syn-
dromes. Am J Hematol 1999;60:36-47.
8. Claessens YE, Bouscary D, Dupont JM, et
al. In vitro proliferation and differentiation
of erythroid progenitors from patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes: evidence for
Fas-dependent apoptosis. Blood 2002;99:
1594-601.
9. Campioni D, Secchiero P, Corallini F, et al.
Evidence for a role of TNF-related apop-
tosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) in the ane-
mia of myelodysplastic syndromes. Am J
Pathol 2005;166:557-63.
Article
[Hematology Reports 2010; 2:e4]
10. Horikawa K, Nakakuma H, Kawaguchi T, et
al. Apoptosis resistance of blood cells from
patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemo-
globinuria, aplastic anemia, and myelodys-
plastic syndrome. Blood 1997;90:2716-22.
11. Boultwood J, Fidler C, Strickson AJ, et al.
Narrowing and genomic annotation of the
commonly deleted region of the 5q- syn-
drome. Blood 2002;99:4638-41.
12. Boultwood J, Pellagatti A, Cattan H, et al.
Gene expression profiling of CD34+ cells
in patients with the 5q- syndrome. Br J
Haematol 2007;139:578-89.
13. Ebert BL, Pretz J, Bosco J, et al. Identi-
fication of RPS14 as a 5q- syndrome gene
by RNA interference screen. Nature 2008;
451:335-9.
14. Pellagatti A, Hellström-Lindberg E,
Giagounidis A, et al. Haploinsufficiency of
RPS14 in 5q- syndrome is associated with
deregulation of ribosomal- and transla-
tion-related genes. Br J Haematol 2008;
142:57-64.
15. Sohal D, Pellagatti A, Zhou L, et al.
Downregulation of ribosomal proteins is
seen in non 5q- MDS. Am Soc Hematol Ann
Meeting 2008, abstract 854.
16. Heiss NS, Knight SW, Vulliamy TJ, et al. X-
linked dyskeratosis congenita is caused by
mutations in a highly conserved gene with
putative nucleolar functions. Nat Genet
1998;19:32-8.
17. Ridanpää M, van Eenennaam H, Pelin K, et
al. Mutations in the RNA component of
RNase MRP cause a pleiotropic human
disease, cartilage-hair hypoplasia. Cell
2001;104:195-203.
18. Draptchinskaia N, Gustavsson P, Andersson
B, et al. The gene encoding ribosomal pro-
tein S19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan
anaemia. Nat Genet 1999;21:169-75.
19. Boocock GR, Morrison JA, Popovic M, et al.
Mutations in SBDS are associated with
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Nat
Genet 2003;33:97-101.
20. Austin KM, Leary RJ, Shimamura A. The
Shwachman-Diamond SBDS protein local-
izes to the nucleolus. Blood 2005;106:1253-8.
21. McGowan KA, Li JZ, Park CY, et al. Ribo-
somal mutations cause p53-mediated dark
skin and pleiotropic effects. Nat Genet
2008;40:963-70.
22. Vousden KH, Prives C. Blinded by the light:
The growing complexity of p53. Cell 2009;
137:413-31.
23. Pellagatti A, Marafioti T, Paterson JC, et al.
Induction of p53 and up-regulation of the
p53 pathway in the human 5q- syndrome.
Blood 2010;115:2721-3.
24. Barlow JL, Drynan LF, Hewett DR, et al. A
p53-dependent mechanism underlies
macrocytic anemia in a mouse model of
human 5q- syndrome. Nat Med 2010;16:
59-66.
25. Jankowska AM, Szpurka H, Tiu RV, et al.
Loss of heterozygosity 4q24 and TET2
mutations associated with myelodysplas-
tic/myeloproliferative neoplasms. Blood
2009;113:6403-10.
26. Langemeijer SM, Kuiper RP, Berends M, et
al. Acquired mutations in TET2 are com-
mon in myelodysplastic syndromes. Nat
Genet 2009;41:838-42.
27. Kosmider O, Gelsi-Boyer V, Cheok M, et al.
TET2 mutation is an independent favorable
prognostic factor in myelodysplastic syn-
dromes (MDSs). Blood 2009;114:3285-91.
28. Gondek LP, Tiu R, O’Keefe CL, et al.
Chromosomal lesions and uniparental di-
somy detected by SNP arrays in MDS,
MDS/MPD, and MDS-derived AML. Blood
2008;111:1534-42.
29. Mohamedali A, Gäken J, Twine NA, et al.
Prevalence and prognostic significance of
allelic imbalance by single-nucleotide
polymorphism analysis in low-risk myelo-
dysplastic syndromes. Blood 2007;110:
3365-73.
30. Heinrichs S, Kulkarni RV, Bueso-Ramos
CE, et al. Accurate detection of uniparental
disomy and microdeletions by SNP array
analysis in myelodysplastic syndromes
with normal cytogenetics. Leukemia
2009;23:1605-13.
31. Garcia-Manero G. Modifying the epi-
genome as a therapeutic strategy in
myelodysplasia. Hematol Am Soc Hematol
Educ Program. 2007; pp 405-11.
32. Grønbaek K, Hother C, Jones PA. Epi-
genetic changes in cancer. APMIS 2007;
115:1039-59.
33. Sawanobori M, Yamaguchi S, Hasegawa
M, et al. Expression of TNF receptors and
related signaling molecules in the bone
marrow from patients with myelodysplas-
tic syndromes. Leuk Res 2003;27:583-91.
Article
[page 31]
