Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1427
IInntteerrnnaattiioonnaall JJoouurrnnaall ooff BBiioollooggiiccaall SScciieenncceess
2011; 7(9):1427-1442
Review
Severe Malarial Anemia: Innate Immunity and Pathogenesis
Douglas J. Perkins 1, 2
, Tom Were 2,3, Gregory C. Davenport 1, 2, Prakasha Kempaiah 1, 2, James B. Hittner 1,
4, and John Michael Ong’echa 2
1. Center for Global Health, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albu-
querque NM, USA
2. University of New Mexico/Kenya Medical Research Institute, Laboratories of Parasitic and Viral Diseases, Centre for
Global Health Research, Kisumu, Kenya
3. Department of Pathology, School of Health Sciences, Kenyatta University, Nairobi, Kenya
4. Department of Psychology, College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, USA
 Corresponding author: Douglas J. Perkins, dperkins@salud.unm.edu
© Ivyspring International Publisher. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Reproduction is permitted for personal, noncommercial use, provided that the article is in whole, unmodified, and properly cited.
Received: 2011.09.01; Accepted: 2011.10.01; Published: 2011.11.02
Abstract
Greater than 80% of malaria-related mortality occurs in sub-Saharan Africa due to infections
with Plasmodium falciparum. The majority of P. falciparum-related mortality occurs in im-
mune-naïve infants and young children, accounting for 18% of all deaths before five years of
age. Clinical manifestations of severe falciparum malaria vary according to transmission in-
tensity and typically present as one or more life-threatening complications, including: hy-
perparasitemia; hypoglycemia; cerebral malaria; severe malarial anemia (SMA); and respira-
tory distress. In holoendemic transmission areas, SMA is the primary clinical manifestation of
severe childhood malaria, with cerebral malaria occurring only in rare cases. Mortality rates
from SMA can exceed 30% in pediatric populations residing in holoendemic transmission
areas. Since the vast majority of the morbidity and mortality occurs in immune-naïve African
children less than five years of age, with SMA as the primary manifestation of severe disease,
this review will focus primarily on the innate immune mechanisms that govern malaria
pathogenesis in this group of individuals. The pathophysiological processes that contribute to
SMA involve direct and indirect destruction of parasitized and non-parasitized red blood cells
(RBCs), inefficient and/or suppression of erythropoiesis, and dyserythropoiesis. While all of
these causal etiologies may contribute to reduced hemoglobin (Hb) concentrations in ma-
laria-infected individuals, data from our laboratory and others suggest that SMA in im-
mune-naïve children is characterized by a reduced erythropoietic response. One important
cause of impaired erythroid responses in children with SMA is dysregulation in the innate
immune response. Phagocytosis of malarial pigment hemozoin (Hz) by monocytes, macro-
phages, and neutrophils is a central factor for promoting dysregulation in innate inflammatory
mediators. As such, the role of P. falciparum-derived Hz (PfHz) in mediating suppression of
erythropoiesis through its ability to cause dysregulation in pro- and anti-inflammatory cyto-
kines, growth factors, chemokines, and effector molecules is discussed in detail. An improved
understanding of the etiological basis of suppression of erythropoietic responses in children
with SMA may offer the much needed therapeutic alternatives for control of this global
disease burden.
Key words: Malarial Anemia, Innate Immunity, Pathogenesis
Ivyspring
International Publisher
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1428
1. Human Malaria
Human malaria is caused by unicellular obligate
intracellular protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmo-
dium. Although malaria was once prevalent
throughout most of the world, malaria is currently
endemic in the tropical zones with extensions into the
sub-tropical regions of Asia, Africa, South and Central
America. However, about half of the world‘s popula-
tion (3.3 billion people) is at risk of malaria in more
than 100 countries [1]. Four primary species of malaria
parasites infect humans: P. falciparum, P. ovale, P. ma-
lariae and P. vivax. In addition, studies in Southeast
Asia have shown that P. knowlesi, a malaria parasite
that typically involves monkeys as the natural reser-
voir, can also infect humans, and in some cases, result
in fatal disease (reviewed in [2]). Malaria due to P.
vivax, P. ovale and P. malariae is less severe than that
experienced by P. falciparum infections and collec-
tively, these three species account for slightly less than
10% of the worldwide malaria cases [3]. The most
virulent of the human malaria parasites is P. falcipa-
rum which is responsible for the bulk of the malar-
ia-related morbidity and mortality. P. falciparum ac-
counts for 91% of malaria cases worldwide of which
the majority (i.e., 86%) occurs in the African region [3].
Consistent with the high rate of morbidity within Af-
rica, 90% of the P. falciparum-attributable malaria
deaths also occur in the African region, primarily
sub-Saharan Africa [3]. Approximately 247 million
malaria infections are estimated annually, resulting in
greater than one million deaths, primarily in African
children under the age of five [1].
2. Clinical Spectrum of Plasmodium falci-
parum Infections
The clinical spectrum of P. falciparum malaria in
African children encompasses a wide range of path-
ophysiological derangements and includes multiple
organ involvement and systemic disorders. Falcipa-
rum malaria ranges from asymptomatic infections to
the classic symptoms of malaria (e.g., fever, chills,
sweating, headache and muscle aches), which in a
sub-population of the cases, results in severe
life-threatening complications such as hyperpara-
sitemia, hypoglycemia, hyperlactatemia, kidney fail-
ure, metabolic acidosis, cerebral malaria, severe ma-
larial anemia [SMA, hemoglobin, (Hb)<5.0 g/dL], and
respiratory distress (RD) [4, 5]. Although the patho-
physiology of malaria is multifactorial and only par-
tially understood, development of a pathogenic ver-
sus protective outcome, once an infection occurs, is
mediated by host and parasite interactions of which
the following appear critically important: endemicity
patterns, acquisition of naturally acquired malarial
immunity, parasite virulence, multiplication rate, an-
tigenic variation and polymorphic variability in both
the host (human) and parasite [6]. The age of the in-
dividual when they first acquire a malarial infection
also plays a significant role in the clinical outcomes of
the disease process. For example, children typically
display enhanced susceptibility to severe anemia and
hypoglycemia, while non-resident malaria-naïve
adults are more likely to present with jaundice and
progress to renal failure and respiratory distress due
to pulmonary edema [7].
3. Infant and Childhood Anemia in De-
veloping Nations
Although this review will focus primarily on
SMA and the innate immune responses that condition
the development and outcomes of the disease, it is
important to understand the definitions of anemia
and the importance of geographic context. A general
definition of anemia is a reduction in Hb levels in re-
lation to the age, gender, and physiological status of
the individual within a defined geographical context
[8]. In western countries, anemia is defined by a Hb
concentration <12.0 g/dL, while in developing coun-
tries the standard definition of anemia for children <5
years of age is Hb<11.0 g/dL [8]. Throughout much of
the developing world, particularly in regions of
sub-Saharan Africa with high rates of malaria and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the majority of
infants and young children suffer from anemia [9].
Anemia in the developing world is largely a product
of inadequate feeding practices, frequent infections,
and micronutrient deficiencies which culminate in
high rates of mortality in infants and young children
[9].
4. Disease Burden of Severe Malarial Ane-
mia
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines
SMA as Hb concentrations <5.0 g/dL (or a hematocrit
<15.0%) in the presence of any density parasitemia [5].
SMA is a major public health problem in developing
countries where it contributes 3-46% of inpatient pe-
diatric fatalities in referral care facilities [10]. Despite
efforts aimed at ameliorating the anemia burden,
SMA remains an important childhood health burden
in sub-Saharan Africa [11]. Previous studies in en-
demic areas of Africa demonstrated that the annual
rate of presentation to hospital with SMA was
7.6/1000 in children aged 0-4 years with a case fatality
of 9.7% [12]. Additional studies illustrate that the risk
for SMA peaks at 1 year of age in high (holoendemic)
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1429
transmission regions and at approximately 2 years of
age in areas with moderate and low transmission in-
tensities, such that (in general) the overall risk of SMA
decreases with increasing age [13]. Multicentre stud-
ies indicate that SMA affects 7.5-34% of the African
children that acquire malaria with an overall preva-
lence of 21.2% and case fatality rate of 8.4% [14].
5. Etiological Basis of Severe Malarial
Anemia
The etiology of SMA can include a number of
distinct, as well as overlapping features, including
lysis of infected and uninfected RBCs [15-18], splenic
sequestration of RBCs [19], dyserythropoiesis and
bone marrow suppression [20, 21], co-infections with
bacteremia, HIV-1, and hookworm [22-26], and
chronic transmission of malaria in holoendemic re-
gions. It is important to note that some or all of these
factors can culminate in the chronically low Hb values
observed in infants and young children residing in
holoendemic regions. As such, the degree of para-
sitemia is typically a poor indicator of malaria disease
severity in these locales, especially considering that
peripheral parasitemia is a ―snapshot‖ in time of the
complex and continuously evolving disease process.
However, it is important to stress that high levels of
parasitemia, particularly in non-immune individuals,
can certainly result in massive lysis and clearance of
RBCs, resulting in profound anemia [21, 27].
6. Impaired Erythropoietic Responses in
Severe Malarial Anemia
Although parasite-driven hemolysis will con-
tribute to a reduction in Hb levels in childhood ma-
laria, one of the primary mechanisms responsible for
low Hb levels in children with SMA is impaired
and/or ineffective erythropoiesis. Loss of appropriate
production of erythrocytes translates into a failure in
the ability to replenish the reduced pool of erythro-
cytes due to parasite- and/or anti-malarial-driven
hemolysis. Earlier studies demonstrated that there is
parenchymal damage of bone marrow, ineffective
erythropoiesis, and a reduced rate of erythropoietic
proliferation in patients with acute falciparum ma-
laria [28]. Subsequent studies in Gambian children
demonstrated that SMA was defined by erythroid
hyperplasia with dyserythropoiesis [6]. Examination
of bone marrow from children with SMA revealed
hypercellularity, mild to normal erythroid hyper-
plasia, and abnormal features of late erythroid pro-
genitors, but absence of damage to burst forming
unit-erythrocyte (BFU-E) or colony forming
unit-erythrocyte (CFU-E) early stages [6]. In addition,
we have shown that children with SMA have an inef-
ficient reticulocyte production index (RPI) character-
ized by levels <2.0 [29]. The RPI is a measure of the
extent to which the reticulocyte count has risen (or
not) in response to the level of anemia [30]. Taken
together, these investigations demonstrate that sup-
pression of erythropoiesis is a primary cause of severe
anemia in children with P. falciparum infections.
7. Role of Inflammatory Mediators in Im-
paired Erythropoiesis
Although the precise mechanisms responsible
for reduced reticulocyte responses in children with
SMA have been somewhat elusive, it is clear that one
important cause of reduced erythropoiesis in children
with SMA is due to an imbalance in inflammatory
mediators. In an attempt to control the parasitemia,
the host releases an array of pro- and an-
ti-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth fac-
tors, and effector molecules as part of the innate im-
mune response. Depending on the magnitude and
timing of inflammatory mediator release, the immune
response to malaria can result in either successful
control of the parasitemia or alternatively, an inap-
propriate balance in the inflammatory milieu that can
induce damage to the host, including suppression of
the erythropoietic response. As such, although ma-
laria is typically viewed as an ‗acute‘ infection, in re-
gions with high levels of falciparum endemicity, SMA
is often a more ‗chronic‘ condition in which the im-
munological response to infection drives an inflam-
matory milieu that can promote suppression of ey-
thropoiesis. This premise is supported by observa-
tions showing that persistent childhood P. falciparum
infections are associated with bone marrow suppres-
sion [31].
8. Role of Parasitic Products in Stimulating
the Innate Immune Response
There are a number of key parasitic products
that drive the innate immune response in the malar-
ia-infected human host, including malarial pigment
(hemozoin, Hz), glycosylphosphatidylinositols
(GPIs), and parasitic antigens. While it is clear that
GPIs, which form the connection between the para-
site‘s cellular membrane and external antigens [32], as
well as an array of parasitic antigens play an im-
portant role in activating the immune response, we
will focus our discussion on the role of P. falcipa-
rum-derived Hz (PfHz) in promoting the host immune
response and the potential implications that this pro-
cess has on suppression of the erythropoietic re-
sponse. Excellent reviews on the means by which
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1430
parasite GPIs [33] and malarial antigens stimulate the
innate immune response can be found elsewhere [34].
9. Hemozoin Formation
The importance of hemozoin in malarial infec-
tions was recognized over five decades ago following
the discovery that accumulation of phagocytosed
malarial pigment in bone marrow produces a
brown/black appearance in patients with repeated
malaria infections [35]. Formation of PfHz occurs
during the intraerythrocytic asexual replication cycle
in which P. falciparum metabolizes host Hb as a source
of amino acids [36, 37], leaving the iron-rich heme
portion designated ferriprotoporphyrin IX (FP-IX). P.
falciparum then promotes aggregation of the toxic
FP-IX molecules, using heme polymerase [38, 39], into
an insoluble product known as PfHz [40-42]. Once the
schizont has gone through replication within the host
RBC, the erythrocyte ruptures [43], releasing PfHz
along with merozoites, with the newly-formed mer-
ozoites infecting other RBCs, and PfHz being phago-
cytosed by monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils.
10. Hemozoin Accumulation as a Causal
Factor in Suppression of Erythropoiesis
Accumulation of phagocytes containing malaria
pigment in the microvasculature of deep tissues such
as the bone marrows of patients with acute malaria
was recognized in earlier studies [44]. Intraleukocytic
malaria pigment is a useful direct diagnostic marker
with the amount of phagocytosed pigment being a
good indirect measure of the sequestered parasite
burden, recent schizogony, and disease severity [45].
Studies by others and our group have also found an
association between the presence of PfHz-containing
monocytes and suppression of erythropoiesis in chil-
dren with P. falciparum-induced anemia [46, 47]. In
addition, our studies in western Kenya, using multi-
variate regression analyses, controlling for age, gen-
der, and parasitemia, revealed that elevated levels of
pigment-containing monocytes (PCM) were a signif-
icant predictor of SMA [47]. A recent multi-site study
that included 26,296 hospitalized children with P.
falciparum malaria demonstrated that the percentage
of PfHz-containing monocytes was negatively corre-
lated with hematocrit [48]. Additional evidence that
PfHz-containing cells are an important source for
promoting erythroid suppression is supported by
histological observations of bone marrow in children
with SMA, and those dying from malaria, showing
that developing erythroid progenitors located within
the vicinity of pigmented macrophages have abnor-
mal cellular development [46]. Consistent with these
observations, we recently demonstrated that elevated
levels of PfHz in monocytes are associated with inef-
ficient erythropoiesis in Kenyan children with malaria
[49].
11. Severe Malarial Anemia is Character-
ized by Dysregulation in Innate Inflam-
matory Mediators
One of the primary factors for stimulating the
innate immune response to P. falciparum is phagocy-
tosis of PfHz by circulating monocytes and neutro-
phils, and resident macrophages. One of the primary
means by which PfHz generates an innate immune
response is through the toll-like receptors (TLRs). A
recent review discussing the role of hemozoin in
stimulating the TLRs can be found elsewhere [50]. The
studies discussed below support a model in which
phagocytosis of PfHz, and the host immune response
patterns that ensue following this event, are a critical
step in the promotion of the reduced erythroid re-
sponses observed in children with SMA (Figure 1).
Although it is clear that a wealth of important cellular
biology is yet to be elucidated about the mechanisms
by which phagocytosis of PfHz shapes the innate
immune response, the ability of PfHz to alter inflam-
matory mediator profiles is central to its action.
However, it is important to note that clarification of
strict protective versus pathological roles for inflam-
matory mediators remains poorly defined and ex-
tremely difficult to quantify in human malaria in
which manipulation of the biological systems is typi-
cally not feasible.
Pro-inflammatory Mediators
A successful type 1 response to malaria requires
a well-timed and proportional release of interleukin
(IL)-12, interferon (IFN)-γ, and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-α to minimize parasitemia and preserve
erythropoiesis [51, 52]. The pro-inflammatory phase
should be followed by an equally timely abrogation of
this response by type 2 cytokines such as IL-10,
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β, and IL-4, to
avoid inflammatory host damage [53].
TNF-α is the molecule typically associated with
pathology in malaria and was first hypothesized to be
involved in the host immune response to malaria in
1978 [54]. Several studies have shown an association
between elevated TNF-α levels and morbidity and
mortality in individuals with malaria [55, 56]. How-
ever, TNF-α is critical for parasite killing and pre-
venting parasite replication [55-59]. In addition to its
direct effects [60, 61], TNF-α also mediates its effects
by inducing production of macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (MIF) [62, 63] and nitric oxide syn-
thase type 2 (NOS2, inducible nitric oxide synthase,
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1431
iNOS) [64], which through generation of nitric oxide
(NO) also has direct parasite killing effects [65].
TNF-α can also exacerbate inflammation by inducing
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and subsequently generated
effector molecules, such as prostaglandins [66]. Many
of the signs and symptoms associated with malaria,
such as fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
anorexia, myalgias, and thrombocytopenia can be
linked to TNF-α [67].
Figure 1. Proposed Model of Dysregulation in Innate Immune Responses in Severe Malarial Anemia. Based on
concomitant measurement of innate inflammatory mediators (using multiplex technologies) in children with varying se-
verities of malarial anemia, we developed a model to describe how dysregulation in innate inflammatory mediators promotes
suppression of erythropoiesis in children with SMA. Central to the model is the fact that phagocytosis of hemozoin (PfHz)
by monocytes is one of the primary causes of altered production of innate inflammatory mediators. Elevated inflammatory
mediators are shown in green text, while those that are decreased in children with SMA are shown in red text. Solid lines
indicate positive signaling (up-regulation), whereas dashed lines indicate suppression (down-regulation). Children with SMA
have decreased levels of IL-12 in response to ingestion of parasitized red blood cells (pRBC) and/or hemozoin by monocytes.
Suppression of IL-12 in children with SMA is due to PfHz-induced IL-10 over-production. Children with SMA have increased
circulating levels of TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, MIP-1α, and MIP-1β. Although TNF-α can induce PGE2 and nitric oxide (NO), these
effector molecules are suppressed in children with SMA. Suppression of PGE2 allows over-production of TNF-α, which is
associated with enhanced severity of anemia. In addition, MIF is suppressed in children with falciparum malaria, an event
associated with phagocytosis of PfHz by monocytes, and enhanced severity of anemia. Circulating levels of IFN-α, IL-1β,
RANTES, and SCGF are also decreased in children with SMA. Reduced production of these innate inflammatory mediators,
along with increased TNF-αIL-6, MIP-1α and MIP-β, likely contribute to the development of SMA by suppressing the
erythropoietic response. Lastly, although the reduced NO and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation reported in
children with falciparum malaria may promote ineffective parasite killing and, thereby, prolong parasitemia, children with
malarial anemia have elevated levels of NO and ROS that can directly inhibit erythropoiesis.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1432
IFN-γ is produced by natural killer and αβ-T
cells, as well as the regulatory γδ-T cells, during the
early phases of the immune response to a malaria
infection [68-70]. This prototypical type 1 cytokine is a
key molecule for protecting against infection in
childhood malaria [71] and in non-immune volunteers
experimentally infected with malaria [72]. The ability
to generate IFN-γ from mononuclear cells exposed to
asexual malaria parasites has recently been attributed
to the significant resistance to P. falciparum malaria in
the Fulani people of West Africa compared to other
tribes in the Mali, Burkina Faso, and Sudan regions
[73]. Consistent with a protective role, IFN-γ re-
sponses to CD8+ T cell epitopes from pre-erythrocytic
antigens are associated with higher Hb levels, and
reduced prevalence of SMA in Kenyan children [74].
Although both TNF-α and IFN-γ appear to play
a protective role in children and adults during the
early stages of a P. falciparum infection through their
ability to stimulate monocyte/macrophage activation
and aid in controlling parasitemia [75],
over-production of these innate inflammatory medi-
ators is also associated with anemia [76, 77]. In addi-
tion, persistent macrophage activation is significantly
greater in children with complicated malaria [78].
Excessive release of IFN- and TNF-, along with NO,
also promote enhanced malarial anemia pathogenesis
by contributing to bone marrow suppression,
dyserythropoiesis, and erythrophagocytosis [79].
IL-1 is a potent endogenous pyrogen that pro-
motes an acute inflammatory response and provides a
first line of defense against invading pathogens [80].
IL-1β and IL-1α synergize with TNF-α to enhance the
production of NO and IFN-γ in murine models of
malaria [81]. However, high levels of sustained IL-1β
production in inflammatory diseases can induce a
number of hematological abnormalities, including
anemia [82, 83]. In murine models, administration of
recombinant IL-1 can inhibit development of the
pre-erythrocytic stages of malaria [84], protect against
the development of cerebral malaria, and aid in con-
trolling parasitemia [85]. Although several studies
have reported elevated peripheral blood levels of
circulating IL-1β levels in humans with severe malaria
[86-88], an additional investigation failed to find sig-
nificant changes in IL-1β levels in children with SMA
[76]. Studies in Gambian children with falciparum
malaria illustrated that IL-1α and TNF-α levels,
measured upon admission to hospital, were positively
correlated with venous blood lactate concentrations,
which were approximately two-fold higher in fatal
cases compared to survivors [89]. A study by our
group investigating the role of IL-1β in the immuno-
pathogenesis of SMA revealed that children with
SMA had significantly lower levels of IL-1β than par-
asitized children without SMA [90]. In addition, hap-
lotypes of IL-1β promoter polymorphisms that were
associated with significantly greater risk of develop-
ing SMA were also associated with reduced IL-1β
production, whereas those haplotypes associated with
protection against SMA produced higher levels of
IL-1β [90]. Thus, although sustained production of
IL-1β can promote anemia [82, 83], it appears that
‗high producing‘ haplotypes of IL-1β provide protec-
tion against SMA.
Elevated levels of IL-6 in the peripheral blood of
patients with severe P. falciparum malaria was recog-
nized two decades ago [57]. This finding has since
been corroborated by a number of studies showing
elevated IL-6 levels in children with severe malaria
[75, 76, 88]. An investigation in Gabonese children
further demonstrated that peripheral blood mononu-
clear cells (PBMC) are a primary source of increased
IL-6 production during acute malaria [91]. However,
studies in murine models illustrate that IL-6 mediates
protective immunity against the pre-erythrocytic
stages of malaria by inducing IL-1β and TNF-α, and
during the erythrocytic stage of disease by controlling
parasitemia through boosting of specific immuno-
globulin (Ig) G antibodies [84]. Experimental infec-
tions with P. falciparum in humans support these
findings in that early IL-6 production is associated
with protective effects [92]. Consistent with the pro-
tective effects of IL-6, lower circulating levels of IL-6
are associated with hyperparasitemia in Malian chil-
dren with falciparum malaria [76]. Taken together,
these studies support a protective role for IL-6 during
the early stages of disease by controlling parasitemia.
However, lack of control over the parasitemia and the
resulting progression towards severe disease may
explain the association between elevated levels of IL-6
and enhanced pathophysiology.
MIF was the first soluble mediator described in
malaria [93], but has only recently been more fully
explored in the context of malaria pathophysiology by
our group and a number of others [47, 94-98]. MIF is a
ubiquitous cytokine produced in response to
pro-inflammatory stimuli by T cells [99, 100], mono-
cytes/macrophages [101], and the anterior pituitary
gland [102]. However, unlike most cytokines, MIF is
constitutively expressed at high levels and stored in
preformed vesicles, and as such can therefore be rap-
idly released without de novo gene expression [102,
103]. MIF has potent pro-inflammatory properties that
are important for both innate and adaptive immune
responses to bacterial and parasitic infections [100,
101, 104-106]. Murine models of malaria demonstrat-
ed that elevated MIF levels were associated with en-
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1433
hanced disease severity [107] with the MIF gene
knock-out mice having less anemia and higher sur-
vival rates following infection with P. chabaudi com-
pared to wild types [108].
Previous investigations in humans showed that
MIF was elevated in intervillous blood during pla-
cental malaria [109, 110], thoracic blood vessels of
Malawian children with cerebral malaria [111], and
peripheral blood from Zambian children with acute
malaria [108]. However, results from our laboratory
were the first to show that elevated MIF protein (in
circulation) and MIF transcripts (in PBMC) were as-
sociated with less severe forms of falciparum malaria
[94]. We subsequently confirmed these results in a
larger study of children (aged <3 years, n=357) with P.
falciparum-induced malarial anemia in western Kenya
[47]. In the Kenyan cohort, circulating MIF concentra-
tions declined with increasing severity of anemia and
significantly correlated with peripheral blood leuko-
cyte MIF transcripts. Interestingly, MIF concentra-
tions in peripheral blood were not significantly cor-
related with reticulocyte responses in these children.
However, multivariate regression modeling, control-
ling for age, gender, and parasitemia, demonstrated
that elevated levels of PCM were significantly associ-
ated with both SMA and decreased MIF production.
As a complement to the in vivo studies in children
with malarial anemia, additional experiments were
conducted in PBMC from malaria-naïve individuals
which showed that phagocytosis of PfHz caused
dysregulation in MIF production in a apopto-
sis-independent manner [47]. Taken together, inves-
tigations in Gabonese and Kenyan children with ma-
larial anemia demonstrate that elevated levels of
monocytic PfHz are associated with suppression of
peripheral blood MIF production and enhanced se-
verity of anemia.
Another pro-inflammatory mediator that ap-
pears important in conditioning the pathogenesis of
SMA is IL-23. Although largely unexplored in the
context of SMA, IL-23 is important in mediating the
development of anemia in autoimmune diseases [112]
and chronic inflammation [113]. IL-23 is composed of
two subunits, p19 and p40 [114]. IL-23 shares a num-
ber of common properties with IL-12, including the
p40 subunit [115], the ability to bind to the IL-12Rβ1
receptor [116], release from activated myeloid antigen
presenting cells, promotion of a type 1 immune re-
sponse [114-118], and suppression by both IL-10 [119,
120] and IL-12p40 homodimers [115, 121]. In addition
to the common properties IL-23 shares with IL-12,
there are also distinct immunological roles in that
IL-23 acts on activated memory CD4+ T cells, while
IL-12 promotes Th1 differentiation of naïve CD4+ T
cells [114, 122]. Based on the common and distinct
roles of IL-23 and IL-12, along with the well estab-
lished importance of IL-12 in the pathogenesis of ma-
larial anemia (discussed below in detail), we explored
the relationships among these cytokines in Kenyan
children with varying severities of malarial anemia
[123]. Children with malarial anemia had increased
peripheral blood levels of IL-23 and suppressed IL-12
relative to healthy controls. Additional experiments in
cultured PBMC revealed that hemozoin caused a
sustained induction of IL-23p19 transcripts over 72 h,
while IL-12p40 and IL-10 transcripts peaked at 24 h,
and rapidly declined thereafter. This line of investi-
gation suggests that elevated IL-23 levels may be im-
portant in the pathogenesis of SMA, and that both
IL-10 and IL-12 may regulate IL-23 production during
an infection with P. falciparum.
Perhaps one of the most important innate in-
flammatory mediators in the pathogenesis of SMA is
IL-12, a heterodimeric protein composed of 35 and 40
kDa subunits, and a prototypical cytokine of the type
1 immune response [124, 125]. IL-12 is secreted from
dendritic cells, monocytes, and B-cells in response to
bacterial cell wall components, intracellular patho-
gens, and CD40 ligation [124-126]. IL-12 stimulates
production of IFN-γ and TNF-α from T-cells and nat-
ural killer (NK) cells [124, 125], thereby further aug-
menting type 1 responses. A number of cytokines and
chemokines can promote IL-12 [e.g., granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and
IFN-γ], while others decrease IL-12 production [e.g.,
IL-4, IL-10, IL-11, IL-13, monocyte chemotactic protein
(MCP)-1/CCL2, and TGF-β] [125, 126]. As such, the
overall ability of the innate immune response to gen-
erate IL-12 is an important event that mediates the
development of malarial anemia.
Previous studies in the murine models showed
that administration of recombinant IL-12 and chlo-
roquine ameliorated blood-stage malaria and severe
anemia, and induced immunity against re-infection
[127]. Additional murine malaria studies demon-
strated that deficient IL-12 production is associated
with severe anemia and dyserythropoiesis [128]. The
protective responses associated with IL-12 against
blood-stage malaria appear to be due to increased
IL-12 production from splenic macrophages and NK
cells [129, 130] and the ability of IL-12 to stimulate
antibody production [131]. Central to the role of IL-12
in malaria is its ability to act as a hematopoietic
growth factor [132, 133]. In concert with IL-3, IL-12
along with IL-6, granulocyte-macrophage colo-
ny-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and IL-11 can bolster
colony formation in dormant hematopoietic progeni-
tors during times of cytopenic crisis [132, 133]. Con-
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1434
sistent with this role, our previous studies in children
with falciparum malaria showed that suppression of
circulating IL-12 is associated with enhanced malarial
anemia [77, 134]. Suppression of IL-12 in these chil-
dren was also associated with increasing concentra-
tions of PfHz-containing leukocytes [134]. Additional
studies from our laboratories demonstrated that chil-
dren with SMA have reduced IL-12 levels through a
mechanism that involves, at least in part, phagocyto-
sis of PfHz which promotes up-regulation of mono-
cyte-derived IL-10 that, in turn, suppresses IL-12p40
subunits [135].
Anti-inflammatory Mediators
High levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such
as IL-10, appear to provide protective effects against
SMA by preventing the over-production of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Anti-inflammatory cy-
tokines are typically produced during the later stages
of the innate immune response to P. falciparum in
which they down-regulate the potentially pathogenic
pro-inflammatory responses that are important for
controlling parasitemia [136]. Previous investigations
show that a low IL-10 to TNF-α ratio is associated
with enhanced severity of malarial anemia [77, 137],
suggesting that the timing and magnitude of
pro-inflammatory cytokine production, relative to the
anti-inflammatory cytokine response, is an important
determinant of the clinical outcomes of malaria. Alt-
hough plasma IL-10 levels are elevated in Malian
children with SMA relative to healthy controls [76],
studies in Ghana showed that plasma IL-10 levels
were significantly lower in children with SMA com-
pared to children with cerebral malaria, uncompli-
cated malaria, or moderate malarial anemia [138].
Additional studies have shown significant associa-
tions between circulating IL-10 levels and pig-
ment-containing phagocytes in the peripheral blood
[134], suggesting that malarial pigment plays an im-
portant role in governing the systemic pathology of
malaria through up-regulation of IL-10 production.
TGF-β1 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine (and
growth factor), which down-regulates the production
of TNF-α and IL-10 and protects against severe mu-
rine malaria [139]. TGF-β appears to be important in
malaria pathogenesis [86, 110, 140], and is attributed
to both positive [141] and negative [141-143] effects on
erythropoiesis. Previous studies from our group
showed that TGF-β1 levels in peripheral blood are
significantly reduced in Gabonese children with se-
vere malaria [77]. However, studies in Burkina Faso
revealed opposite effects in which severe childhood
malaria was associated with increased plasma con-
centrations of TGF-β1 [144]. The reason for differing
results may be due to the differences in malaria en-
demicity since the rural site in Lambaréné, Gabon, has
a high level of P. falciparum transmission, whereas the
urban region of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, is a
mesoendemic area for P. falciparum. Alternatively, it is
unclear whether or not ‗platelet poor‘ samples were
used to measure TGF-β1 in the Burkina Faso study, an
important consideration since platelets contain high
levels of TGF-β1. A more recent study further sup-
ports the importance of the TGF-β family in malaria
pathogenesis by showing that serum levels of the
soluble form of the TGF-β co-receptor, endoglin (sEng
or CD105/ TGF-βRIII), was significantly elevated in
children with severe falciparum malaria [145]. In ad-
dition to TGF-β1, a recent investigation in Angolan
children illustrates that polymorphic variability in
TGF-β2 conditions susceptibility to the risk of pro-
gressing to cerebral malaria [146]. It remains to be
definitively determined if TGF-β2 is also an important
mediator of SMA pathogenesis.
Chemokines
Chemotactic cytokines, or chemokines, are pri-
marily known for their chemotactic properties, but
also play important roles in immune activation, hem-
atopoiesis, angiogenesis, and antimicrobial activities
[147]. Burgmann et al. were the first to investigate
chemokines in the context of malaria in 1995 by
measuring the C-C chemokine, macrophage inflam-
matory protein (MIP)-1α/CCL3, and the C-X-C
chemokine, IL-8/CXCL8, in the serum of acutely in-
fected adult patients with P. falciparum infections in
which they found a positive correlation between par-
asitemia and IL-8/CXCL8 [148]. A subsequent inves-
tigation revealed that Malian children with severe
malaria had ten-fold higher concentrations of
IL-8/CXCL8 compared to either healthy controls or
individuals with uncomplicated malaria [76]. IL-8 is
an important neutrophil activating chemokine that
was also previously shown to be elevated in Thai pa-
tients with severe, non-fatal malaria [149]. Additional
studies in Gabonese children and adults illustrated
that higher plasma IL-8 levels were associated with
acute malaria and a slow rate of cure after malaria
chemotherapy [75].
It appears that phagocytosis of PfHz is an im-
portant signal for promoting chemokine production
and/or suppression. For example, PfHz treatment of a
bone marrow-derived murine cell line increased
transcript levels of MIP-1α/CCL3, MIP-1β/CCL4,
MIP-2/CXCL2, and MCP-1/CCL2 [150]. Concomitant
studies from our group demonstrated that Gabonese
children with severe malaria had elevated levels of
MIP-1α/CCL3 and MIP-1β/CCL4 protein (measured
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1435
in circulation) and transcripts (determined in ex vivo
PBMC) [151]. Additional experiments in cultured
PBMC from healthy, malaria-naïve donors revealed
that PfHz promoted increased MIP-1α/CCL3 and
MIP-1β/CCL4 production [151].
Regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed
and secreted (RANTES, CCL5) also appears to play a
critically important role in the pathogenesis of SMA.
RANTES is secreted by a number of cell types in-
cluding monocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, NK and
T cells, and CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors
[152-155]. RANTES protein is sequestered in the
-granules of platelets and is released by thrombin
stimulated platelets [156], indicating that RANTES is
involved in both innate and adaptive immune re-
sponse. In addition, RANTES stimulates hematopoie-
sis, angiogenesis, cell proliferation, and development
[157]. An earlier study by our group, which was the
first to examine RANTES in the context of malaria,
demonstrated that RANTES was suppressed in Gab-
onese children with severe malaria, at least in part,
through PfHz-induced down-regulation of RANTES
transcripts in PBMC [151]. The inherent ability to
produce RANTES/CCL5 also appears important in
conditioning susceptibility to severe malaria. For
example, our investigation in Gabon revealed that
healthy children with prior mild malaria produced
significantly higher RANTES transcripts and protein
than children with a history of severe malaria [151].
These investigations were then confirmed in Kenya
where we showed that RANTES was significantly
suppressed in children with SMA [29]. Suppression of
RANTES in these children was also significantly as-
sociated with inefficient erythropoiesis and malar-
ia-induced thrombocytopenia [29]. Subsequent stud-
ies from our laboratories determined that naturally
acquired PfHz by monocytes promotes suppression of
RANTES in children with malarial anemia through an
IL-10-dependent mechanism [49]. Taken together,
these findings suggest that thrombocytopenia may be
an important source of reduced RANTES which ap-
pears to contribute to suppression of erythropoiesis in
children with SMA.
Growth Factors
Since a number of growth factors influence the
erythropoietic cascade, and SMA is clearly a disease
process in which phagocytosis and lysis of RBCs ne-
cessitates the production of new RBCs to recover from
anemia, growth factors will clearly emerge as critical
determinants of clinical outcomes. However, the lit-
erature is largely lacking with respect to the im-
portance of growth factors in conditioning the de-
velopment of SMA. A time-course study in patients
with P. falciparum malaria in Thailand showed that
serum levels of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) were significantly elevated in individuals
with complicated disease on day 0 that then declined
to within the normal range by day 7; G-CSF at day 0
was correlated with procalcitonin, parasite density,
and erythropoietin [158]. Although not specifically
examined in children with SMA, the potential nega-
tive consequences associated with over-production
could certainly emerge since G-CSF has a negative
impact on erythropoiesis [159-161].
GM-CSF is important for promoting erythro-
poiesis [162] and synergizes with TNF-α to increase
the killing capabilities of neutrophils on blood-stage
malaria parasites [163]. In addition, enhanced pa-
thology in a murine model of malaria (characterized
by parasitemia and anemia) was associated with ele-
vated levels of erythropoietin (EPO), which were
strongly correlated with the level of anemia, and
negatively correlated with GM-CSF concentrations
[164]. The influence that GM-CSF has on anemia out-
comes in children with SMA remains to be deter-
mined.
As part of our investigations aimed at identify-
ing genes/gene pathways that could play a role in the
pathogenesis of SMA, we utilized gene expression
profiling from pooled fractions of human PBMCs
stimulated with PfHz. These experiments revealed
that human stem cell growth factor [SCGF, C-type
lectin domain family member 11A, (CLEC11A)] was
up-regulated following treatment with PfHz [165].
SCGF is a hematopoietic growth factor, expressed
primarily by myeloid cells and fibroblasts that possess
burst-promoting activity for human bone marrow
erythroid progenitors [166]. Human SCGF-α is a
323-amino acid protein, while SCGF-β is a 245-amino
acid protein that results from cleavage of the con-
served carbohydrate domain [167]. After determining
the in vitro kinetics of SCGF expression in response to
PfHz, we then examined circulating SCGF levels in
Kenyan children with malarial anemia. SCGF levels in
circulation and in cultured peripheral blood were
significantly suppressed in children with SMA, with
circulating SCGF levels being positively correlated
with Hb concentration and the RPI [165]. SCGF was
significantly lower in children with a suppressed
erythropoietic response and in children with high
levels of naturally acquired monocytic PfHz [165].
Our additional investigation showed that a novel
SCGF promoter variant (–539C/T, rs7246355) was
significantly associated with susceptibility to SMA
and reduced erythropoietic responses with the ‗high
producing‘ TT genotype protecting against develop-
ment of SMA and suppression of erythropoiesis in
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1436
parasitized children [168]. Taken together, these re-
sults illustrate that SCGF is an important mediator of
SMA pathogenesis that may offer the potential for
immunotherapy in future clinical trials.
Effector Molecules
As described above, the clinical outcomes of
malaria are largely conditioned by the relative ex-
pression of inflammatory mediators. The relative
timing and magnitude of pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors released
into the inflammatory milieu have direct actions on
the cellular response as well as the ‗down-stream‘
effector molecules that ultimately get produced. As
such, effector molecules play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of SMA. One important effector mole-
cule in malaria is the toxic free radical, NO. NO and
equimolar amounts of L-citrulline are generated by
catalysis of L-arginine by the NO synthases (NOS)
[169]. In the context of an acute inflammatory disease,
such as malaria, much of the NO produced comes
from the cytokine inducible isoform, nitric oxide
synthase type 2 [NOS2 or inducible NO synthase
(iNOS)] present in monocytes, macrophages, and
neutrophils [170]. In general, pro-inflammatory cyto-
kines (e.g. IL-12, IFN-γ, and TNF-α) increase
NOS2-generated NO production, whereas an-
ti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-10 and TGF-β)
down-regulate NOS2 expression (for review see
[171]). Although the role of NO in the pathogenesis of
malaria has been debated for nearly a decade, it is
apparent that NO is both protective and pathogenic.
For example, NO is protective in that it has potent
parasiticidal properties against P. falciparum [65] and
can thereby limit parasitemia [172]. A protective effect
is also illustrated by our previous investigation
showing that healthy, malaria-exposed Gabonese
children with a history of mild malaria have signifi-
cantly higher levels of ex vivo PBMC NO production
and NOS enzymatic activity than their age-matched
cohort with a history of severe malaria [173]. Howev-
er, our follow-up investigation in the same population
revealed that ex vivo and in vitro NOS activity in
PBMCs was significantly higher in children with ma-
larial anemia in which there was an inverse associa-
tion between NOS enzyme activity and hemoglobin
levels [174]. Additional experiments confirmed that
PfHz was an important source of NOS2 transcripts
and NO production [174]. Thus, although NO serves
an important role in controlling parasitemia, it is
likely that sustained, high levels of NO production
also promotes anemia. This premise is supported by
the fact that generation of NO during a malarial in-
fection can promote severe anemia through bone
marrow suppression, dyserythropoiesis, and
erythrophagocytosis (for review see [79]).
In addition to NO, reactive oxygen species (ROS)
also appear to be both protective and pathogenic in
human malaria. High levels of oxygen radical pro-
duction are associated with accelerated clearance of
parasitemia in Gabonese children with falciparum
malaria [175]. In addition, ROS are important for
controlling peripheral parasitemia in children with
severe malaria [176]. A pathogenic role for ROS is
illustrated by a study in Kenyan children showing
that ROS cause damage to the erythrocytic membrane
(demonstrated by measurement of α-tocopherol and
polyunsaturated fatty acid levels in the erythrocyte
membrane) [177]. A recent investigation in Indian
children (<15 years of age) infected with P. falciparum
(in which the primary disease manifestation of severe
malaria was SMA) revealed that severe malaria cases
had significantly elevated markers of oxidant stress,
including malondialdehyde, protein carbonyl, nitrite,
ascorbic acid, and copper levels [178]. Although a
wealth of data exists on the topic of free radicals in
malaria, such a discussion is beyond the scope of this
review. However, studies outlined here highlight
both the protective and pathogenic roles of reactive
nitrogen and oxygen intermediates.
Prostaglandin (PG)E2 is synthesized from ara-
chidonic acid (AA) through the catalytic activity of
cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes also known as pros-
taglandin-H2 (PGH2) synthase, which exists in two
isozymes: COX-1 (PGH synthase-1) and COX-2 (PGH
synthase-2). Constitutively expressed COX-1 catalyses
immediate biosynthesis of PGE2 and other pros-
tanoids involved in physiological homeostasis,
whereas inducible COX-2 catalyses delayed formation
of PGE2 and prostanoids involved in regulating the
inflammatory response and immunity to invading
pathogens [179]. Formation of PGH2, the committed
step in prostanoid biosynthesis, promotes generation
of primary prostanoids [i.e., PGE2, PGH2, thrombox-
ane A2, PGD2, PGF2α, and prostacyclin (PGI2) through
the action of respective terminal prostanoid synthases
[179]. Our previous study illustrates that intervillous
blood mononuclear cell (IVBMC) PGE2 production is
reduced in parasitemic women of all gravidae due, at
least in part, to acquisition of intraleukocytic PfHz
[180]. Additional studies from our group have shown
that plasma bicyclo-PGE2 (a stable end metabolite of
PGE2) and ex vivo PBMC COX-2 gene expression are
significantly reduced in Gabonese children with se-
vere malaria [181]. Studies in Tanzanian children also
showed that suppression of systemic bicyclo-PGE2
production (measured in urine) was suppressed in
children with cerebral malaria [182]. In addition, in
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1437
vitro experiments in our laboratories revealed that
reduced PGE2 biosynthesis in children with falcipa-
rum malaria was largely due to inhibition of de novo
COX-2 transcripts following phagocytosis of PfHz by
monocytes [183, 184]. Further investigation of the role
of prostaglandins in childhood malaria showed that
suppression of PGE2 by PfHz and commonly used
antipyretics to treat the malarial fever promoted
over-production of TNF-, an event associated with
enhanced malaria pathogenesis [183, 184].
12. In vitro Models for Investigating Sup-
pression of Erythropoiesis in Malarial
Anemia
In vitro studies have shown that PfHz directly (or
in synergy with TNF-α) inhibits erythroid cell devel-
opment [46]. In addition to inducing erythropoie-
sis-inhibiting cytokines, PfHz has direct effects on the
erythropoietic cascade through its ability to cause
apoptosis of erythroid precursor cells via oxidative
stress [185]. We recently developed an in vitro model
of erythropoiesis using CD34+ stem cells isolated
from human peripheral blood to investigate the ef-
fects of inflammatory mediators on erythroid devel-
opment [186]. This model showed that PfHz only
slightly suppressed erythroid cell proliferation and
maturation, marked by decreased expression of gly-
cophorin A (GPA) [186]. However, the addition of
PfHz-stimulated PBMC-conditioned media
(PfHz-CM), recombinant TNF-α, and NO donors sig-
nificantly inhibited erythroid cell proliferation [186].
The decreased proliferation witnessed in cells treated
with PfHz-CM and NO was accompanied by in-
creased apoptosis of erythropoietin-stimulated
CD34+ cells [186]. Interestingly, the addition of NO
donors significantly inhibited erythroid cell matura-
tion, whereas TNF-α failed to impact on maturation.
These results demonstrate that PfHz suppresses
erythropoiesis by acting directly on erythroid cells,
and to a greater extent, through indirect effects in
which phagocytosis of PfHz generates inflammatory
mediators which have adverse effects on erythroid
development.
13. Conclusion
Studies outlined here support a model in which
the pathogenesis of SMA is largely driven by dysreg-
ulation in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines, growth factors, and effector molecules.
Altered patterns of these innate inflammatory medi-
ators is due, at least in part, to the phagocytosis of
PfHz by monocytes, resident macrophages (including
those in bone marrow), and neutrophils. The mecha-
nisms that lead to the profoundly low Hb concentra-
tions witnessed in children with SMA are due to he-
molysis and phagocytosis of parasitized and
non-parasitized RBCs, and to a large extent, by sup-
pression of erythropoiesis that is driven by
PfHz-generated dysregulation in innate inflammatory
mediators. While it is clear that overcoming the global
burden of SMA will continue to present a serious
challenge, it is our hope that gaining an improved
understanding of pathogenic events that cause sup-
pression of erythropoiesis, particularly dysregulation
in innate immunity, may offer future treatment strat-
egies to combat the unacceptable rates of morbidity
and mortality associated with SMA.
Conflict of Interests
The authors have declared that no conflict of in-
terest exists.
References
1. WHO. World Malaria Report 2008. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO.
2008.
2. Sabbatani S, Fiorino S, and Manfredi R. The emerging of the
fifth malaria parasite (Plasmodium knowlesi). A public health
concern? Braz J Infect Dis, 2010. 14(3): 299-309.
3. WHO and UNICEF. World malaria report 2008. Geneva: World
Health Organization. 2008.
4. Marsh K, et al. Indicators of life-threatening malaria in African
children. N Engl Med J, 1995. 332(21): 1399-404.
5. WHO. Severe falciparum malaria; World Health Organization,
Communicable Diseases Cluster. Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2000. 94 (Suppl 1):
S1-90.
6. Abdalla S.H and Pasvol G. Malaria: a hematological perspec-
tive. Tropical medicine; v4 (xvi, 429 p). London, River Edge, NJ:
Imperial College Press, Distributed by World Scientific Pub.
2004 .
7. White N.J. Not much progress in treatment of cerebral malaria.
Lancet, 1998. 352(9128): 594-5.
8. Murray C.J.L, et al. The global burden of disease: a compre-
hensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases,
injuries, and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020. Cam-
bridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. 1996: 43.
9. Lartey A. Maternal and child nutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa:
challenges and interventions. Proc Nutr Soc, 2008. 67(1): 105-8.
10. English M, et al. Assessment of inpatient paediatric care in first
referral level hospitals in 13 districts in Kenya. Lancet, 2004.
363(9425): 1948-53.
11. Brabin B.J, Premji Z, and Verhoeff F. An analysis of anemia and
child mortality. Nutr J, 2001. 131(2S-2): 636S-645S.
12. Snow R.W, et al. A preliminary continental risk map for malaria
mortality among African children. Parasitol Today, 1999. 15(3):
99-104.
13. Reyburn H, et al. Association of transmission intensity and age
with clinical manifestations and case fatality of severe Plasmo-
dium falciparum malaria. JAMA, 2005. 293(12): 1461-70.
14. Taylor T, et al. Standardized data collection for multi-center
clinical studies of severe malaria in African children: establish-
ing the SMAC network. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 2006.
100(7): 615-22.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1438
15. Dondorp A.M, et al. Red blood cell deformability as a predictor
of anemia in severe falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg,
1999. 60(5): 733-7.
16. Dondorp A.M, et al. Red cell deformability, splenic function
and anaemia in thalassaemia. Br Haematol J, 1999. 105(2): 505-8.
17. Price R.N, et al. Factors contributing to anemia after uncom-
plicated falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg, 2001. 65(5):
614-22.
18. Egan A.F, et al. Aotus New World monkeys: model for study-
ing malaria-induced anemia. Blood, 2002. 99(10): 3863-6.
19. Buffet P.A, et al. Retention of erythrocytes in the spleen: a dou-
ble-edged process in human malaria. Curr Opin Hematol, 2009.
16(3): 157-64.
20. Abdalla S, et al. The anaemia of P. falciparum malaria. Br
Haematol J, 1980. 46(2): 171-83.
21. Phillips R.E, et al. The importance of anaemia in cerebral and
uncomplicated falciparum malaria: role of complications,
dyserythropoiesis and iron sequestration. Q Med J, 1986.
58(227): 305-23.
22. Berkley J.A, et al. Bacteremia among children admitted to a
rural hospital in Kenya. N Engl Med J, 2005. 352(1): 39-47.
23. Otieno R.O, et al. Increased severe anemia in HIV-1-exposed
and HIV-1-positive infants and children during acute malaria.
AIDS, 2006. 20(2): 275-80.
24. Bassat Q, et al. Severe malaria and concomitant bacteraemia in
children admitted to a rural Mozambican hospital. Trop Med
Int Health, 2009. 14(9): 1011-9.
25. Davenport G.C, et al. Hematological predictors of increased
severe anemia in Kenyan children coinfected with Plasmodium
falciparum and HIV-1. Am Hematol J, 2010. 85(4): 227-33.
26. Were T, et al. Bacteremia in Kenyan children presenting with
malaria. J Clin Microbiol, 2011. 49(2): 671-6.
27. Molyneux M.E, et al. Clinical features and prognostic indicators
in paediatric cerebral malaria: a study of 131 comatose Mala-
wian children. Q Med J, 1989. 71(265): 441-59.
28. Dormer P, et al. Ineffective erythropoiesis in acute human P.
falciparum malaria. Blut, 1983. 46(5): 279-88.
29. Were T, et al. Suppression of RANTES in children with Plas-
modium falciparum malaria. Haematologica, 2006. 91(10):
1396-9.
30. Turgeon M.L. Clinical hematology: theory and procedures; 4th
ed; ix, 570 p. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 2005.
31. Helleberg M, et al. Bone marrow suppression and severe
anaemia associated with persistent Plasmodium falciparum
infection in African children with microscopically undetectable
parasitaemia. Malaria Journal, 2005. 4: 56.
32. Krishnegowda G, et al. Induction of proinflammatory respons-
es in macrophages by the glycosylphosphatidylinositols of
Plasmodium falciparum: cell signaling receptors, glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structural requirement, and reg-
ulation of GPI activity. J Biol Chem, 2005. 280(9): 8606-16.
33. Nebl T, De Veer M.J., and Schofield L. Stimulation of innate
immune responses by malarial glycosylphosphatidylinositol
via pattern recognition receptors. Parasitology, 2005. 130
(Suppl): S45-62.
34. McKenzie F.E, et al. Strain theory of malaria: the first 50 years.
Adv Parasitol, 2008. 66: 1-46.
35. Deegan T and Maegraith B.G. Studies on the nature of malarial
pigment (haemozoin). II. The pigment of the human species,
Plasmodium falciparum and malariae P. Ann Trop Med Para-
sitol, 1956. 50(2): 212-22.
36. Krugliak M, Zhang J, and Ginsburg H. Intraerythrocytic Plas-
modium falciparum utilizes only a fraction of the amino acids
derived from the digestion of host cell cytosol for the biosyn-
thesis of its proteins. Mol Biochem Parasitol, 2002. 119(2):
249-56.
37. Liu J, et al. Plasmodium falciparum ensures its amino acid
supply with multiple acquisition pathways and redundant
proteolytic enzyme systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2006.
103(23): 8840-5.
38. Chou A.C and Fitch C.D. Heme polymerase: modulation by
chloroquine treatment of a rodent malaria. Life Sci, 1992. 51(26):
2073-8.
39. Slater A.F and Cerami A. Inhibition by chloroquine of a novel
haem polymerase enzyme activity in malaria trophozoites.
Nature, 1992. 355(6356): 167-9.
40. Slater A.F, et al. An iron-carboxylate bond links the heme units
of malaria pigment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1991. 88(2): 325-9.
41. Egan T.J. Physico-chemical aspects of hemozoin (malaria pig-
ment) structure and formation. J Inorg Biochem, 2002. 91(1):
19-26.
42. Pandey A.V, et al. Hemozoin formation in malaria: a two-step
process involving histidine-rich proteins and lipids. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun, 2003. 308(4): 736-43.
43. Omodeo-Sale F, et al. Destabilisation and subsequent lysis of
human erythrocytes induced by Plasmodium falciparum haem
products. Eur Haematol J, 2005. 74(4): 324-32.
44. Srichaikul T, Panikbutr N, and Jeumtrakul P. Bone-marrow
changes in human malaria. Ann Trop Med Parasitol, 1967.
61(1): 40-51.
45. Nguyen P.H, et al. Intraleucocytic malaria pigment and prog-
nosis in severe malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 1995. 89(2):
200-4.
46. Casals-Pascual C, et al. Suppression of erythropoiesis in ma-
larial anemia is associated with hemozoin in vitro and in vivo.
Blood, 2006. 108(8): 2569-77.
47. Awandare G.A, et al. Role of monocyte-acquired hemozoin in
suppression of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in chil-
dren with severe malarial anemia. Infect Immun, 2007. 75(1):
201-10.
48. Kremsner P.G, et al. Prognostic value of circulating pigmented
cells in African children with malaria. J Infect Dis, 2009. 199(1):
142-50.
49. Were T, et al. Naturally acquired hemozoin by monocytes
promotes suppression of RANTES in children with malarial
anemia through an IL-10-dependent mechanism. Microbes In-
fect, 2009. 11(8-9): 811-9.
50. Shio M, et al. Innate inflammatory response to the malarial
pigment hemozoin. Microbes and Infection, 2010. 12(12-13):
889-899.
51. Crutcher J.M, et al. Interleukin-12 and malaria. Research in
Immunology, 1995. 146: 552-559.
52. Stevenson M.M, et al. IL-12-induced protection against
blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi AS requires IFN-gamma
and TNF-alpha and occurs via a nitric oxide-dependent mech-
anism. Immunol J, 1995. 155(5): 2545-56.
53. Clark I.A, et al. Human malarial disease: a consequence of
inflammatory cytokine release. Malar J, 2006. 5: 85.
54. Clark I.A. Does endotoxin cause both the disease and parasite
death in acute malaria and babesiosis? Lancet, 1978. 2(8080):
75-7.
55. Grau G.E, et al. Tumor necrosis factor and disease severity in
children with falciparum malaria. N Engl Med J, 1989. 320(24):
1586-91.
56. Kwiatkowski D, et al. TNF concentration in fatal cerebral,
non-fatal cerebral, and uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. Lancet, 1990. 336(8725): 1201-4.
57. Kern P, et al. Elevated tumor necrosis factor alpha and inter-
leukin-6 serum levels as markers for complicated Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. Am Med J, 1989. 87(2): 139-43.
58. Kwiatkowski D, et al. Tumour necrosis factor production in
Falciparum malaria and its association with schizont rupture.
Clin Exp Immunol, 1989. 77(3): 361-6.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1439
59. Clark I.A, et al. TNF and Plasmodium berghei ANKA-induced
cerebral malaria. Immunol Lett, 1990. 25(1-3): 195-8.
60. Clark I.A, et al. Possible roles of tumor necrosis factor in the
pathology of malaria. Am Pathol J, 1987. 129(1): 192-9.
61. van Hensbroek M.B, et al. The effect of a monoclonal antibody
to tumor necrosis factor on survival from childhood cerebral
malaria. J Infect Dis, 1996. 174(5): 1091-7.
62. Calandra T and Bucala R. Macrophage migration inhibitory
factor: a counter-regulator of glucocorticoid action and critical
mediator of septic shock. Inflamm J, 1995. 47(1-2): 39-51.
63. Lan H.Y, et al. TNF-alpha up-regulates renal MIF expression in
rat crescentic glomerulonephritis. Mol Med, 1997. 3(2): 136-44.
64. Rockett K.A, et al. In vivo induction of nitrite and nitrate by
tumor necrosis factor, lymphotoxin, and interleukin-1: possible
roles in malaria. Infect Immun, 1992. 60(9): 3725-30.
65. Rockett K, et al. Killing of Plasmodium falciparum in vitro by
nitric oxide derivatives. Infection and Immunity, 1991. 59: 3280.
66. Perkins D.J and Kniss D.A. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha pro-
motes sustained cyclooxygenase-2 expression: attenuation by
dexamethasone and NSAIDs. Prostaglandins, 1997. 54(4):
727-43.
67. Schwartz J.E, et al. A phase I trial of recombinant tumor necro-
sis factor (rTNF) administered by continuous intravenous infu-
sion in patients with disseminated malignancy. Biotherapy,
1989. 1(3): 207-14.
68. Hensmann M and Kwiatkowski D. Cellular basis of early cyto-
kine response to Plasmodium falciparum. Infect Immun, 2001.
69(4): 2364-71.
69. Artavanis-Tsakonas K and Riley E.M. Innate immune response
to malaria: rapid induction of IFN-gamma from human NK
cells by live Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes.
Immunol J, 2002. 169(6): 2956-63.
70. D'Ombrain M.C, et al. gammadelta-T cells expressing NK re-
ceptors predominate over cells NK and conventional T cells in
the innate IFN-gamma response to Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. Eur Immunol J, 2007. 37(7): 1864-73.
71. D'Ombrain M.C, et al. Association of early interferon-gamma
production with immunity to clinical malaria: a longitudinal
study among Papua New Guinean children. Clin Infect Dis,
2008. 47(11): 1380-7.
72. Pombo D.J, et al. Immunity to malaria after administration of
ultra-low doses of red cells infected with Plasmodium falcipa-
rum. Lancet, 2002. 360(9333): 610-7.
73. McCall M.B, et al. Early interferon-gamma response against
Plasmodium falciparum correlates with interethnic differences
in susceptibility to parasitemia between sympatric Fulani and
Dogon in Mali. J Infect Dis, 2010. 201(1): 142-52.
74. Ong'echa J.M, et al. Association of interferon-gamma responses
to pre-erythrocytic stage vaccine candidate antigens of Plas-
modium falciparum in young Kenyan children with improved
hemoglobin levels: XV. Asembo Bay Cohort Project. Am J Trop
Med Hyg, 2003. 68(5): 590-7.
75. Kremsner P.G, et al. Prediction of accelerated cure in Plasmo-
dium falciparum malaria by the elevated capacity of tumor ne-
crosis factor production. Am J Trop Med Hyg, 1995. 53(5):
532-8.
76. Lyke K.E, et al. Serum levels of the proinflammatory cytokines
interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta), IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, tumor necrosis
factor alpha, and IL-12(p70) in Malian children with severe
Plasmodium falciparum malaria and matched uncomplicated
malaria or healthy controls. Infect Immun, 2004. 72(10): 5630-7.
77. Perkins D.J, Weinberg J.B, and Kremsner P.G. Reduced inter-
leukin-12 and transforming growth factor-beta1 in severe
childhood malaria: relationship of cytokine balance with dis-
ease severity. J Infect Dis, 2000. 182(3): 988-92.
78. Biemba G, et al. Prolonged macrophage activation and persis-
tent anaemia in children with complicated malaria. Trop Med
Int Health, 1998. 3(1): 60-5.
79. Clark I.A and Cowden W.B. The pathophysiology of falciparum
malaria. Pharmacol Ther, 2003. 99(2): 221-60.
80. Dinarello C.A. Infection, fever, and exogenous and endogenous
pyrogens: some concepts have changed. J Endotoxin Res, 2004.
10(4): 201-22.
81. Rockett K.A, et al. Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1
synergy in the context of malaria pathology. Am J Trop Med
Hyg, 1994. 50(6): 735-42.
82. Pascual V, et al. Role of interleukin-1 (IL-1) in the pathogenesis
of systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis and clinical re-
sponse to IL-1 blockade. J Exp Med, 2005. 201(9): 1479-86.
83. Dinarello C.A. Blocking IL-1 in systemic inflammation. J Exp
Med, 2005. 201(9): 1355-9.
84. Pied S, et al. IL-6 induced by IL-1 inhibits malaria
pre-erythrocytic stages but its secretion is down-regulated by
the parasite. Immunol J, 1992. 148(1): 197-201.
85. Curfs J.H, et al. Low dosages of interleukin 1 protect mice
against lethal cerebral malaria. J Exp Med, 1990. 172(5): 1287-91.
86. Prakash D, et al. Clusters of cytokines determine malaria se-
verity in Plasmodium falciparum-infected patients from en-
demic areas of Central India. J Infect Dis, 2006. 194(2): 198-207.
87. Vogetseder A, et al. Time course of coagulation parameters,
cytokines and adhesion molecules in Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. Trop Med Int Health, 2004. 9(7): 767-73.
88. John C.C, et al. Low levels of RANTES are associated with
mortality in children with cerebral malaria. J Infect Dis, 2006.
194(6): 837-45.
89. Krishna S, et al. Lactic acidosis and hypoglycaemia in children
with severe malaria: pathophysiological and prognostic signif-
icance. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 1994. 88(1): 67-73.
90. Ouma C, et al. Polymorphic variability in the interleukin
(IL)-1beta promoter conditions susceptibility to severe malarial
anemia and functional changes in IL-1beta production. J Infect
Dis, 2008. 198(8): 1219-26.
91. Aubouy A, Deloron P, and Migot-Nabias F. Plasma and in vitro
levels of cytokines during and after a Plasmodium falciparum
malaria attack in Gabon. Acta Trop, 2002. 83(3): 195-203.
92. Harpaz R, et al. Serum cytokine profiles in experimental human
malaria. Relationship to protection and disease course after
challenge. J Clin Invest, 1992. 90(2): 515-23.
93. Coleman R.M, Bruce A, and Rencricca N.J. Malaria: macro-
phage migration inhibition factor (MIF). Parasitol J, 1976. 62(1):
137-8.
94. Awandare G.A, et al. Decreased circulating macrophage mi-
gration inhibitory factor (MIF) protein and blood mononuclear
cell MIF transcripts in children with Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. Clin Immunol, 2006. 119(2): 219-25.
95. Awandare G.A, et al. A macrophage migration inhibitory factor
promoter polymorphism is associated with high-density para-
sitemia in children with malaria. Genes Immun, 2006. 7(7):
568-75.
96. De Mast Q, et al. A decrease of plasma macrophage migration
inhibitory factor concentration is associated with lower num-
bers of circulating lymphocytes in experimental Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. Parasite Immunol, 2008. 30(3): 133-8.
97. Awandare G.A, et al. MIF (macrophage migration inhibitory
factor) promoter polymorphisms and susceptibility to severe
malarial anemia. J Infect Dis, 2009. 200(4): 629-37.
98. Jain V, et al. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor is associ-
ated with mortality in cerebral malaria patients in India. BMC
Res Notes, 2009. 2: 36.
99. David J.R, Delayed hypersensitivity in vitro: its mediation by
cell-free substances formed by lymphoid cell-antigen interac-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1966. 56(1): 72-7.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1440
100.Bacher M, et al. An essential regulatory role for macrophage
migration inhibitory factor in T-cell activation. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A, 1996. 93(15): 7849-54.
101.Calandra T and Roger T. Macrophage migration inhibitory
factor: a regulator of innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol, 2003.
3(10): 791-800.
102.Bernhagen J, Calandra T, and Bucala R. Regulation of the im-
mune response by macrophage migration inhibitory factor: bi-
ological and structural features. J Mol Med (Berl), 1998. 76(3-4):
151-61.
103.Bernhagen J, et al. MIF is a pituitary-derived cytokine that
potentiates lethal endotoxaemia. Nature, 1993. 365(6448): 756-9.
104.Calandra T, et al. Protection from septic shock by neutralization
of macrophage migration inhibitory factor. Nat Med, 2000. 6(2):
164-70.
105.Koebernick H, et al. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor
(MIF) plays a pivotal role in immunity against Salmonella
typhimurium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2002. 99(21): 13681-6.
106.Juttner S, et al. Migration inhibitory factor induces killing of
Leishmania major by macrophages: dependence on reactive
nitrogen intermediates and endogenous TNF-alpha. Immunol J,
1998. 161(5): 2383-90.
107.Martiney J, et al. Macrophage migration inhibitory factory
release by macrophages after ingestion of Plasmodium
chaubaudi-Infected erythrocytes: possible role in the patho-
genesis of malarial anemia. Infection and Immunity, 2000. 68(4):
2259-2267.
108.McDevitt M.A, et al. A critical role for the host mediator mac-
rophage migration inhibitory factor in the pathogenesis of ma-
larial anemia. J Exp Med, 2006. 203(5): 1185-96.
109.Chaisavaneeyakorn S, et al. Levels of macrophage inflamma-
tory protein 1 alpha (MIP-1 alpha) and MIP-1 beta in intervil-
lous blood plasma samples from women with placental malaria
and human immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin Diagn Lab
Immunol, 2003. 10(4): 631-6.
110.Chaiyaroj S.C, et al. Reduced levels of transforming growth
factor-beta1, interleukin-12 and increased migration inhibitory
factor are associated with severe malaria. Acta Trop, 2004. 89(3):
319-27.
111.Clark I.A, et al. Tissue distribution of migration inhibitory
factor and inducible nitric oxide synthase in falciparum malaria
and sepsis in African children. Malar J, 2003. 2: 6.
112.Cua D, et al. Interleukin-23 rather than interleukin-12 is the
critical cytokine for autoimmune inflammation of the brain.
Nature, 2003. 421: 774-748.
113.Wiekowski M.T, et al. Ubiquitous transgenic expression of the
IL-23 subunit p19 induces multiorgan inflammation, runting,
infertility, and premature death. Immunol J, 2001. 166(12):
7563-70.
114.Oppmann B, et al. Novel p19 protein engages IL-12p40 to form
a cytokine, IL-23, with biological activities similar as well as
distinct from IL-12. Immunity, 2000. 13(5): 715-25.
115.Shimozato O, et al. The secreted form of the p40 subunit of
interleukin (IL)-12 inhibits IL-23 functions and abrogates
IL-23-mediated antitumour effects. Immunology, 2006. 117(1):
22-8.
116.Parham C, et al. A receptor for the heterodimeric cytokine IL-23
is composed of IL-12Rbeta1 and a novel cytokine receptor
subunit, IL-23R. Immunol J, 2002. 168(11): 5699-708.
117.Pirhonen J, Matikainen S, and Julkunen I. Regulation of vi-
rus-induced IL-12 and IL-23 expression in human macrophag-
es. Immunol J, 2002. 169(10): 5673-8.
118.Trinchieri G. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate re-
sistance and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol, 2003. 3(2):
133-46.
119.Aste-Amezaga M, et al. Molecular mechanisms of the induction
of IL-12 and its inhibition by IL-10. Immunol J, 1998. 160(12):
5936-44.
120.Schuetze N, et al. IL-12 family members: differential kinetics of
their TLR4-mediated induction by Salmonella enteritidis and
the impact of IL-10 in bone marrow-derived macrophages. Int
Immunol, 2005. 17(5): 649-59.
121.Gately M.K, et al. Interleukin-12 antagonist activity of mouse
interleukin-12 p40 homodimer in vitro and in vivo. Ann N Y
Acad Sci, 1996. 795: 1-12.
122.Aggarwal S, et al. Interleukin-23 promotes a distinct CD4 T cell
activation state characterized by the production of interleu-
kin-17. J Biol Chem, 2003. 278(3): 1910-4.
123.Ong'echa J.M, et al. Increased circulating interleukin (IL)-23 in
children with malarial anemia: In vivo and in vitro relationship
with co-regulatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-10. Clin Immunol,
2008 Feb;126(2):211-21.
124.Gately M.K, et al. The interleukin-12/interleukin-12-receptor
system: role in normal and pathologic immune responses. An-
nu Rev Immunol, 1998. 16: 495-521.
125.Trinchieri G. Interleukin-12: a cytokine at the interface of in-
flammation and immunity. Adv Immunol, 1998. 70: 83-243.
126.Mosser D.M and Karp C.L. Receptor mediated subversion of
macrophage cytokine production by intracellular pathogens.
Curr Opin Immunol, 1999. 11(4): 406-11.
127.Mohan K, Sam H, and Stevenson M.M. Therapy with a combi-
nation of low doses of interleukin 12 and chloroquine com-
pletely cures blood-stage malaria, prevents severe anemia, and
induces immunity to reinfection. Infect Immun, 1999. 67(2):
513-9.
128.Mohan K and Stevenson M.M. Dyserythropoiesis and severe
anaemia associated with malaria correlate with deficient inter-
leukin-12 production. Br Haematol J, 1998. 103(4): 942-9.
129.Mohan K, Moulin P, and Stevenson M.M. Natural killer cell
cytokine production, not cytotoxicity, contributes to resistance
against blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi AS infection. Im-
munol J, 1997. 159(10): 4990-8.
130.Sam H and Stevenson M.M. Early IL-12 p70, but not p40, pro-
duction by splenic macrophages correlates with host resistance
to blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi AS malaria. Clin Exp
Immunol, 1999. 117(2): 343-9.
131.Su Z and Stevenson M.M. IL-12 is required for anti-
body-mediated protective immunity against blood-stage Plas-
modium chabaudi AS malaria infection in mice. Immunol J,
2002. 168(3): 1348-55.
132.Bellone G and Trinchieri G. Dual stimulatory and inhibitory
effect of NK cell stimulatory factor/IL-12 on human hemato-
poiesis. Immunol J, 1994. 153(3): 930-7.
133.Dybedal I, Larsen S, and Jacobsen S.E. IL-12 directly enhances
in vitro murine erythropoiesis in combination with IL-4 and
stem cell factor. Immunol J, 1995. 154(10): 4950-5.
134.Luty A.J, et al. Low interleukin-12 activity in severe Plasmo-
dium falciparum malaria. Infect Immun, 2000. 68(7): 3909-15.
135.Keller C.C, et al. Acquisition of hemozoin by monocytes
down-regulates interleukin-12 p40 (IL-12p40) transcripts and
circulating IL-12p70 through an IL-10-dependent mechanism:
in vivo and in vitro findings in severe malarial anemia. Infect
Immun, 2006. 74(9): 5249-60.
136.Ho M, et al. Endogenous interleukin-10 modulates proinflam-
matory response in Plasmodium falciparum malaria. J Infect
Dis, 1998. 178(2): 520-5.
137.Othoro C, et al. A low interleukin-10 tumor necrosis fac-
tor-alpha ratio is associated with malaria anemia in children
residing in a holoendemic malaria region in western Kenya. J
Infect Dis, 1999. 179(1): 279-82.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1441
138.Kurtzhals J.A, et al. Low plasma concentrations of interleukin
10 in severe malarial anaemia compared with cerebral and un-
complicated malaria. Lancet, 1998. 351(9118): 1768-72.
139.Omer F.M and Riley E.M. Transforming growth factor beta
production is inversely correlated with severity of murine ma-
laria infection. J Exp Med, 1998. 188(1): 39-48.
140.Gourley I.S, et al. Profound bias in interferon-gamma and in-
terleukin-6 allele frequencies in western Kenya, where severe
malarial anemia is common in children. J Infect Dis, 2002.
186(7): 1007-12.
141.Zermati Y, et al. Transforming growth factor inhibits erythro-
poiesis by blocking proliferation and accelerating differentia-
tion of erythroid progenitors. Exp Hematol, 2000. 28(8): 885-94.
142.Hino M, et al. Effects of type beta transforming growth factors
on haematopoietic progenitor cells. Br Haematol J, 1988. 70(2):
143-7.
143.Sing G.K, et al. Transforming growth factor beta selectively
inhibits normal and leukemic human bone marrow cell growth
in vitro. Blood, 1988. 72(5): 1504-11.
144.Malaguarnera L, et al. Plasma levels of interleukin-12 (IL-12),
interleukin-18 (IL-18) and transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta) in Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Eur Cytokine
Netw, 2002. 13(4): 425-30.
145.Dietmann A, et al. Endoglin in African children with Plasmo-
dium falciparum malaria: a novel player in severe malaria
pathogenesis? J Infect Dis, 2009. 200(12): 1842-8.
146.Sambo M.R, et al. Transforming growth factor beta 2 and heme
oxygenase 1 genes are risk factors for the cerebral malaria syn-
drome in Angolan children. PLoS One. 2010;5(6): e11141.
147.Rollins B.J. Chemokines. Blood, 1997. 90(3): 909-28.
148.Burgmann H, et al. Serum concentrations of MIP-1 alpha and
interleukin-8 in patients suffering from acute Plasmodium fal-
ciparum malaria. Clin Immunol Immunopathol, 1995. 76(1 Pt
1): 32-6.
149.Friedland J.S, et al. Interleukin-8 and Plasmodium falciparum
malaria in Thailand. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 1993. 87(1):
54-5.
150.Jaramillo M, Godbout M, and Olivier M. Hemozoin induces
macrophage chemokine expression through oxidative
stress-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Immunol J,
2005. 174(1): 475-84.
151.Ochiel D.O, et al. Differential regulation of beta-chemokines in
children with Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Infect Immun,
2005. 73(7): 4190-7.
152.Conlon K, et al. CD8+ and CD45RA+ human peripheral blood
lymphocytes are potent sources of macrophage inflammatory
protein 1 alpha, interleukin-8 and RANTES. Eur Immunol J,
1995. 25(3): 751-6.
153.Marfaing-Koka A, et al. Contrasting effects of IL-4, IL-10 and
corticosteroids on RANTES production by human monocytes.
Int Immunol, 1996. 8(10): 1587-94.
154.Mariani E, et al. RANTES and MIP-1alpha production by lym-
phocytes T, monocytes and NK cells from nonagenarian sub-
jects. Exp Gerontol, 2002. 37(2-3): 219-26.
155.Umland O, et al. Induction of various immune modulatory
molecules in CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. J Leukoc Biol, 2004.
75(4): 671-9.
156.Tang Y.Q, Yeaman M.R, and Selsted M.E. Antimicrobial pep-
tides from human platelets. Infect Immun, 2002. 70(12): 6524-33.
157.Luster A.D. The role of chemokines in linking innate and adap-
tive immunity. Current Opinion in Immunology, 2002. 14(1):
129-135.
158.Stoiser B, et al. Serum concentrations of granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor in complicated Plasmodium falciparum ma-
laria. Eur Cytokine Netw, 2000. 11(1): 75-80.
159.Van Zant G and Goldwasser E. Simultaneous effects of eryth-
ropoietin and colony-stimulating factor on bone marrow cells.
Science, 1977. 198(4318): 733-5.
160.Kojima S, et al. Treatment of aplastic anemia in children with
recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Blood, 1991. 77(5): 937-41.
161.Papaldo P, et al. Does granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
worsen anemia in early breast cancer patients treated with
epirubicin and cyclophosphamide? J Clin Oncol, 2006. 24(19):
3048-55.
162.Liehl E, et al. Prediction of the role of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor in animals and man from in vitro re-
sults. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis, 1994. 13 (Suppl 2): S9-17.
163.Kumaratilake L.M, et al. GM-CSF-induced priming of human
neutrophils for enhanced phagocytosis and killing of asexual
blood stages of Plasmodium falciparum: synergistic effects of
GM-CSF and TNF. Parasite Immunol, 1996. 18(3): 115-23.
164.Chang K.H and Stevenson M.M. Effect of anemia and renal
cytokine production on erythropoietin production during
blood-stage malaria. Kidney Int, 2004. 65(5): 1640-6.
165.Keller C.C, et al. Suppression of a novel hematopoietic mediator
in children with severe malarial anemia. Infect Immun, 2009.
77(9): 3864-71.
166.Hiraoka A, et al. Stem cell growth factor: in situ hybridization
analysis on the gene expression, molecular characterization and
in vitro proliferative activity of a recombinant preparation on
primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells. Hematol J, 2001. 2(5):
307-15.
167.Mio H, et al. Isolation and characterization of a cDNA for hu-
man mouse, and rat full-length stem cell growth factor, a new
member of C-type lectin superfamily. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun, 1998. 249(1): 124-30.
168.Ouma C, et al. A novel functional variant in the stem cell
growth factor promoter protects against severe malarial ane-
mia. Infect Immun, 2010. 78(1): 453-60.
169.Nathan C and Xie Q.W. Nitric oxide synthases—Roles, tolls,
and controls [Review]. Cell, 1994. 78(6): 915-918.
170.Perkins D, et al. Blood monocuclear cell nitric oxide production
and plasma cytokine levels in healthy Gabonese children with
prior mild or severe malaria. Infection and Immunity, 1999. 67:
4977-4981.
171.Geller D.A and Billiar T.R. Molecular biology of nitric oxide
synthases. Cancer & Metastasis Reviews, 1998. 17(1): 7-23.
172.Kremsner P.G, et al. High plasma levels of nitrogen oxides are
associated with severe disease and correlate with rapid parasi-
tological and clinical cure in Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 1996. 90(1): 44-7.
173.Perkins D.J, et al. Blood mononuclear cell nitric oxide produc-
tion and plasma cytokine levels in healthy gabonese children
with prior mild or severe malaria. Infect Immun, 1999. 67(9):
4977-81.
174.Keller C.C, et al. Elevated nitric oxide production in children
with malarial anemia: hemozoin-induced nitric oxide synthase
type 2 transcripts and nitric oxide in blood mononuclear cells.
Infect Immun, 2004. 72(8): 4868-73.
175.Greve B, et al. High oxygen radical production is associated
with fast parasite clearance in children with Plasmodium fal-
ciparum malaria. J Infect Dis, 1999. 179(6): 1584-6.
176.Postma N.S, et al. Oxidative stress in malaria; implications for
prevention and therapy. Pharm World Sci, 1996. 18(4): 121-9.
177.Griffiths M.J, et al. Oxidative stress and erythrocyte damage in
Kenyan children with severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
Br Haematol J, 2001. 113(2): 486-91.
178.Narsaria N, et al. Oxidative stress in children with severe ma-
laria. J Trop Pediatr, 2011; epub.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011, 7
http://www.biolsci.org
1442
179.Vane J.R, Bakhle Y.S, and Botting R.M. Cyclooxygenases 1 and
2. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 1998. 38:
97-120.
180.Perkins D.J, et al. In vivo acquisition of hemozoin by placental
blood mononuclear cells suppresses PGE2, TNF-alpha, and
IL-10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2003. 311(4): 839-46.
181.Perkins D.J, Kremsner P.G, and Weinberg J.B. Inverse rela-
tionship of plasma prostaglandin E2 and blood mononuclear
cell cyclooxygenase-2 with disease severity in children with
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. J Infect Dis, 2001. 183(1):
113-8.
182.Perkins D.J, et al. Impaired systemic production of prostaglan-
din E2 in children with cerebral malaria. J Infect Dis, 2005.
191(9): 1548-57.
183.Keller C.C, et al. Reduced peripheral PGE2 biosynthesis in
Plasmodium falciparum malaria occurs through hemozo-
in-induced suppression of blood mononuclear cell cyclooxy-
genase-2 gene expression via an interleukin-10-independent
mechanism. Mol Med, 2004. 10(1-6): 45-54.
184.Keller C.C, et al. Suppression of prostaglandin E2 by malaria
parasite products and antipyretics promotes overproduction of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha: association with the pathogenesis
of childhood malarial anemia. J Infect Dis, 2006. 193(10):
1384-93.
185.Lamikanra A.A, et al. Hemozoin (malarial pigment) directly
promotes apoptosis of erythroid precursors. PLoS One, 2009.
4(12): e8446.
186.Awandare G.A, et al. Mechanisms of erythropoiesis inhibition
by malarial pigment and malaria-induced proinflammatory
mediators in an in vitro model. Am Hematol J, 2011. 86(2):
155-62.
