Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7, 2745-2788; doi:10.3390/ijerph7072745
International Journal of
Environmental Research and
Public Health
ISSN 1660-4601
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Review
Chelation in Metal Intoxication
Swaran J.S. Flora * and Vidhu Pachauri
Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Defence Research and Development Establishment, Jhansi
Road, Gwalior 474 002, India; E-Mail: vidhudrde@gmail.com
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: sjsflora@drde.drdo.in;
sjsflora@hotmail.com; Tel.: +91-751-234-4301; Fax: +91-751-234-1148.
Received: 8 March 2010; in revised form: 22 April 2010 / Accepted: 27 May 2010 /
Published: 28 June 2010
Abstract: Chelation therapy is the preferred medical treatment for reducing the toxic
effects of metals. Chelating agents are capable of binding to toxic metal ions to form
complex structures which are easily excreted from the body removing them from
intracellular or extracellular spaces. 2,3-Dimercaprol has long been the mainstay of
chelation therapy for lead or arsenic poisoning, however its serious side effects have led
researchers to develop less toxic analogues. Hydrophilic chelators like meso-2,3-
dimercaptosuccinic acid effectively promote renal metal excretion, but their ability to
access intracellular metals is weak. Newer strategies to address these drawbacks like
combination therapy (use of structurally different chelating agents) or co-administration of
antioxidants have been reported recently. In this review we provide an update of the
existing chelating agents and the various strategies available for the treatment of heavy
metals and metalloid intoxications.
Keywords: chelating agents; combination therapy; oxidative stress; antioxidant; succimer;
monoesters; heavy metals
OPEN ACCESS
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2746
1. Introduction
Metals are an integral part of many structural and functional components in the body, and the
critical role of metals in physiological and pathological processes has always been of interest to
researchers. Unfolding the latter has inspired newer therapeutic strategies based on alteration of the
metal concentrations in specific body organs and/or entire body evolving branches like
metallotoxicology and metallopharmacology. The use of metals to restore the normal healthy
physiology of the body either by direct administration of essential metals, or by chelating out excess or
toxic metals, or using them as carriers for targeted drug delivery, or for tagging biomolecules for
diagnostics, are all techniques that may be classified under the general heading of
metallo-pharmacology. However, in the present review we will restrict our discussion to chelation
therapy which is an important concept and tool for modifying metal concentrations in the body.
Chelation has its origin in the Greek word chele that means claw of a lobster, thus depicting the
concept of clinging or holding with a strong grip. The term chelate was first applied by Sir Gilbert T.
Morgan and H. D. K. Drew in 1920. They suggested the term for the caliper-like groups which
function as two associating units and fasten to a central atom so as to produce heterocyclic rings [1].
Metal toxicity may occur due to essential metal overload or exposure to heavy metals from various
sources. Most metals are capable of forming covalent bonds with carbon, resulting in metal-organic
compounds. Metals and metal compounds interfere with functions of various organ systems like the
central nervous system (CNS), the haematopoietic system, liver, kidneys, etc. Diagnostic testing for
the presence of heavy metals, and subsequently decreasing the body’s burden of these substances,
should be an integral part of the overall treatment regimen for individuals with a metal poisoning
symptomatology or a known exposure to these substances.
2. Chelation: Concept and Chemistry
Although the concept of chelation is based on simple coordination chemistry, evolution of an ideal
chelator and chelation therapy that completely removes specific toxic metal from desired site in the
body involves an integrated drug design approach. Chelating agents are organic or inorganic
compounds capable of binding metal ions to form complex ring-like structure called ‘chelates’.
Chelating agents possess “ligand” binding atoms that form either two covalent linkages or one
covalent and one co-ordinate or two co-ordinate linkages in the case of bidentate chelates. Mainly
atoms like S, N and O function as ligand atoms in the form of chemical groups like –SH, –S-S, –NH2,
=NH, –OH, –OPO3H, or >C=O. Bidenate or multidentate ligands form ring structures that include the
metal ion and the two-ligand atoms attached to the metal [2] (Figure 1). Many donors act as bidentate
ligands. Five-membered chelate rings are specially stable and they are often formed by ligands with
YCCY skeltons such as Y-CH2-CH2-Y, Y-CO-CH2-Y etc. where Y is OR, NR2, O, S, NR, etc. There
are also examples of inorganic chelate ligands which form five-membered ring with metal ions. Other
types of chelating ligands are possible, like EDTA4−
, which is a hexadentate ligand. In the simplest
case a proton (H+
) that can absorb the lone pair of electrons of ligand-binding atom(s) of the chelator
may be involved in the coordination complex formation. However, the positive charge on proton
remains since there is no loss or gain of electrons in the process.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2747
Figure 1. Formation of metal ligand complexes using mono, bi and polydentate ligands.
The latter may also be known as the ‘net ionic charge’ of the complex, which plays a crucial role in
governing the pharmacokinetic fate and ultimately the toxicological behavior of such complexes in
vivo. In the biological environment metal cations viz. Na+
, Mg+
, Cu+
, Cu2+
, and Zn2+
and specially the
transition metals like Mn, Fe and Co may be involved in such complex formation. Although the
stability of such complexes varies, the deciding factors are based on the properties of both the
chelating agent and the chelated metal. The stability constant of a complex can be quantitatively
expressed in equilibrium equation values, which depend on the atomic structure of the chelated metals.
For example, the stability constants for different metals with EDTA are on the scale shown in Table 1,
where a metal with higher k constant competes for the chelating agent with a metal of lower stability
value and ultimately removes the latter.
Table 1. EDTA-metal complex stability constants.
Metal Na Li Ba Sr Mg Ca Mn Fe Co Zn Cd Pb Ni
K (log) 1.7 2.8 7.8 8.6 8.7 10.6 13.4 14.4 16.1 16.1 16.4 18.3 18.4
However, other variables like the number of heterocyclic rings formed and relative concentration
also play a role, that’s why Ca2+
, which is readily available in the body fluids, binds preferentially with
Na2EDTA in spite of the higher stability constant of Pb. Moreover, in spite of all the known properties
desired in an ideal chelator the predictability of the outcome is limited. A chemical entity that qualifies
as an ideal chelator in vitro might not prove so in vivo, either due to the toxicity considerations or due
to the presence of endogenous substances (hemoglobin, cytochromes, etc.) that can also chelate metal
ions and thus offer competition.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2748
Further, pH also is an important factor influencing complex formation and stability. Most chelating
agents are unstable at low pH, whereas at high pH metals tend to form insoluble hydroxides which are
less accessible to chelating agents. This feature becomes significant in pathological conditions leading
to acidosis or alkalosis.
Optimally effective chelation can be achieved by virtue of some combination of the basic properties
of both the metal ions, chelating agents and the resulting metal complex. A chelating agent that will
occupy more of the coordination positions of a metal ion will generally (but not always) give a
complex of greater stability than otherwise. Similarly, whereas the net ionic charge of the chelator
defines its absorption, distribution and ability to reach the metal ion for binding; the net ionic charge of
the complex decides its elimination from the specific site and excretion from the body. Thus, it is
important that a chelator satisfy criteria that allow it to: (1) transport across physiological barriers into
compartments where a toxic metal ion is concentrated, (2) form a stable complex with the metal after
removing it from the biological chelator, if required at the site and (3) form a chelation complex whose
properties render it non-toxic and facilitate its excretion, not only from the site of deposition, but also
from the body [3].
3. Common Chelating Agents: Pharmacology and Toxicology
An ideal chelator should have high solubility in water, resistance to biotransformation, ability to
reach the sites of metal storage, retain chelating ability at the pH of body fluids and the property of
forming metal complexes that are less toxic than the free metal ion (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Characteristics of an ideal chelating agent for better chelation of heavy metals.
During Second World War, dimercaprol (also named British Anti-Lewisite or BAL), an organic
dithiol compound, was developed as an experimental antidote against the arsenic-based poison gas
Lewisite. After World War II, mass lead poisoning was observed in large number of navy personnel,
later identified as a result of their jobs repainting the hulls of ships. This introduced the medical use of
Characteristics of an Ideal Chelator
• Greater Affinity, Low Toxicity
•Ability to compete with natural chelators
•Ability to penetrate cell membranes
•Rapid elimination of the toxic metal
•High water solubility
•Capacity to form non-toxic complexes
•Same distribution as the metal
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2749
EDTA as a lead chelating agent. BAL has dominated medical prescriptions for general metal
intoxication due to its high efficacy for human arsenic and mercury poisoning. In the 1960s, BAL was
modified into meso 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), a related dithiol with far fewer side effects.
Another dithiol, sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropane 1-sulfonate (DMPS), was introduced as a mercury-
chelating agent by researchers in the former Soviet Union. Chelation therapy has historically been used
in attempts to reduce the body burden of toxic metals in highly symptomatic patients with elevated
biological markers [4-6]. Chelating agents can affect metal toxicity by mobilizing the toxic metal
mainly into urine. A chelating agent forming a stable complex with a toxic metal may shield biological
targets from the metal ion, thereby reducing the local toxicity [7] (Figure 3). Desferrioxamine (DFOA),
an iron chelator, completely covers the surface of Fe3+
during complex formation, thereby preventing
iron-catalyzed free radical reactions [8]. However, sometimes a chelator may expose the metal to the
biological environment and thus increase the toxicity of the metal (Figure 3). Ethylenediamine-
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) is not able to shield the surface of the Fe3+
ion, but forms an open complex
(basket complex), thereby increasing the catalytic capacity of Fe3+
for generating oxidative stress [9].
Structures of various chelating agents are presented in Figure 4.
Figure 3. Structures of two different complexes of metals with chelating agents. (A) Stable
complex prevent interaction of metal with bio-molecules, (B) Basket complex enhance
interaction of metal with bio-molecules. Symbols used: B- Bio-molecules; C-Chelating
agent; M- Metal.
Preferred ligands for soft and borderline ions such as Pb2+
, Hg2+
, Cd2+
and As3+
are thiolates and
amines. Consequently, known metal-binding sites in most cases contain Cys or His residues. Many of
these sites consist of contiguous short stretches of amino acid sequences that overlap between
neighboring peptides with binding activity which are used to tentatively determine major binding
motifs. The majority of proteins and peptides that function in the uptake, distribution, storage or
detoxification of essential and non-essential metal ions possess one or several metal-binding sites. The
M
(A) Stable Complex
(Complete Shielding)
(B) Basket Complex
(Incomplete Shielding)
C
M
C
B
B
B
B B
B
Bio-molecule-Metal Interaction
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2750
-Cys-X-X-Cys- and -Cys-Cys- motifs of various proteins are well known for their heavy metal binding
properties [10,11]. It has long been acknowledged that sulfhydryl-containing compounds have the
ability to chelate metals. The sulfur-containing amino acids methionine and cysteine, N-acetylcysteine,
an acetylated analogue of cysteine, the methionine metabolite S-adenosylmethionine, α-lipoic acid, and
the tripeptide glutathione (GSH) all contribute to the chelation and excretion of metals from the
human body.
Figure 4. Structures of various chelating agents used to treat cases of heavy
metal poisoning.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2751
3.1. Calcium Disodium Ethylenediamine Tetraacetic Acid (CaNa2EDTA)
Calcium disodium ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (CaNa2EDTA) is the most commonly used
chelating agent. It is a derivative of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA); a synthetic
polyamino-polycarboxylic acid and since 1950s has been one of the mainstays for the treatment of
childhood lead poisoning [12]. The drug has been claimed beneficial in vascular disease since 1955. It
is believed that chelation therapy may alter plaque morphology and volume, or improve endothelial
function, and suggest that it might replace coronary artery bypass draft surgery [13]. Several theories
have been proposed to support latter mainly focusing on calcium chelation. EDTA is said to work in
vascular conditions either by removing calcium found in fatty plaques either directly via chelation
effect or alternately by stimulating release of hormones that in turn cause calcium removal or lower
cholesterol levels. Another theory suggests that EDTA therapy may reduce the oxidative stress injury
and inflammation in blood vessel walls [14].
Although a number of trials conducted indicate the utility of CaNa2EDTA in coronary heart disease,
the evidence in the absence of the controlled trial is not as convincing. In view of reports where
symptomatic improvements have been comparable with placebo effects and the risks associated with
the therapy, it has been facing criticism [15]. The American Heart Association has stated that “there
have been no adequate, controlled, published scientific studies using currently approved scientific
methodology to support this therapy for coronary heart disease. Using this form of unproven treatment
for coronary heart disease may deprive patients of the well-established benefits from the many other
valuable methods of treating these diseases” [13,16] for the program to assess alternative treatment
strategies to achieve cardiac health (PATCH) investigators also concluded after a randomized control
trial with 84 patient that there is no evidence to support a beneficial effect of calcium chelation therapy
with EDTA in patients with ischemic heart disease, stable angina and a positive treadmill test for
ischemia. Another sub-study under PATCH rejects the proposed benefits of EDTA in combination
with vitamins to improve impaired endothelium-dependent brachial artery flow-mediated vasodilation
in patients with coronary artery disease [17]. But recently all randomized clinical trials have been
underpowered and the NCCAM and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute launched the Trial
to Assess Chelation Therapy (TACT). TACT is the first largest, multicenter study to assess safety and
efficacy of EDTA chelation therapy for patients with coronary artery disease. This placebo-controlled,
double-blind trial has started recruiting participants, aiming at 2,372 sample size, aged ≥ 50 years with
prior myocardial infarction to test whether EDTA chelation therapy, high dose vitamin therapy, or both
are effective in secondary prevention. The study started in 2003 and was expected to complete in 5
years [14]. However, trials are ongoing and conclusive results are not expected before June 2012.
CaNa2EDTA can be valuable for the treatment of poisoning by metals that have higher affinity for
chelating agent than does Ca2+
. The successful use of CaNa2EDTA in the treatment of lead poisoning
is due, in part, to the capacity of lead to displace calcium from the chelate. Initially EDTA was
introduced as its sodium salt (NaEDTA) which when administered in vivo resulted in the urinary
excretion of calcium leading to hypocalcaemia with the risk of tetany due to the formation of its
calcium complex. To overcome this hazard, CaNa2EDTA was introduced for the treatment of lead
poisoning. The Pb-EDTA complex has high stability constant thus CaNa2EDTA was found to chelate
lead from the body fluids, excreting PbNa2EDTA leaving Ca behind.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2752
Pharmacological Profile
CaNa2EDTA is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract (<5%) thus can only be administered by
parenteral route. Intravenous administration of this drug results in good absorption but is very painful
at the injection site. Hence intravenous injection could be given either by diluting in 5% dextrose or
saline (iv infusion) [12]. CaNa2EDTA is distributed mainly in the extracellular fluids, which limits its
capacity to chelate out metals from inside the cells. The latter also contributes to one of its major
drawbacks that of redistributing lead from other tissues to the brain. Reporting the same,
Flora et al. [18] recommended avoiding the use of CaNa2EDTA for lead mobilization tests in children.
It was suggested that CaNa2EDTA when administered in animals chronically exposed to lead,
mobilizes the metal deposited in hard tissue for chelation. This then allows mobilized circulating lead
to redistribute in soft tissues like the brain and liver in order to achieve equilibrium. CaNa2EDTA is
not significantly metabolized and is excreted rapidly by glomerular filtration, entirely unchanged in
urine, 50% of which appears within one hour [2]. The drug shows an elimination half life of 1.4 to 3
hours in adult and is entirely excreted within 24 hours.
The risks associated with CaNa2EDTA therapy are substantial, including renal failures,
arrhythmias, tetany, hypocalcaemia, hypotension, bone marrow depression, prolonged bleeding time,
convulsions, respiratory arrest, etc. [16]. Although the nephrotoxicity by CaNa2EDTA is dose
dependent and reversible after cessation of therapy yet exceeding maximal daily dose of 75 mg/kg
could be fatal. However, there also are reports that highlight the efficacy of EDTA in chronic renal
artery diseases [19,20]. Other adverse effects may include fatigue, headache, fever, nasal congestion,
lacrimation, mucocutaneous lesions, glycosuria, myalgia, hepatotoxicity, increased urinary frequency,
hypotension, abnormal changes in ECG and gastrointestinal symptoms [21]. Prolonged treatment with
CaNa2EDTA results in depletion of essential metal, especially Zn, Cu and Mn [22]. It has been
reported that zinc supplementation during and after chelation is also beneficial [23]. Although zinc
depletion by CaNa2EDTA therapy is rapidly reversible by zinc supplementation, it is considered to be
key mechanism for teratogenic effects of the drug, especially when administered between days 11 to
14 at doses comparable to humans. This allows the use of EDTA as a research tool to study
mechanisms and role of zinc dependent molecules at critical periods of pregnancy. CaNa2EDTA has
the LD50 value of 16.4 mmol/kg in mouse [12]. The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy, active renal
diseases or anuria, hepatitis, and hypersensitivity to edentate products [21].
3.2. Calcium Trisodium DTPA
Calcium or zinc trisodium diethylenetriaminepentaacetate (CaNa3DTPA or ZnNa3DTPA
respectively) have been used against plutonium and other transuranic elements like californium,
americium, and curium [24]. The drug is effective against cobalt and zinc poisoning in experimental
models [25,26]. Its efficacy against acute cadmium poisoning is promising however is less effective as
compare to carbodithioates [27,28].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2753
Pharmacological Profile
Like CaNa2EDTA, CaNa3DTPA/ZaNa3DTPA is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, and
thus they are parenterally administered and are distributed extracellularly. They may be administered
by intravenous or intramuscular routes or by inhalation through a nebulizer [24,29], where the former
are painful. CaNa3DTPA shows an expected disadvantage of depleting Zn from the system that may be
overcome by supplementation or using the zinc salt of the drug. Despite this disadvantage, although
CaNa3DTPA is still preferred over the Zn form due to its higher efficacy, it is not recommended for
prolonged therapy. Although CaNa3DTPA is well tolerated, some adverse effects may be observed,
including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, fever and muscle cramps during the first 24 hrs [29].
CaNa3DTPA is teratogenic like CaNa2EDTA due to its Zn and Mn depletion effect that is confirmed
by the teratogenic effects of ZnNa3DTPA at a dose 16 times lower than CaNa3DTPA. Thus, although
the drug is contraindicated during pregnancy ZnNa3DTPA may be carefully administered if
unavoidable. Other contraindications include prescription to children, in patients with renal
insufficiency and bone marrow depression.
3.3. D-Penicillamine
D-Penicillamine (DPA; β-β-dimethylcysteine or 3-mercapto-D-valine) is a sulfhydryl containing
amino acid and a degradation product of penicillin. Only the D-isomer is used because the L-isomer
causes optic neuritis. DPA is used mainly as a chelating agent in heavy metal toxicity viz. lead,
mercury and copper poisoning (Wilson’s disease) [30].
Pharmacological Profile
DPA is well absorbed via the gastrointestinal tract and can be administered orally or by iv route. It
is approximately 50% absorbed orally and mainly follows extracellular distribution. Peak plasma
concentration is reached between 1 and 4 hours after oral administration. A minimal drug fraction
under-goes hepatic metabolism to disulfides, and most of the drug is excreted unchanged in urine.
Elimination half life ranges from 1 to more than 7 hours. Although low adverse reactions have been
reported, some serious ones including thrombocytopenia and leukocytopenia (incidence 5–15%), and
rarely aplastic anemia may occur. Prolonged DPA treatment may lead to anorexia, nausea and
vomiting. The ulcerogenic activity of DPA in rats, which may involve the stimulation of histaminergic
(H1 and H2) receptors, has been reported [31]. Other toxic effects of DPA include gastrointestinal
disturbances (10–30%), changes/loss of taste (5–30%), hair loss (1–2%), and partly proteinuria
(5–20%) [32]. Severe adverse effects are autoimmune phenomena such as pemphigus, DPA-induced
lupus erythematosus, polymyositis/dermatomyositis, membranous glomerulopathy and
hypersensitivity pneumonitis [32]. DPA is a well recognized teratogen and lathyrogen that causes
skeletal, cutaneous and pulmonary abnormalities [31]. The most important contraindication is in
patients allergic to penicillin and in cases of renal insufficiency. Co-administration of DPA to patients
receiving gold therapy, antimalarial or cytotoxic drugs, phenyl-butazone, or oxyphenbutazone must be
contraindicated since it can result in more serious adverse reactions.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2754
3.4. British Anti Lewisite (BAL)
2,3-Dimercaprol (BAL) is a traditional chelating agent developed by British biochemists at Oxford
University during World War II [33]. BAL has a 3-carbon backbone with two sulfhydryl (–SH) groups
and a hydroxyl group. It has been used clinically since 1949 in arsenic, cadmium and mercury
poisoning. It is an oily, clear, colorless liquid with a pungent, unpleasant typical mercaptan smell. It
detoxifies lewisite by forming a five membered stable complex with arsenic (Figure 5). In humans and
experimental models, the antidotal efficacy of BAL has been shown to be most effective when
administered immediately after the exposure. Besides rapid mobilization of arsenic and mercury from
the body, it causes a significant increase in brain deposition of arsenic and mercury compounds [34,35].
Figure 5. Chemical reaction of lewisite with British Anti Lewisite (BAL) to give a stable
5- membered ring complex.
Pharmacological Profile
Due to its oily nature, the drug is not absorbed orally and administration of BAL requires deep
intra-muscular injection that is extremely painful and allergenic. It was found to mobilize and relocate
lead to the brain, increasing its neurotoxic effects [36]. Although treatment with dimercaprol increases
the excretion of cadmium, there is a concomitant increase in renal cadmium concentration, so its use
should be avoided in cases of cadmium toxicity. The drug has a short half life. Thus, the major
drawbacks of BAL include:
1. Low therapeutic index (small margin of safety)
2. Tendency to redistribute arsenic to brain and testes
3. Need for (painful) intramuscular injection
4. Unpleasant odor (rotten eggs)
Other common adverse effects include fever, conjunctivitis (eye inflammation), lacrimation
(tearing), constricted feeling (chest, limbs, jaw, abdomen), headache, paresthesias (tingling sensation),
tremor, nausea, and pain at the injection site [37]. More serious complications may be infections
(abscesses) at the injection site, liver damage, elevated blood pressure and heart rate, and hemolysis
(destruction of red blood cells) in patients with glucose-6-phophate deficiency (G6PD) [37].
Lewisite BAL
5-membered ring complex of
BAL and arsenic
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2755
3.5. Meso-2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic Acid (DMSA)
A chemical derivative of dimercaprol which has gained more and more attention, is
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA). DMSA is a dithiol compound (containing two sulfhydryl,
or –SH, groups) and an analogue of dimercaprol (BAL). It was 40 years ago when initial studies
identified DMSA as an effective antidote to heavy metal poisoning. Subsequently DMSA was studied
for more than twenty years in the People’s Republic of China, Japan, and Russia before scientists in
Europe and the United States “discovered” the substance and its potential usefulness in the
mid-1970s [38].
Pharmacological Profile
The hydrophilic nature of DMSA causes considerable absorption in gastro intestinal tract thus
possible oral route of administration creates its distinct advantage over BAL. The drug is 95 % plasma
protein bound, most likely by virtue of binding on one of its sulfhydryl groups to a cysteine residue on
albumin, leaving the other –SH available to chelate metals [39]. DMSA has a large therapeutic window
and is the least toxic amongst the dithiol compounds [40]. No significant loss of essential metals like
zinc, iron, calcium and magnesium are observed. However, metabolism of copper may be altered in
humans after administration of DMSA [41]. A major drawback associated with DMSA is its
extracellular distribution, since it is unable to cross the cell membrane. Adverse reaction of DMSA
includes gastrointestinal discomfort, skin reaction, mild neutropenia and elevated liver enzymes. The
LD50 value of sodium salt of DMSA is about 3% greater than that of DMPS [38], in mice it is: 2.4 for
i.v., 3.8 for i.m., 4.4 for i.p., and 8.5 gm/kg for oral route.
Figure 6. Limitations of DMSA in the treatment of mercury toxicity.
- Mercury which mainly absorbs in lungs and finally gets distributed to soft tissues.
- Altered copper metabolism following chelation with DMSA might also contribute towards
redistribution of Hg from soft tissues to brain.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2756
Numerous animal and human studies have shown that DMSA administration increases urinary
mercury excretion and reduces blood and tissue mercury concentration [42-44]. Chelation therapy with
DMSA must be initiated shortly after exposure to prevent accumulation and avoid toxicity. Studies in
animal models have shown that neither DMSA nor any other chelating or mobilizing agents were able
to ameliorate the brain burden of mercury [45,46]. The treatment with DMSA after exposure to
inorganic mercury caused an increased elevation of mercury into motor axons presumably owing to
redistribution of mercury, which was mobilized from non-neural tissues (e.g., kidneys and liver)
(Figure 6) [46].
3.6. Sodium 2,3 Dimercaptopropane-l-Sulphonate (DMPS)
Sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropane sulfonate (DMPS) is another analogue of BAL. DMPS is not
considered as an appropriate drug against lead toxicity. A pilot study of DMPS in lead poisoned
children by Gersl and co workers indicates less efficiency than CaNa2EDTA and DMSA [47]. DMPS,
although known for its antidotal efficacy against mercury, it has also been reported to have limited
efficacy for treating lead and arsenic poisoning [18,48]. The drug is registered in Germany for
treatment of mercury intoxication, but it is not approved in the United States, so unless special
permission is given by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, it is unlawful for physicians to use it in
the United States, nor is it lawful for pharmacies to compound it. Still, DMPS is being illegally used
by members of the alternative health industry to treat people allegedly suffering from mercury
intoxication, most often claimed to be due to amalgam dental fillings.
Pharmacological Profile
DMPS, being hydrophilic in nature, is mainly distributed in the extracellular space but may enter
cells by specific transport mechanisms. Thus, DMPS is known to be distributed both in the
extracellular and to small extent in intracellular spaces [2]. DMPS appears to be bio-transformed in
humans to acyclic and cyclic disulphides. The drug and its metabolites are rapidly eliminated from the
body through the kidneys. It is important to note that this drug does not redistribute arsenic, lead, or
inorganic mercury to the brain [49]. No major adverse effects following DMPS administration in
humans or animals have been reported [49]. Adverse reactions during treatment with DMPS include
gastrointestinal discomfort, skin reactions, mild neutropenia, and elevated liver enzymes. Some
patients, especially those with allergic asthma symptoms, may develop hypersensitivity to DMPS [50].
Further, oral administration of DMPS did not adversely affects late gestation, parturition or lactation in
mature mice and fetal and neonatal development do not appear to be adversely affected.
3.7. New DMSA Analogues
The known chelating agent DMSA has been found to have fewer side effects with greater efficacy.
The heavy metal chelating property of DMSA is due to the presence of vicinal dithiol groups that may
also act as an oxygen radical scavenger and thus inhibit lipid peroxidation, giving an added advantage
of fighting heavy metal induced oxidative stress. However, its hydrophilic properties do not allow it to
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2757
cross the cell membrane. It was recently observed that esters of DMSA might be more effective
antidotes for heavy metal toxicity. A large number of esters of DMSA have been synthesized aiming to
for achieve optimal chelation and transport effects, compared to DMSA. These esters are mainly the
mono- and diesters of DMSA that have been studied experimentally with the aim of enhancing tissue
uptake of chelating agents. In order to make the compounds more lipophilic, the carbon chain length of
the parent DMSA was increased by controlled esterification with the corresponding alcohol (methyl,
ethyl, propyl, isopropyl, butyl, isobutyl, pentyl, isopentyl and hexyl) (Figure 7). It has also been
reported that these mono and diesters have a better potential in mobilizing heavy metal from the tissues
in mice [51]. Walker et al. [51] studied the effects of seven different monoalkyl esters of DMSA on the
mobilization of lead in mice and observed that after a single parenteral dose of the chelator DMSA
there was a 52% reduction in the lead concentrations while with the monoesters the reduction varied
from 54% to 75%. In most of these published reports, it has been observed that the analogues of
DMSA were capable of crossing the biomembranes and were more effective in reducing arsenic
burden in acute and sub-chronic intoxication. These studies have also suggested that the monoesters
may be preferred over DMSA diesters owing to their higher efficacy against arsenic intoxication and
lower toxicity.
Figure 7. Newly synthesized monoesters of DMSA.
3.7.1. Monoisoamyl DMSA (MiADMSA)
Monoisoamyl DMSA was synthesized by controlled esterification of DMSA with isoamyl alcohol.
Controlled esterification made MiADMSA, a C5 branched chain alkyl monoester of DMSA which was
lipophilic in nature as compared to the parent DMSA. Chelation studies with MiADMSA found it to
be highly effective in reducing heavy metal burden from various organs in heavy metal exposed
animals [52,53].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2758
Pharmacological Profile
MiADMSA is a potential drug candidate that is still in its developmental phase thus, its entire
pharmacological profile has not been established yet. However, studies to date highlight the efficacy
and safety of the new molecule in lead and arsenic acute and chronic toxicity in experimental animals.
Results suggest that MiADMSA administration increases the activity of ALAD, a specific lead toxicity
biomarker in all the age groups and increased blood GSH levels in young rats. MiADMSA was also
found to potentiate the synthesis of MT in liver and kidneys and GSH levels in liver and brain, along
with significantly reducing the GSSG levels in tissues. MiADMSA is capable of mobilizing
intracellularly bound cadmium [54] and is seen to provide antioxidant functions by removing cadmium
from the site of deleterious oxidation reactions. The reduced sulfhydryl groups in this compound may
also participate in antioxidant reactions and possibly retard propagation of oxidative damage induced
by cadmium. Recently Flora and Mehta [55] suggested reversal of arsenic-induced dysfunctioning with
concomitant treatment of MiADMSA in vitro and in vivo. Employing IR spectroscopy they suggested
that MiADMSA binds to arsenic to form an adduct which prevents arsenic from exerting its toxic
effect in both models. Mehta and Flora, [56] reported for the first time the comparison of the role in
metal redistribution of different chelating agents (three amino and four thiol chelators) on
hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress in chelating agent-induced metallothionein in rats. The interaction
of MiADMSA and DMSA with essential metals is same. MiADMSA was found to be safe in adult rats
followed by young and old rats [57]. Our group reported for the first time the toxicological data of
MiADMSA, when administered in male and female rats through the oral as well as the intraperitoneal
(i.p.) route (25, 50 and 100 mg/kg for three weeks). The oral route of administration was found better
when compared to the i.p. route based on the histopathological studies of the liver and kidney tissues.
MiADMSA was seen to be slightly more toxic in terms of copper loss and some biochemical variable
in the hepatic tissue in females as compared to male rats [58,59]. The studies concluded that the
administration of MiADMSA in female rats is confounded with side effects and may require caution
during its use. No observed adverse effect levels (NOAELs) for maternal and developmental toxicity
of MiADMSA were 47.5 mg/kg and 95 mg/kg/day, respectively, indicating that MiADMSA would not
produce developmental toxicity in mice in the absence of maternal toxicity [60]. Mehta et al. [61] have
suggested that MiADMSA had no effect on length of gestation, litter-size, sex ratio, viability and
lactation. Taubeneck et al. [62] showed that the developmental toxicity of DMSA is mediated mainly
through disturbed copper metabolism and this may also be true for MiADMSA. It is reported that the
toxicity of DMSA with LD50 of 16 mmol/kg is much lower than the toxicity of MiADMSA with LD50
of 3 mmol/kg, but lesser than BAL (1.1 mmol/kg).
3.7.2. Monomethyl DMSA (MmDMSA) and Monocyclohexyl DMSA (MchDMSA)
MmDMSA has a straight and branched chain methyl group, while MchDMSA has a cyclic carbon
chain. Thus, they both have better lipophilic characteristics and might penetrate cells more readily that
extracellularly acting chelating agent like DMSA. Both these chelating agents are orally active.
Jones et al. [54] in their in vivo study on male albino mice exposed to cadmium for seven days,
observed that administration of MmDMSA and MchDMSA produced significant reductions in whole
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2759
body cadmium levels. Further, no redistribution of cadmium in brain was observed. The in vivo
evaluation of these monoesters derived from higher alcohols (C3–C6 monoesters) proved to have better
efficacy as compared to the monoesters derived from lower ones (C1–C2 monoesters) [54]. Their
ability to be administered orally suggests that they may possess considerable advantages in the clinical
treatment of lead toxicity however; extensive studies are further required to reach a final conclusion.
3.8. Deferoxamine (DFO)
Deferoxamine is a trihydroxamic acid, siderphore secreted by Streptomyces pilosus, a fungus. This
chelating agent is known for its strong binding affinity for trivalent iron and less affinity for other
metals making it a specific chelating agent for iron related diseases such as thalassaemia major as well
as aluminium poisoning associated with chronic renal dialysis.
Pharmacological Profile
The absorption of DFO in the gastrointestinal tract is low and thus it is administered mainly through
intravenous injection or infusion. It is mainly distributed extracellularly and the protein binding in
plasma is low (<10%). It complexes with iron and is excreted rapidly as ferrioxamine, mainly through
kidney and one third into bile through faces. Thus, its efficacy also is determined by adequate urine
output and may be facilitated by dialysis in case of dysfunctioning. This drug is generally well
tolerated with few cases where side effects include opthalamic and auditory toxicity, bacterial and
fungal infections, alterations in blood histology, allergic and skin reaction besides few reported adverse
effect on lungs, kidney and nervous system [63]. The total intravenous dose of deferoxamine should
generally not exceed 80 mg/kg/24 hours. The intramuscular route of administration is not
recommended in circulatory shock states.
3.9. Deferiprone (L1)
Deferiprone (L1; CP20; 1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid-4-one) is an iron chelator and is considered a
suitable alternative to deferoxamine in the trasfusional iron overload [64]. It is comparatively less
expensive than deferoxamine. Clinical studies suggest that combined administration of deferoxamine
and deferiprone for three days per week is very effective in depleting iron overload accompanied by
improvement in the cardiac function in transfusion dependent thalassemia patients. It may be noted
that deferoxamine is known for reversal of cardiac dysfunction, and deferiprone has also shown
cardio-protective effects. These may be attributed to reduction in iron overload however, the specific
mechanism is not clear. Besides, due to higher incidences of agranulocyrosis, treatment must be
closely monitored [65].
Pharmacological Profile
The major advantages include oral administration and rapid absorption through gastrointestinal
tract. L1 is mainly excreted via renal route and has a half life of 47–134 minutes. Dosages of
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2760
75–100 mg/kg body weight/day of L1 have been considered effective to maintain stable iron balance
and to reduce serum ferritin levels within one year of treatment in iron-overloaded thalassemic patients.
L1 is rapidly absorbed mainly from the stomach and reaches the circulation quickly. However, they
might be the possibility of food–drug interaction or other gastric factors that delays the appearance of
the drug in blood following oral administration. L1 is mainly metabolized as glucoronide conjugates
and excreted from urine. Wide variation in the metabolism and clearance of L1 amongst patients have
been observed, which mainly depend on iron overload and availability of chelatable iron [66]. The
main reported side effects during a deferiprone therapy are arthropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms,
headache, and moderate zinc deficiency. These adverse reactions are usually reversed on reducing the
dose or discontinuing the drug. Except for severe joint symptoms in few patients, most of the subjects
in different clinical trials have been able to continue with L1 therapy for a long term. The most severe,
but rare complication following administration of deferiprone is agranulocytosis or neutropenia.
3.10. TETA
Tetraethylenetetraamine or trientine is a drug of choice for acute copper intoxication. Although
nowadays there is less use of copper utensils, in ancient times the use of copper utensils could lead to
extensive exposure to copper. Increased urinary copper excretion has been reported after
administration of TETA [2].
Pharmacological Profile
Normally TETA is administered through the oral route but its absorption is relatively poor, as
indicated by the as evident from the recovery observed in urine and caracass after administration of an
oral dose of C14
-labeled TETA. Two major metabolites of TETA have been identified, i.e.,
N1-acetyltriethylenetetramine (MAT) and N1,N10-diacetyltriethylenetetramine (DAT). The former plays a
significant role in the molecular mechanism by which TETA extracts copper from the system. The 5–18%
of TETA that is systemically absorbed is said to be extensively metabolized, with the majority being
excreted in urine as metabolite(s) [67,68]. Wilson’s disease is characterized by disturbance in copper
homeostasis which is inherited and leads to progressive increase in accumulation of copper and may
even be fatal if not cured. Wilson’s disease was originally treated with DPA but TETA was a better
chelator and found to be potentially free of side effects like those of DPA. The recommended dosage
to treat Wilson’s disease patients is 0.75–2 g/day. The oral LD50 for rats for TETA is 2.5 g/kg body
weight and is very close to the recommended dose for treatment of Wilson’s disease.
3.11. Nitrilotriacetic Acid (NTA)
Nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA, C6H9NO6), is a polyamino carboxylic acid and is also used as a chelating
agent which forms coordination compounds (chelates) with metal ions such as Ca2+
, Cu2+
or Fe3+
. The
uses of NTA are quite similar to EDTA. However, in contrast to EDTA, NTA is easily biodegradable.
NTA is available in two forms, one that is a sodium derivative (Na3NTA) and the other iron (FeNTA).
Both of these forms have been used as chelating agents [69].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2761
NTA has been used shown to possess the ability to mobilize nickel from brain, heart, kidney and
liver of nickel poisoned rats. In a comparative study with six metal binding agents, NTA was highly
effective in dialyzing out nickel from the subcellular fractions of liver, kidney and blood corpuscles in
rats that were exposed to nickel sulphate [70]. Apart from nickel mobilization, a single dose of NTA
has been tried in the removal of manganese from various organs and plasma in rats. Results from these
studies have indicated that NTA binds rapidly to Mn and forms stable and diffusible complexes that
result in faster excretion of Mn from the rats [71]. Since NTA is considered to be non-mutagenic
in vitro [72] an epigenetic mechanism is assumed, based on the fact that there is sustained cytotoxicity
of zinc ions transfer to the urinary tract [72]. Vacuolated cells of the proximal tubules represent the
earliest lesions [73], followed by sloughing, necrosis/apoptosis, and proliferation [74-76]. With chronic
application of a high dose level, these alterations lead as a continuum to hyperplastic foci, adenomas,
and adenocarcinomas [77]. This ability of both NTA to form tumors cannot be ruled out. Studies
however have indicated that tumor formation ability of both NTA is highly route and dose
dependented. While FeNTA causes an iron overload and lipid peroxidation in cells and is
genotoxic [78,79], Na3NTA predominantly binds to zinc and calcium, thereby exerting its toxic
effects [72].
4. Limitations of Current Chelation Therapy
Most of the currently used chelating agents have serious side effects [80]. Since possible adverse
effects and risk associated with conventionally used chelators has already been highlighted in the
previous sections, mechanistic limitations are addressed here. CaNa2EDTA is a general chelating agent
that complexes a wide variety of metal ions and is used clinically despite associated risks.
CaNa2EDTA cannot pass through cellular membranes and therefore its use is restricted in removing
metal ions from their complexes in the extracellular fluid. Similarly conventionally used succimer,
DMSA although is considered safer, it shares the limitation of extracellular distribution. The latter
renders the drug effective in cases of slow, low dose, chronic metal poisoning (especially lead and
arsenic) since metal reaches the cellular compartments behind the physiological barriers including the
blood brain barrier. One such classical example was demonstrated during the clinical trial conducted in
Bangladesh where DMSA was found ineffective in patients chronically exposed to arsenic [81]. Thus,
it is of immediate environmental health concern to identify the limitations of currently available
chelating agents and develop new drugs that are more effective in the cases of low, long term exposure
to toxic metal. Although treatment with DMSA and DMPS has shown lesser adverse effects, essential
metal loss in particular of copper and zinc may be considered as one of the serious notable limitations.
Specificity for the target metal may be another domain that needs to be addressed during new drug
development. D-Penicillamine (DPA) exhibits disadvantage of possible risk to cause anaphylactic
reaction in patient allergic to penicillin. Also prolonged use of DPA may induce several cutaneous
lesions, dermatomyosites, adverse effects on collagen, dryness, etc. We have summarized the
beneficial and the drawbacks associated with chelation therapy are presented in Figure 8.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2762
Figure 8. Benefits and drawbacks of chelation therapy.
A retrospective examination of various antidotes reveals that there is no global unanimity of opinion
regarding the efficacy of a particular treatment regimen. This is mainly due to different experimental
conditions, test protocols and species of animals employed in evaluating various antidotes. Adoption of
a particular treatment in a country is dictated by various factors including the regulatory bodies and the
legislations. Also, the toxicity of a particular treatment regimen is overlooked in a particular country
where as in other countries it is the reason for rejection. The success of any treatment relies on the fact
that: (i) it is fast-acting, (ii) has long half and shelf lives, (iii) has minimal side effects and (iv) has ease
of application.
The reason to look for newer antidotes are that: (i) there is no effective and safe pre-treatment
available which could be instituted as preventive measure against possible arsenic exposure, (ii) the
recommended treatments have serious limitations like side-effects or are contraindicated for various
instances of heavy metal poisoning, (iii) most of the available treatments are to be given intravenously
by a medical practitioner and under no circumstances victim can resort to self aid, (iv) there is no safe
and effective oral treatment available and (v) there is no fast acting antidote available which could
immediately remove toxic metal from blood and soft tissues. It is thus clear from above that most of
the conventional chelators are compromised with many side effects and drawbacks and there is no safe
and effective treatment available for heavy metal poisoning.
5. Newer Strategies: Combination Therapy
A new trend in chelation therapy is to use two structurally different chelators (Table 2). The concept
of combination therapy lies on the fact that two prescribed drug will act through different mechanism
of action, thus resulting in additional effect, or sometimes they may support each others’ mode of
action leading to synergism. The idea of using combined treatment is based on the assumption that
various chelating agents are likely to mobilise toxic metals from different tissue compartments and
therefore better results could be expected [18,82]. The combination therapy is an approach to ensure
enhanced metal mobilization from the body, reduction in the dose of potential toxic chelators, and no
redistribution of toxic metal from one organ to another following chronic metal exposure [18,83-85].
The principle mechanism behind administration of two structurally different chelating agents is
Chelation
Effective against acute poisoning
Form non-toxic complexes
Remove metal from soft tissues
Oral therapy is available
Benefits
Redistribution of toxic metal
Essential metal loss
No removal of metal from intracellular sites
Hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity
Poor clinical recovery
Pro-oxidant effects (DTPA)
Headache, nausea, increased blood pressure
Drawbacks
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2763
illustrated in Figure 9. Flora et al. [18] observed that combined administration of DMSA and
CaNa2EDTA against chronic lead poisoning lead to a more pronounced elimination of lead and better
recoveries in altered lead sensitive biochemical variables besides no redistribution of lead to any other
organ, was noticed. Co-administration of DMSA and MiADMSA at lower dose (0.15 mmol/kg) was
most effective not only in reducing arsenic-induced oxidative stress but also in depleting arsenic from
blood and soft tissues compared to other treatments [86].
Treating experimental animals with MiADMSA along with DMSA, we could not only ensure
enhanced arsenic elimination but also minimize many serious side-effects, leading to better therapeutic
efficacy of the chelators [87]. Since MiADMSA is lipophilic it can chelate intracellular toxic metal and
make it accessible to extracellularly available DMSA which may then facilitate rapid excretion of
metal from the body. DMSA and MiADMSA in addition to acting as a metal chelator could also act as
an antioxidant [88]. The sulfhydryl groups present in these chelators may interact with free oxygen
radical or by product of lipid peroxidation like lipid hydroperoxides and aldehydes produced by heavy
metal thereby reducing oxidative stress.
Figure 9. Beneficial effects of combination therapy.
Moreover, the combined administration of DMSA and MiADMSA in chronically arsenic exposed
animals was also able to protect against hepatic DNA damage. This observation greatly strengthens the
possibility that co-administration of two chelating agents not only gives better efficacy in terms of
recovery from arsenic-induced oxidative stress but also helps in reducing the dose of a potentially toxic
chelator, thereby minimizing the possible side effects [87]. A reduced dose of chelating agent was
found to be beneficial against lead toxicity, with optimum efficacy in the altered biochemical variables
and body burden of lead [87]. Recently it has been reported that combined administration of thiol
chelator (MiADMSA) and CaNa2EDTA is beneficial against chronic lead toxicity in terms of altering
neurotransmitters level, neurobehavioral changes, and markers of apoptosis [83]. It was also beneficial
in reducing body lead burden and neuronal cell death [83]. Combined administration of DMSA and
MiADMSA has found to be highly effective in not only reducing lead burden but also provide better
clinical recoveries especially in the brain than monotherapy [89]. Thus, combined administration of
DMSA and MiADMSA is recommended for achieving optimum effects of chelation therapy. Figure
10 describes effects of acute and chronic metal exposure and various preventive and therapeutic
measures against it.
Lipophilic + Lipophobic
(Intracellular Metal) (Extracellular Metal)
Combination Therapy
(Incorporation of Two Structurally different chelating agents)
Enhanced metal decorporation
Reduction in magnitude of the dose
Lesser redistribution of essential trace elements
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2764
Figure 10. Acute and chronic exposure symptoms of metal toxicity and possible
preventive and therapeutic measures against them.
6. Oxidative Stress in Metal Toxicity and the Role of Antioxidants
Arsenic is one of the most extensively studied metals that induce ROS generation and results in
oxidative stress. Experimental results show that superoxide radical ion and H2O2 are produced after
exposure to arsenite in various cellular systems [48,86,90]. Shi et al. [91] provided evidence that
arsenic generates free radicals that leads to cellular damage and death through the activation of
oxidative sensitive signaling pathways. ROS play a significant role in altering the signal transduction
pathway and transcription factor regulation. Numerous reports have indicated that arsenic affects
transcriptional factors either by activation or inactivation of various signal transduction
cascades [92,93] Arsenic is known not only to produce ROS but also, nitric oxide (NO•)
dimethylarsinic peroxyl radicals (CH3)2AsOO• and also the dimethylarsinic radical (CH3)2As• [94,95].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2765
Oxidative DNA lesions induced by arsenic were observed both in vivo [96] and in vitro [97,98]
studies. In a study by Schiller et al. [99] it was shown that arsenite can inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) activity through binding to vicinal dithiols in both the pure enzyme and tissue extract. The
mechanism of arsenite toxicity was reported owing to its effects on the generation of the hydroxyl
radical [100].
Cadmium, unlike other heavy metals is unable to generate free radicals by itself, however, reports
have indicated superoxide radical, hydroxyl radical and nitric oxide radicals could be generated
indirectly [101]. Watanabe et al. [102] showed generation of non-radical hydrogen peroxide which by
itself became a significant source of free radicals via the Fenton chemistry. Cadmium could replace
iron and copper from a number of cytoplasmic and membrane proteins like ferritin, which in turn
would release and increase the concentration of unbound iron or copper ions. These free ions
participate in causing oxidative stress via the Fenton reactions [103-105]. Acute intoxication of
animals with cadmium has shown increased activity of antioxidant defense enzymes like copper-zinc
containing superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase and
glutathione-S-transferase [106].
Although various mechanisms have been suggested for the toxic effects of Hg, no single
mechanism explains all of the pathological outcomes. The chemical reactivity of the metal suggests
that oxidative stress might be involved in Hg-induced toxicity. GSH, the primary intracellular
antioxidant, was shown to be depleted and to have impaired function in Hg toxicity [107].
Oxidative stress may be considered as one of the prime contributing mechanism in metal toxicity
and thus provide a strong rationale for including antioxidants during chelation therapy (Table 2).
Antioxidant supplementation with chelating agents has been found beneficial in increasing lead
mobilization and providing recovery of altered biochemical variables [108,109]. Combinational
therapies with antioxidants like N-acetylcysteine (NAC) [53], lipoic acid (LA) [109], melatonin [53],
and gossypin [110] have shown considerable promise in improving clinical recoveries in animal
models. MiADMSA alone or in combination with captopril was significantly effective in reversing
lead-induced apoptosis [111]. We noted significant effect of taurine in depleting blood, liver, kidney
and brain lead and arsenic levels, respectively, when co-administered with DMSA or
MiADMSA [112,113]. This suggests that the antioxidant capacity of taurine becomes most effective
when it is administered along with the thiol chelators or taurine might be facilitating the entry of
chelator to the intracellular sites thereby reducing arsenic concentration. NAC is known to have metal-
chelating properties and has been used in several clinical conditions [114]. Thiol groups present in
NAC act to reduce free radical and provide chelating site for metals. Combined administration of NAC
and succimer post arsenic exposure led to a significant turnover in the variables indicative of oxidative
stress and removal of toxic metal (arsenic) from the soft organs [115]. Pande et al. [116] suggested that
NAC could be used both as preventive as well as therapeutic agent along with MiADMSA/DMSA in
the prevention or treatment of lead intoxication in rats. Co-administration of vitamin C and
MiADMSA in reducing liver and kidney arsenic burden supports the view that vitamin C acts as
detoxifying agent by forming a poorly ionized but soluble complex [108]. Recently we have also
reported that interaction of non-metal (fluoride) with metalloid (arsenic) also lead to some antagonistic
effects [117]. Lipoic acid might also have the capability to interfere with the absorption of arsenic.
Beneficial role of LA against lead [109] and GaAs [118] toxicity in terms of lead and arsenic chelation
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2766
form blood and soft tissues have also been reported. Recently, the clinical importance of herbal drugs
has received considerable attention (Table 2). Combination treatment with the thiol chelator and the
natural antioxidant Centella asiatica proved to be beneficial in the recovery from lead-induced
oxidative stress, including the level of biogenic amines and body lead burden as compared with the
monotherapy [119].
Table 2. Therapeutic strategies to address limitations in conventional chelation therapy.
Therapeutic
Strategy
Examples Refs. Benefits
Development of
newer chelating
agents
MiADMSA
MmDMSA
MchDMSA
[86]
- Better therapeutic efficacy.
- Access to intracellularly bound
metals.
- Lesser adverse drug reactions.
- Better specificity.
Combination
therapy with two
chelating agents
DMSA+ MiADMSA
MiADMSA+CaNa2EDTA
[52,87,89]
[85]
- Better chelation efficacy
- Removal of intra- and extra-cellular
metals.
- Prevents metal redistribution
- Reduction in dose.
- Lesser adverse effects
Chelating agent
+ Antioxidants
DMSA/MiADMSA + NAC
DMSA/ MiADMSA + LA
MiADMSA+ Quercetin
DMSA/ MiADMSA + Taurine
DMSA/ MiADMSA+ Vitamin
[115,207]
[109]
[132]
[112,113]
[205,108,120]
- Metal chelation and protection
against ROS.
- Reestablish Pro/Antioxidant status.
- Protects from oxidative stress.
Chelating agent
+ Micronutrients
DMSA+Zn
CaNa2EDTA+Zn
Fe
DMSA+Cu
[16,122,121]
[111]
[208]
[121]
- Modifies toxicokinetics of metals.
- Replenish essential metal loss
- Cofactors for crucial antioxidant
and metabolizing enzymes.
Chelating agent
+ Herbal extract.
Centella asiatica Moringa
Oleifera
Garlic
[209]
[210]
[211]
- Plant extracts have been shown to
potentiate the efficacy of chelating
agents.
- Herbal drugs are safer according to
traditional claims.
- Herbal extracts provide the benefits
of natural chelation properties and
antioxidant benefits.
Administration of C. asiatica during chelation provided more pronounced effects, particularly in the
recovery of oxidative stress parameters, suggesting that with the removal of lead from the target tissue,
this antioxidant provides effective reversal in the altered parameters indicative of oxidative stress.
Number of studies have been reported where a co-administration of a dietary nutrients like a vitamin
e.g., thiamine [120], an essential metal viz. zinc [121,122] or an amino acid like methionine [123] with
a chelating agent lead to many beneficial effects like providing better clinical recoveries as well as
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2767
mobilization of heavy metal. Supplementation of trace metals has been found to be more effective
when given during the course of chelation therapy compared to the chelating agents alone [23,124].
Iron, in vitro, is a good chelator of arsenic [125]. Simultaneous supplementation of zinc was found to
effectively reverse inhibition of the lead sensitive zinc dependent enzyme ALAD in male Wistar
rats [126,127]. When zinc was administered prior to arsenic, there was a reduction in arsenic
concentration in several parts of the organism of adult mice, contributing to a decrease in toxicity from
the metal [128]. It was also well established that the biosynthesis of metallothionein can be influenced
by zinc. The role of zinc supplementation during the course of chelation of lead [23] and
cadmium [129,130] has been reported to have many beneficial effects. A more effective removal of
hepatic arsenic and recoveries in the arsenic sensitive biochemical indices following combined
administration of zinc and MiADMSA [124] may offer an answer to the problem raised with
MiADMSA monotherapy [56,57]. Various trends in combination therapy and their beneficial aspects
have been summarized in Figure 11.
Figure 11. showing possible mechanism involved for the better therapeutic efficacy of
combined chelation therapy in lead/ arsenic poisoning using two different chelating agents.
Phenolic compounds acting as antioxidants may function as terminators of free radical chains and as
chelators of redox-active metal ions that are capable of catalyzing lipid peroxidation [131]. Mishra and
Flora [132] have also reported that the combined treatment with quercetin and MiADMSA was not
only able to chelate arsenic from the cell but also ameliorate oxidant levels, i.e., abatement of toxic
effects of arsenic. Combined treatments with MiADMSA + NAC and MiADMSA + mannitol were
effective both in terms of recovery in parameters of oxidative stress and reduction in blood and tissue
cadmium burden [133]. These combined treatments were also effective in partially correcting the
cadmium induced loss of liver and brain endogenous zinc. It has been reported that co-treatment with
NAC reduces lipid peroxidation and prevents Cd-induced hepatotoxicity [134]. NAC besides
preventing hepatotoxicity and reducing the rate of CdMT release from the liver, protect directly by
forming a complex with Cd [135], or indirectly by scavenging free radicals [136] or by serving as a
cysteine donor for GSH synthesis.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2768
7. Therapeutic Recommendations for Heavy Metal Poisoning
Metal poisoning may be acute, sub acute or chronic. Usually acute poisoning is well defined and
identifiable, with serious rapid manifestations that may be recovered with immediate medical attention.
However, the sub chronic that may convert to chronic metal toxicities may be ill defined as general ill
health and not identifiable as any classical syndrome. Moreover, the chronic toxicities may be
reversible or irreversible leading to slow development of manifestations like cancer or teratogenic
malformations after latent period. The treatment of acute metal poisoning involves emergency medical
care that may not be described in the present review. The present review will follow outline of general
and specific metal toxicity management. Basic principles of metal toxicity management deals with step
by step protocol, for easy understanding that follows as under:
(1) Prevention of further metal absorption into the system
(2) Elimination of metal from the circulation
(3) Inactivation of metal bioavailable in the system
Steps 1 and 2 are more applicable in cases of acute metal poisoning and step 3 is more directed to
sub chronic or chronic metal toxicities [137].
7.1. Prevention of Further Metal Absorption into the System
The most important and immediate measure is to remove the patient from the exposure. Toxic
metals may be absorbed by various routes of exposure including inhalation, dermally or orally.
Depending on the intensity and extent of exposure further treatment is decided. In case of high metal
exposure as vapours of Hg or concentrated fumes of Pb or As gas, immediate removal of patient not
only from the site but removal of clothing, decontamination of skin, eyes, hair and the area around
followed by emergency medical assistance may be needed, whereas in case of chronic occupational
exposures, or exposure due to lifestyle (household, contaminated drinking water, food, utensils, etc.)
removal from exposure that may or may not be followed by immediate therapy is needed. The normal
excretory system may expel metals to provide a gradual recovery from mild toxicity. In cases of
ingestion of toxic metals, acute cases will need stomach emptying within four hours of metal ingestion,
or inactivation of metal in the stomach beyond four hours or when gastric emptying is not possible.
Various inactivating antidotes, including activated charcoal, milk, egg white, sodium bicarbonate,
sodium or magnesium sulphate, Prussian Blue, etc. may be used for specific metals that are not
discussed herein.
7.2. Elimination of Metal from the Circulation
After metal absorption into the circulation in acute cases it may be eliminated from the body to
avoid further distribution and penetration in tissues; thus reduce serious damage. Techniques like
inducing diureses, modulating urinary pH for metal excretion, employing complexing agents to
enhancing faecal excretion for metals undergoing extensive enterohepatic circulation or haemodialysis
may be employed.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2769
Although these techniques sounds promising there applicability and efficacy varies depending upon
physicochemical properties of metal, route of exposure, intensity and extent of exposure and condition
of the patient.
7.3. Inactivation of Metal Bioavailability in the System
7.3.1. Lead
The clinical manifestation of lead toxicity is termed ‘plumbism’ and has been known since ancient
times. Children are more vulnerable to lead exposure than adults because of the frequency of hand-to-
mouth activity (pica), and a higher rate of intestinal absorption and retention. Blood lead has been
reported to impair normal metabolic pathways in children at very low levels [138]. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention determined that primary prevention activities in children should begin at blood
lead levels (BLLs) > 10 μg/dL [139]. Lead (Pb) binds to sulfhydryl and amide group components of
enzymes, altering their configuration and diminishing their activities. It may also compete with
essential metallic cations for binding sites, inhibiting enzyme activity, or altering the transport of
essential cations such as calcium [83]. Lead produces a range of effects, primarily on the
haematopoietic system, the nervous system, and the kidneys. Lead inhibits many stages in the haem
synthesis pathway. δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD), which, catalyses the formation of
porphobilinogn from δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and ferrochelatase, which incorporates iron into
protoporphyrin [140]. ALA in urine has been used for many years as an indicator of exposure,
inhibition of haematopoiesis among industrial workers, and the diagnosis of lead poisoning [140,141].
Ferrochelatase catalyzes the incorporation of iron into the porpohyrin ring. As a result of lead toxicity,
the enzyme is inhibited and zinc is substituted for iron, and zinc protoporphyrin concentration is
increased [142]. The most vulnerable target of lead poisoning is the nervous system. Lead
encephalopathy rarely occurs at blood lead below 100 µg/dL. One of the important mechanisms known
for lead induced neurotoxicity is the disruption of calcium metabolism. Oxidative stress, a condition
describing the production of oxygen radicals beyond a threshold for proper antioxidant neutralization,
has been implicated as a pathologic condition in lead toxicity. Studies have shown that lead causes
oxidative stress by inducing the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and weakening the
antioxidant defence system of cells [143,144]. Depletion of cells’ major sulfhydryl reserves seems to
be an important indirect mechanism for oxidative stress that is induced by redox-inactive
metals [145,146].
Other than the supportive therapy for lead exposed subjects, chelation therapy is recommended in
symptomatic cases or where blood lead levels are high (50–60 µg/dL) [12]. The recommended dose of
CaNa2EDTA for asymptomatic adult and pediatric patients with blood lead concentration below
70 µg/dL but above 20 µg/dL is 1,000 mg/m2
/day given intravenously (iv) or by intramuscular (im)
route. The iv administration of CaNa2EDTA must always be as infusion over a period of 8–12 hrs,
where by im route the drug is administered as two doses given at 8–12 hr intervals. However, in
patients with blood lead levels higher than 70 µg/dL monotherapy with CaNa2EDTA might actually
aggravate symptoms. These cases must receive combination treatment of CaNa2EDTA with BAL.
Similarly, for lead encephalopathy in infants, immediate CaNa2EDTA iv infusion (1,500 mg/m2
/day) is
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2770
administered for five days and complimentary BAL (450 mg/m2
/day) is recommended four hours
before and during CaNa2EDTA treatment to avoid lead brain redistribution. Initial therapy increases
urinary lead excretion and reduced blood lead burden which is usually followed by a rebound high
blood lead concentration at chelation cessation. This happens by virtue of redistribution (mobilization)
of metal from reservoirs like skeletal system. Thus, after a two day interval a second course of therapy
is prescribed to allow redistribution of lead and replenishment of zinc and other essential metals.
Further, anticonvulsive drugs (e.g., Phenytoin) or hyperosmotic (e.g., Dexamethasone) therapy may be
added to CaNa2EDTA infusion if needed. CaNa2EDTA although is effective but is contraindicated in
patients with renal insufficiency. Since the lead-EDTA complex is excreted by glomerulus filtration it
aggravates chances of renal failure. In adults with lead nephropathy, CaNa2EDTA may be prescribed
at the dose of 500 mg/m2
at various time intervals for five days that may be repeated after a month
interval depending upon serum creatinine levels. Dimercaprol was initially prescribed as monotherapy
at a dose of 4 mg/kg, im at various intervals up to seven days. This is no longer in use due to its
adverse effects and availability of safer chelators like DMSA. In less severe cases DMSA
(30 mg/kg/day) can be conveniently prescribed for its oral administration and fewer side effects.
DMSA has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) for the treatment of
lead intoxication in children with blood lead levels 45 μg/dL. A major advantage of DMSA is that,
lead is not redistributed to the brain and other vital organs after its therapy in rats intoxicated with
lead [18,84]. Animal studies suggest that DMSA is an effective chelator of lead concentrated in soft
tissue but it is unable to chelate lead from bones [142]. Ercal et al. [148] indicated that lead induced
oxidative stress responded moderately to the treatment with DMSA accompanied by reduction in lead
concentration from blood and soft tissue. DMSA for being an antioxidant and a strong lead chelator
has been shown to deplete significantly lead from hippocampus leading to recovery in the oxidative
stress and apoptosis induced by lead [149]. DMSA binds with lead utilizing –SH groups. Although D-
penicillamine also shared advantage of oral administration when prescribed at 250 mg given four times
for five days of therapy or 40 mg/kg/day for chronic therapy; it is no longer used for the treatment of
lead intoxications as safer profile succimer is available [12]. It is important to note that in cases of
occupational lead poisoning, chelation therapy with ongoing exposure is never recommended. Instead
patient heavily exposed to lead may be removed from the site and then only then chelation therapy
should be administered.
7.3.2. Arsenic
Arsenic is listed as the highest priority contaminant on the ATSDR/EPA priority list of hazardous
substances at Superfund sites [150]. Major anthropogenic sources of arsenic in the environment
include smelting operations and chromated copper arsenate, a variety of pesticide used in pressure
treating wood for construction purposes. Arsenic can be transmitted not just by drinking water, but also
by direct exposure to skin and hair. It can also be transmitted through food grains and the possible
transmit of arsenic through summer (Boro) rice grown in the Bengal basin is an issue of debate [151].
High levels of arsenic have been found in 10 developing countries, including India [152,153]. In
Bangladesh, 57.5% of the studied population had skin lesions caused by arsenic poisoning (n = 1,630
adults) [154]. Arsenic toxicity is associated with various hepatic, renal, neurological and skin disorders.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2771
At chronic exposure it is known to also produce carcinogenic effects. Arsenic is rapidly and
extensively accumulated in the liver, where it inhibits NAD-linked oxidation of pyruvate or
α-ketoglutarate. This occurs by complexation of trivalent arsenic with vicinal thiols necessary for the
oxidation of this substrate [115]. Dermatological changes following chronic arsenic intoxication are
common features and the initial clinical diagnosis is often based on hyper pigmentation, palmar and
solar keratosis. Toxic effects of arsenic also include changes in behavior, confusion, and memory loss.
Exposure to arsenic in drinking water has been associated with a decline in intellectual function in
children. Arsenic is classified as a group 1 carcinogen to humans based on strong epidemiological
evidence [155]. Areas in Bangladesh and India with arsenicosis showed high incidences of tumors in
local residents [156]. The mechanisms by which arsenic causes human cancers are not well understood.
Recent in vivo studies indicate that methylated forms of arsenic may serve as co-carcinogens or tumour
promoters [157,158]. One of the important mechanisms of arsenic induced disorders is its ability to
bind with sulfhydryl group (–SH) containing molecules.
Dimercaprol, at a dose of 3–4 mg/kg im every 4 to 12 hrs could be followed by penicillamine for
four days, as four divided doses may be given to a maximum of 2 gm/day. Succimer or DMSA has
been tried successfully in animal as well as in cases of human arsenic poisoning [159]. DMSA is also
efficacious against arsenic toxicity however USFDA has approved DMSA only for lead chelation in
children. We also reported significant depletion of arsenic and a significant recovery in the altered
biochemical variables of chronically arsenic exposed rats [140]. However in a double blind,
randomized controlled trial study conducted on few selected patients from arsenic affected West
Bengal (India) regions with oral administration of DMSA suggested that DMSA was not effective in
producing any clinical and biochemical benefits or any histopathological improvements of skin
lesions [160].
7.3.4. Cadmium
Cadmium (Cd) is one of the most toxic metal ions of our environment and is found in air, food and
water. Cd ions are absorbed by most tissues of the body and become concentrated mainly in liver and
kidney and it has a long biological half-life of 11 to 20 years in humans [161]. Cadmium is listed by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as one of 126 priority pollutants. The most dangerous
characteristic of cadmium is that it accumulates throughout a lifetime. Chronic human exposure to Cd
results in renal dysfunction, anemia, hepatic dysfunction, osteotoxicities, and cancer in multiple organs,
potentially including the kidney [162,163]. Because of its carcinogenic properties, cadmium has been
classified as a #1 category human carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France [164]. Cadmium is a potent human carcinogen and has been associated with cancers of
the lung, prostate, pancreas, and kidney. Cadmium can cause osteoporosis, anemia, non-hypertrophic
emphysema, irreversible renal tubular injury, eosinophilia, anosmia and chronic rhinitis. Cd-induced
nephrotoxicity is clearly the most important and the most frequently occurring ailment in humans as a
result of chronic exposure to the metal [165]. The various toxic effects induced by cadmium and other
heavy metals in biological systems might be due to alterations in the antioxidant defense system [166].
Cadmium-induced oxidative damage has been demonstrated by the increased lipid peroxidation and
inhibition of enzymes required to prevent such oxidative damage [167]. It has been suggested that the
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2772
mechanisms of acute Cd toxicity involve the depletion of glutathione and protein-bound sulfhydryl
groups, resulting in enhanced production of ROS such as superoxide ion, hydrogen peroxide, and
hydroxyl radicals [168,169]. ROS has been implicated in chronic Cd nephrotoxicity [170],
immunotoxicity [171], and carcinogenesis [172]. Cd-induced inflammation in the liver is another
important mechanism for Cd-induced oxidative stress [173]. Mitochondrion is an important target of
Cd toxicity [174]. It has been proposed that Cd initially binds to protein thiols in mitochondrial
membrane, affects mitochondrial permeability transition, inhibits respiratory chain reaction, and then
generates ROS [175]. Cadmium accumulation in the brain causes behavioral alteration, which is
exacerbated in rats fed with low protein diet [176]. Metallothionein (MT), a low-molecular-weight,
cysteine-rich, metal-binding protein, has been shown to play a protective role in Cd-induced
hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity [177].
Effective chelation therapy against cadmium has yet to be identified, but CaNa2EDTA has also been
recommended with no proven clinical benefits. It is suggested that CaNa2EDTA at the dose of
75 mg/kg/day in three to six divided doses for five days (total dose per five days not exceeding more
than 500 mg/kg) may be prescribed immediately after Cd exposure. Since decrease in efficacy of
cadmium therapy happens in parallel to distribution of metal in the tissue. CaNa3DTPA, an effective
antidote against cobalt is also found effective against acute cadmium toxicity. However, it is less
effective as compared to carbodithioates [27,28]. The usual widely accepted dose of CaNa3DTPA or
ZnNa3DTPA is 1 gm/day in single dose, two to five days a week via im administration. Various
analogues of carbodithioates including diethyl (De), dimethyl (Dm), and diisopropyl (Di)—
dithiocarbamates (DTC) have been investigated for their chelation efficacy against cadmium toxicity.
The analogues although were effective but showed greater efficacy with delayed injection indicating
interaction with Cd-thionein (bound Cd) rather than free ionic Cd. Further, combination therapy of
DeDTC with DTPA caused excretion of increased concentrations of Cd in urine. It was suggested that
DTPA acts directly with DeDTC in Cd complexation where DTPA contributes in increased urinary
excretion of the complex by virtue of its polarity [167].
7.3.5. Mercury
Mercury is a naturally occurring constituent of the Earth’s crust and is found in several chemical
and physical forms. In its elemental (metallic) form, it exists in a liquid state at room temperature and
readily volatilizes at standard temperature (0 °C) and pressure (1 atm) to form mercury vapors. In
recent years, elemental mercury has proven to be a potential source of toxicosis in children [178,179].
In the environment, humans and animals are exposed to numerous chemical forms of mercury,
including elemental mercury vapor (Hg), inorganic mercurous [Hg (I)], mercuric [Hg (II)] and organic
mercuric compounds. Elemental mercury can be released from dental amalgam restorations [180] and
can then be converted into inorganic mercury in the body which can accumulate in the brain [181].
Metallic mercury vapor is both neurotoxicant and nephrotoxicant. Exposure to significant levels of
metallic mercury can result in neurologic, respiratory, renal, reproductive, immunologic, dermatologic,
and a variety of other effects [182]. Mercurous and mercuric ions impart their toxicological effects
mainly through molecular interactions with sulfhydryl groups on various molecules like GSH,
metallothionein (MT) and albumin [183-187]. Mercurials have been reported to cause apoptosis in
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2773
cultured neurons; however, the signaling pathways resulting in cell death have not been well
characterized. It has been reported that skeletal muscle is an important deposit of MeHg [188] and the
activated antioxidant defense system of cells provides a compensatory mechanism for HgCl2 induced
oxidative stress. However, such a phenomenon has not been reported in neurons [189] and hence Hg
exhibits a more neurotoxic effect [106].
Dimercaprol and D-penicillamine has been the prescribed chelation agents against inorganic and
elemental mercury poisoning. Recommended treatment include, dimercaprol at 5 mg/kg dose im for
high level symptomatic patients and D-penicillamine at 250 mg/kg orally for asymptomatic patients or
incase of low level exposure. Hydrophilic analogues of BAL, DMPS, and DMSA have been
successfully tested for treatment of toxicity by mercurial compounds [190]. DMPS has shown effective
mobilization of mercury from kidney and reduced its biological half life [191]. DMPS is the drug of
choice to reduce the burden of alkylmercury from the body including brain [191]. Further, DMPS is an
approved drug in Germany for the treatment of mercury it has also been used for its provocative test. It
is important to note that BAL may be contraindicated in organic mercury (phenyl- and alkylmercury)
poisoning as the lipid soluble complex formed by it may increase mercury distribution into tissue and
brain making it more detrimental.
7.3.6. Iron
Iron is an essential micronutrient utilized in almost every aspect of normal cell function and it is
particularly crucial for the conservation of energy. Iron is a well known hepatotoxin. Iron overload is a
less frequent condition, but a high content of tissue iron has been associated with several pathological
conditions, including liver and heart diseases [193], cancer [194], neurodegenerative disorders [195],
diabetes and immunological disorders [196]. Hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis are the major outcomes of
chronic iron overload as well as to repeated blood transfusion [197]. Iron toxicity is thus generally
divided into five clinical stages, gastrointestinal toxicity, circulatory shock, relative stability,
hepatotoxicity and gastrointestinal scarring. Iron toxicity is associated with primary hemochromatosis,
high dietary iron intake and frequent blood transfusion. Oxidative stress is a general condition in
hemodialysis patients [198], the periodic intravenous iron injection being a factor contributing to
oxidative stress. The gastrointestinal tract is the primary target site, which occur without systemic
toxicity. The chief site of systemic toxicity is the heart while liver is susceptible because, unlike other
organs it is capable of clearing nontransferrin-bound iron [199]. Toxic shock is the most common
cause of death in iron poisoning. At an early stage it is hypovolemic due to significant loss of blood
and fluid from gastrointestinal tract. Hepatic necrosis is the next common cause of death. A serum
concentration of more than 500 µg/dL is the recommended laboratory indicator. Common symptoms
include vomiting within first 30 min to several hours, followed by abdominal pain, diarrhea,
hyper-glycemia and fever.
Treatment of iron poisoning involves decontamination of gastrointestinal, supportive care and the
administration of a chelating agent. Deferoxamine is the specific and most potent chelator for iron and
known for its high affinity for ferric form (Fe3+
) but has a very low affinity for calcium (Ca2+
).
Deferoxamine needs to be given either through the intramuscular (90 mg to 1 g/kg) or intravenously at
a rate of 15 mg/kg/h. Its gastrointestinal absorption is very low. Irrespective of the route of
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2774
administration the daily dose should not exceed 6 g. Patients should be monitored carefully for
gastrointestinal complications and shock after the treatment is over. Oral Deferiprone
(1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid-4-one) has been shown to be as effective as s.c. desferrioxamine in the
removal of iron in human and have a similar but different toxicity profile from desferrioxamine in both
animals and humans [200]. There are few recent encouraging developments following the introduction
deferiprone in combination with deferoxamine [201]. Variable doses of deferiprone (50–120 mg/kg)
and deferoxamine (20–60 mg/kg) have been used to achieve low and safe body iron stores but the
effects of these treatments are variables in patients. Various recent studies demonstrated the safety and
efficacy of another new iron chelator, Deferasirox in reducing iron burden in iron-overloaded patients.
Deferasirox, a tridentate oral chelator approved for the chronic iron overload offers a convenient,
effective and promising alternative to deferoxamine [66]. This chelator is likely to be a significant
development in the treatment of transfusional iron overload, due to its ability to provide constant
chelation coverage and the potential to improve compliance [202].
8. Role of Antioxidants during Chelation
Induction of reactive oxygen species by metals and subsequent depletion of antioxidant cell
defenses can result in disruption of the pro-oxidant/antioxidant balance in tissues [203]. In the event
that oxidative stress can be partially implicated in toxicity of metals, a therapeutic strategy to increase
the antioxidant capacity of cells may fortify the long term effective treatment. This may be
accomplished by either reducing the possibility of metal interacting with critical biomolecules and
inducing oxidative damage, or by bolstering the cells antioxidant defenses through endogenous
supplementation of antioxidant molecules. Although many investigators have confirmed metal induced
oxidative stress, the usefulness of antioxidants along or in conjunction with chelation therapy has not
been extensively investigated yet. Vitamins, essential metals or amino acid supplementation during
chelation therapy has been found to be beneficial in increasing metal mobilization and providing
recoveries in number of altered biochemical variables [204-206]. These antioxidants (vitamin C and E,
α-lipoic acid etc.) when given either alone or in combination with a chelating agent proved to be
effective in mobilizing metal from soft as well as hard tissue [203]. The important role of heavy metals
in oxidative damage suggested a new mechanism for an old problem, whether metals are involved in
the oxidative deterioration of biological macromolecules. Although several mechanisms have been
proposed to explain the heavy metal induced toxicity, none of the mechanisms have been yet defined
explicitly. Indirect in vivo evidence of oxidative involvement in metal induced pathotoxicity was
demonstrated by alleviation of oxidative stress in the erythrocytes after treatment with thiol containing
proven antioxidants, N-acetylcysteine and a succimer in arsenic exposed rats [115]. In addition to the
role of micronutrients in modifying metal toxicity, these nutritional components can also act as
complimentary chelating agents (adjuvants) increasing the efficacy of a known chelator, or by
acting independently.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2775
9. Conclusions
Metals on the one hand serve as essential components of the normal health physiology yet on the
other hand, can cause serious toxic manifestations. Chelation therapy has been the mainstay treatment
against metal toxicity. Chelation therapy complexes the metal and allows removal of excess or toxic
metal from the system rendering it immediately nontoxic and reducing the late effects. Although a
range of metal chelators are now available for toxic metal chelation, development of molecules that
may be categorized anywhere close to an ideal chelator is far from reality. Most chelators have the
disadvantages of numerous adverse effects, non-specific binding and administration inconvenience. In
the world of increasing metal exposure although chelation therapy is an important tool in fighting
metal storage disorders yet lack of larger clinical trials still offers controversy on its clinical
therapeutic benefits. However, inspite of all the drawbacks it is important to understand the need for
more specific and advanced chelation molecules to not only resolve the unanswered poisonings like
cadmium toxicity but also to achieve complete clinical recovery in cases of other metal disorders.
Further, newer therapeutic strategies should be investigated that may provide better therapeutic
outcomes. Employing combination therapy with more than one chelating agent and or prescribing
antioxidants or nutraceuticals may be more seriously considered as crucial recommendations of
chelation therapy.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank R. Vijayaraghavan, Director of the establishment for his support and
encouragement. One of us (VP) thanks Central Council of Research in Ayurveda and Sidha for a
Senior Research Fellowship (SRF).
References
1. Morgan, T.; Gilbert, T.; Drew; Harry, D.K. CLXII—Researches on residual affinity and
co-ordination. Part II Acetyl acetones of selenium and tellurium. J. Chem. Soc. 1920, 117,
1456-1465.
2. Andersen, O. Principles and recent developments in chelation treatment of metal intoxication.
Chem. Rev. 1999, 99, 2683-2710.
3. Jones, M.M. Design of new chelating agents for removal of intracellular toxic metals. In
Coordination Chemistry: A Century of Progress; Kauffman, G.B., Ed.; The American Chemical
Society: Washington, DC, USA, 1994; pp. 427-438.
4. Baum, C.R. Treatment of mercury intoxication. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 1999, 11, 265-268.
5. Guldager, B.; Jorgensen, P.J.; Grandjean, P. Metal excretion and magnesium retention in patients
with intermittent claudication treated with intravenous disodium EDTA. Clin. Chem. 1996, 42,
1938-1942.
6. Fournier, L.; Thomas, G.; Garnier, R.; Buisine, A.; Houze, P.; Pradier, F. 2, 3-Dimercaptosuccinic
acid treatment of heavy metal poisoning in humans. Med. Toxicol. 1988, 3, 499-504.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2776
7. Andersen, O. Oral cadmium exposure in mice: toxicokinetics and efficiency of chelating agents.
Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 1989, 20, 83-112.
8. Tilbrook, G.S.; Hider, R.C. Iron chelators for clinical use metal ions. Biol. Syst. 1998, 35, 691-730.
9. Singh, S.; Khodr, H.; Tayler, M.I.; Hider, R.C. Therapeutic iron chelators and their potential
side-effects. Biochem. Soc. Symp. 1995, 61, 127-137.
10. Kojima, Y.; Binz, P.A.; Kägi, J.H. Metallothionein IV; Klaassen, C., Ed.; Birkhäuser Verlag:
Basel, Switzerland, 1999; Volume 66, pp. 3-6.
11. Cobbett, C.; Goldsbrough, P. Phytochelatins and metallothionein: roles in heavy metal
detoxification and homeostasis. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 2002, 53, 159-182.
12. Klaassen, C.D. Heavy metals and heavy metal antagonists. In The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics; Goodman, L., Gilman, A., Eds.; McGraw Hill, Medical Publishing Division: New
York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 1825-1872.
13. Quan, H.; Ghali, W.A.; Verhoef, M.J.; Norris, C.N.; Galbraith, P.D.; Knudtson, M.L. Use of
chelation therapy after coronary angiography. Am. J. Med. 2001, 111, 686-691.
14. Miller, K.L.; Liebowitz, R.S.; Newby, L.K. Complementary and alternative medicine in
cardiovascular diseases: A review of biologically based approaches Am. Heart J. 2004, 147,
401-411.
15. Ernst, E. Chelation therapy for coronary heart disease: An overview of all clinical investigations.
Am. Heart J. 2000, 140, 139-141.
16. Knudtson, M.L.; Wyse, K.G.; Galbraith, P.D. Chelation therapy for ischemic heart disease. A
randomized controlled trail. JAMA 2002, 287, 481-486.
17. Anderson, T.J.; Hubacek, J.; Wyse, D.G.; Knudtson, M.L. Effect of chelation therapy on
endothelial function in patients with coronary artery disease: PATCH substudy. J. Amer. Coll.
Cardiol. 2003, 41, 420-425.
18. Flora, S.J.S.; Bhattacharya, R.; Vijayaraghavan, R. Combined therapeutic potential of meso
2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid and calcium disodium edetate in the mobilization and distribution of
lead in experimental lead intoxication in rats. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 1995, 25, 233-240.
19. Lin-Tan, D.T.; Lin, J.L.; Yen, T.H.; Chen, K.H.; Huang, Y.L. Long-term outcome of repeated
lead chelation therapy in progressive non-diabetic chronic kidney diseases. Nephrol. Dial.
Transplant. 2007, 22, 2924-2931.
20. Lin, J.L.; Ho, H.H.; Yu, C.C. Chelation therapy for patients with elevated body burden
progressive renal insufficiency. A randomized, controlled trail. Ann. Intern. Med. 1999, 130, 7-13.
21. DRUGDEX Drug evaluation. Thomson MICROMEDEX Healthcare Series (Monograph on
CD-ROM); 2004, Volume 122.
22. Ibim, S.E.; Trotman, J.; Musey, P.I.; Semafuko, W.E. Depletion of essential elements by calcium
disodium EDTA treatment in the dog. Toxicology 1992, 73, 229-237.
23. Flora, S.J.S.; Tandon, S.K. Beneficial effects of zinc supplementation during chelation treatment
of lead intoxication in rats. Toxicology 1990, 64, 129-139.
24. Spoor, N.L. The use of EDTA and DTPA for accelerating the removal of deposited transuranic
elements from human; Harwell: Didcot, UK, 1977.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2777
25. Llobet, J.M.; Domingo, J.L.; Corbella, J. Comparison of the effectiveness of several chelators
after single administration on the toxicity, excretion and distribution of cobalt. Arch. Toxicol.
1986, 58, 278-281.
26. Llobet, J.M.; Domingo, J.L.; Corbella, J. Antidotes for zinc intoxication in mice. Arch. Toxicol.
1988, 61, 321-323.
27. Gale, G.R.; Atkins, L.M.; Walker, E.M., Jr.; Smith, A.B. Comparative effects of
diethyldithiocarbamate, dimercaptosuccinate and diethylenetriaminepentaacetate on organ
distribution and excretion of cadmium. Ann. Clin. Lab. Sci. 1983, 13, 33-44.
28. Walker, E.M., Jr.; Gale, G.R.; Fody, E.P.; Atkins, L.M.; Smith, A.B.; Jones, M.M. Comparative
antidotal effects of diethyldithicarbamate, dimercaptosuccinate and diethylene triamine
pentaacetate against cadmium induced testicular toxicity in mice. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol.
Pharmacol. 1986, 51, 231-244.
29. Radiation emergency assistance center, Training site (REAC/TS). Ca-DTPA (Trisodium calcium
diethylenetriaminepentaacetate). Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education: Oak Ridge, TN,
USA, 2002.
30. Roussaeux, C.G.; MacNabb, L.G. Oral administration of D-pencillamine causes neonatal
mortality without morphological defects in CD-1 mice. J. Appl. Toxicol. 1992, 12, 35-38.
31. Gupta, B.; Srivastava, R.K.; Saxena, K.K.; Prasad, D.N. A study on the penicillamine induced
gastric ulceration in the rat. Ind. J. Pharmacol. 1980, 12, 247-252.
32. Grasedyck, K. D-penicillamine—side effects, pathogenesis and decreasing the risks. Z. Rheumatol.
1988, 47, 17-19.
33. Peters, R.; Stocken, L.; Thompson, R. British Anti-Lewisite (BAL). Nature 1945, 156, 616-619.
34. Hoover, T.D.; Aposhian, H.V. BAL increases the arsenic-74 content of rabbit brain. Toxicol. Appl.
Pharmacol. 1983, 70, 160-162.
35. Berlin, M.; Ullberg, S. Increasing uptake of mercury in mouse brain caused by 2,3-
dimercaptopropanol (BAL). Nature 1963, 197, 84-85.
36. Andersen, O. Chemical and biological considerations in the treatment of metal intoxications by
chelating agents. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2004, 4, 11-21.
37. Janakiraman, N. Hemolysis during BAL chelation therapy for high blood lead levels in two G6PD
deficient children. Clin. Pediatr. 1978, 17, 485-487.
38. Aposhian, H.V. DMSA and DMPS—Water soluble antidotes for heavy metal poisoning. Ann. Rev.
Pharmacol. Toxicol. 1983, 23, 193-215.
39. Alan, L.; Miller, N.D. Dimercaptosuccinic Acid (DMSA), a non-toxic, water-soluble treatment for
heavy metal toxicity. Altern. Med. Rev. 1998, 3, 199-207.
40. Graziano, J.H. Role of 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in the treatment of heavy metal poisoning.
Med. Tox. 1986, 1, 155-162.
41. Aposhian, H.V.; Maiorino, R.M.; Dart, R.C.; Perry, D.F. Urinary excretion of
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in human subjects. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 1989, 45, 520-526.
42. Aaseth, J.; Alexander, J.; Raknerud, N. Treatment of mercuric chloride poisoning with
dimercaptosuccinic acid and diuretics: preliminary studies. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 1982, 19,
173-186.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2778
43. Grandjean, P.; Guldager, B.; Larsen, I.B. Placebo response in environmental disease. Chelation
therapy of patients with symptoms attributed to amalgam fillings. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 1997,
39, 707-714.
44. Ramsey, D.T.; Casteel, S.W.; Faggella, A.M. Use of orally administered succimer (meso-2,
3-dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment of lead poisoning in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 1996,
208, 371-375.
45. Aposhian, H.V.; Morgan. D.L.; Queen, H.L.; Maiorino, R.M.; Aposhian, M.M. Vitamin C,
glutathione, or lipoic acid did not decrease brain or kidney mercury in rats exposed to mercury
vapor. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 2003, 41, 339-347.
46. Ewan, K.B.; Pamphlett, R. Increased inorganic mercury in spinal motor neurons following
chelating agents. Neurotoxicology 1996, 17, 343-349.
47. Gersl, V.; Hrdina, R.; Vavrova, J.; Holeckova, M.; Palicka, V.; Vogkova, J.; Mazurova, Y.;
Bajgar, J. Effects of repeated administration of dithiol chelating agent- sodium 2,3-dimercapto
1-propanesulphonate (DMPS)- on biochemical and hematological parameters in rabbits. Acta.
Medica. 1997, 40, 3-8.
48. Kalia, K.; Flora, S.J.S. Strategies for Safe and Effective Treatment for Chronic Arsenic and Lead
Poisoning. J. Occup. Hlth. 2005, 47, 1-21.
49. Aposhian, M.M.; Maiorino, R.M.; Xu, Z. Sodium 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonate (DMPS)
treatment does not redistribute lead or mercury to the brain of rats. Toxicology 1996, 109, 49-55.
50. McNeill Consumer Products Co. Chemet Product Information; McNeill Consumer Products Co.:
Fort Washington, PA, USA, 1994.
51. Walker, E.M.; Stone, A.; Milligan, L.B.; Gale, G.R.; Atkins, L.M.; Smith, A.B.; Jones, M.M.;
Singh, P.K.; Basinger, M.A. Mobilization of lead in mice by administration of monoalkyl esters of
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid. Toxicology 1992, 76, 79-87.
52. Flora, S.J.S.; Dubey, R.; Kannan, G.M.; Chauhan, R.S.; Pant, B.P.; Jaiswal, D.K.
Meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) and monoisoamyl DMSA effect on gallium arsenide
induced pathological liver injury in rats. Toxicol. Lett. 2002, 132, 9-17.
53. Flora, S.J.S.; Pande, M.; Kannan, G.M.; Mehta, A. Lead induced oxidative stress and its recovery
following co-administration of melatonin or n-acetylcysteine during chelation with succimer in
male rats. Cell. Mol. Biol. 2004, 50, 543-551.
54. Jones, M.M.; Singh, P.K.; Gale, G.R.; Smith, A.B.; Atkins, L.M. Cadmium mobilization in vivo
by intraperitoneal or oral administration of mono alkyl esters of meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid.
Pharmacol. Toxicol. 1992, 70, 336-343.
55. Flora, S.J.S.; Mehta, A. Monoisoamyl dimercaptosuccinic acid abrogates arsenic-induced
developmental toxicity in human embryonic stem cell-derived embryoid bodies: comparison with
in vivo studies. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2009, 78, 1340-1349.
56. Mehta, A.; Flora, S.J.S. Possible role of metal redistribution, hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress in
chelating agents induced hepatic and renal metallothionein in rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2001, 39,
1029-1038.
57. Flora, S.J.S; Mehta, A.; Gautam, P.; Jatav, P.C.; Pathak, U. Essential metal status, prooxidant/
antioxidant effects of MiADMSA in male rats: age-related effects. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2007,
120, 235-247.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2779
58. Mehta, A.; Kannan, G.M.; Dube, S.N.; Pant, B.P.; Pant, S.C.; Flora, S.J.S. Hematological, hepatic
and renal alterations after repeated oral or intraperitoneal administration of monoisoamyl DMSA I.
Changes in male rats. J. Appl. Toxicol, 2002, 22, 359-369.
59. Flora, S.J.S.; Mehta, A. Haematological, hepatic and renal alterations after repeated oral and
intraperitoneal administration of monoisoamyl DMSA. II. Changes in female rats. J. Appl. Toxicol,
2003, 23, 97-102.
60. Blanusa, M.; Prester, L.; Piasek, M.; Kostial, K.; Jones, M.M.; Singh, P.K. Monoisoamyl ester of
DMSA reduces 203
Hg(NO3)2 retention in rats: 1. Chelation therapy during pregnancy. J. Trace
Elem. Exp. Med. 1997, 10, 173-181.
61. Mehta, A.; Pant, S.C.; Flora, S.J.S. Monoisoamyl dimercaptosuccinic acid induced changes in
pregnant female rats during late gestation and lactation. Reproduct. Toxicol. 2006, 21, 94-103.
62. Taubeneck, M.W.; Domingo, J.L.; Llobet, J.M.; Keen, C.L. Meso 2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA) affects maternal and fetal copper metabolism in Swiss mice. Toxicology 1992, 72, 27-40.
63. Winship, K.A. Toxicity of aluminium: a historical review, Part 2. Adverse Drug React Toxicol.
Rev. 1993, 12, 177-211.
64. Hoffbrand, A.V.; Cohen, A.; Hershko, C. Role of deferiprone in chelation therapy for
transfusional iron overload. Blood 2003, 102, 17-24.
65. Kattamis, A.; Ladis, V.; Berdousi, H.; Kelekis, N.L.; Alexopoulou, E.; Papasotiriou, I.; Drakaki,
K.; Kaloumenou, I.; Galani, A.; Kattamis, C. Iron chelation treatment with combination therapy
with deferiprone and deferioxamine: A 12-month trial. Blood Cell. Mol. Dis. 2006, 36, 21-25.
66. Cappellini, M.D.; Pattoneri, P. Oral iron chelators. Annu. Rev. Med. 2009, 60, 25-38.
67. Kodama, H.; Meguro, Y.; Tsunakawa, A.; Nakazato, Y.; Abe, T.; Murakita, H. Fate of orally
administered triethylenetetramine dihydrochloride: a therapeutic drug for Wilson’s disease.
Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 1993, 169, 59-66.
68. Kodama, H.; Murata, Y.; Iitsuka, T.; Abe, T. Metabolism of administered triethylene tetramine
dihydrochloride in humans. Life Sci. 1997, 61, 899-907.
69. Bahnemann, R.; Leibold, E.; Kittel, B.; Mellert, W.; Jackh, R. Different patterns of kidney
toxicity after sub-acute administration of Na-nitrilotriacetic acid and Fe-nitrilotriacetic acid to
Wistar rats. Toxicol. Sci. 1998, 46, 166-175.
70. Tandon, S.K.; Mathur, A.K. Chelation in Metal Intoxication. III. Lowering of Nickel Content in
Poisoned Rat Organs. Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol. 1976, 38, 401-408.
71. Kaur, G.; Hasan, S.K.; Srivastava, R.C. Effect of nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) on the distribution of
manganese-54 in rats. Arch. Toxicol. 1980, 45, 203-206.
72. Anderson, R.L. The role of zinc in nitrilotriacetate (NTA)-associated renal tubular cell toxicity.
Fd Cosmet. Toxicol. 1981, 19, 639-650.
73. Nixon, G.S.; Buehler, E.V.; Niewhuis, R.J. Two year rat feeding study with trisodium
nitrilotriacetate and its calcium chelate. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1972, 21, 244-249.
74. Alden, C.L.; Kanerva, R.L.; Anderson, R.L.; Adkins, A.G. Short-term effects of dietary
nitrilotriacetic acid in the male Charles River rat kidney. Vet. Pathol. 1981, 18, 549-559.
75. Hiasa, Y.; Kitahori, Y.; Konishi, N.; Shimoyama, T. Dose-related effect of trisodium
nitrilotnacetate monohydrate on renal tumorigenesis initiated with N-ethyl-N-hydroxy-
ethylnitrosamine in rats. Carcinogenesis 1985, 6, 907-910.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2780
76. Miyashiro, A. Promoting effect of trisodium nitrilotriacetate monohydrate on the development of
tumors in kidneys and urinary bladders or rats treated with N-ethyl-N-hydroxyethylnitrosamine or
N-butyl-N-(hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine. J. Nara Med Assoc. 1984, 35, 550-565.
77. Dietrich, D.R.; Swenberg, J.A. Preneoplastic lesions in rodent kidney induced spontaneously or
by non-genotoxic agents: Predictive nature and comparison to lesion induced by genotoxic
carcinogens. Mutat. Res. 1991, 248, 239-260.
78. Hartwig, A.; Klyszcz-Nasko, H.; Schlepegrell, R.; Beyersmann, D. Cellular damage by ferric
nitrilitriacetate and ferric citrate in V79 cells: Interrelationship between lipid peroxidation, DNA
strand breaks and sister chromatid exchange. Carcinogenesis 1993, 14, 107-112.
79. Umemura, T.; Hasegawa, R.; Sai-Kato, K.; Nishikawa, A.; Furukawa, F.; Toyokum, S.; Uchida,
K.; Inouc, T.; Kurokawa, Y. Prevention by 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate and N-acetylcysteine of
renal oxidative damage in rats treated with ferric nitriltriacetate. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 1996, 87,
882-886.
80. Angle, C.R. Chelation therapies for metal intoxication. In Toxicology of Metals; Chang, L.W.,
Ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1996; pp. 487-504.
81. Guha Mazumder, D.N.; Ghoshal, U.C.; Saha, J.; Santra, A.; De, B.K.; Chatterjee, A.; Dutta, S.;
Angle, C.R.; Centeno, J.A. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of 2,3-dimercapto succinic acid
in therapy of chronic arsenicosis due to drinking arsenic contaminated subsoil water. Clin. Toxicol.
1998, 36, 683-690.
82. Kostial, K.; Blanusa, M.; Plasek, L.J.; Samarzila, M.; Jones, M.M.; Singh, P.K. Monoisoamyl-
and mono-n-hexyl-meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinate in mobilizing Hg203
retention in relation to age
of rats and route of administration. J. Appl. Toxicol. 2001, 15, 201-206.
83. Flora, S.J.S.; Saxena, G.; Mehta, A. Reversal of lead-induced neuronal apoptosis by chelation
treatment in rats: role of ROS and intracellular Ca2+.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 2007, 322, 108-116.
84. Cory-Slechta, D.A. Mobilisation of lead over the course of DMSA chelation therapy and long
term efficacy. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap. 1988, 246, 84-91.
85. Flora, S.J.S.; Saxena, G. Lead induced oxidative stress and hematological alterations and their
response to combined administration of calcium disodium EDTA with a thiol chelator in rats. J.
Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 2004, 18, 221-233.
86. Mishra, D.; Mehta, A.; Flora, S.J.S. Reversal of hepatic apoptosis with combined administration
of DMSA and its analogues in guinea pigs: role of glutathione and linked enzymes. Chem. Res.
Toxicol. 2008, 21, 400-407.
87. Bhadauria, S.; Flora, S.J.S. Response of arsenic induced oxidative stress, DNA damage and metal
imbalance to combined administration of DMSA and monoisoamyl DMSA during chronic arsenic
poisoning in rats. Cell. Biol. Toxicol. 2007, 23, 91-104.
88. Flora, S.J.S.; Mehta, A.; Rao, P.V.L.; Kannan, G.M.; Bhaskar, A.S.B.; Dube, S.N.; Pant, B.P.
Therapeutic potential of monoisoamyl and monomethyl esters of meso 2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic
acid in gallium arsenide intoxicated rats. Toxicology 2004, 195, 127-146.
89. Flora, S.J.S.; Saxena, G.; Gautam, P.; Kaur, P.; Gill, K.D. Lead induced oxidative stress and
alterations in biogenic amines in different rat brain regions and their response to combined
administration of DMSA and MiADMSA. Chem. Biol. Interac. 2007, 170, 209-220.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2781
90. Flora, S.J.S.; Bhadauria, S.; Dhaked, R.; Pant, S.C. Arsenic induced blood and brain oxidative
stress and its response to some thiol chelators in male rats. Life Sci. 2005, 77, 2324-2337.
91. Shi, H.; Shi, X.; Liu, K.J. Oxidative mechanism of arsenic toxicity and carcinogenesis. Mol. Cell.
Biochem. 2004, 255, 67-78.
92. Kumagai, Y.; Sumi, D. Arsenic: Signal transduction, transcription factor, and biotransformation
involved in cellular response and toxicity. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2007, 47, 243-262.
93. Hu, Y.; Jin, X.; Snow, E.T. Effect of arsenic on transcription factor AP-1 and NF-kappaB DNA
binding activity and related gene expression. Toxicol. Lett. 2002, 133, 33-45.
94. Pi, J.; Horiguchi, S.; Sun, Y.; Nikaido, M.; Shimojo, N.; Hayashi, T. A potential mechanism for
the impairment of nitric oxide formation caused by prolonged oral exposure to arsenate in rabbits.
Free Rad. Biol. Med. 2003, 35, 102-113.
95. Rin, K.; Kawaguchi, K.; Yamanaka, K.; Tezuka, M.; Oku, N.; Okada, S. DNA-strand breaks
induced by dimethylarsinic acid, a metabolite of inorganic arsenics, are strongly enhanced by
superoxide anion radicals. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 1995, 18, 45-58.
96. Magos, L. Epidemiological and experimental aspects of metal carcinogenesis: physicochemical
properties, kinetics, and the active species. Environ. Health Perspect. 1991, 95, 157-189.
97. Angeline, S.A.; Jefferey, L.B.; Maria, M.M.; Eugene, D.; Mary, G.W.; Joshua, W.H.; Margaret,
R.K. Arsenic exposure is associated with decreased DNA repair in vitro and in individuals
exposed to drinking water arsenic. Environ. Health Perspect. 2006, 114, 1193-1198.
98. Wen-Chien, C.; Chunfa, J.; Andrew, A.K.; Richard, J.J.; Michael, A.T.; Chi, V.D. Role of
NADPH oxidase in arsenic-induced reactive oxygen species formation and cytotoxicity in
myeloid leukemia cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2004, 101, 4578-4583.
99. Schiller, C.M.; Fowler, B.A.; Woods, J.S. Effects of arsenic on pyruvate dehydrogenase
activation. Environ. Health Perspect. 1977, 19, 205-207.
100. Nadia, E.; Garcia-Medina, M.E.; Jimenez, C.; Marc, C.; Luz, M.M.; Juan, M.D.; Charles, C.H.
Conditioned flavor aversion and brain Fos expression following exposure to arsenic. Toxicology
2007, 235, 73-82.
101. Galan, C.; Garcia, B.L.; Troyano, A.; Vilaboa, N.E.; Fernandez, C.; Blas, D.E.; Aller, P. The role
of intracellular oxidation in death induction (apoptosis and necrosis) in human promonocytic
cells treated with stress inducers (cadmium, heat, X-rays). Eur. J. Cell. Biol. 2001, 80, 312-320.
102. Watanabe, M.; Henmi, K.; Ogawa, K.; Suzuki, T. Cadmium-dependent generation of reactive
oxygen species and mitochondrial DNA breaks in photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic strains
of Euglena gracilis. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2003, 134, 227-234.
103. Casalino, E.; Calzaretti, G.; Sblano, C.; Landriscina, C. Molecular inhibitory mechanisms of
antioxidant enzymes in rat liver and kidney by cadmium. Toxicology 2002, 30, 37-50.
104. Waisberg, M.; Joseph, P.; Hale, B.; Beyersmann, D. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of
cadmium carcinogenesis. Toxicology 2003, 192, 95-117.
105. Watjen, W.; Beyersmann, D. Cadmium-induced apoptosis in C6 glioma cells: influence of
oxidative stress. Biometals 2004, 17, 65-78.
106. Ognjanovic, B.I.; Pavlovic, S.Z.; Maletic, S.D.; Zikic, R.V.; Stajn, A.S.; Radojicic, R.M.; Saicic,
Z.S.; Petrovic, V.M. Protective influence of vitamin E on antioxidant defense system in the blood
of rats treated with cadmium. Physiol. Res. 2003, 52, 563-570.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2782
107. Quig, D. Cysteine metabolism and metal toxicity. Alter. Med. Rev. 1998, 3, 262-270.
108. Flora, S.J.S. Nutritional components modify metal absorption, toxic response and chelation
therapy. J. Nutri. Environ. Med. 2002, 12, 51-65.
109. Pande, M.; Flora, S.J.S. Lead induced oxidative damage and its response to combined
administration of α-Lipoic acid and succimers in rats. Toxicology 2002, 177, 187-196.
110. Gautam, P.; Flora, S.J.S. Oral supplementation of gossypin during lead exposure protects
alteration in heme synthesis pathway and brain oxidative stress in rats. Nutrition 2010, 26,
563-570.
111. Pachauri, V.; Saxena, G.; Mehta, A.; Mishra, D.; Flora, S.J.S. Combinational chelation therapy
abrogates lead-induced neurodegeneration in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2009, 240, 255-264.
112. Flora, S.J.S.; Pande, M.; Bhadauria, S.; Kannan, G.M. Combined administration of taurine and
meso 2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in the treatment of chronic lead intoxication in rats. Hum. Exp.
Toxicol. 2004, 23, 157-166.
113. Flora, S.J.S.; Chouhan, S.; Kannan, G.M.; Mittal, M.; Swarnakar, H. Combined administration of
taurine and monoisoamyl DMSA protects arsenic induced oxidative injury in rats. Oxidat. Med.
Cell. Long. 2008, 1, 39-45.
114. Banner, W.; Koch, M.; Capin, D.M.; Hopf, S.B.; Chang, S.; Tong, T.G. Experimental chelation
therapy in chromium, lead, and boron intoxication with N-acetylcysteine and other compounds.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1986, 83, 142-147.
115. Flora, S.J.S. Arsenic induced oxidative stress and its reversibility following combined
administration of N-acetylcysteine and meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in rats. Clin. Exp.
Pharmacol. Physiol. 1999, 26, 865-869.
116. Pande, M.; Mehta, A.; Pant, B.P.; Flora, S.J.S. Combined administration of a chelating agent and
an antioxidant in the prevention and treatment of acute lead intoxication in rats. Environ. Toxicol.
Pharmacol. 2001, 9, 173-184.
117. Mittal, M.; Flora, S.J.S. Effects of individual and combined exposure to sodium arsenite and
sodium fluoride on tissue oxidative stress, arsenic and fluoride levels in male mice. Chem. Biol.
Interact. 2006, 162, 128-139.
118. Bhatt, K.; Flora, S.J.S. Oral co-administration of α- lipoic acid, quercetin and captopril prevents
gallium arsenide toxicity in rats. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2009, 240, 236-244.
119. Saxena, G.; Flora, S.J.S. Changes in brain biogenic amines and heme- biosynthesis and their
response to combined administration of succimers and Centella asiatica in lead poisoned rats. J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. 2006, 58, 547-559.
120. Flora, S.J.S. Singh, S.; Tandon, S.K. Chelation in metal intoxication XVIII: Combined effects of
thiamine and calcium disodium versenate on lead toxicity. Life Sci. 1986, 38, 67-71.
121. Flora, S.J.S. Influence of simultaneous supplementation of zinc and copper during chelation of
lead in rats. Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 1991, 10, 331-336.
122. Flora, S.J.S.; Bhattacharya, R.; Sachan, S.R.S. Dose dependent effects of zinc supplementation
during chelation treatment of lead intoxication in rats. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 1994, 74, 330-333.
123. Flora, S.J.S.; Tandon, S.K. Beneficial effects of zinc supplementation during chelation treatment
of lead intoxication in rats. Toxicology 1990, 64,129-139.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2783
124. Modi, M.; Pathak, U.; Kalia, K.; Flora, S.J.S. Arsenic antagonism studies with monoisoamyl
DMSA and zinc in male mice. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2005, 19, 131-138.
125. Paul, P.C.; Misbahuddin, M.; Ahmed, A.N.N.; Dewan, Z.F.; Mannan, M.A. Accumulation of
arsenic in tissues of iron-deficient rats. Toxicol. Lett. 2000, 135, 193-197.
126. Flora, S.J.S.; Singh, S.; Tandon, S.K. Thiamine and zinc in prevention or therapy of lead
intoxication. J. Inter. Med. Res. 1989, 17, 68-75.
127. Cerklewski, F.L. Post-absorptive effect at increased dietary zinc on toxicity and removal of tissue
lead in rats. J. Nutr. 1984, 114, 550-554.
128. Kreppel, H.; Liu, J.; Liu, Y.; Reichl, F.X.; Klaassen, C.D. Zinc-induced arsenite tolerance in
mice. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 1994, 23, 32-37.
129. Flora, S.J.S.; Gubrelay, U.; Kannan, G.M.; Mathur, R. Effect of zinc supplementation during
chelating agent administration in cadmium intoxication in rats. J. Appl. Toxicol. 1998, 18,
357-362.
130. Jones, M.M.; Singh, P.K.; Gale, G.R.; Atkins, L.M.; Smith, A.B. Esters of meso dimercapto-
succinic acid as cadmium mobilizing agent. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1988, 95,
507-514.
131. Schroeter, H.; Boyd, C.; Spencer, J.P.E.; Williams, R.J.; Cadenas, E.; Rice-Evans, C. MAPK
signaling in neurodegeneration: influences of flavonoids and of nitric oxide. Neurobiol. Aging
2002, 23, 861-880.
132. Mishra, D.; Flora, S.J.S. Quercetin administration during chelation therapy protects arsenic
induced oxidative stress in mouse. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 2008, 122, 137-147.
133. Tandon, S.K.; Singh, S.; Prasad, S.; Khandekar, K.; Dwivedi, V.K.; Chatterjee, M.; Mathur, N.
Reversal of cadmium induced oxidative stress by chelating agent, antioxidant or their
combination in rat. Toxicol. Lett. 2003, 145, 211-217.
134. Shaikh, Z.A.; Zaman, K.; Tang, W.; Thanhtam Z.V. Treatment of chronic cadmium
nephrotoxicity by N-acetyl cysteine. Toxicol. Lett. 1999, 104, 137-142.
135. Kadima, W.; Rabenstein, D.L. Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the solution chemistry of
metal complexes. Mixed ligand complexes of cadmium, nitrilotriacetic acid, glutathione, and
related ligands. J. Inorg. Biochem. 1990, 38, 277-288.
136. Nagasaki, H.; Nakano, H.; Boudjeina, K.; Jaeck, D.; Alexandre, E.; Baek, Y.; Kitamura, N.;
Yamaguchi, M.; Kumada, K. Efficacy of preconditioning with N-acetylcysteine against
reperfusion injury after prolonged cold ischemia in rats liver in which glutathione had been
reduced by buthionine sulphoximine. Eur. J. Surg. 1998, 164, 139-146.
137. Kazantzis, G. Diagnosis and treatment of metal poisoning-General aspect. In Handbook on the
Toxicology of Metals; Friberg, G., Nordberg, G.F., Vouk, V.B., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherland, 1990; pp. 302-317.
138. Finkelstein, Y.; Markowitz, M.; Rosen, J. Low level lead induced neurotoxicity in children: an
update on central nervous system effects. Br. Res. Rev. 1998, 27, 168-176.
139. Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young Children: a Statement by the Centers for Disease Control
Atlanta, GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Atlanta, GA, USA, 1991.
140. Jaffe, E.K. Porphobilnogen synthase, the first source of heme asymmetry. J. Bioenerg.
Biomembra. 1995, 27, 169-179.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2784
141. Wetmur, J.G. Influence of the common human δ-aminolevulinate dehydratase polymorphism on
lead body burden. Environ. Hlth. Perspect. 1994, 102, 215-219.
142. Gurer, H.; Ozgunes, H.; Neal, R.; Spitz, D.R.; Ercal, N. Antioxidant effects of N-acetyl cysteine
and succimer in red blood cells from lead exposed rats. Toxicology 1998, 128, 181-189.
143. Sandhir, R.; Gill, K.D. Effect of lead on lipid peroxidation in liver of rats. Biol. Trace Elem. Res.
1995, 48, 91-97.
144. Flora, S.J.S. Lead in the environment: prevention and treatment. J. Environ. Biol. 2002, 23, 29-44.
145. Stohs, S.T.; Bagchi, D. Oxidative mechanism in the toxicity of metal ions. Free Rad. Biol. Med.
1995, 18, 321-336.
146. Ercal, N.; Gurer-Orhan, H.; Aykin-Burns, N. Toxic metals and oxidative stress part I:
mechanisms involved in metal-induced oxidative damage. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2001, 1,
529-539.
147. Flora, S.J.S.; Pant, B.P.; Tripathi, N.; Kannan, G.M.; Jaiswal, D.K. Distribution of arsenic by
diesters of meso 2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic acid during sub-chronic intoxication in rats. J. Occup.
Health 1997, 39, 119-123.
148. Ercal, N.; Treratphan, P.; Hammond, T.C.; Mathews, R.H.; Grannemann, N.H.; Spitz, D.R. In
vivo indices of oxidative stress in lead exposed C57BL/6 mice are reduced by treatment with
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid or N-acetyl cysteine. Free Rad. Biol. Med. 1996, 21, 157-161.
149. Zhang, J.; Wang, X.F.; Lu, Z.B.; Liu, N.O.; Zhao, B.L. The effects of
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid and oligomeric procyanidins on acute lead neurotoxicity in rat
hippocampus. Free Rad. Biol. Med. 2004, 37, 1037-1050.
150. ATSDR Toxicological Profile for Arsenic; Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry,
ATSDR/PB/2000/108021, US Public Health Service: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2000.
151. Duxbury, J.M.; Mayer, A.B.; Lauren, J.G.; Hassan, N. Food chain aspects of arsenic
contamination in Bangladesh: effects on quality and productivity of rice. J. Environ. Sci. Hlth. A
Tox. Hazard Subst. Environ. Eng. 2003, 38, 61-69.
152. Smedley, P.L.; Kinniburgh, D.G. A review of the source, behavior and distribution of arsenic in
natural waters. Appl. Geochem. 2001, 17, 517-568.
153. UN Synthesis Report, Arsenic in Drinking Water; United Nations: Geneva, Switzerland, 2001.
154. Smith, A.H.; Arroyo, A.P.; Mazumdar, D.N. Arsenic-induced skin lesions among Atacameno
people in northern Chile despite good nutrition and centuries of exposure. Environ. Hea.
Perspect. 2000, 108, 617-620.
155. Tchounwou, P.B.; Patlolla, A.K.; Centeno, J.A. Carcinogenic and systemic health effects
associated with arsenic exposure-a critical review. Toxicol. Pathol. 2003, 31, 575-588.
156. Chowdhury, U.K.; Biswas, B.K.; Chowdhury, T.R.; Samanta, G.; Mandal, B.K.; Basu, G.C.;
Chanda, C.R.; Lodh, D.; Saha, K.C.; Mukherjee, S.K.; Roy, S.; Kabir, S.; Quamruzzaman, Q.;
Chakraborti, D. Groundwater arsenic contamination in Bangladesh and West Bengal, India.
Environ. Hlth. Perspect. 2000, 108, 393-397.
157. Bode, A.M.; Dong, Z. The paradox of arsenic: molecular mechanisms of cell transformation and
chemotherapeutic effects. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 2002, 42, 5-24.
158. Wang, Y.P.; Zhu, H.G.; Zhang, Z.Y. Preliminary study on arsenic trioxide induced Tca8113 cell
apoptosis. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue 2002, 11, 343-345.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2785
159. Gubrelay, U.; Mathur, R.; Flora, S.J.S. Treatment of arsenic poisoning: an update. Ind. J.
Pharmacol. 1998, 30, 209-217.
160. Guha Mazumder, D.N.; Ghoshal, U.C.; Saha, J.; Santra, A.; De, B.K.; Chatterjee, A.; Dutta, S.;
Angle, C.R.; Centeno, J.A. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid
in therapy of chronic arsenicosis due to drinking arsenic-contaminated subsoil water. J. Toxicol.
Clin. Toxicol. 1998, 36, 683-690.
161. Suwazono, Y.; Kido, T.; Nakagawa, H.; Nishijo, M.; Honda, R.; Kobayashi, E.; Dochi, M.;
Nogawa, K. Biological half-life of cadmium in the urine of inhabitants after cessation of
cadmium exposure. Biomarkers 2009, 14, 77-81.
162. Mandel, J.S.; McLaughlin, J.K.; Schlehofer, B.; Mellemgaard, A.; Helmuert, U.; Linbald, R.;
McCredie, M.; Adami, U. International renal-cell cancer study. IV. Occupation. Int. J. Cancer
1995, 61, 601-605.
163. Waalkes, M.P.; Misra, R.R. Cadmium carcinogenicity and genotoxicity. In Toxicology of Metals;
Chang, L., Ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1996; pp. 231-244.
164. IARC, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Beryllium, cadmium, mercury, and
exposures in the glass manufacturing industry. In International Agency for Research on Cancer
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans; IARC Scientific Publications:
Lyon, France, 1993; Volume 58, pp. 119-237.
165. Goyer, R.A.; Cherian, M.G. Renal effects of metals. In Metal Toxicology; Goyer, R.A., Klaassen,
C.D., Waalkes, M.P., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA, USA, 1995; pp. 389-412.
166. Sheweita, S.A. Heavy metal-induced changes in the glutathione levels and glutathione
reductase/glutathione S-transferase in the liver of male mice. Int. J. Toxicol. 1998, 17, 383-392.
167. Kelley, C.; Sargent, D.E.; Uno, J.K. Cadmium therapeutic agents. Curr. Pharm. Des. 1999, 5,
229-240.
168. Liu, F.; Jan, K.Y. DNA damage in arsenite- and cadmium-treated bovine aortic endothelial cells.
Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2000, 28, 55-63.
169. Bagchi, D.; Vuchetich, P.J.; Bagchi, M.; Hassoun, E.A.; Tran, M.X.; Tang, L.; Stohs, S.J.
Induction of oxidative stress by chronic administration of sodium dichromate and cadmium
chloride to rats. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1997, 22, 471-478.
170. Shaikh, Z.A.; Vu, T.T.; Zaman, K. Oxidative stress as a mechanism of chronic cadmium-induced
hepatotoxicity and renal toxicity and protection by antioxidants. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1999,
154, 256-263.
171. Ramirez, D.C.; Gimenez, M.S. Induction of redox changes, inducible nitric oxide synthase and
cyclooxygenase-2 by chronic cadmium exposure in mouse peritoneal macrophages. Toxicol. Lett.
2003, 145, 121-132.
172. Waisberg, M.; Joseph, P.; Hale, B.; Beyersmann, D. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of
cadmium carcinogenesis. Toxicology 2003, 192, 95-117.
173. Yamano, T.; DeCicco, L.A.; Rikans, L.E. Attenuation of cadmium-induced liver injury in
senescent male Fischer 344 rats: role of Kupffer cells and inflammatory cytokines. Toxicol. Appl.
Pharmacol. 2000, 162, 68-75.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2786
174. Belyaeva, E.A.; Dymkowska, D.; Wieckowski, M.R.; Wojtczak, L. Mitochondria as an important
target in heavy metal toxicity in rat hepatoma AS-30D cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2008,
231, 34-42.
175. Dorta, D.J.; Leite, S.; DeMarco, K.C.; Prado, I.M.; Rodrigues, T.; Mingatto, F.E.; Uyemura,
S.A.; Santos, A.C.; Curti, C. A proposed sequence of events for cadmium induced mitochondrial
impairment. J. Inorg. Biochem. 2003, 97, 251-257.
176. Ali, M.M.; Lal, B.; Mathur, N.; Chandra, S.V. Behavioral toxicity of cadmium in rats in relation
to the level of protein nutrition. Nutr. Res. 1991, 11, 325.
177. Klaassen, C.D.; Liu, J. Role of metallothionein in cadmium-induced hepatotoxicity and
nephrotoxicity. Drug Metab. Rev. 1997, 29, 79-102.
178. Amler, S. Liquid mercury: a poisonous plaything. Contemp. Pediatr. 2002, 19, 37-56.
179. Risher, J.F.; Nickle, R.A.; Amler, S.N. Elemental mercury poisoning in occupational and
residential settings: two case studies. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Hlth. 2003, 206, 371-379.
180. Patterson, J.E.; Weissberg, B.G.; Dennison, P.J. Mercury in human breath from dental amalgams.
Bull Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 1985, 34, 459-468.
181. Bjorkman, L.; Lundekvam, B.F.; Laegreid, T.; Bertelsen, B.I.; Morild, I.; Lilleng, P. Mercury in
human brain, blood, muscle and toenails in relation to exposure: an autopsy study. Environ.
Health 2007, 6, 30.
182. Goyer, R.A.; Clarkson, T.W. Toxic effects of metals. In Casarett & Doull’s Toxicology: the
Basic of Poisons, 6th ed.; Klaassen, C.D., Ed.; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 2001;
pp. 822-826.
183. Geier, D.A.; Sykes, L.K.; Geier, M.R. A review of thimerosal (merthiolate) and its ethyl mercury
breakdown product: specific historical considerations regarding safety and effectiveness. J.
Toxicol. Environ. Health B Crit. Rev. 2007, 10, 575-596.
184. Clarkson, T.W. The pharmacology of mercury compounds. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. 1972, 12,
375-406.
185. Lorscheider, F.L.; Vimy, M.J.; Summers, A.O. Mercury exposure from “silver” tooth fillings:
emerging evidence questions a traditional dental paradigm. FASEB J. 1995, 9, 504-508.
186. Hultberg, B.; Anderson, A.; Isaksson, A. Interaction of metals and thiols in cell damage and
glutathione distribution: potentiation of mercury toxicity by dithiothreitol. Toxicology 2001, 156,
93-100.
187. McGoldrick, T.A.; Lock, E.A.; Rodilla, V.; Hawksworth, G.M. Renal cysteine conjugate C-S
lyase mediated toxicity of halogenated alkenes in primary cultures of human and rat proximal
tubular cells. Arch. Toxicol. 2003, 77, 365-370.
188. Gonzalez, P.; Dominique, Y.; Massabuau, J.C.; Boudou, A.; Bourdineaud, J.P. Comparative
effects of dietary methyl mercury on gene expression in liver, skeletal muscle, and brain of the
zebra fish (Danio rerio). Environ. Sci. Technol. 2005, 39, 3972-3980.
189. Sarafian, T.A.; Bredesen, D.E.; Verity, M.A. Cellular resistance to methylmercury.
Neurotoxicology 1996, 17, 27-36.
190. Blanusa, M.; Varnai, V.M.; Piasek, M.; Kostial, K. Chelators as antidotes of metal toxicity:
Therapeutic and Experimental Aspects. Curr. Med. Chem. 2005, 12, 2771-2794.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2787
191. Gonzalez-Ramirez, D.; Zuniga-Charles, M.; Narro-Juarez, A.; Molina-Recio, Y.; Hurlbut, K.M.;
Dart, R.C.; Aposhian, H.V. DMPS (2,3-dimercaptopropane-1-sulfonate, dimaval) decreases the
body burden of mercury in humans exposed to mercurous chloride. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
1998, 287, 8-12.
192. Lund, M.E.; Banner, W., Jr.; Clarkson, T.W.; Berlin, M. Treatment of acute methylmercury
ingestion by hemodialysis with N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) infusion and
2,3-dimercaptopropane sulfonate. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 1984, 22, 31-49.
193. Rassmusen, M.; Folsom, A.R.; Catellier, D.J.; Tsai, M.; Garg, U.; Eckfeldt, J.H. A prospective
study of coronary heart disease and the hemochromatosis gene (HFE) C282Y mutation: the
atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study. Atherosclerosis 2001, 154, 739-746.
194. Parikkila, S.; Niemela, O.; Savolainen, E.R.; Koistinen, P. HFE mutation do not account for
trnasfusional iron overload in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Transfusion 2001, 41,
828-831.
195. Berg, D.; Gerlach, M.; Youdim, M.B.; Double, K.L.; Zecca, L.; Riederer, P.; Becker, G. Brain
iron pathways and their relevance to Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem. 2001, 79, 225-236.
196. Li, J.; Zhu, Y.; Singhal, D.P. HFE gene mutation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J.
Rhematol. 2000, 27, 2074-2077.
197. Tenenbein, M. Hepatotoxicity in acute iron poisoning. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 2001, 39,
721-726.
198. Salahudeen, A.K.; Oliver, B.; Bower, J.D.; Roberts, L.J. Increase in plasma esterified
F2-isoprostanes following intravenous iron infusion in patients on hemodialysis. Kidney Int.
2001, 11, 539-549.
199. Ponka, P.; Tenenbein, M.; Eaton, J.W. Iron. In Handbook on the Toxicology of Metals, 3rd ed.;
Nordberg, G.F., Fowler, B.A., Nordberg, M., Friberg, L., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA,
USA, 2007; pp. 577-598.
200. Kontoghiorghes, G.J. Comparative efficacy and toxicity of desferioxamine, deferiprone and other
iron and aluminium chelating drugs. Toxicol. Lett. 1995, 80, 1-18.
201. Kontoghiorghes, G.J.; Kolnagou, A. Effective new treatment of iron overload in the lassaemia
using the ICOC combination therapy protocol of deferiprone (L1) and deferoxamine and of new
chelating drugs. Haematologica 2006, 91, 34-35.
202. Stumpf, J.L. Deferasirox. Am. J. Health Syst. Pharm. 2007, 64, 606-616.
203. Flora, S.J.S.; Mittal, M.; Mehta, A. Heavy metal induced oxidative stress & its possible reversal
by chelation therapy. Ind. J. Med. Res. 2008, 128, 501-523.
204. Pachauri, P.; Saxena, G.; Mehta, A.; Mishra, D.; Flora, S.J.S. Combinational chelation therapy
abrogates lead induced neurodegeneration in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2009, 240, 255-265.
205. Flora, S.J.S.; Pande, M.; Mehta, A. Beneficial effect of combined administration of some
naturally occurring antioxidants (vitamins) and thiol chelators in the treatment of chronic lead
intoxication. Chem. Biol. Inter. 2003, 145, 267-280.
206. Pande, M.; Flora, S.J.S. Lead induced oxidative damage and its response to combined
administration of α-lipoic acid and succimers in rats. Toxicology 2002, 177, 187-196.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7 2788
207. Kannan, G.M.; Flora, S.J.S. Combined administration of n-acetyl cysteine and monoisoamyl
DMSA on tissue oxidative stress during arsenic chelation therapy. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 2006,
110, 43-59.
208. Modi, M.; Flora, S.J.S. Combined administration of iron and monoisoamyl DMSA in the
treatment of chronic arsenic intoxication in mice. Cell. Biol. Toxicol. 2007, 23, 429-443.
209. Saxena, G.; Flora, S.J.S. Changes in brain biogenic amines and heme- biosynthesis and their
response to combined administration of succimer and Centella asiatica in lead poisoned rats. J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. 2006, 58, 547-559.
210. Mishra, D.; Gupta, R.; Pant, S.C.; Kushwah, P.; Satish, H.T.; Flora, S.J.S. Therapeutic potential
of combined administration of MiADMSA and Moringa oleifera seed powder on arsenic induced
oxidative stress and metal distribution in mouse. Toxicol. Mechanism Meth. 2008, 19, 169-182.
211. Flora, S.J.S.; Mehta, A.; Gupta, R. Prevention of arsenic-induced hepatic apoptosis by
concomitant administration of garlic extracts in mice. Chem. Biol. Inter. 2009, 177, 227-233.
© 2010 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an Open Access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
