© 2013 Imai et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
International Journal of General Medicine 2013:6 575–579
International Journal of General Medicine
An autopsy case of pulmonary fissure induced
by zygomycosis
Yuichiro Imai1
Yasushi Adachi2,3
Takashi Kimura4
Chikara Nakano5
Toshiki Shimizu4
Ming Shi2
Mitsuhiko Okigaki6
Tomohiko Shimo1
Kazunari Kaneko1
Susumu Ikehara2
1
Department of Pediatrics,
Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
2
Department of Stem Cell Disorders,
Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
3
Division of Clinical Pathology,
Toyooka Hospital, Hyogo, 4
First
Department of Internal Medicine,
Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
5
Second Department of Internal
Medicine, Kansai Medical University,
Osaka, 6
Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Correspondence: Susumu Ikehara
Department of Stem Cell
Disorders, Kansai Medical
University, 10-15 Fumizono-cho,
Moriguchi City, Japan 570-8506
Tel +81 6 6992 1001 ext 2470
Fax +81 6 6994 8283
Email ikehara@takii.kmu.ac.jp
Abstract: For immunodeficient patients, fungi are life-threatening pathogens. In this paper,
we present an autopsy case of combined zygomycosis and aspergillosis. A female in her 70s on
chronic hemodialysis was admitted to a hospital suffering bloody sputum, dyspnea, and fever,
probably due to perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-related vasculitis. Antibiotics
were administered and immunosuppressive therapy was started, resulting in an improvement in
her condition. Pneumonia later developed, followed by pulmonary bleeding and intractable pneu-
mothorax from which she ultimately died. On autopsy, the upper lobe of the left lung was found to
have hemorrhagic necrosis and showed a large longitudinal fissure. Microscopically, Zygomycota
were observed in both the lungs and heart, while Aspergillus was found in the middle lobe of the
right lung. Zygomycosis, which usually has a poor prognosis, is assumed to have induced hemor-
rhagic infarction of the lungs, inducing pulmonary bleeding and necrosis, despite the use of lipid
formulations of amphotericin B, which are effective medicines against Zygomycota.
Keywords: pulmonary fissure, zygomycosis, aspergillosis, lung, immunosuppression
Introduction
Fungi are responsible for life-threatening infections in patients with immunodeficiency.1
Common pathogens are Candida and Aspergillus.2
However, there has been an increase
in the number of patients with zygomycosis. This is probably due to the increased use
of immunosuppressive therapies and newly developed antifungal agents, which are
effective against Candida and Aspergillus but not against ­Zygomycota. Thus, cases
have been identified as being associated with leukemia,3
aplastic anemia,4
bone marrow
transplantation,3
diabetes mellitus,5
renal disease,6
burns,7
and corticosteroid therapy.3,7
The most common clinical zygomycosis manifestations are rhino-orbital-cerebral,
cutaneous, pulmonary, disseminated, and gastrointestinal.8
The most clinically impor-
tant Zygomycota are those of the Mucorales order, which are widespread in nature.
The likelihood of infection following ingestion or inhalation depends on the host’s
resistance mechanisms rather than on the number of infectious particles.8
Pulmonary
zygomycosis has been reported in immunodeficient patients, with extremely poor
prognosis.9
In this paper, we present an autopsy case of combined zygomycosis and aspergil-
losis associated with immunosuppressive therapy.
Case report
A female patient in her 70s on chronic hemodialysis due to chronic renal failure
presented with bloody sputum, dyspnea, and fever. This was the first episode of these
Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
575
C ase R eport
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/IJGM.S44701
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
International Journal of General Medicine
10 July 2013
International Journal of General Medicine 2013:6
symptoms she had experienced. As her condition worsened,
she was admitted to hospital 3 days after the onset of the
disease. She was diagnosed with pulmonary bleeding, prob-
ably due to perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
(p-ANCA)-related vasculitis, as she was positive for p-ANCA
(138 U/mL [normal ,9.0 U/mL]). Consolidation of the upper
lobes in the bilateral lungs was found in her chest X-ray and
computed tomography image (Figure 1). Cultures of sputum
and blood were negative. ­Plasmapheresis, steroid pulse, and
administration of azathioprine and ­antibiotics (meropenem,
sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, and fluconazole) were car-
ried out. Her dyspnea improved and C-reactive protein (CRP),
which was 7.7 mg/dL on admission, gradually decreased to
2.2 mg/dL by 2 weeks following admission. Consolidation
areas of the lungs also decreased (Figure 1).
Subsequently, the pulmonary bleeding reappeared
and dyspnea developed, probably due to pneumonia.
­Pneumothorax occurred (Figure 1) and she needed mechani-
cal ventilation. Three weeks after admission, she developed
pneumonia (Figure 1) and the CRP titer increased again.
Candida species were detected on blood culture at 21 days
after admission. Micafungin was started, replacing the
­fluconazole. Twenty-five days after admission, levofloxacin
and lipid formulations of amphotericin B (AMB) were also
started.
However, her dyspnea continued to develop and she died 4
weeks following her admission. Beta-D-glucan was negative
in her serum until 21 days after her admission, but increased
to 35.2 pg/mL at 26 days after her admission. p-ANCA
gradually decreased during her hospitalization until it finally
reached the normal range 2 days before her death.
Pathology report
Four hours after her death, an autopsy was carried out.There
were some purpuras on the skin.
Macroscopic examination
Both lungs were found to show congestion and edema; the
weights of the left and right lung were 550 g and 640 g,
respectively (Figure 2). Most of the upper lobe of the left
lung displayed hemorrhagic necrosis and there was a 9 cm
long longitudinal fissure in the lobe. Cavities were found in
the middle lobe of the right lung. Bloody pleural effusion
in bilateral thoracic cavities and thickening of pleura in the
left lung were observed. There was no significant disorder
in the heart. The weight of the left kidney was 15 g; this was
assumed the result of hypoplasia. The weight of the right
kidney was 48 g. The kidney cortex was thin – 1 mm in the
left kidney and 2 mm in the right.
Microscopic examination
Massive bleeding in most alveoli and a large necrotic area
were observed in the upper lobe of the left lung. Non-septate
irregularly branched hyphae of Zygomycota existed in the
bilateral lungs and heart (Figures 3 and 4). The hyphae
were frequently observed around and within the blood
vessels, causing obstruction and thromboembolization of
blood vessels, which turned into hemorrhagic infarction
Day of
hospital admission Days after hospitalization
15 18 27
Figure 1 Changes in the chest X-rays and chest computed tomography (CT) images of the patient. Chest X-rays and CT images at hospitalization and at 15, 18, and 27 days
after hospitalization are shown.
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
576
Imai et al
International Journal of General Medicine 2013:6
and necrosis of the adjacent tissue in the bilateral lung. In
particular, in the upper lobe of the left lung, the hyphae
existed not only around and within the blood vessels but
also in the alveoli.
In the wall of the cavity in the middle lobe of the right lung,
there were numerous basophilic septate hyphae withY-shaped
branching, suggesting that these hyphae were Aspergillus
(Figure 4A and B). Zygomycota hyphae were observed around
and within the blood vessels in the muscle layer of the left ven-
tricle of the heart (Figure 4C and D). Many inflammatory cells
had also infiltrated the cardiac muscle layer around the blood
vessels. Therefore, vasculitis, thrombosis, and myocarditis
caused by Zygomycota were observed in the left ventricle of
the heart. Small necrotic areas of cardiac muscle were also
observed. Glomerular sclerosis was observed in most of the
glomeruli of both kidneys, suggesting that the kidneys were
in the end stage. Chronic thyroiditis was also observed. We
did not find any evidence of candidiasis.
Discussion
In this paper, we have presented an autopsy case of combined
zygomycosis and aspergillosis in an immunodeficient patient
that was caused by immunosuppressive therapy.
Although fungi are widespread in nature, lethal infec-
tion with fungi is very rare in healthy persons. However,
infectious fungal diseases are sometimes lethal in those who
are immunodeficient. Recently, a number of protocols to
detect fungi have been developed. These include the detec-
tion of the specific sequence of fungal DNA, the detection
of serum β-D-glucan, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays. However, although serum β-D-glucan increases
in Candida or Aspergillus infections, it does not do so in
Zygomycota.10
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays have
also been developed for Candida and Aspergillus but not
for Zygomycota.11
Therefore, it is very difficult to confirm
Zygomycota infections.
Pharmaceutical agents for fungi have also been devel-
oped, including voriconazole, itraconazole, and so on.12
These medicines are easier to use than AMB due to the
Figure 2 Macroscopic examination of the lungs. Congestion and edema were
observed in the lungs bilaterally – (A) left lung, (B) right lung. The upper lobe of the
left lung showed hemorrhagic necrosis and a longitudinal fissure of approximately
9 cms long (arrows). The lower lobe of the left lung showed severe thickening of the
pleura. Several cavities were observed in the middle lobe of the right lung and the
inner wall of the cavities was yellow ochre in color and solid.
Figure 3 Microscopic examination of the lungs.The hyphae of Zygomycota were
frequently observed around and within the blood vessels causing obstruction
and thromboembolization of blood vessels. Non-septated, irregularly branched
hyphae of Zygomycota observed used a high power field are shown in (C and D).
The specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin stain in (A and C), while
those in (B and D) were stained with Grocott’s methenamine silver stain.
Notes: Magnification: (A and B), ×20; (C and D), ×100.
Figure 4 Microscopic examination of cavities in the middle lobe of the right lung
and the heart. The hyphae of Aspergillus were observed in the wall of cavities in
the middle lobe of the right lung (A and B). The hyphae show basophilic fungus
bodies and Y-shaped branching. The hyphae of Zygomycota were observed around
and within the blood vessels in the muscle layer of the left ventricle of the heart
(C and D). In the blood vessels, thrombi were observed. Many inflammatory cells
had infiltrated the blood vessels, suggesting that the Zygomycota infection induced
vasculitis, thrombosis, and fungal myocarditis.
Notes: Magnification: (A), ×10 (hematoxylin and eosin stain); (B), ×100 (Grocott’s
methenamine silver stain); (C), ×20 (Grocott’s methenamine silver stain); (D), ×60
(Grocott’s methenamine silver stain).
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
577
Pulmonary fissure induced by zygomycosis
International Journal of General Medicine 2013:6
lower incidence of side effects and are therefore used pro-
phylactically during therapy for malignancies. Zygomycota
are resistant to most antifungal agents that are active against
invasive aspergillosis and are increasingly encountered as
breakthrough infections in patients who are receiving antifun-
gal agents active against Candida and Aspergillus species.13–15
Only AMB deoxycholate (including lipid formulations of
AMB [LAMB]) and the newer triazole, posaconazole, are
active against zygomycosis.16,17
It has also been reported
that delayed administration of AMB significantly increases
mortality in patients with zygomycosis.18
In our case, we
also used LAMB. However, LAMB was started 10 days after
emergence of the patient’s second dyspnea (25 days after her
admission), which may have been too late to suppress the
activity of the Zygomycota.
During the autopsy, hemorrhagic necrosis was seen to
have developed in the left lung due to the infarction of the pul-
monary blood vessels induced by Zygomycota.The left lung
had become very fragile, allowing a fissure to be induced,
followed by intractable pneumothorax. It has been reported
that Zygomycota tend to invade the blood vessels then induce
infarction;19
our case was in line with this report.
In our case, p-ANCA was positive in the serum of the
patient at admission. However, we did not confirm the pres-
ence of any vasculitis except for that induced by the zygo-
mycosis, and p-ANCA became negative 2 days before her
death, suggesting that the p-ANCA-associated vasculitis had
been successfully treated by plasmapheresis, steroid pulse,
and azathioprine. Until 2 weeks after the patient’s admis-
sion, CRP had decreased and her condition had improved.
­Therefore, it was thought that the zygomycosis developed
2 weeks after her admission. It has been reported that hemo-
dialysis is associated with immunodeficiency.20
In this case,
the steroid therapy, azathioprine, and plasmapheresis may
have decreased the serum level of p-ANCA and improved
the vasculitis, but accelerated the immunodeficiency, which
may have induced the fungal infection.
Conclusion
In this report, we have described a case of combined Zygo-
mycota and Aspergillus infection in a dialysis patient treated
with immunosuppressive therapy.As previously described,18
even LAMB is not enough to suppress the activity of Zygo-
mycota in an immunodeficient patient.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Mr J Lee, Mr K Okano, Mr H Hongo,
Mr H Egawa (Department of Anatomical Pathology, Kansai
Medical University), MrY Kinoshita, Mr K Ichibe (Surgical
Pathology, Kansai Medical University – Takii Hospital),
Mr H Kawakami, Ms H Ogaki, Mr K Nagaoka, Mr T Kuge
(Department of Laboratory,Tyooka Hospital) for their expert
technical assistance and also thank Mr Hilary Eastwick-Field
and Ms KAndo (Department of Stem Cell Disorders, Kansai
Medical University) for manuscript preparation.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Bodey G, Bueltmann B, Duguid W, et al. Fungal infections in cancer
patients: an international autopsy survey. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
Dis. 1992;11(2):99–109.
	 2.	 Gonzalez CE, Couriel DE, Walsh TJ. Disseminated zygomycosis in
a neutropenic patient: successful treatment with amphotericin B lipid
complex and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Clin Infect Dis.
1997;24(2):192–196.
	 3.	 Oliver MR, Van Voorhis WC, Boeckh M, Mattson D, Bowden RA.
Hepatic mucormycosis in a bone marrow transplant recipient who
ingested naturopathic medicine. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;22(3):521–524.
	 4.	 Weitzman I, Della-Latta P, Housey G, Rebatta G. Mucor ramosis-
simus Samutsevitsch isolated from a thigh lesion. J Clin Microbiol.
1993;31(9):2523–2525.
	 5.	 CostaAR, Porto E,Tayah M, et al. Subcutaneous mucormycosis caused
by Mucor hiemalis Wehmer f. luteus (Linnemann) Schipper 1973.
Mycoses. 1990;33(5):241–246.
	 6.	 Fergie JE, Fitzwater DS, Einstein P, Leggiadro RJ. Mucor peritonitis
associated with acute peritoneal dialysis. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1992;
11(6):498–500.
	 7.	 Zabel DD. Mycotic infection with mucormycosis. Del Med J. 1997;
69(9):459–463.
	 8.	 Roden MM, Zaoutis TE, Buchanan WL, et al. Epidemiology and out-
come of zygomycosis: a review of 929 reported cases. Clin Infect Dis.
2005;41(5):634–653.
	 9.	 Pagano L, Ricci P, Tonso A, et al. Mucormycosis in patients with
haematological malignancies: a retrospective clinical study of 37 cases.
GIMEMA Infection Program (Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche
Maligne dell’Adulto). Br J Haematol. 1997;99(2):331–336.
	10.	 LauA, Chen S, Sleiman S, SorrellT. Current status and future perspec-
tives on molecular and serological methods in diagnostic mycology.
Future Microbiol. 2009;4(9):1185–1222.
	11.	 Arendrup MC, Fisher BT, Zaoutis TE. Invasive fungal infections in
the paediatric and neonatal population: diagnostics and management
issues. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2009;15(7):613–624.
	12.	 Siwek GT, Dodgson KJ, de Magalhaes-Silverman M, et al. Invasive
zygomycosis in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients receiving
voriconazole prophylaxis. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39(4):584–587.
	13.	 Pappas PG, Alexander BD, Andes DR, et al. Invasive fungal infections
among organ transplant recipients: results of theTransplant-Associated
Infection Surveillance Network (TRANSNET). Clin Infect Dis. 2010;
50(8):1101–1111.
	14.	 Imhof A, Balajee SA, Fredricks DN, Englund JA, Marr KA.
­Breakthrough fungal infections in stem cell transplant recipients receiv-
ing voriconazole. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39(5):743–746.
	15.	 Kontoyiannis DP, Lionakis MS, Lewis RE, et al. Zygomycosis in a
tertiary-care cancer center in the era of Aspergillus-active antifungal
therapy: a case-control observational study of 27 recent cases. J Infect
Dis. 2005;191(8):1350–1360.
	16.	 Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE. Invasive zygomycosis: update on patho-
genesis, clinical manifestations, and management. Infect Dis Clin North
Am. 2006;20(3):581–607.
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
578
Imai et al
International Journal of General Medicine
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/international-journal-of-general-medicine-journal
The International Journal of General Medicine is an international,
peer-reviewed open-access journal that focuses on general and internal
medicine, pathogenesis, epidemiology, diagnosis, monitoring and treat-
ment protocols. The journal is characterized by the rapid reporting of
reviews, original research and clinical studies across all disease areas.
A key focus is the elucidation of disease processes and management
protocols resulting in improved outcomes for the patient.The manu-
script management system is completely online and includes a very
quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
International Journal of General Medicine 2013:6
	17.	 van Burik JA, Hare RS, Solomon HF, Corrado ML, Kontoyiannis DP.
Posaconazole is effective as salvage therapy in zygomycosis: a retro-
spective summary of 91 cases. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;42(7):e61–e65.
	18.	 Chamilos G, Lewis RE, Kontoyiannis DP. Delaying amphotericin
B-based frontline therapy significantly increases mortality among
patients with hematologic malignancy who have zygomycosis. Clin
Infect Dis. 2008;47(4):503–509.
	19.	 Roden MM, Zaoutis TE, Buchanan WL, et al. Epidemiology and out-
come of zygomycosis: a review of 929 reported cases. Clin Infect Dis.
2005;41(5):634–653.
	20.	 Birkeland SA. Uremia as a state of immune deficiency. Scand J
­Immunol. 1976;5(1–2):107–115.
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
579
Pulmonary fissure induced by zygomycosis
