This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 1
International Journal of Integrated Care – ISSN 1568-4156
Volume 10, 27 September 2010
URL:http://www.ijic.org
URN:NBN:NL:UI:10-1-100969
Publisher: Igitur, Utrecht Publishing & Archiving Services
Copyright:
Research and Theory
Evaluation of UK Integrated Care Pilots: research protocol
Tom Ling, Director, Evaluation and Audit, RAND Europe, Westbrook Centre, Westbrook Centre, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4
1YG, UK
Martin Bardsley, Head of Research, Nuffield Trust, 59 New Cavendish Street, London W1G 7LP, UK
John Adams, Senior Statistician, RAND Health, 1776 Main Street, Santa Monica, CA 90401-3208, USA
Richard Lewis, Partner, Ernst and Young LLP, 1 More London Place, London SE1 2AF, UK
Martin Roland, Professor of Health Services Research, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2
0SR, UK
Correspondence to: Martin Roland, Professor of Health Services Research, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0SR, UK, Phone: +44 1223 330329, Fax: +44 1223 762515, E-mail: mr108@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Background: In response to concerns that the needs of the aging population for well-integrated care were increasing, the English National
Health Service (NHS) appointed 16 Integrated Care Pilots following a national competition. The pilots have a range of aims including
development of new organisational structures to support integration, changes in staff roles, reducing unscheduled emergency hospital
admissions, reduced length of hospital stay, increasing patient satisfaction, and reducing cost. This paper describes the evaluation of the
initiative which has been commissioned.
Study design and data collection methods: A mixed methods approach has been adopted including interviews with staff and patients,
non-participant observation of meetings, structured written feedback from sites, questionnaires to patients and staff, and analysis of rou-
tinely collected hospital utilisation data for patients/service users. The qualitative analysis aims to identify the approaches taken to integra-
tion by the sites, the benefits which result, the context in which benefits have resulted, and the mechanisms by which they occur.
Methods of analysis: The quantitative analysis adopts a ‘difference in differences’ approach comparing health care utilisation before
and after the intervention with risk-matched controls. The qualitative data analysis adopts a ‘theory of change’ approach in which we
triangulate data from the quantitative analysis with qualitative data in order to describe causal effects (what happens when an independent
variable changes) and causal mechanisms (what connects causes to their effects). An economic analysis will identify what incremental
resources are required to make integration succeed and how they can be combined efficiently to produce better outcomes for patients.
Conclusion: This evaluation will produce a portfolio of evidence aimed at strengthening the evidence base for integrated care, and in par-
ticular identifying the context in which interventions are likely to be effective. These data will support a series of evaluation judgements
aimed at reducing uncertainties about the role of integrated care in improving the efficient and effective delivery of healthcare.
Keywords
integrated care, evaluation, protocol
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  2
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
Background
There are growing numbers of people with chronic con-
ditions with a particularly rapid rise in the number with
multiple care needs. The complex needs of people with
multiple chronic conditions require the development of
delivery systems that bring together a range of profes-
sionals and skills from both the cure and care sectors
to meet those needs. Despite this, service delivery has
developed in ways that have tended to fragment care,
both within and between sectors, through for example
structural and financial barriers dividing providers at the
primary/secondary care and at the health and social
care interface; distinct organizational and professional
cultures; and differences in terms of governance and
accountability [1].
A substantial number of evaluations have been carried
out of interventions designed to improve the integra-
tion or coordination of care. A systematic review based
on 21 reviews and 85 primary studies [2] showed that
many of these initiatives were effective in improv-
ing care, though many fewer resulted in a reduction
in healthcare costs (Table 1). One of the conclusions
of this and other reviews is that the effectiveness of
attempts to provide better integrated care is highly
dependent on the context in which the intervention
takes place. Interventions cannot be seen separated
from the context in which they are introduced, and this
has been an important guiding principle in the evalua-
tion described in this paper.
In response to concerns that the needs of the aging
population for well-integrated care were increasing,
the UK Department of Health for England announced
in 2008 that a number of ‘Integrated Care Pilots’ would
be established. Healthcare purchasers and provid-
ers were invited to submit proposals for innovative
approaches to providing better integrated care [3].
There was no specification as to the form that such
integration should take, or client groups who should
receive the intervention. There were over 100 appli-
cations, and after a two-stage selection process, the
Department of Health selected 16 pilots. The locali-
ties of selected pilots and the main focus of each are
described in Annex 1.
Table 1. Summary of the evidence on the effectiveness of interventions to improve coordination in health care, from Powell Davies et al. [2]
Main focus of intervention Proportion (%)
of studies with
positive outcome
for health
Proportion (%) of
studies with positive
outcome for health/
social care service
user satisfaction
Proportion
(%) of studies
with positive
outcome for cost
saving
Changed relationships between service providers
Structured relationships between service providers
including co-location, case management, multi-disciplinary
teams or assigning health/social care service users to a
particular PHC provider (33 studies)
19/29 (65.5%) 8/12 (66.7%) 2/12 (16.7%)
Coordination of clinical activities
Using structured arrangements for coordinating service
provision between providers, including joint consultations,
shared assessments and priority access to another clinical
service (37 studies)
19/31 (61.3%) 4/12 (33.3%) 3/15 (20%)
Improving communication between service providers
Interventions designed to improve communication between
service providers, e.g. case conferences (56 studies)
26/47 (55.3%) 12/22 (54.5%) 2/21 (14.3%)
Support for clinicians
Interventions include support or supervision for clinicians,
training (joint or relating to collaboration), and reminder
systems (33 studies)
16/28 (57.1%) 8/14 (57.1%) 1/12 (8.3%)
Information systems to support co-ordination
Using information systems to support the coordination of
care, including care plans; decision support, proformas;
health/social care service user held or shared records;
shared information or communication systems; and a
register of health/social care service users (47 studies)
23/38 (60.5%) 7/19 (36.8%) 2/13 (15.4%)
Support for health/social care service users
Interventions include education, reminders and assistance
in accessing care (19 studies)
6/17 (35.3%) 3/6 (50.0%) 1/7 (14.3%)
All studies 36/65 (55.4%) 14/31 (45.2%) 5/28 (17.9%)
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 3
A team from RAND Europe, Ernst and Young LLP and
the University of Cambridge were appointed to carry
out a three-year evaluation that was augmented by
the inclusion in the evaluation of experts from the Nuf-
field Trust. The evaluation aims to answer the following
questions:
What approaches to integration have been••
employed by the pilots?
What approaches to integration work well and in••
what contexts?
Who benefits from integration, in what ways, and••
with what consequences for equity?
What resources are required to make integration••
succeed and how can these be efficiently used?
In delivering integrated care in the English National••
Health Service, what policies and practices are:
most likely to deliver the intended outcome, most
capable of being implemented and most accept-
able to patients, users, clinicians, managers and
the wider public.
A mixed methods approach was adopted includ-
ing interviews with staff and patients, non-participant
observation of meetings, structured written feedback
from sites, questionnaires to service users and staff,
and analysis of routinely collected hospital utilisation
data for patients/users who had been recruited into the
pilots.
Analytical framework
Our approach to understanding the context in which
integration takes place is based on two classifica-
tions relating to structure and function. At the start of
the evaluation these classifications were deliberately
general to avoid focusing too early on very specific
approaches to integrated care. We wanted to accom-
modate the fact that that the pilots themselves were
still refining their approaches.
a) Structure
Integration can be seen as occurring at three levels
[4, 5]
•• Micro-level integration activities. These promote
integration among individual practitioners within
a single organisation (e.g. between doctors and
nurses in a primary care practice setting).
•• Meso-level integration activities. These promote
integration among practitioners working in different
organisations (e.g. between GPs and specialists).
This might include co-location of services, which
could occur with or without macro-level activities,
such as pooled budgets.
•• Macro-level integration activities. These promote
integration designed to facilitate organisation-to-
organisation working, e.g. across different sectors.
These may include policy agreements and finan-
cial arrangements. Examples of these are pooled
budgets or joint budget holding between health and
social care services, employment of care staff in a
single organisation, or structural changes to facili-
tate work across two or more organisations.
b) Function
Integration can be classified [6] in terms of
•• Organisational integration, where organisations
are brought together by mergers or by structural
change.
•• Service integration, where different clinical services
or support/back-office functions are integrated.
•• Clinical integration, where the focus is on care for a
particular condition.
This classification will guide our analysis of the data,
and our testing of the various hypotheses which arose
during the course of the study. These included hypothe-
ses that integrated care would lead to the development
of new organisational structures to support integration,
changes in staff roles, increased staff job satisfaction,
fewer unscheduled emergency hospital admissions,
reduced length of hospital stay, increased patient sat-
isfaction, and reduced cost.
It should be noted that the evaluation was designed and
funded prior to the appointment of the integrated care
pilots, so these hypotheses were developed during the
first six months of the evaluation as a result of detailed
interaction with the sites. This unusual research design
allowed for the evaluation to be tailored to the aims of
the sites which were not known at the time the evalua-
tion team was appointed.
Research methods
Principles guiding the evaluation
The evaluation described here adopts the approach
of the ‘embedded evaluator’. The evaluation activi-
ties form a distinct strand within the Integrated Care
Pilot programme, helping to co-produce the successful
delivery of the programme, rather than a completely
separate study focused solely on contributing to the
scientific understanding of integrated care. However,
it is equally important that the evaluation contributes
to scientific understanding and that it generates valid
and independent evidence to support decision-making
in the future. The approach combines systematically
collecting and synthesizing evidence from across all
the pilots together with a deeper investigation of a
smaller number of pilots in order to gain more detailed
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  4
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
understanding of the structures, processes, costs and
outcomes of integration.
Integrated Care Pilots use a variety of integrating activ-
ities (ranging from influencing, creating incentives,
sharing information, creating new information systems
and so forth) and have a variety of objectives (including
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of services,
enhancing patient reported outcomes and delivering
measurable health improvements. In this context, the
research approach is multi-method in order to under-
stand both the activities pursued and the outcomes
achieved. The evaluation is based on six approaches
to data collection and analysis:
Systematic qualitative data collection from all sites1.	
(through a ‘Living Document’ which is a semi-struc-
tured document completed regularly by each pilot
site).
In-depth case studies of six sites (‘Deep Dives’)2.	
including interviews with staff and patients/service
users and non-participant observation of meetings
[see Section Systematic qualitative data collection
from all sites (the ‘Living Document’) for more on
why we decided to use case studies].
Difference in differences analysis of data on hos-3.	
pital utilization comparing patients/service users
enrolled in pilots with control data.
Data from patient questionnaires.4.	
Data from staff questionnaires.5.	
Analysis of costs (combining data from qualitative6.	
case studies and quantitative data on service uti-
lization).
Evaluation involves a number of activities leading to an
exercise of judgement [7, 8]. In evaluating the complex
set of activities which broadly sit under the heading of
‘Integrated Care Pilots’ we also seek to arrive at judge-
ments which are seen to be legitimate by the stakehold-
ers involved [9]. This requirement for legitimacy is one
of the many ways in which ‘pure’ research is distinct
from evaluation. This legitimacy potentially involves
five steps (similar to those identified by Scriven [10]):
Understand from those delivering the pilots and1.	
from those funding the initiative the criteria they
consider to be applicable.
Agree the standards and intended outcomes that2.	
are applicable.
Gather data relating to these standards and out-3.	
comes.
Assess the contribution made by the agency/4.	
activity in achieving these standards and outcomes.
Form a performance audit judgement.5.	
These steps protect the evaluators from the accusa-
tion of being arbitrary or otherwise non-rational, but
an important part of the logic of the evaluation is to
develop a set of hypotheses based on the ‘theory of
change’ offered up by the pilots themselves. Implicitly
or explicitly, many evaluations of complex interventions
use a ‘theory of change’ approach. These evaluations
aim not only to understand the contribution made by a
programme or activity to achieving outcomes, but also
to interrogate evidence and communicate findings to
support both learning and accountability. Our approach
takes as its starting point the argument of Weiss [11,
p. 66–67] that: “The concept of grounding evaluation
in theories of change takes for granted that social pro-
grammes are based on explicit or implicit theories about
how and why the programme will work…The evalua-
tion should surface those theories and lay them out in
as fine detail as possible, identifying all the assump-
tions and sub-assumptions built into the programme.
The evaluators then construct methods for data collec-
tion and analysis to track the unfolding assumptions.
The aim is to examine the extent to which programme
theories hold…the evaluation should show which of
the assumptions underlying the programme are best
supported by the evidence.”
In this sense, ‘theories of change’ is a guiding approach
rather than a methodology, and its successful delivery
requires harnessing a range of methodologies, such
as those outlined elsewhere in this paper. Our ‘theo-
ries of change’ approach has five precepts. First the
approach requires us to not only look at the outcomes
of the programme but to pay equal attention to pro-
cesses. This contrasts with more classical evalua-
tion approaches which tend to look at outcomes first
and then to look for evidence to support attribution.
Secondly, the approach requires a more ‘embedded’
evaluator where the evaluator works closely with policy
makers, practitioners and end users to understand and
elaborate a sometimes changing theory of change.
Without losing their independence, successful evalu-
ators will understand the world of the policy makers,
practitioners and service users, including an under-
standing of what motivates their behaviour. Thirdly, the
approach requires an ability to reconstruct and rep-
resent the sequence of events connecting actions to
each other and how these contributed to the outcomes
identified, reconstructing at least the sequence of
events and statistical co-variations, but preferably also
identifying the causal mechanisms at work. Fourthly,
the approach is sensitive to the possibility that during
the life of a programme or intervention, initial theories
of change may alter in response to learning or to exog-
enous events and that the evaluation needs to capture
these changing understandings and actions. Fifthly, it
will also be sensitive to the fact that different and poten-
tially conflicting theories of change might be simultane-
ously pursued within any one programme. Collectively,
these precepts describe an interest not only in causal
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 5
effects (what happens when an independent variable
changes) but also causal mechanisms (what connects
causes to their effects); not only what officials say they
do but what the evidence shows they do; and not only
what contribution stories practitioners tell themselves
and others but also what really contributes to benefit.
Therefore, theory building and testing is an important
part of the approach taken but it does not start with a
priori theoretical claims or assumptions.
Systematic qualitative data collection
from all sites (the ‘Living Document’)
The Living Document involves semi-structured data
collection from all Integrated Care Pilots at approxi-
mately six-monthly intervals during the evaluation.
A lead person is designated in each site to collate
responses in the Living Document, but in most cases,
this individual draws on a variety of sources in collating
responses, and there is an expectation that the views
of a wide range of stakeholders will be represented in
the completion of the document. The data collected
in the Living Document are organised into a series of
broad questions:
Development of the pilot and background informa-••
tion. Questions identifying the background, purpose
and background setting of the pilot.
Who is doing what? Identifying the main people••
and organisations involved, and their roles in imple-
menting the pilot.
Processes—identifying the intended processes,••
and processes which have been implemented so
far.
Outputs and outcomes achieved so far.••
Progress to date. A description of progress to date,••
an assessment of progress against plan, and an
outline of what has facilitated/prevented progress.
Sustainability. Assessment of how arrangements to••
promote sustainability are progressing.
Attribution of changes to specific initiatives relating••
to the pilot. An assessment of how much difference
is really being made by the pilot itself, in the context
of other health policy initiatives which are taking
place concurrently.
Resource implications of the pilot. Without attempt-••
ing to provide a precise monetary value to the out-
comes of the pilot, an assessment of the costs of
the pilot, and whether benefits might have been
achieved more easily in other ways.
After each round of data collection, data from the Liv-
ing Document are analysed, and feedback is given
in two ways. First, limited feedback is given to each
site, including the opportunity to specify where more
detailed information is needed in future rounds of
Living Document completion. Second, the overall
themes emerging from the Living Document are analy-
sed, and these are fed back in a single document to all
sites after each round of data collection. This analysis
also contributes to ‘learning events’ (conferences and
teleconferences to address different issues of rele-
vance to pilots) which are being run by the Department
of Health throughout the pilot period, and subsequent
rounds of the Living Document are adapted in light of
feedback from the sites.
In-depth case studies of six sites
(‘Deep Dives’)
We selected a range of types of pilots for in-depth case
study to reflect the range of approaches in the pilots
and then select a sample from these reflecting the need
for variety and site’s ability to support a more detailed
evaluation. For the depth case studies in six sites, we
will structure the evaluation using an approach that
combines logic modeling with process mapping of the
patient journey. These methods will complement each
other in creating a full picture of the integration path-
ways. Logic models [12] provide a brief summary of
the key elements of an intervention (or programme, or
project) and organize inputs, processes, outputs and
outcomes systematically. They facilitate a focus on the
causal links in the chain connecting the allocation of
resources to the intended outcomes. As such, they are
well suited to supporting an understanding the ‘theory
of change’ underpinning the activity and simultane-
ously identifying the sorts of data that might support or
weaken that theory [11].
This approach will provide both a way to describe and
communicate the different interventions but also to
provide a basis for what, causally, is happening. It will
provide the framework for understanding how the inputs
of a pilot are related to its outcomes and impacts. They
are especially helpful in developing a shared under-
standing of a process between stakeholders and serve
as a reference point for stakeholders in the initiative
or programme. Process mapping the service user
experience, by contrast, involves understanding the
motivations, experiences and outcomes of the various
interactions between the service user and the (inte-
grated) service [13].
Using these case studies, we will address the following
questions:
Whatapproachestointegrationhavebeenemployed••
by the pilots? This will provide a richer description
of models than is possible in the overall national
evaluation by exploring experiences, motivations,
relationships, processes and costs in more detail.
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  6
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
conditions (see Annex 2), and length of stay. We
derived the list of ambulatory sensitive conditions from
AHRQ [14] and Purdy et al. [15].
Information will be available for the individuals enrolled
in any intervention, and also for the whole populations
of general practices which are participating in the Inte-
grated Care Pilot. The data will be at person level but
anonymised so that the research team cannot identify
sensitive personal information or individual identities.
The NHS Information Centre for Health and Social
Care will act a trusted third party to handle any confi-
dential information and create the anonymised linked
fields for use by the research team.
One of the key challenges in undertaking analyses of
changes in hospital use for complex interventions is
that individuals may be selected for an intervention
because they have a high use of health services. The
problem is that any subsequent fall in utilisation in this
group may simply be due to regression to the mean—
that is people reverting to a normal level of use irre-
spective of the intervention. One way round this is to
use an approach that allows us to standardise for dif-
ferences in the risk of future admissions.
First, we will assess the impact of the intervention on
individuals enrolled in the Integrated Care Pilots. Infor-
mation on the prior patterns of diagnoses and hospital
utilisation will be used to stratify cases according to the
risk of admission. The actual level of utilisation before
and after the agreed starting point in each pilot will be
compared. In this way we will be able to track levels of
hospital use for cohorts of people for 2–3 years before
they became part of the pilot. We will then test for sub-
sequent change and compare results by risk strata.
In addition, we will undertake a more sophisticated
analysis to create a matched ‘control group’ con-
structed by identifying individuals within national data.
These control cases will be matched on a number of
variables including risk of admission (or other hospital
use); major diseases recorded; history of hospital use;
and characteristics of the area of residence, such as
levels of deprivation. Matching will be conducted using
propensity scoring techniques [16] and prognostic
scoring techniques [17]. Trends in hospital use within
the groups of selected control cases will then be used
as a test of observed differences in those enrolled in
the Integrated Care Pilots.
Second, we will quantify the effect of the interventions
on wider groups of patients (e.g. practice populations)
by matching utilization data to that from to similar prac-
tice populations in national HES datasets. The popula-
tion level analysis will assess whether the intervention
might not only have an impact on individual patients
but also upon the wider population.
What approaches to integration work well and in••
what contexts? This will generate data linking puta-
tive causes to observed effects i.e. understanding
causal mechanisms.
Who benefits from integration and in what ways••
(what definitions are there of ‘success’)? This will
identify how benefits are distributed and with what
implications for equality.
What resources are required to make integration••
succeed and how can these be efficiently used?
This will identify the descriptive categories of costs,
establishing their dimensions, estimating overall
costs, and suggesting how generalisable these
findings might be. The Living Document will help
identify what types of costs become apparent at
various stages of development of a project.
How the development of integrated care is facilitated••
or impeded by other current policies, e.g. payment
by results, practice-based commissioning etc.
From these analyses, we aim to identify what policies
and practices are most suitable (i.e. fit for purpose and
likely to deliver the intended outcome); most feasible
(i.e. capable of being implemented given the existing
architecture of delivery and accountability); and most
acceptable (i.e. likely to generate the support of the
people who use services, clinicians and other profes-
sionals, managers and the wider public).
There will be three key data collection methods: semi-
structured interviews with professionals and patients/
service users, documentary analysis, non-participant
observation of meetings. The qualitative data collec-
tion in the Deep Dive sites will also be used to collect
data for the economic analysis (see below).
Interviews with staff will concentrate on the experience
of delivering care, interactions with other professional
groups and organizations within the Integrated Care
Pilot, and understanding of implications for the wider
care system. Interviews with patients and users will
focus on the patient/user journey and experience and
its relationship to changes in the Integrated Care Pilots.
Service utilisation
In analysing data on service utilisation, we will focus
principally on hospital admissions as a key variable,
as many of the sites have a focus on reducing such
admissions.
Data will be taken from Hospital Episode Statistics
(HES), both for outpatient referrals, accident and
emergency attendances and inpatient stays. These will
enable analyses of changes in a number of measures
of hospital use including overall rates of emergency
admissions, admissions for ‘ambulatory sensitive’
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 7
both observed differences between intervention and
control groups as well controlling for unobserved but
fixed person characteristics.
The aim of identifying risk-matched controls and using
propensity score analysis is to allow so far as possible
for unmeasured patient and system effects and there-
fore to increase our ability to draw conclusions about
likely cause and effect from what inevitably remains
observational data.
Questionnaires for service users
We are conducting two surveys to assess the experi-
ence of service users in 11 of the 16 pilots. The survey
is being administered in autumn/winter 2009 and will
be repeated on the same sample of service users in
autumn 2010. The questionnaire was developed using
the intended outcomes identified by pilot sites in their
applications to join the scheme. This identified a num-
ber of domains which were common to most pilots and
were therefore included in the questionnaire. These
were:
Communication with primary care doctors and••
nurses.
Organisation and coordination of care.••
Care planning.••
Assessment of care from social services.••
Arrangements following discharge from hospital.••
Frequency of certain critical events (notes unavail-••
able, test duplicated, wrong medication or wrong
dose of medication prescribed, no follow-up
arrangements after hospital discharge).
In addition, a question on service usage was included
to contribute to the analysis of health service costs
(see below). The questionnaire is available from the
authors.
In selecting items to represent these domains, we
drew questions were possible from existing validated
instruments. In particular we drew a substantial num-
ber of questions from the English National GP patient
survey which is currently sent annually to 5.5 million
randomly sampled patients (www.gp-patient.co.uk).
By matching the socio-demographic and health ques-
tions to this survey also, we will be able to conduct a
difference in differences analysis with individual con-
trol patients drawn from responders to the national
survey.
For five pilot sites it was not appropriate to collect
patient information using this questionnaire because
of the nature of the intervention and/or the population
group targeted by the intervention (for example, some
pilots were focusing on end of life care). These sites
are excluded from this part of the evaluation.
Both of these approaches to analysis are required as
there might be an impact of the interventions on indi-
viduals (e.g. a reduction in admissions) which could not
be demonstrated in the wider population. This might be
because resources were simply redistributed between
groups at equal risk of admission, or because the num-
bers enrolled in the pilots were too small to show an
effect on the wider population.
Sample size calculations suggest that few of the Inte-
grated Care Pilot sites will enroll sufficient numbers for
data from individual sites to be analysed. We therefore
intend to pool data from sites which have similar aims
and are providing broadly comparable interventions.
It is not possible to say which sites will provide data
that can be pooled, as all sites are still developing their
interventions. However, it looks likely, for example, that
several sites will be using a form of case management
of high-risk patients with the aim of reducing hospital
admission, and we will be able to pool data from such
sites. Data will also be analysed on primary and social
care utilisation (from patient questionnaires). However,
these data are being collected primarily for the eco-
nomic analysis, as none of the sites has reduction in
primary care utilisation as their main goal.
Our analysis strategy is built around a generalized
difference-of-differences regression approach at the
person level. Regression models appropriate for each
of the outcome measures (e.g. emergency admis-
sions) will be developed. These may be Poisson mod-
els, negative binomial models, or gamma models as
required by the form of the measure. Each individual
will contribute one or more time periods to the data-
set in both the pre- and post-intervention periods.
Non-intervention controls will come from routinely col-
lected national data. These models will use covariates
including basic demographics and historical utilization
to control for potential differences between the inter-
vention and control cases. Person level random effects
will also be included in the models to adjust standard
errors for the repeated measures within person.
In addition to the traditional covariate adjustment in
the difference-of-differences model we will use pro-
pensity score based methods. In a combined dataset
of intervention cases and non-intervention controls a
propensity score model will be fitted that uses avail-
able covariates to predict intervention vs. control sta-
tus. The predicted treatment status probabilities can
be used to match intervention and control cases.
We may also use the propensity scores to produce
analysis weights which can be combined with cova-
riate adjustment to support ‘doubly robust’ estimation
of intervention effects [18]. Doubly robust estimation
combined with difference-of-differences modeling will
provide intervention effect estimates that control for
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  8
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
Care Pilots. This will provide a sense of how much
the approach might cost if it were implemented else-
where. An important part of this will be through data
collection in the Deep Dive sites where we will use the
logic model, process maps, key informant interviews,
and documentary evidence to produce estimates of
the costs of providing integrated care. This will enable
us to identify the categories of cost and the scale of
resources required to deliver different models of inte-
gration. We aim to produce a clear understanding of
the main categories of cost (staff by grade, equipment,
building, travel etc.), the likely range of costs within
each category, and subsequently estimate best, worst
and most likely case scenarios.
We will also distinguish between ‘set-up’ costs and ‘run-
ning costs’, although in a fluid, adaptive and improving
system it may be difficult to draw this distinction. For
both of these we need to distinguish between the costs
associated with participating in the DH programme
(including, for example, participation in events, report-
ing, contributing to the national evaluation) and the
costs solely required to deliver the integrated care pro-
gramme. We also aim to gather data through time that
can show how costs have altered in response to actual
service delivery or in order to overcome changing
circumstances etc. We propose only to look at costs
internal to the health and social care system (including
private sector partners) but we will be aware that costs
could potentially be externalised onto service users
and carers and we will ask service users and staff to
comment on their sense of the types and magnitudes
of these costs.
Across the Integrated Care Pilots where we are col-
lecting quantitative data on hospital utilisation, data on
hospital admissions and length of stay will be costed
using standard NHS costs, and included in the con-
trolled difference in differences analysis described in
above.
Conclusion
Selecting evaluation frameworks always involves a
degree of compromise to meet conflicting demands
within a finite budget. We have opted to balance the
collection of data from across all the pilots with more
detailed data from six Deep Dive sites. We have also
opted to focus the evaluation on what the pilots them-
selves told us they were seeking to achieve. The ben-
efit of this is that we will be in a position to provide
an evaluation which is grounded firmly in what the
pilots are seeking to do. This increases the chances
that findings will be acceptable and used. However,
it also means that some theoretical propositions will
be under-explored and that attention may be directed
Questionnaires are being sent to up to 500 service
users in each site. Where the site has identified more
that 500 service users by autumn 2009, a random
sample of 500 will be taken. Where fewer than 500
service users have been identified by March 2010, the
questionnaire is sent to them all. Where a site is enroll-
ing patients/service users sequentially during autumn
2009/spring 2010, all patients receive a questionnaire
until 500 have been enrolled. Those individuals who
receive a questionnaire in autumn 2009/spring 2010
will receive a second questionnaire in autumn 2010.
For all service users, the site identifies the start data
of any intervention, so that we can determine whether
questionnaires returned have been completed before
or after the start of the intervention.
Questionnaires for health and social
care staff
We are conducting two cross-sectional staff surveys
within the 16 pilot sites, involving health and social
care staff (including community nurses, GPs and
social workers), in spring 2010, and repeated in spring
2011. The staff questionnaire has substantial sections
for free text to allow staff to describe their experience
of the pilot in more detail, and these sections will be
transcribed for qualitative analysis. The questionnaire
includes sections on:
Job changes since the introduction of the Integrated••
Care Pilot.
Perceived changes to the care that patients/service••
users receive.
Changes in communication within and between••
employing organisations.
Changes in team working.••
Communication with other health and social care••
staff.
Job satisfaction, ability to deliver high quality care.••
For the staff survey the targeted sample size is 50
staff from each site. The first are staffs who are closely
involved in the development of the pilot (e.g. employed
by the pilot). There are expected to be between 5 and
15 of these per site. The additional 35–45 will be sent
to stratified random samples of practitioners whose
work might be altered by the pilot—e.g. GPs, commu-
nity nurses, social workers.
Economic analysis
There are two approaches to the economic evalua-
tion. The first is to estimate costs in order to provide
decision-makers in the health and social care systems
with a basis for understanding the categories and
potential range of costs associated with the Integrated
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 9
evidence base for integrated care, and in particular
identifying the context in which interventions are likely
to be effective. These data will support a series of eval-
uation judgements but it is important to recognise that
they cannot be arrived at by simple aggregation of data
[20]. Rather, the process locates the new data within
the existing body of research and forms judgements
about what is added and how compelling this addi-
tional evidence is, thus reducing uncertainties about
the role of integrated care in improving the efficient and
effective delivery of healthcare.
Acknowledgements
The study was funded by the Department of Health
and is being carried out by RAND Europe and Ernst
and Young. The views expressed are those of the
authors and not of the Department of Health and does
not constitute any form of assurance, legal opinion or
advice. RAND Europe and Ernst and Young shall have
no liability to any third party in respect to the contents
of this article.
Reviewers
Guus Schrijvers, Prof. Dr., Julius Centre for Patient
Oriented Research, The University Medical Centre
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Nick Goodwin, PhD, Senior Fellow, Policy Director-
ate, King’s Fund, London, UK
Ingrid Mur, Dr. (Associate Professor), Department of
Health Organisation, Policy and Economics (H.O.P.E.),
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Maastricht,
The Netherlands
more towards intended outcomes than unintended
outcomes. However, we are satisfied that this risk is
managed by independent data collection (for example
on service utilisation, service user surveys and staff
surveys) and by the iterative way of working with those
responsible for running each project.
In planning to assess the evidence produced by this
evaluation, we have been influenced by the principles
of realistic evaluation [19] in which the mechanism
(the intervention) acts in context to produce the out-
come. If there is a single lesson from previous evalu-
ations of attempts to integrate or coordinate care, it
is that the context in which an intervention is intro-
duced is crucially important to its success or failure.
So, in this evaluation, we have committed substan-
tial resources to the qualitative evaluation, knowing
that these analyses will be critical to interpreting the
results of quantitative analyses. Our approach is to
understand not only the ‘dose, frequency and effect’
but to identify the way pilots learn, respond and
evolve and to take into account the expectations and
motivations of staff and patients to understand how
complex and evolving projects might have lessons for
others seeking to do related things in different con-
texts. Policy makers, professionals, managers, car-
ers and patients are all part of an emergent process.
We do not expect to measure precisely all effects but
we do expect to understand the likely scope of ben-
efits and the scale of efforts required, to contribute
to the analysis of health service interventions and
so reduce decision-makers’ uncertainties about inte-
grated care.
This evaluation will produce a portfolio of evidence
including interviews, surveys, cost estimations and
service utilisation data aimed at strengthening the
References
1. Glasby J, Dickinson H, Peck E. Partnership working in health and social care. Health and Social Care in the Community
2006;14(5):373–4.
2. Powell Davies G, Williams AM, Larsen K, Perkins D, Roland M, Harris M. Coordinating primary health care: an analysis of
the outcomes of a systematic review. Medical Journal of Australia 2008;188(8 Suppl):S65–8.
3. Department of Health, UK. Integrated Care Programme: prospectus for potential pilots, 2008. [webpage on the internet]
[cited August 31, 2010]. Available from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/docu-
ments/digitalasset/dh_089370.pdf.
4. Grone O, Garcia-Barbero M. Integrated care: a position paper of the WHO European office for integrated health care services.
International Journal of Integrated Care [serial online] 2001 Jun 1; 1. Available from: http://www.ijic.org/. URN:NBN:NL:UI:10-
1-100270.
5. Epping-Jordan JE, Pruitt SD, Bengoa R, Wagner EH. Improving the quality of health care for chronic conditions. Quality and
Safety in Health Care 2004;13:299–305.
6. Fulop N, Mowlem A, Edwards N. Building integrated care: lessons from the UK and elsewhere. London: The NHS Confed-
eration. 2005. [webpage on the internet] [cited August 31, 2010]. Available from: http://www.nhsconfed.org/Publications/
Documents/Building%20integrated%20care.pdf.
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  10
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
7. Schwandt TA. The relevance of practical knowledge traditions to evaluation practice. In: Smith NL, Brandon PR, editors.
Fundamental issues in evaluation. New York: Guildford Press; 2008. p. 29–40.
8. Ling T, Villalba L. The performance audit handbook. Cambridge: RAND Europe Cambridge; 2009.
9. Hurteau M, Houle S, Mongiat S. How legitimate and justified are judgements in programme evaluation? Evaluation
2009;15(3):307–19.
10. Scriven M. The logic of evaluation. Inverness CA: Edge Press; 1980.
11. Weiss CH. Nothing as practical as a good theory: exploring theory based evaluation for comprehensive community initia-
tives for children and families. In: Connell J, Kubisch AC, Schorr LB, Weiss CH, editors. New approaches to evaluating
community initiatives: concepts, methods and contexts. Washington DC: The Aspen Institute; 1995. p. 65–92.
12. W.K. Kellogg Foundation. W.K. Kellogg Foundation Logic Model Development Guide. 2001. [webpage on the internet]
[cited August 31, 2010]. Available from: http://www.wkkf.org/knowledge-center/resources/2010/Logic-Model-Development-
Guide.aspx.
13. Audit Scotland. The map to success. 2000. [webpage on the internet] [cited August 31, 2010]. Available from: www.audit-
scotland.gov.uk/docs/local/2000/nr_010201_process_mapping.pdf.
14. Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research. AHRQ Quality Indicators—Guide to prevention quality indicators: hospital
admission for ambulatory care sensitive conditions. October 2001, Version 3.1 (March 12, 2007). Department of Health and
Human Services. [webpage on the internet] [cited August 31, 2010]. Available from: http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov.
15. Purdy S, Griffin T, Salisbury C, Sharp D. Ambulatory care sensitive conditions: terminology and disease coding need to be
more specific to aid policy makers and clinicians. Public Health 2009;123(2):169–73.
16. Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrica
1983;70(1):41–55.
17. Hansen BB. The prognostic analogue of the propensity score. Biometrica 2008;95:481–8.
18. Bang H, Robins JM. Double robust estimation in missing data and causal inference models. Biometrics 2005;61(4):962–
73.
19. Pawson R, Tilley. Realistic evaluation. London: Sage; 1998.
20. Ling T. What counts as “sufficient evidence” and a “compelling argument” in evaluation? In: Rieper O, Leeuw F, Ling T, edi-
tors. The evidence book: concepts, generation and use of evidence. Washington: Transaction Publishing; 2009. p. 53–65.
[Comparative Policy Evaluation, vol 15].
Annex 1
Summary of focus of individual Integrated Care Pilot sites
Pilot Main focus (some sites have other objectives also)
Bournemouth and Poole Structured support for people with dementia in the community
Cambridge Support for end of life care in the community; reduction in unnecessary admissions to hospital
Church View Medical Practice Improved support for people with long-term conditions at risk of admission to hospital
Cumbria Improved support for people with long-term conditions at risk of admission to hospital
Durham Dales Providing integrated primary and secondary care service for acutely ill people, improved
community services, moving specialist services into the community, identification of people at
risk of fuel poverty
Northamptonshire Integrated
Care Partnership (NENE)
Improved support for people with long-term conditions at risk of admission to hospital
Newquay Structured support for people with dementia in the community
Norfolk Improved support for people with long-term conditions at risk of admission to hospital
North Tyneside Screening of patients at risk of falls: assessment by multi-disciplinary team
Northumbria Improved support for people with COPD with a history of admissions to hospital
North Cornwall Mental health care
Principia Partners in Health Improved support for people with long-term conditions at risk of admission to hospital. Second
stream has specific focus on people with COPD
Tameside and Glossop Structured programme of identification and management of people at risk of cardio-vascular
disease (CVD). Second stream of work for people with established CVD
Torbay Improved discharge planning. Support for GPs from community geriatrician. Improved support
for people in the community with dementia, COPD and congestive cardiac failure. Falls
prevention programme
Tower Hamlets Structured care for people with diabetes
Wakefield Integrated Substance Misuse
Service
Implementation of ‘dashboard’ routinely feeding back performance data for services providing
care for people with substance misuse
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 11
Annex 2
List of ‘ambulatory care sensitive conditions’ (ACSCs) and associated ICD-10 codes (derived from AHRQ [14] and
Purdy et al. [15]). These are admissions for diagnoses that in principle may be preventable by good quality primary
care
Ambulatory care sensitive condition ICD-10 code Definition
Alcohol-related disease F10 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol
Angina I20 Angina pectoris
Angina I240 Coronary thrombosis not resulting in myocardial infarction
Angina I248 Other forms of acute ischemic heart disease
Angina I249 Acute ischemic heart disease, unspecified
Angina I25 Chronic ischemic heart disease
Angina R072 Precordial pain
Asthma J45 Asthma
Asthma J46 Status asthmaticus
Atrial fibrillation and flutter I471 Supra-ventricular tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation and flutter I479 Paroxysmal tachycardia, unspecified
Atrial fibrillation and flutter I495 Sick sinus syndrome
Atrial fibrillation and flutter I498 Other specified cardiac arrhythmias
Atrial fibrillation and flutter I499 Cardiac arrhythmia, unspecified
Atrial fibrillation and flutter R000 Tachycardia, unspecified
Atrial fibrillation and flutter R002 Palpitations
Atrial fibrillation and flutter R008 Other and unspecified abnormalities of heart beat
Cellulitis I891 Lymphangitis
Cellulitis L010 Impetigo [any organism] [any site]
Cellulitis L011 Impetiginization of other dermatoses
Cellulitis L020 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of face
Cellulitis L021 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of neck
Cellulitis L022 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of trunk
Cellulitis L023 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of buttock
Cellulitis L024 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of limb
Cellulitis L028 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle of other sites
Cellulitis L029 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle, and carbuncle, unspecified
Cellulitis L03 Cellulitis
Cellulitis L04 Acute lymphadenitis
Cellulitis L080 Pyoderma
Cellulitis L088 Other specified local infections of skin and subcutaneous tissue
Cellulitis L089 Local infection of skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified
Cellulitis L88 Pyoderma gangrenosum
Cellulitis L980 Pyogenic granuloma
Congestive heart failure I110 Hypertensive heart disease with (congestive) heart failure
Congestive heart failure I130 Hypertensive heart and renal disease with (congestive) heart failure
Congestive heart failure I132 Hypertensive heart and renal disease with both (congestive) heart failure and
renal failure
Congestive heart failure I255 Ischemic cardiomyopathy
Congestive heart failure I50 Heart failure
Congestive heart failure J81 Pulmonary edema
Constipation K590 Constipation
Convulsions and Epilepsy G253 Myoclonus
Convulsions and Epilepsy G40 Epilepsy
Convulsions and Epilepsy G41 Status epilepticus
Convulsions and Epilepsy R56 Convulsions, not elsewhere classified
COPD J40 Bronchitis, not specified as acute or chronic
COPD J41 Simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis
COPD J42 Unspecified chronic bronchitis
COPD J43 Emphysema
COPD J44 Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COPD J47 Bronchiectasis
COPD J20 Acute bronchitis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A020 Salmonella gastroenteritis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A04 Other bacterial intestinal infections
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A059 Bacterial food-borne intoxication, unspecified
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A072 Cryptosporidiosis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A080 Rotaviral enteritis
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  12
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
Ambulatory care sensitive condition ICD-10 code Definition
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A081 Acute gastroenteropathy due to Norwalk agent
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A082 Adenoviral enteritis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A083 Other viral enteritis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A084 Viral intestinal infection, unspecified
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A085 Other specified intestinal infections
Dehydration and gastroenteritis A09 Diarrhea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin
Dehydration and gastroenteritis E86 Volume depletion
Dehydration and gastroenteritis K520 Gastroenteritis and colitis due to radiation
Dehydration and gastroenteritis K521 Toxic gastroenteritis and colitis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis K522 Allergic and dietetic gastroenteritis and colitis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis K528 Other specified non-infective gastroenteritis and colitis
Dehydration and gastroenteritis K529 Non-infective gastroenteritis and colitis, unspecified
Dementia F00 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease
Dementia F01 Vascular dementia
Dementia F02 Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere
Dementia F03 Unclassified dementia
Dementia R54 Senility
Dental conditions A690 Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
Dental conditions K02 Dental caries
Dental conditions K03 Other diseases of hard tissues of teeth
Dental conditions K04 Diseases of pulp and periapical tissues
Dental conditions K05 Gingivitis and periodontal diseases
Dental conditions K06 Other disorders of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge
Dental conditions K08 Other disorders of teeth and supporting structures
Dental conditions K098 Other cysts of oral region, not elsewhere classified
Dental conditions K099 Cyst of oral region, unspecified
Dental conditions K12 Stomatitis and related lesions
Dental conditions K13 Other diseases of lip and oral mucosa
Diabetes complications E100 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with coma
Diabetes complications E101 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
Diabetes complications E102 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with renal complications
Diabetes complications E103 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic comps
Diabetes complications E104 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with neurological comps
Diabetes complications E105 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with periph circ comps
Diabetes complications E106 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with other spec comps
Diabetes complications E107 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with multiple comps
Diabetes complications E108 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with unspec comps
Diabetes complications E110 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with coma
Diabetes complications E111 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
Diabetes complications E112 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with renal comps
Diabetes complications E113 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with ophthalm comps
Diabetes complications E114 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with neuro comps
Diabetes complications E115 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with periph circ comp
Diabetes complications E116 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with other spec comp
Diabetes complications E117 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with multiple comps
Diabetes complications E118 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with unspec comps
Diabetes complications E120 Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus with coma
Diabetes complications E121 Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
Diabetes complications E122 Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus with renal comps
Diabetes complications E128 Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus with unspec comps
Diabetes complications E130 Other specified diabetes mellitus with coma
Diabetes complications E131 Other specified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
Diabetes complications E132 Other specified diabetes mellitus with renal complications
Diabetes complications E133 Other specified diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic comps
Diabetes complications E134 Other specified diabetes mellitus with neurological comps
Diabetes complications E135 Other specified diabetes mellitus with periph circ comps
Diabetes complications E136 Other specified diabetes mellitus with other spec comps
Diabetes complications E137 Other specified diabetes mellitus with multiple comps
Diabetes complications E138 Other specified diabetes mellitus with unspecified comps
Diabetes complications E140 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with coma
Diabetes complications E141 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
Diabetes complications E142 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with renal complications
Diabetes complications E143 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
Annex 2 (Continued)
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 13
Ambulatory care sensitive condition ICD-10 code Definition
Diabetes complications E144 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with neurological comps
Diabetes complications E145 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with periph circulatory comps
Diabetes complications E146 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other specified comps
Diabetes complications E147 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with multiple complications
Diabetes complications E148 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with unspecified complications
Dyspepsia and other stomach function
disorders
K21 Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Dyspepsia and other stomach function
disorders
K30 Dyspepsia
Ear, nose and throat infections H66 Suppurative and unspecified otitis media
Ear, nose and throat infections H67 Otitis media in diseases classified elsewhere
Ear, nose and throat infections J02 Acute pharyngitis
Ear, nose and throat infections J03 Acute tonsillitis
Ear, nose and throat infections J040 Acute laryngitis
Ear, nose and throat infections J06 Acute upper respiratory infections of multiple and unspecified sites
Ear, nose and throat infections J312 Chronic pharyngitis
Fractured proximal femur S720 Fracture of neck of femur
Fractured proximal femur S721 Pertrochanteric fracture
Fractured proximal femur S722 Subtrochanteric fracture
Gangrene R02 Gangrene, not elsewhere classified
Hypertension I10 Essential (primary) hypertension
Hypertension I119 Hypertensive heart disease without (congestive) heart failure
Hypertension I129 Hypertensive renal disease without renal failure
Hypertension I139 Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified
Hypokalaemia E876 Hypokalemia
Influenza and pneumonia A481 Legionnaires’ disease
Influenza and pneumonia A70 Chlamydia psittaci infection
Influenza and pneumonia J10 Influenza due to identified influenza virus
Influenza and pneumonia J11 Influenza, virus not identified
Influenza and pneumonia J120 Adenoviral pneumonia
Influenza and pneumonia J121 Respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia
Influenza and pneumonia J122 Parainfluenza virus pneumonia
Influenza and pneumonia J128 Other viral pneumonia
Influenza and pneumonia J129 Viral pneumonia, unspecified
Influenza and pneumonia J13 Pneumonia due to Streptococcus pneumoniae
Influenza and pneumonia J14 Pneumonia due to Hemophilus influenzae
Influenza and pneumonia J153 Pneumonia due to streptococcus, group B
Influenza and pneumonia J154 Pneumonia due to other streptococci
Influenza and pneumonia J157 Pneumonia due to Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Influenza and pneumonia J159 Bacterial pneumonia, unspecified
Influenza and pneumonia J160 Chlamydial pneumonia
Influenza and pneumonia J168 Pneumonia due to other specified infectious organisms
Influenza and pneumonia J18 Pneumonia, organism unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D460 Refractory anemia without sideroblasts, so stated
Iron-deficiency anaemia D461 Refractory anemia with sideroblasts
Iron-deficiency anaemia D463 Refractory anemia with excess of blasts with transformation
Iron-deficiency anaemia D464 Refractory anemia, unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D501 Sideropenic dysphagia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D508 Other iron deficiency anemias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D509 Iron deficiency anemia, unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D510 Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia due to intrinsic factor deficiency
Iron-deficiency anaemia D511 Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia due to selective vitamin B12 malabsorption with
proteinuria
Iron-deficiency anaemia D512 Transcobalamin II deficiency
Iron-deficiency anaemia D513 Other dietary vitamin B12 deficiency anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D518 Other vitamin B12 deficiency anemias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D520 Dietary folate deficiency anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D521 Drug-induced folate deficiency anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D528 Other folate deficiency anemias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D529 Folate deficiency anemia, unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D531 Other megaloblastic anemias, not elsewhere classified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D571 Sickle-cell anemia without crisis
Iron-deficiency anaemia D580 Hereditary spherocytosis
Iron-deficiency anaemia D581 Hereditary elliptocytosis
Annex 2 (Continued)
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care  14
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
Ambulatory care sensitive condition ICD-10 code Definition
Iron-deficiency anaemia D590 Drug-induced autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D591 Other autoimmune hemolytic anemias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D592 Drug-induced non-autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D599 Acquired hemolytic anemia, unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D601 Transient acquired pure red cell aplasia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D608 Other acquired pure red cell aplasias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D609 Acquired pure red cell aplasia, unspecified
Iron-deficiency anaemia D610 Constitutional aplastic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D611 Drug-induced aplastic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D640 Hereditary sideroblastic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D641 Secondary sideroblastic anemia due to disease
Iron-deficiency anaemia D642 Secondary sideroblastic anemia due to drugs and toxins
Iron-deficiency anaemia D643 Other sideroblastic anemias
Iron-deficiency anaemia D644 Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
Iron-deficiency anaemia D648 Other specified anemias
Migraine/acute headache G43 Migraine
Migraine/acute headache G440 Cluster headache syndrome
Migraine/acute headache G441 Vascular headache, not elsewhere classified
Migraine/acute headache G443 Chronic posttraumatic headache
Migraine/acute headache G444 Drug-induced headache, not elsewhere classified
Migraine/acute headache G448 Other specified headache syndromes
Migraine/acute headache R51 Headache
Nutritional deficiency E40 Kwashiorkor
Nutritional deficiency E41 Nutritional marasmus
Nutritional deficiency E42 Marasmic kwashiorkor
Nutritional deficiency E43 Unspecified severe protein-energy malnutrition
Nutritional deficiency E550 Rickets, active
Nutritional deficiency E643 Sequelae of rickets
Other vaccine-preventable diseases A35 Other tetanus
Other vaccine-preventable diseases A36 Diphtheria
Other vaccine-preventable diseases A37 Whooping cough
Other vaccine-preventable diseases A80 Acute poliomyelitis
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B05 Measles
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B06 Rubella [German measles]
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B161 Acute hepatitis B with delta-agent (coinfection) without hepatic coma
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B169 Acute hepatitis B without delta-agent and without hepatic coma
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B180 Chronic viral hepatitis B with delta-agent
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B181 Chronic viral hepatitis B without delta-agent
Other vaccine-preventable diseases B26 Mumps
Other vaccine-preventable diseases G000 Hemophilus meningitis
Other vaccine-preventable diseases M014 Rubella arthritis
Pelvic inflammatory disease N70 Salpingitis and oophoritis
Pelvic inflammatory disease N73 Other female pelvic inflammatory diseases
Pelvic inflammatory disease N74 Female pelvic inflammatory disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Perforated appendix K350 Acute appendicitis with generalized peritonitis
Perforated appendix K351 Acute appendicitis with peritoneal abscess
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K20 Esophagitis
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K210 Gastroesophageal reflux disease with esophagitis
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K219 Gastroesophageal reflux disease without esophagitis
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K221 Ulcer of esophagus
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K226 Gastroesophageal laceration-hemorrhage syndrome
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K250 Acute with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K251 Acute with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K252 Acute with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K254 Chronic or unspecified with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K255 Chronic or unspecified with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K256 Chronic or unspecified with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K260 Acute with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K261 Acute with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K262 Acute with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K264 Chronic or unspecified with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K265 Chronic or unspecified with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K266 Chronic or unspecified with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K270 Acute with hemorrhage
Annex 2 (Continued)
International Journal of Integrated Care – Vol. 10, 27 September 2010 – ISSN 1568-4156 – http://www.ijic.org/
This article is published in a peer reviewed section of the International Journal of Integrated Care 15
Ambulatory care sensitive condition ICD-10 code Definition
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K271 Acute with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K272 Acute with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K274 Chronic or unspecified with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K275 Chronic or unspecified with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K276 Chronic or unspecified with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K280 Acute with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K281 Acute with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K282 Acute with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K284 Chronic or unspecified with hemorrhage
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K285 Chronic or unspecified with perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K286 Chronic or unspecified with both hemorrhage and perforation
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K920 Hematemesis
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K921 Melena
Perforated/bleeding ulcer K922 Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, unspecified
Peripheral vascular disease I73 Other peripheral vascular diseases
Tuberculosis A15 Respiratory tuberculosis, bacteriologically and histologically confirmed
Tuberculosis A16 Respiratory tuberculosis, not confirmed bacteriologically or histologically
Tuberculosis A17 Tuberculosis of nervous system
Tuberculosis A18 Tuberculosis of other organs
Tuberculosis A19 Miliary tuberculosis
Urinary infection N10 Acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis
Urinary infection N11 Chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis
Urinary infection N12 Tubulo-interstitial nephritis, not specified as acute or chronic
Urinary infection N136 Pyonephrosis
Urinary infection N151 Renal and perinephric abscess
Urinary infection N159 Renal tubulo-interstitial disease, unspecified
Urinary infection N30 Cystitis
Urinary infection N390 Urinary tract infection, site not specified
The above table contains all conditions and codes listed in Purdy et al. (2009) tables 3 and 4 except the following:
‘Failure to thrive’ and ‘low birth weight’ are excluded as they are purely paediatric conditions.••
‘Angina’ codes R073, R074, Z034, Z035 are generic chest pain codes which are unlikely to indicate ischaemic••
heart disease.
E139 and E149 not included in ‘diabetes complications’ as both codes specify ‘...without complications’.••
Mental health admissions (with the exception of ‘dementia’) are excludes as they are not relevant to the evalua-••
tion sites that are collecting admission data. The excluded conditions are ‘deliberate self-harm’, ‘neuroses’ and
‘schizophrenia’. ‘Dementia’ is relevant to two pilot sites, and so is retained.
‘Stroke’ is excluded because of the substantial change seen in the admission criteria for stroke over the study••
period.
O15 is excluded from ‘convulsions and epilepsy’ as the condition—eclampsia (a specific disorder of pregnancy)—••
is unrelated, except for the common symptom of fits.
There are also some additional codes included:••
I129, I139, I132 and A082 are introduced by the process of converting the AHRQ codes from ICD-9CM to••
ICD-10.
All cystitis codes (N30) are included in ‘urinary tract infection’, supplementing N300, N308 and N309.••
