© 2010 Gupta et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 171–182
Journal of Blood Medicine Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
171
R e v i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
DOI: 10.2147/JBM.S12257
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms:recent
classification system based onWorld Health
Organization Classification ofTumors –
InternationalAgency for Research on Cancer
for Hematopoietic and LymphoidTissues
Geetanjali Gupta
Reecha Singh
Dhananjay S Kotasthane
Vaishali D Kotasthane
Department of Pathology, Mahatma
Gandhi Medical College and Research
Institute, Puducherry-607402, India
Correspondence: Geetanjali Gupta,
Mahatma Gandhi Medical College
and Research Institute,
Puducherry-607402, India
Tel +91-9442400023
Email gng_82@yahoo.co.in
Abstract: The myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal hematopoietic stem
cell diseases characterized by cytopenia(s), dysplasia in one or more of the major myeloid cell
lines, ineffective hematopoiesis, and increased risk of development of acute myeloid leukemia.
The classification and the diagnostic criteria have been redefined by the recent World Health
Organization Classification of Tumors – International Agency for Research on Cancer for
Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. The myelodysplastic syndromes are now classified into
the following categories – refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia, refractory anemia
with ring sideroblasts, refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia, refractory anemia with
excess blasts, myelodysplastic syndrome associated with isolated del (5q), myelodysplastic
syndrome – unclassifiable, and childhood myelodysplastic syndrome. The clinicopathologic
features, morphology, differential diagnosis, immunophenotyping, cytogenetics, prognosis and
predictive factors are presented in the light of recent World Health Organization Classification
of Tumors – International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Keywords: myelodysplastic syndromes, leukemia
Introduction
The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal hematopoietic stem cell
diseases characterized by cytopenia(s), dysplasia in one or more of the major myeloid
cell lines, ineffective hematopoiesis, and increased risk of development of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML).1–3
The thresholds for cytopenia(s) as recommended in the International
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) for risk stratification in the MDS are hemoglobin
,10 g/dl, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ,1.8 × 109
/L and platelets ,100 × 109
/L.4,5
Values above these thresholds are not exclusionary for a diagnosis of MDS if definitive
morphologic or cytogenetic findings are present.6
Myeloblasts in the peripheral blood
and bone marrow are ,20%.A working group of theWorld Health Organization (WHO)
recently proposed a new classification of MDS (Table 1), based on a significant modi-
fication of the original FAB proposals. The classification system as proposed by FAB
included the following subtypes – refractory anemia (RA), refractory anemia with ring
sideroblasts (RARS), refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), refractory anemia
with excess blasts in transformation (RAEBT), and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
(CMML). In the recent WHO classification, CMML and RAEB-T were removed from
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Journal of Blood Medicine
24 August 2010
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
172
Gupta et al
the MDS classification and RAEB was split into two groups
with medullary blast counts below and above 10%. In addi-
tion, a group of patients with less than 5% medullary blasts
but evidence of multilineage dysplasia was defined. MDS
patients with 5q − as the sole chromosomal anomaly were
also considered a separate group. There is a significant dif-
ference in prognosis between RAEB I and RAEB II, as well
as a difference between refractory anemia and multilineage
dysplasia. Furthermore, patients with 5q − anomaly had a
much better prognosis than other WHO subtypes, but this
was only true for patients with a medullary blast count below
5%. In summary, the WHO classification appears to define
morphological subgroups that are more homogeneous with
respect to prognosis than the FAB subtypes.
Although progression to AML is the natural course in
many cases of MDS, the percentage of patients who prog-
ress varies substantially in the various subtypes. A higher
percentage of patients with increased myeloblasts transforms
into AML.7,8
The recurring chromosomal abnormalities
and their frequency in MDS at diagnosis is illustrated in
Table 2A scoring system for predicting survival and evolution
to AML based on percent of BM blasts, type of cytogenetic
abnormalities, and degree and number of cytopenias has been
proposed by International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS)
for MDS4,5
(Table 3). Treatment is based on several factors
including age, prior history of a myelodysplastic syndrome,
overall clinical assessment and tempo of the process.
The annual incidence of myelodysplastic syndromes
is 3–5/100000 persons but rising to .20/100000 among
those over the age of 70 years.9,10
MDS principally occurs in
older adults with a median age of 70 years. There is a male
predominance.
Clinical features
The majority of patients present with symptoms related to
cytopenia(s) – hemorrhage, recurrent infection, fatigue,
­dyspnea, gingival bleeding and hematomas. Most patients
are anemic and transfusion dependent.11
Less frequent
are ­neutropenia or thrombocytopenia. Organomegaly is
­infrequently observed. Approximately 10%–40% of the
Table 1 Recent WHO 2008 classification of myelodysplastic syndromes11
Disease Blood findings Bone marrow findings
Refractory cytopenia with
unilineage dysplasia (RCUD)
Refractory anemia (RA);
Refractory neutropenia (RN);
Refractory thrombocytopenia (RT)
Unicytopenia or bicytopenia$
No or rare blasts (,1%)#
Unilineage dysplasia:
$10% of cells in one myeloid lineage
,5% blasts
,15% erythroid
precursors are ring sideroblasts
Refractory anemia with ring
sideroblasts (RARS)
Anemia
No blasts
.15% erythroid precursors are ring sideroblasts
Erythroid dysplasia only ,5% blasts
Refractory cytopenia with
multilineage dysplasia (RCMD)
Cytopenia(s)
No or rare blasts (,1%)#
No Auer rods
,1 × 109
/L monocytes
Dysplasia in .10% of cells in
$two myeloid lineages
,5% blasts in marrow No Auer rods
±15% ring sideroblasts
Refractory anemia with excess
blasts-1 (RAEB-1)
Cytopenia(s)
,5% blasts#
No Auer rods
,1 × 109
/L monocytes
Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia
5%–9% blasts#
No Auer rods
Refractory anemia with excess
blasts-2 (RAEB-2)
Cytopenia(s)
5%–19% blasts
Auer rods ±
,1 × 109
/L monocytes
Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia
10%–19% blasts
Auer rods ±
Myelodysplastic
syndrome – unclassified (MDS-U)
Cytopenias
,1% blasts#
Unequivocal dysplasia in less than 10% of cells
in one or more myeloid cell lines when
accompanied by cytogenetic abnormality
considered as presumptive evidence for
diagnosis of MDS ,5% blasts
MDS associated with isolated
del (5q)
Anemia
Usually normal or increased
platelet count
No or rare blasts (,1%)
Normal to increased megakaryocytes with
hypolobated nuclei ,5% blasts Isolated del (5q)
cytogenetic abnormality
No Auer rods
Notes: $
Bicytopenia may occasionally be observed. Cases with pancytopenia should be classified as MDS-U.
#
If the marrow myeloblast percentage is ,5% but there are 2%–4% myeloblasts in the blood, the diagnostic classification is RAEB-1. Cases of RCUD and RCMD with 1%
myeloblasts in the blood should be classified as MDS, U.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
173
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms
patients progress to AML and 20%–40% of the patients die
of infection or bleeding, or both.
Etiology
Primary MDS occurs without a known history of chemo-
therapy or radiation exposure. Possible etiologies for primary
MDS include benzene exposure at levels above the minima
allowed by most government agencies, ­cigarette smoking,
exposure to agricultural chemicals or solvents and family
­history of hematopoietic neoplasms.12
­Secondary MDS is
­usually seen under 50 years of age and is due to ­chemotherapy,
radiation therapy or environmental mutagens.
Morphology
The morphological classification of MDS is principally
based on the percent of blasts in the bone marrow (BM) and
peripheral blood (PB), the type and degree of dysplasia and
the presence of ring sideroblasts.1
To determine the blast
percentage in the BM, a 500-cell differential of all nucleated
cells in a smear or trephine imprint is recommended and in
the PB, a 200-leukocyte differential. In severely cytopenic
patients, buffy coat smears of PB may facilitate performing
the differential. The characteristics of dysplasia are relevant
when distinguishing between various types of MDS and
may be important in predicting biology. Persistent cytopenia
without dysplasia and without one of the specific cytogenetic
abnormalities considered as presumptive evidence of MDS
should be viewed as the recently described “idiopathic
cytopenia of undetermined significance” (ICUS).13
The
recommended requisite percentage of cells manifesting
dysplasia to qualify as significant is $10% in the erythroid
precursors and granulocytes.14
Significant megakaryocyte
dysplasia is defined as $10% dysplastic megakaryocytes
based on evaluation of at least 30 megakaryocytes in smears
or sections. Dyserythropoiesis is manifest principally by
alterations in the nucleus including budding, internuclear
bridging, karyorrhexis, multinuclearity (Figure 2A, 2B
and 2C) and megaloblastoid changes (Figure 2A and 2B);
cytoplasmic features include ring sideroblasts, vacuoliza-
tion and periodic acid-Schiff positivity, either diffuse
or granular. ­Dysgranulopoiesis is characterized primar-
ily by nuclear hypolobation (pseudo Pelger–Huet) and
­hypersegmentation, cytoplasmic hypogranularity, pseudo
­Chediak–­Higashi ­granules and small size. Megakaryocyte
dysplasia is ­characterized by micro-megakaryocytes with
hypolobated nuclei, nonlobated nuclei in megakaryocytes
of all sizes, and multiple, widely separated nuclei. The
characteristics of dysplasia may be relevant in predicting
biology of ­myelodysplastic disorder and the relationship to
specific cytogenetic abnormalities, eg, 5q-syndrome.6
The
significance of Auer rod in myeloid ­disorders is uncertain.
In the revised FAB classification of 1982 it was viewed
as evidence of a high grade MDS, ­refractory anemia with
excess of blasts in transformation (RAEBT), irrespective of
the blast percentage in the PB or BM.1
In the prior WHO
Classification of the MDS it was considered as evidence of
RAEB-2 or CMML-2 in the context of MDS/MPN regardless
of blast percentage. This concept is retained in the present
classification. The BM in MDS is usually hypercellular or
normocellular; the cytopenias result from the ineffective
hematopoiesis. Histologically, aggressive MDS may be char-
acterized by the presence of aggregates (3–5 cells) or clusters
(.5 cells) of blasts in BM biopsies usually localized in the
central portion of the BM away from the vascular structures
and endosteal surfaces of the bony trabeculae. These are
frequently present in RAEB.
Other investigations reveal normal-to-high serum iron and
folic acid levels.TheTotal Iron Binding Capacity (TIBC) may
be normal-to-decreased.There is a decrease in the number of
T-lymphocytes (CD4 and CD8) while the B-lymphocytes are
quantitatively normal. Serum immunoglobulins are increased
and circulating immune complexes are frequently present.15
Differential diagnosis
Several nutritional, toxic and other factors including
­essential element deficiencies and exposure to heavy metals,
Table 2 Recurring chromosomal abnormalities and their
frequency in myelodysplastic syndromes at diagnosis11
Abnormality MDS t-MDS
Unbalanced
+8 10%
-7 or del (7q) 10% 50%
-5 or del (5q) 10% 40%
del (20q) 5%–8%
-Y 5%
i(17q) or t(17p) 3%–5%
-13 or del (13q) 3%
del (11q) 3%
del (12p) or t(12p) 3%
del (9q) 1%–2%
idic(X)(q13) 1%–2%
Balanced
t(11;16)(q23;p13.3) 3%
t(3;21)(q26.2;q22.1) 2%
t(1;3)(p36.3;q21.2) 1%
t(2;11)(p21;q23) 1%
inv(3)(q21q26.2) 1%
t(6;9)(p23;q34) 1%
Abbreviation: MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
174
Gupta et al
­particularly arsenic and several commonly used drugs and
biologic agents may cause myelodysplastic changes.16
Other
causes for dyserythropoiesis include congenital hematologi-
cal disorders, Parvovirus B19 infection and immunosuppres-
sive agent mycophenolate mofetil. Chemotherapeutic agents
may result in marked dysplasia of all myeloid cell lineages.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria may also present with
features similar to MDS.
Variants
Hypoplastic MDS
In approximately 10% of the cases the BM is hypocellular.
These cases have been referred to as hypoplastic MDS. The
BM cellularity is ,30% or ,20% in patients over 60 years
of age.This group has no individual prognostic significance.
The differential diagnosis for this group includes aplastic
anemia, toxic myelopathy and autoimmune disorders.
­Antithymocyte globulin and other therapies used for aplastic
anemia are used as treatment options in this subgroup.16
MDS with myelofibrosis
Significant degrees of myelofibrosis are observed in
­approximately 10% of the cases of MDS. These cases have
been referred to as MDS with fibrosis.17
Most of these cases
have an excess of blasts and an aggressive clinical course.
Laboratory investigations reveal pancytopenia, ­hypocellular
bone marrow with fibrosis, trilineage dysplasia, small
­megakaryocytes with hypolobated nuclei and absence of
A B
Figure 1 Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia (RCUD). Bone marrow aspirate (Wright–Giemsa – 100x). A) Refractory anemia – showing dyserythropoiesis with
cytoplasmic vacuolation. B) Refractory thrombocytopenia – showing dysmegakaryopoiesis with multinucleation.
A
B
C
Figure 2 A) Leishman Stain (×100 magnification). Showing dyserythropoiesis. B) May–Grunwald Giemsa Stain (×100 magnification). Arrow showing binucleate erythroblast.
C) Leishman Stain (×200 magnification). Showing multinucleate erythroblast and erythroid dysplasia.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
175
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms
hepatomegaly with prominent splenomegaly. Increase in
fibrosis is due to liberation of cytokines such as TGF-β and
PDGF from dysplastic megakaryocytes.15
The differential
diagnosis includes myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia,
chronic myelocytic leukemia and acute megakaryocytic
leukemia.
Classification
Refractory cytopenia
with unilineage dysplasia
Refractory anemia with unilineage dysplasia (RCUD) is
intended to encompass those myelodysplastic syndromes
which present with a refractory cytopenia with unilineage
dysplasia and includes refractory anemia (RA), refrac-
tory neutropenia (RN) and refractory thrombocytopenia
(RT). Refractory bicytopenia may be included in the
RCUD ­category if accompanied by unilineage dysplasia.
­Refractory pancytopenia is placed in a category of myelo-
dysplastic ­syndrome, unclassifiable (MDS-U). The recom-
mended level for dysplasia is $10% of the cell lineage
affected. The ­recommended levels for defining cytopenias
are hemoglobin ,10 g/dL, absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) ,1.8 × 109
/L and platelet count ,100 × 109
/L.4,5
The presence of peripheral blood blasts essentially excludes
a diagnosis of RCUD although in an occasional case a rare
blast may be identified.
Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia ­comprises
10%–20% of the cases of MDS.18
The median age of
­presentation is around 65–70 years.There is no significant sex
predilection. Majority of the RCUD cases are RA. Refractory
neutropenia and refractory thrombocytopenia are rare. The
presenting symptoms are related to the type of cytopenia.
Refractory anemia
The peripheral blood picture in refractory anemia shows
­normocytic or macrocytic with normochromic red blood
cells. There is variable anisopoikilocytosis. Blasts are rarely
seen and if present, account for ,1% of the white blood cells.
The neutrophils and platelets are usually normal in number
and morphology. The bone marrow is usually hypercellular
with erythroid hyperplasia. Dyserythropoiesis varies from
slight to moderate with evidence of dysplasia in 10% or
more of the erythroid precursors (Figure 1A, 2A, 2B, 2C).
Ring sideroblasts may be present but are ,15% of erythroid
precursors. Myeloblasts account for ,5% of the nucleated
BM cells. The neutrophils and megakaryocytes are normal
or may show minimal dysplasia, but always ,10% in either
cell line.
Cytogenetic abnormalities associated with RA include
del (20q), +8 and abnormalities of chromosome 5 and/or
chromosome 7. Approximately 90%–95% of patients with
refractory anemia have low or intermediate International
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS).4,5
Refractory neutropenia
Refractory neutropenia is characterized by $10% dysplastic
neutrophils in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. The
dysplasia principally manifests as nuclear hypolobation and
hypogranulation. The other myeloid cell lines do not show
significant dysplasia (,10%).
Refractory thrombocytopenia
Refractory thrombocytopenia is characterized by $10%
dysplastic megakaryocytes of at least 30 megakaryocytes
evaluated.The dysplasia principally manifests as hypolobate
megakaryocytes, binucleate and multinucleate megakaryo-
cytes and micromegakaryocytes (Figure 1B).The other myel-
oid cell lines do not show significant dysplasia (,10%).
Most patients with refractory thrombocytopenia have
low IPSS scores and 90% of the patients live more than two
years.19
Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts
Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) is a
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) characterized by anemia,
morphologic dysplasia in the erythroid lineage and ring
sideroblasts comprising $15% of the bone marrow erythroid
precursors.There is no significant dysplasia in the noneryth-
roid lineages. Myeloblasts comprise ,5% of the nucleated
BM cells and are not present in the peripheral blood.
RARS accounts for 3%–11% of the MDS cases. The
median age of presentation is 60–73 years with no sex
predilection. Primary defects of heme synthesis can largely
be excluded because protoporphyrin IX, the end product of
porphyrin synthesis, is not decreased in RARS.20
Acquired
mutations in genes of the heme synthetic pathway have
not been ­demonstrated in RARS. Thus a primary defect of
­mitochondrial iron metabolism is suspected. RARS repre-
sents a clonal stem cell defect that manifests as abnormal iron
metabolism in the erythroid lineage and results in ineffective
erythropoiesis. The PB and BM are the principal sites of
involvement. The liver and spleen may show signs of iron
overload. Patients present with symptoms related to anemia
and progressive iron overload.
The peripheral blood picture shows a normochromic
macrocytic or normochromic normocytic anemia. Blasts are
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
176
Gupta et al
not present in the PB (Figure 3A). The BM aspirate smear
shows increase in the number of erythroid ­precursors with
erythroid lineage dysplasia (Figure 3B). Granulocytes and
megakaryocytes show no significant dysplasia (,10% dys-
plastic forms). Hemosiderin laden macrophages are often
abundant. On an iron stained aspirate smear, 15% or more
of the red cell precursors are ring sideroblasts (Figure 3C).
The BM biopsy is normocellular to markedly hypercellular,
usually with marked erythroid proliferation. Megakaryocytes
are normal in number and morphology.
Clonal chromosomal abnormalities are seen in 5%–20%
of cases of RARS and when present, typically involve a
single chromosome.21
Approximately 1%–2% of cases of
RARS evolve to acute myeloid leukemia.The overall median
­survival is 69–108 months.
Refractory cytopenia
with multilineage dysplasia
Refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD)
is a type of myelodysplastic syndrome with one or more
­cytopenias and dysplastic changes in two or more of the
myeloid lineages: erythroid, granulocytic, ­megakaryocytic.14
There are ,1% blasts in the peripheral blood and ,5%
in the bone marrow. Auer rods are not present and the
­monocytes in the peripheral blood are less than 1 × 109
/L.
The ­recommended levels for defining cytopenias are hemo-
globin ,10 g/dL, absolute neutrophil count ,1.8 × 109
/L
and platelet count ,100 × 109
/L.4,5
The thresholds for
­dysplasia are $10% in each of the affected cell lines. At
least 30 megakaryocytes should be evaluated for dysplasia
in BM smears or sections.
RCMD accounts for 30% of cases of MDS. The median
age is approximately 70 years.There is a slight predominance
of males. The peak incidence for males is 70–74 years, for
females 75–79 years.18
Blood and bone marrow are the
principal sites of involvement. Most of the patients present
with evidence of BM failure with cytopenia of two or more
myeloid cell lines.
The BM is usually hypercellular. Myeloblasts account for
,5% of the BM cells. Neutrophil dysplasia is ­characterized by
hypogranulation and nuclear hyposegmentation with marked
clumping of nuclear chromatin (pseudo ­Pelger–Huet nuclei)
(Figure 4). Erythroid precursors may show cytoplasmic vacu-
oles and marked nuclear irregularity. The vacuoles may be
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive.There may also be diffuse
cytoplasmic PAS positivity. Megakaryocyte abnormalities
include nonlobated nuclei, hypolobated nuclei, binucleate
or multinucleate megakaryocytes and micromegakaryocytes.
Micromegakaryocytes are the most reliable and reproducible
dysplastic feature in the megakaryocyte series.22
Clonal cytogenetic abnormalities including trisomy 8,
monosomy 7, del (7q), monosomy 5, del (5q), and del (20q)
as well as complex karyotypes, may be found in up to 50%
of patients with RCMD.18,4
A B C
Figure 3 Refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS). A) Peripheral blood smear (Wright–Giemsa – 100x). Occasional macro-ovalocytes seen. B) Bone marrow
biopsy specimen (H&E stain – 100x). Erythroid hyperplasia with immature erythroid cells. C) Iron stain – 100x. With ringed sideroblasts.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
177
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms
Refractory anemia with excess blasts
Refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB) is a
myelodysplasyic syndrome with 5%–19% myeloblasts in
the bone marrow or 2%–19% blasts in the peripheral blood.
Due to differences in survival and incidence of evolution to
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), two categories of RAEB are
recognized: RAEB-1, defined by 5%–9% blasts in the BM
(Figure 5A, 5B) or 2%–4% blasts in the PB, and RAEB-2,
defined by 10%–19% blasts in the BM or 5%–19% blasts in
the PB.4
The presence ofAuer rods in blasts qualifies a case as
RAEB-2 (Figure 5C) irrespective of the blast percentage.7
RAEB accounts for approximately 40% of all patients
with MDS. It affects individuals above 50 years of age.
Risk factors include exposure to environmental toxins;
such as pesticides, petroleum derivatives, some heavy met-
als, and cigarette smoking. RAEB principally involves the
blood and bone marrow. Patients present with symptoms
related to BM failure, including anemia, thrombocytopenia
and neutropenia.
Theperipheralbloodsmearfrequentlyshowsabnormalities
in all three myeloid cell lines, including red cell anisopoikilo-
cytosis; large, giant or hypogranular platelets and abnormal
cytoplasmic granularity and nuclear ­segmentation of the
neutrophils. Blasts are commonly present in the PB. The
bone marrow is usually hypercellular with varying degrees
of dysplasia. Erythropoiesis may be increased with mac-
rocytic or megaloblastoid changes. Granulopoiesis and
­megakaryopoiesis are frequently increased with varying
degrees of dysplasia. The megakaryocytes often show a ten-
dency to cluster. In the BM biopsy, both erythropoiesis and
megakaryopoiesis appear frequently dislocated towards the
paratrabecular areas that are normally predominantly occu-
pied by granulopoietic cells. Blasts in RAEB often tend to
form cell clusters or aggregates that are usually located away
from bone trabeculae and vascular structures, a ­histologic
finding commonly referred to as abnormal localization of
immature precursors (ALIP) (Figure 5D). These may be
identified by immunohistochemical staining for CD34.
Flow cytometry shows increased number of cells positive
for CD34 and CD117. These cells are usually positive for
CD38, HLA-DR and myeloid associated antigens CD13 and
CD33.Asynchronous expression of granulocytic maturation
antigens CD15, CD11b and CD65 can be seen in the blast
population. Antibodies such as CD61 or CD42b can aid in
the identification of micromegakaryocytes and other small
dysplastic forms, which are particularly numerous in cases
of RAEB-F.17
Clonal cytogenetic abnormalities are present in 30%–50%
cases of RAEB. These include +8, −5, del (5q), −7, del (7q)
and del (20q). Approximately 25% of cases of RAEB-1 and
33% of patients with RAEB-2 progress toAML, the remain-
der succumb to sequelae of BM failure.The median survival
is approximately 16 months for RAEB-1 and 9 months for
RAEB-2.
RAEB with fibrosis (RAEB-F)
The current working definition of MDS with fibrosis (MDS-F)
requires diffuse coarse reticulin fibrosis with or without
concomitant collagenization, associated with dysplasia in
at least two cell lineages.23
Most of the cases defined as
MDS-F belong to the RAEB category.The presence of excess
blasts can be demonstrated using immunohistochemistry for
CD34. A characteristic finding in RAEB-F is an increased
number of megakaryocytes of different cell sizes and a high
degree of dysplasia.17
The differential diagnosis includes
therapy-related MDS, myeloproliferative neoplasms, acute
panmyelosis with myelofibrosis (APMF) and rarely reactive
dyshematopoietic conditions.
Myelodysplastic syndrome
with isolated del (5q)
Myelodysplastic syndrome with isolated del (5q) is a MDS
characterized by anemia with or without other cytopenias
and/or thrombocytosis and in which the sole cytogenetic
abnormality is del (5q). Myeloblasts comprise ,5% of
nucleated BM cells and ,1% of peripheral blood leukocytes
and Auer rods are absent.
The median age of presentation is 67 years and occurs
more often in women. The etiology includes presumed loss
of tumor suppressor gene in the deleted region. Possible
candidates include early growth response 1 (EGR1) and
Figure 4 Refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD). Bone marrow
aspirate (Wright–Giemsa stain – 100x). Erythroid precursors with nuclear irregularity
and myeloid precursors with hypogranulation and hyposegmentation.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
178
Gupta et al
α-catenin (CTNNA1) genes. The RPS 14 gene that encodes
a ribosomal protein (40S subunit) has been proposed as
a candidate in the 5q-syndrome, raising the possibility
that a defect in the ribosomal protein function causes the
disorder.11
The gene haploinsufficiency blocks the process-
ing of the preribosomal RNA and the formation of 40S
subunit. Forced expression of RPS 14 in primary bone
marrow cells from patients with the 5q-syndrome rescues
the phenotype.24
The principal sites of involvement are blood and
bone marrow. The most common symptoms are related
to anemia, which is often severe and usually macrocytic.
Thrombocytosis is present in one-third to one-half of patients,
while thrombocytopenia is uncommon.25
Thebonemarrowisusuallyhypercellularornormocellular
and frequently exhibits erythroid hypoplasia. Megakaryocytes
are increased in number and are normal to slightly decreased
in size with nonlobated or hypolobated nuclei (Figure 6).
In contrast, dysplasia in erythroid and myeloid lineages is
uncommon.25
The sole cytogenetic abnormality involves an interstitial
deletion of chromosome 5; the size of the deletion and
breakpoints are variable, but bands q31–q33 are invari-
ably deleted. Any additional cytogenetic abnormality if
present, (with the exception of loss of Y chromosome),
the case should not be placed in this ­category. It has been
recently reported that a small subset of patients with iso-
lated del (5q) may show concomitant JAK2 V617F muta-
tion.11
The disease is associated with a median ­survival
of 145 months, with transformation to AML occurring in
,10% of patients.25
The thalidomide analog ­lenalidomide
has been shown to benefit MDS patients with isolated
del (5q) as well as del (5q) with additional cytogenetic
abnormalities.
Myelodysplastic syndrome, unclassifiable
Myelodysplastic syndrome, unclassifiable (MDS-U) is a
subtype of MDS which initially lacks findings appropriate
for classification into any other MDS category.
The incidence of MDS-U is unknown. The peripheral
blood and bone marrow are the principal sites of involve-
ment. Patients present with symptoms similar to those seen
in other myelodysplastic syndromes.
There are no specific morphologic findings.The ­diagnosis
of myelodysplastic syndrome, unclassifiable is made in
the following three instances: i) Patients with findings of
refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia or refractory
cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia but with 1% blasts in
the peripheral blood, ii) cases of MDS with unilineage dyspla-
sia which are associated with pancytopenia, iii) patients with
persistent cytopenia with 1% or fewer blasts in the blood and
fewer than 5% in the BM, unequivocal dysplasia in less than
10% of the cells in one or more myeloid lineages, and who
have cytogenetic abnormalities considered as a presumptive
evidence of MDS.26
In cases diagnosed as MDS-U, it is unknown both
percentage of patients which transform to acute myeloid
leukemia as well as the disease survival.
A B
C D
Figure 5 Refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB). Bone Marrow (A, B) Aspirate (Wright–Giemsa – 100x) showing blasts, RAEB-1. C) Aspirate (Wright–Giemsa – 100x)
Blasts with Auer rods, RAEB-2. D) Biopsy (H&E stain – 40x), Abnormal localization of immature precursors (ALIP).
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
179
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms
Childhood myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome is very uncommon in ­children,
accounting for less than 5% of all hematopoietic neoplasms
in patients less than 14 years of age. Refractory ­cytopenia
of childhood (RCC) is a myelodysplastic syndrome
­characterized by persistent cytopenia with ,5% blasts
in the bone marrow and ,2% blasts in the peripheral
blood.27
RCC is the most common subtype of MDS in child-
hood accounting for about 50% of the cases. It is diagnosed
in all age groups and affects boys and girls with equal
frequency. Blood and bone marrow are always affected.
­Generally, spleen, liver and lymph nodes are not sites of
initial ­manifestation. The most common symptoms are
malaise, bleeding, fever and infection. Lymphadenopathy
may be present. In up to 20% of patients no clinical signs
or ­symptoms are reported.28
Congenital abnormalities of
different organ systems may be present.
The classical picture of RCC is a peripheral blood
smear that shows red blood cell anisopoikilocyto-
sis and ­macrocytosis. Anisochromia may be present.
Hemoglobin ,10 g/dL is noted in about half of the affected
children. Three quarters of patients have a platelet count
below 150 × 109
/L. Platelets often display anisocytosis and
occasionally giant platelets may be detected. Neutropenia
with pseudo-­Pelger–Huet nuclei or hypogranularity of
­neutrophil cytoplasm may be noted. Blasts are absent or
account for less than 2% of the white blood cells. On bone
marrow aspirate smears dysplastic changes should be present
in two different myeloid cell lineages, or exceed 10% in one
single cell line. Myeloblasts account for fewer than 5% of
bone marrow cells. Megakaryocytes are usually absent or
very low in number. The detection of micromegakaryocytes
is a strong indicator of RCC (Figure 7). Ring sideroblasts are
not found.About 75% of children with RCC show consider-
able hypocellularity of the bone marrow, down to 5%–10%
of the normal age matched value.The morphologic findings
are similar to those observed in the normally cellular or
hypercellular cases.
Monosomy 7 is the most common cytogenetic abnor-
mality. Other cytogenetic abnormalities including complex
karyotypes may also be observed. Patients with monosomy
7 have a significantly higher probability of progression than
patients with other chromosomal abnormalities or normal
karyotype. Immunosuppressive therapy can be a successful
therapy strategy for improving outlook in some children
with RCC.
Micromegakaryocytes are readily appreciated by the
expression of platelet glycoproteins like CD61 (glycoprotein
IIIa), CD41 (glycoprotein IIb/IIIa) or von Willebrand fac-
tor. Myeloblasts are positive for CD34, myeloperoxidase,
lysozyme and CD117.
A B
C D
Figure 6 Myelodysplastic syndrome with isolated del (5q). A, B) Bone marrow aspirate (40x and 100x). Hypolobated megakaryocyte seen. C, D) Bone marrow­
biopsy – (10x and 40x – H&E stain). Hypercellular bone marrow with myeloid proliferation associated with hypolobated or nonlobated megakaryocytes.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
180
Gupta et al
Cytochemistry and
immunophenotyping
Peroxidase and Sudan black B identify blasts with a myel-
oid origin, however, in MDS the blasts may have a lower
­peroxidase activity than normal blasts. Combined esterase
stain may be performed on both peripheral blood and bone
marrow for a more accurate assessment of monocytic
cells. Iron stain may reveal abnormal iron metabolism in
erythroblasts with the presence of increased iron stores and
ringed sideroblasts. Abnormal carbohydrate metabolism
is ­indicated by the presence of blocks of PAS-positive
material in erythrocyte precursors. Abnormal small
megakaryocytes are identified by immunochemistry with
antibodies against platelet-specific glycoproteins IIb/IIIa
(CD41), GPIIIa (CD61), or by antibody against factor VIII
in histologic sections. Diaminobenzidine can be utilized
to identify platelet peroxidase in electron micrographs.15,17
Erythroid abnormalities can be determined by the pat-
tern of expression of H-Ferritin, CD71 and CD105 in
glycophorin A (GPA) positive nucleated cells. Increased
expression of markers found on immature myeloid cells
such as CD13, CD33, CD34, and HLA-DL and decreased
expression of NAT-9 (found on mature myeloid cells) may
be associated with a worse prognosis and with ­progression
to AML.15
Cytogenetics
Cytogenetic and molecular studies have a major role in the
evaluation of patients with MDS in regard to ­prognosis,
determination of clonality, and the recognition of ­cytogenetic,
morphologic, and clinical correlates. Clonal cytogenetic
abnormalities are observed in around 50% of MDS cases.
The recurring chromosomal abnormalities and their
­frequency in MDS at diagnosis is illustrated in Table 2. The
types of ­cytogenetic abnormalities seen in MDS are usually
­unbalanced in contrast to inversions or translocations seen in
AML. The more frequent cytogenetic abnormalities involve
structural or numeric abnormalities of chromosome 5 and
7 and trisomy 8.15
New techniques such as fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) have improved the identification
of chromosome abnormalities using specific DNA probes.
Three major risk categories of cytogenetic findings have
been defined by the International Myelodysplastic Syndrome
Working Group.4
These include: i) good risk – normal
karyotype, isolated del (5q), isolated del (20q) and − Y;
ii) poor risk – complex abnormalities, ie, $3 abnormalities,
or abnormalities of chromosome 7; and iii) intermediate
risk – all other abnormalities.
Prognosis and predictive factors
A scoring system for predicting survival and evolution
to AML based on percent of BM blasts, type of cytoge-
netic abnormalities, and degree and number of cytopenias
has been proposed by International Prognostic Scoring
System (IPSS) for MDS (Table 3).4,5
Four risk groups
are recognized based on this scoring system: low, 0; INT
(intermediate) −1, 0.5–1.0; INT −2, 1.5–2.0; and high, $2.5.
The median ­survival for the low risk group is 5.7 years, for
­intermediate −1 is 3.5 years, for intermediate −2 is 1.2 years
and for the high risk group is 0.4 years.15
In general, the
higher risk groups are related to higher BM blast percent-
age, more unfavorable cytogenetic findings and more severe
degree of cytopenia. Patients younger than 60 years of age
have improved survival in the individual risk categories
compared with patients older than 60 years.The cytogenetic
subgrouping of the IPSS system also has independent value
in ­predicting the outcome of allogeneic stem cell transplanta-
tion in patients with MDS.29
Treatment
The therapy of MDS has been unsatisfactory. Only stem
cell transplantation offers cure: survival rates of 50% at
3 years have been reported, but older patients are particularly
prone to develop treatment-related mortality and morbidity.
Results of transplant using matched unrelated donors are
comparable, although most series contain younger and more
highly selected cases.30
MDS has been regarded as particularly refractory to
cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens but is probably no more
resistant to effective treatment than acute myeloid leukemia
in the elderly, in whom drug toxicity is often fatal and remis-
sions, if achieved, are brief.
Low doses of cytotoxic drugs have been administered
for their “differentiating” potential, and from this experience
has emerged drug therapies based on pyrimidine analogs.
Table 3 International prognostic scoring system (IPSS) for MDS4,5
Score 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Prognostic variables
% bone marrow
blasts
,5% 5%–10% 11%–19% 20%–30%*
Karyotype** Good Intermediate Poor
Cytopenias*** 0–1 2–3
Notes: *This group is recognized as AML in the WHO classification; **Karyotype:
Good = normal, -Y, del (5q), del (20q); Poor = complex ($3 abnormalities) or
chromosome 7 anomalies; Intermediate = other abnormalities; ***Cytopenias: Hgb
,10 g/dL; Neutrophils ,1.8 × 109
/L; Platelets ,100 × 109
/L.
Abbreviations: MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia;
WHO, world health organization.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
181
Myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms
Azacitidine is directly cytotoxic but also inhibits DNA
methylation, thereby altering gene expression. Azacitidine
improves blood counts and modestly improves survival in
about 16% of MDS patients, compared to best supportive
care.30
Decitabine is closely related to azacitidine and more
potent.The major toxicity of both azacitidine and decitabine
is myelosuppression, leading to worsened blood counts. Other
symptoms associated with cancer chemotherapy frequently
occur.
Thalidomide, a drug with many activities including anti-
angiogenesis and immunomodulation, has modest biologic
activity in MDS. Lenalidomide, a thalidomide derivative
with a more favorable toxicity profile, is ­particularly effec-
tive in reversing anemia in MDS patients with 5q-syndrome;
not only do a high proportion of these patients become
­transfusion-independent with normal or near-normal
­hemoglobin levels, but their cytogenetics also become
normal.29
Toxicities include myelosuppression (worsening
thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, necessitating blood count
monitoring) and an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis
and pulmonary embolism.
Other treatments for MDS include amifostine, an organic
thiophosphonate that blocks apoptosis; it can improve blood
counts but has significant toxicities.Antithymocyte globulin
and cyclosporine, also may produce sustained independence
from transfusion, especially in younger MDS patients with
more favorable International Prognostic Scoring System
(IPSS) scores.30
Hematopoietic growth factors can improve blood counts
but, as in most other marrow failure states, have been most
beneficial to patients with the least severe pancytopenia.
Erythropoietin alone or in combination with G-CSF can
improve hemoglobin levels, but mainly in those with low
serum erythropoietin levels who have no or only a modest
need for transfusions. RBC transfusion support should be
accompanied by iron chelation in order to prevent secondary
hemochromatosis.30
Conclusion
In 1982, the French–American–British (FAB) cooperative
group proposed a classification of myelodysplastic syn-
dromes (MDS) based on morphological features in blood
and bone marrow, namely on medullary and peripheral
blast count, Auer rods, ring sideroblasts and the number
of ­monocytes in the peripheral blood. This classification
has been used for numerous studies regarding ­morphology,
prognosis and treatment of MDS. Some details of this
­morphological classification remained unclear, and some
patients were unclassifiable. Myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS) are spectrum of bone marrow failure disorders that
share a common pathologic feature: cytologic dysplasia.
The classification of MDS reflects the understanding of
the disease. The WHO 2008 Classification for MDS has
been summarized in Table 1. It is hoped that in the future
­classification and risk stratification will be based on underly-
ing pathobiology of different ­disease subsets and molecular
signatures where the pathologic ­classification represents
their phenotype. This article reviews MDS classification
and risk stratification highlighting differences between the
various systems.
Disclosure
This manuscript has been read and approved by all
authors. This paper is unique and not under consideration
by any other publication and has not been published
elsewhere. The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.
References
1.	 Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et  al. Proposals for the
­classification of the myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol. 1982;
51:189–199.
2.	 Cazzola M, Malcovati L. Myelodysplastic syndromes-coping with
­ineffective hematopoiesis. N Eng J Med. 2005;352:536–538.
3.	 Vardiman JW. The new World Health Organization classification of
myeloid neoplasms: Q&A with James W. Vardiman MD. Clin Adv
Hematol Oncol. 2003;1:18, 21.
4.	 Greenberg P, Cox C, Lebeau MM, et al. International scoring system
for evaluating prognosis in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 1997;
89:2079–2088.
5.	 Greenberg P, Cox C, Lebeau MM, et al. Erratum Blood. 1998;91:
1100.
6.	 Verburgh E, Achten R, Louw VJ, et al. A new disease categorization
of low-grade myelodysplastic syndromes based on the expression of
cytopenia and dysplasia in one versus more than one lineage improves
on the WHO classification. Leukemia. 2007;21:668–677.
7.	 Germing U, Strupp C, Knendgen A, et al. Refractory anemia with
excess blasts (RAEB): analysis of reclassification according to the WHO
­proposals. Br J Haematol. 2006;132:162–167.
8.	 Malcovati L, Porta MG, Pascutto C, et al. Prognostic factors and life
expectancy in myelodysplastic syndromes classified according to
WHO criteria: a basis for clinical decision making. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:7594–7603.
Figure 7 Childhood myelodysplastic syndrome. Bone marrow biopsy (H and E –
100X). Dysplastic megakaryocytes.
Journal of Blood Medicine
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/Journal-of-blood-medicine-journal
The Journal of Blood Medicine is an international, peer-reviewed, open
access, online journal publishing laboratory, experimental and clinical aspects
of all topics pertaining to blood based medicine including but not limited to:
Transfusion Medicine; Blood collection, Donor issues,Transmittable diseases,
and Blood banking logistics; Immunohematology; Artificial and alternative
blood based therapeutics; Hematology; Biotechnology/nanotechnology of
blood related medicine; Legal aspects of blood medicine; Historical perspec-
tives.The manuscript management system is completely online and includes
a very quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2010:1submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
182
Gupta et al
	 9.	 Aul C, Gattermann N, Schneider W. Age-related incidence and other
epidemiological aspects of myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol.
1992;82:358–367.
	10.	 Germing U, Strupp C, Knendgen A, et al. No increase in age-specific
incidence of myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematological. 2004;89:
905–910.
	11.	 Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al, editors.WHO Classification of
Tumors of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC: Lyon 2008.
	12.	 Strom SS, Gu Y, Gruschkus SK, Pierce SA, Estey EH. Risk ­factors
of myelodysplastic syndromes: a case-control study. Leukemia. 2005;
19:1912–1918.
	13.	 Wimazal F, Fonatsch C,Thalhammer R, Schwarzinger I, et al. Idiopathic
cytopenia of undetermined significance (ICUS) versus low risk MDS:
The diagnostic interface. Leuk Res. 2007;31:1461–1468.
	14.	 Rosati S, Mick R, Xu F, Stonys E. Refractory cytopenia with
­multilineage dysplasia: further characterization of an ‘unclassifiable’
myelodysplastic syndrome. Leukemia. 1996;10:20–26.
	15.	 Lawrence LW, McKenzie SB, Williams JL. Clinical Laboratory
Hematology. Myelodysplastic Syndromes. 2nd edition. Prentice Hall.
2004.
	16.	 Bowen D, Culligan D, Jowitt S, Kelsey S, et al. Guidelines for ­diagnosis
and therapy of adult myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol.
2003;120:187–200.
	17.	 Lambertenghi-Detiliers G, Orazi A, Luksch R, Annaloro C, et al.
Myelodysplastic syndrome with increased marrow fibrosis: a distinct
clinic-pathological entity. Br J Haematol. 1991;78:163–166.
	18.	 Germing U, Strupp C, Knendgen A, et al. Prospective validation of the
WHO proposals for the classification of myelodysplastic syndromes.
Hematologica. 2006;91:1596–1604.
	19.	 Sashida G, Takaku TI, Shoji N, et al. Clinic-hematologic features of
myelodysplastic syndrome presenting as isolated thrombocytopenia:
an entity with relatively favorable prognosis. Leuk Lymphoma. 2003;
44: 653–658.
	20.	 Kushner JP, Lee GR,Wintrobe MM, Cartwight GE. Idiopathic refractory
sideroblastic anemia: clinical and laboratory investigation of 17 patients
and review of literature. Medicine (Baltimore). 1971;50:139–159.
	21.	 Breccia M, Carmosino I, Biondo F, et al. Usefulness and ­prognostic
impact on survival of WHO reclassification in FAB low risk
­myelodysplastic syndromes. Leuk Res. 2006;30:178–182.
	22.	 Matsuda A, Germing U, Jinnai I, et al. Improvement of criteria for
refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia according to theWHO
classification based on prognostic significance of morphological features
in patients with refractory anemia according to the FAB classification.
Leukemia. 2007;21:678–686.
	23.	 Steensma DP, Hanson CA, Letendre L, Tefferi A. Myelodysplasia with
fibrosis: a distinct entity? Leuk Res. 2001;25:829–838.
	24.	 Ebert BL, Pretz J, Bosco J, Chang CY, Tamayo P, Galili N, et al.
Identification of RPS 14 as a 5q- syndrome gene by RNA interference
screen. Nature. 2008;451:335–339.
	25.	 Giagounidis AA, Germing U, Haase S, et al. Clinical, morphologic,
cytogenetic, and prognostic features of patients with myelodysplastic
syndromes and del (5q) including band q31. Leukemia. 2004;18:
113–119.
	26.	 Knipp S, Strupp C, Gattermann N, Hilderbrandt B, et al. Presence of
peripheral blasts in refractory anemia and refractory cytopenia with
multilineage dysplasia predicts an unfavorable outcome. Leuk Res.
2008;32:33–37.
	27.	 Hasle H, Niemeyer CM, Chessells JM, et al. A pediatric approach to
the WHO classification of myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative
diseases. Leukemia. 2003;17:277–282.
	28.	 Kardos G, Baumann I, Passmore SJ, et al. Refractory anemia in
­childhood: a retrospective analysis of 67 patients with particular
­reference to monosomy 7. Blood. 2003;102:1997–2003.
	29.	 De Witte T, Oosterveld M, Muus P. Autologous and allogeneic
stem cell transplantation for myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood Rev.
2007;21:49–59.
	30.	 Fauci, Braunwald, Kasper, et al. Harrison’s-Principles of Internal
Medicine. Aplastic anemia, Myelodysplasia, and related bone marrow
failure syndromes. 17th edition. McGraw-Hill’s. 2008.
