© 2011 Eridani and Mosca, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access
article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 23–30
Journal of Blood Medicine Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
23
R e v i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
DOI: 10.2147/JBM.S14942
Fetal hemoglobin reactivation and cell engineering
in the treatment of sickle cell anemia
Sandro Eridani
Andrea Mosca
Department of Biomedical
Science and Technology,
University of Milano, Italy
Correspondence: Sandro Eridani
Department of Biomedical Science
and Technology, University of Milano,
Via Fratelli Cervi 93, 20090, Italy
Tel +39 02 5033 0422
Fax +39 02 9998 7559
Email seridani@gmail.com
Abstract: The natural history of severe hemoglobinopathies like sickle cell disease (SCD) is
rather variable, depending on the circumstances, but the main influence on such variability is
the level of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in the patient’s red cells. It is well known that a significant
HbF level is associated with a milder course of disease and fewer complications. Therefore,
attempts have been made to reactivate using various means the HbF production, which is nor-
mally switched off perinatally.A pharmacological approach has been attempted since the 1980s,
ranging from drugs like 5-azacytidine and its derivative, decitabine, to a series of compounds
like hydroxyurea and a number of histone deacetylase inhibitors like butyrate, which seem to
act as epigenetic modifiers. Many other disparate agents have been tried with mixed results, but
hydroxyurea remains the most effective compound so far available. Combinations of different
compounds have also been tried with some success. Established treatments like bone marrow
or cord blood transplantation are so far the only real cure for a limited number of patients with
severe hemoglobinopathies. Improved chemotherapy regimens of milder toxicity than those
employed in the past have made it possible recently to obtain a stable, mixed donor-recipient
chimerism, with reversal of the SCD phenotype. However, great effort is directed to cell
­engineering, searching for an effective gene vector by which a desired gene can be transferred
into new classes of vectors for autologous hemopoietic stem cells. Recent studies are also aiming
at targeted insertion of the therapeutic gene into hemopoietic cells, which can also be “induced”
human stem cells, obtained from somatic dedifferentiated cells. Attention in this area must be
paid to the possibility of undesired effects, like the emergence of potentially oncogenic cell
populations. Finally, an update is presented on improved HbF determination methods, because
common international standards are becoming mandatory.
Keywords: sickle cell disease, hemoglobin F, determinants, inducers, cell engineering, induced
pluripotent stem cells
Introduction
In the wide spectrum of congenital hemoglobin disorders, two entities have always
attracted attention because of their severity and extensive geographic distribution,
ie, beta thalassemia major and sickle cell disease (SCD). In the present review, ­attention
is focused on the latter disease, characterized by a qualitative defect in ­beta-globin
­production, due to replacement of a single amino acid (valine for ­glutamic acid) in the
beta-globin chain and formation of an anomalous hemoglobin, called­hemoglobin S.This
induces severe deformity of red cells upon deoxygenation, ­hampering ­microcirculation,
and leading to vascular occlusion and critical organ damage.1
However, it has been noted that the natural history of this disease shows considerable
heterogeneity in signs and symptoms, due to a variety of concomitant situations.
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Journal of Blood Medicine
2 March 2011
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
24
Eridani and Mosca
Actually, the main factor in the variable severity of SCD is
the level of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) produced by patients.
There are indeed many disparate conditions, in which a higher
level of HbF than expected can be found. They range from
hereditary disorders to acquired ones, as well as from blood
diseases to nonhematological situations (Table 1). It is well
known that populations showing a genetically determined
presence of HbF have a milder form of SCD, including
a reduced incidence of severe clinical complications.2
It is
therefore understandable that many efforts have been directed
to restore the production of HbF in adults.3
As for the background of this process, recent studies
have produced a good amount of information, particularly on
gamma-globin gene control. In the present paper, we therefore
propose a brief initial survey of these genetic factors, and then
focus on new ways of drug treatment for reactivation of HbF
level, as well as attempts at correction of the genetic defect by
cell engineering. A brief update on recent methods for HbF
assay is also included.
Genetics of HbF
It is well known that only a tiny fraction of HbF is still present
in the majority of adults, as a result of the switch to HbA in
early life. However, the switch may be impaired by a number
of mutations in the beta-globin cluster,4
leading to uniform
increase of HbF (pancellular hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin [HPFH]), a condition allowing a normal way of
life, or to a nonuniform distribution of HbF, based on the coex-
istence of two populations of red cells, one with a high content
of HbF (so-called F cells) and another with a negligible amount
of the same. In this case, the condition is called heterocellular
HPFH, which is regarded as a multifactorial quantitative trait,
quite distinct from the classical form of pancellular hereditary
persistence of fetal hemoglobin.5
A number of interesting studies have proposed different
mechanisms which may be responsible for such persistence
of HbF in adults, and can be either mutations in critical
genic regions involved in the activation of globin genes or
deletions of the globin gene cluster. Examples of the former
event are single base substitutions in the promoter region
of the gamma-globin genes, found in adults with high HbF
production,6
or T to C substitution in the gamma-globin
gene, leading to disruption of the assembly of a repressive
chromatin structure, which normally silences the expression
of the gamma-globin gene in adult erythrocytes.7
In the latter
case, (ie, deletional persistence of HbF), Gazouli et  al,8
attempting to explain the production of the HbF phenotype
in adult red cells, carried out an investigation in transgenic
mice ­lacking two elements of the Aγ-to-δ gene region, sug-
gesting that a deletion of silencer elements in that gene region
may account for persistent expression of HbF in the adult
stage. Previous experiments by the same authors had shown
that a juxtaposition of downstream enhancers may also con-
tribute to that effect, but different models are not ­mutually
exclusive. According to another study, a downregulation
of the ­transcriptional repressor, ZHX2, or some chromatin
remodelling factors may also be involved in deletional
­hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin.9
 Anyway, there is
an obvious benefit from the analysis of multiple mechanisms
of HbF persistence in adults, namely a better understanding
of the molecular basis for the perinatal hemoglobin switch.
As far as possible genetic determinants of HbF production
are concerned, recent investigations have produced interesting
data(seeTable 2). Anearly­hypothesissuggestedthatvariability
Table 1 Conditions affecting hemoglobin F levels
Hereditary diseases
  • Thalassemia syndromes (homozygous beta thalassemia,
heterozygous beta thalassemia, delta beta thalassemia,
homozygous and heterozygous)
  • Other hemoglobinopathies (hereditary persistence of hemoglobin F,
homozygous and heterozygous, sickle cell anemia, hemoglobin C,
hemoglobin E, Hemoglobin Lepore syndrome, some
unstable hemoglobin)
  • Hereditary spherocytosis
  • Hemoglobin variants with retention time similar to that
of hemoglobin F
Acquired conditions
Non neoplastic blood disorders
  • Pernicious anemia
  • Sideroblastic anemia
  • Pure red cell aplasia
  • Refractory normoblastic anemia
  • Aplastic anemia
  • Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
  • Recovery from bone marrow transplant
Neoplastic blood disorders
  • Acute leukemias
  • Erythroleukemia
  • Juvenile chronic myeloid leukemia
  • Marrow neoplastic metastases
  • Hepatoma
Treatment-related situations
  • Antileukemic chemotherapy
  • Therapy with hydroxyurea, aza-deoxycytidine,
butyrates, and erythropoietin
Miscellaneous
  • Pregnancy
  • Hyperthyroidism
  • Chronic renal disease
  • Trisomy 13 (Palau syndrome)
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
25
HbF induction and genetic engineering in sickle cell disease
inHbFwasmainlydueto­independentgeneticfactors,aneffect
particularly evident in patients with SCD.10
A seminal study
showedthatavariationofgeneticdeterminantsonchromosome
11p16 was involved in the expression of HbF, and precisely at
position 158.11
However, the effect of such variation is modest
in normal people, and its presence is not always associated
with high HbF, but variants at this locus have a considerable
frequency in certain populations likeAsian Indians, in whom it
was first studied and found to be associated with the presence
of moderate levels of HbF in normal individuals.12
A second determinant was found in a large Indian ­family
with beta thalassemia and hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin, situated in a region on chromosome 6q23-q24,
between the HBS1L and MYB genes.13
This locus was there-
fore termed HMIP (HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism),
and is an important component (about 19%) of the F cell trait
in the general population.
A strong association with HbF level was eventually
observed with a third locus, situated on chromosome 2p15,
namely the BCL11A, leading to the ­hypothesis that a prod-
uct of this locus, a multizinc finger ­transcription factor, may
encode a stage-specific regulator of HbF ­expression.14
On the
clinical side, extensive research ­carried out among patients in
Sardinia and other groups showed that a variant of BCL11A
was strongly ­associated with ­individuals having high HbF
levels, as well as with patients having mild forms of thalas-
semia and SCD.15
A very recent study, based on genome-wide
association, has also identified a regulatory region in the
olfactory receptor gene cluster (on chromosome 11), which
may play a role in gamma-globin gene expression.16
Finally, it should be stressed that, although recent ­progress
in the genetics of HbF has not yet promoted ­therapeutic
­applications, every contribution to the ­understanding of
genetic mechanisms presiding over HbF synthesis and to the
HbF-to-HbA switch is a necessary premise for the formulation
of treatment strategies for severe hemoglobin disorders.
Inducers of fetal hemoglobin
Agents capable of inducing production of fetal hemoglobin
have been known for many years, and have also been used
in clinical trials (Table 3).
1)  It was in the early 1980s that 5-azacytidine was shown
to be able to reinduce production of HbF in adults, as well as
in experimental animals.A few patients with beta thalassemia
and SCD treated with this drug showed a modest correction
of globin chain imbalance and had lower transfusion needs.17
However, the possibility that such treatment could have an
oncogenic effect discouraged the undertaking of these tri-
als. It was only years later that a derivative of azacytidine,
namely deoxy-azacytidine, or decitabine, was found to be
effective in reactivating ­production of fetal hemoglobin,
and was therefore started in regular trials on SCD patients.18
As for possible toxic effects from this drug, only revers-
ible neutropenia was observed, while tests on experimental
animals not only showed absence of tumorigenic action,
but even suggested a decrease of tumor formation in mice
predisposed to cancer.19
Parenteral administration of decitabine can produce a
notable increase of HbF levels as well as stimulate erythroid
differentiation in SCD patients.20
Oral preparations have also
been tested in animals, with the aim of making them more
acceptable to patients.21
More investigations are needed to
study possible long-term adverse effects of this compound.
Great interest was devoted to the study of the mecha-
nism of action of different compounds in the induction
of HbF. Early suggestions of a relevant effect on DNA
­hypomethylation at the promoters of the gamma-globin gene3
were ­followed by the realization that different mechanisms
may be involved.A unifying theory has been proposed, based
on the ­assumption that a variety of cellular stresses and
stimuli can ­promote coordinated stress responses, including
­gamma-globin gene activation. Different signaling pathways,
like cAMP, p38MAPK, and others may be involved.22
2)  Hydroxyurea (hydroxycarbamide [HC]) has been
known for a long time as a well tolerated oral treatment for
some myeloproliferative disorders. Its action on HbF produc-
tion, first observed in baboons, was then tested and demon-
strated in clinical trials on SCD patients. Predictably, bone
marrow suppression was observed after long-term treatment,
but this effect was reversible.3
The mechanism of action of
this compound seems to be mediated through the induction
of a GTP-binding protein SAR, which modulates expres-
Table 2 Genetic determinants of hemoglobin F production
Locus Chromosome
  • Xmn1-HBG2 11
  • HMIP (HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism) 6
  • BCL11A 2
  • OR5 -OR6 (olfactory receptor gene cluster) 11
Table 3 Inducers of hemoglobin F production
  • Nucleoside analogs, ie, azacytidine and decitabine
  • Hydroxyurea (hydroxycarbamide)
  • Histone deacetylase inhibitors, ie, butyrate, trychostatin A, apicidin,
scriptaid, hydroxyamides
  • Others, including erythropoietin, valproate, thalidomide derivatives,
kit ligand
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
26
Eridani and Mosca
sion of the gamma-globin gene in erythroid cells.23
Very
good results have been reported recently in a 17-year trial
­carried out in a variety of sickle cell syndromes. A dramatic
­reduction of severe pain crises, transfusion requirements and
hospital admissions was obtained, showing how prolonged
and tolerable treatment with hydroxyurea can profoundly
modify the natural history of the disease.24
As for the mechanism of action of hydroxyurea, a series of
investigations point to an effect on genes which are involved in
hemoglobin synthesis. One of these genes is the transcription
factor, EGR1, which is one of the most ­upregulated genes
following HC treatment.Another group of genes, represented
by CENTB1 (centaurin, beta 1), ARHGAP4 (Rho GTPase
activating protein 4), and RIN3 (Ras and Rab interactor 3),
were found to be induced after hydroxyurea administration.25
Another study, carried out in reticulocytes from SCD patients
after hydroxyurea treatment showed an altered expression of
genes associated with the regulation of globin ­expression,
like SUD53, FZD5, and PHC3.26
These results show that
hydroxyurea produces significant changes in the gene
­expression pattern, with activation of ­transcription ­factors and
pathways involved in signal transduction, ­eventually leading
to an increase of globin gene expression.
The search continues to find agents able to enhance the
action of hydroxyurea in SCD patients. In this context, a
compound which has been known for a long time as an HbF
inducer is erythropoietin, which is capable of increasing
the amount of F cells and HbF concentration. A synergistic
action was seen when erythropoietin was associated with
hydroxyurea, either simultaneously or sequentially, and
of special interest is the finding of a good erythropoietin
response in patients who were hydroxyurea-intolerant.
In this case, erythropoietin treatment made it possible to
tolerate hydroxyurea dosage escalation, with an increase
in F cells and only minor side effects.27
More studies are
in progress to investigate the potential of such a drug
combination.
3)  Butyrate was the earliest of a number of compounds
used in this context because of their action as inhibitors of
­histone deacetylase. It is indeed known that by promoting his-
tone acetylation, butyrate increases the transcription rate of the
­gamma-globingene,aswellasthetranslationofgamma-globin
mRNA.28
It has also been demonstrated that transcription
­factors like GATA1 and NF-E32 are involved.29
Other histone deacetylase inhibitors, and butyrate itself,
have also shown a different mechanism of action, namely
throughactivationofthep38MAPkinasepathway.The­effector
molecules have been identified by ­Sangerman et al as CREB1
and ATF2, acting via the ­aforementioned pathway, which
therefore appears to be one of the main mediators of gamma-
globin gene regulation.30
Many more compounds, acting
as histone deacetylase inhibitors, have been mentioned as
beneficial agents in sickle cell disease.31
New classes of synthetic histone deacetylase inhibitors,
defined as aroyl-pyrrolyl hydroxyamides and uracil-based
hydroxyamides, have also been tested. Of 24 agents, two
were found to be active for their ability to induce HbF
in ­different models of erythroid differentiation. The two
­compounds increased the γ/(γ + β) ratio in normal erythroid
cells. ­Interestingly, both compounds were also effective in
­correcting the impaired in vitro maturation of beta ­thalassemic
erythroblasts.32
These results and those obtained with other
types of histone deacetylase inhibitors seem to suggest that
compounds acting as epigenetic modifiers, namely capable
of modulating gene expression, may be a promising area of
investigation.
4)  A number of disparate compounds has been suggested
as endowed with stimulating activity on the production of
gamma-globin and HbF. One of them is valproate, which
was found to induce hemoglobin synthesis in erythroid cells,
again by activation of the p38 pathway.33
An interesting compound tried in this context is the kit
ligand, an important cytokine for the initiation of hemopoiesis.
In unilineage erythroid cultures of 20 patients with major beta
thalassemia or thalassemia intermedia, ­addition of kit ligand
induced a marked increase of ­gamma-globin synthesis,
thus reaching HbF levels three-fold higher than in control
cultures.34
Worth mentioning is the effect of thalidomide, which
seems capable of inducing HbF expression via activation
of the same p38MAPK signaling pathway, as well as the
action of two thalidomide analogs, used as immunomodu-
lators, which have been shown to possess, among other well
known activities, a stimulating effect on HbF ­production.
Such ­compounds, ie, pomalidomide and lenalinamide,
recently tested on early erythroid progenitors in vitro, caused
increased proliferation of immature erythroid cells, regulated
hemoglobin transcription, and induction of HbF without
cytotoxicity. A synergistic effect was also observed in
association with hydroxyurea.35
Cell transplant and cell engineering
An effective strategy employed in SCD is the transplantation
of hemopoietic bone marrow or cord blood, thus delegating
to transplanted stem cells the task of providing normal levels
of hemoglobin A. However, it has been calculated that, up
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
27
HbF induction and genetic engineering in sickle cell disease
to 2008, more than 1600 allogeneic transplants had been
performed in beta thalassemia, but many fewer were done
in SCD, perhaps because fewer patients in the advanced
stages were eligible, due to the presence of severe vascular
damage.36
This option is moreover restricted by limited availability
of suitable donors and the severe effects of marrow ablation
treatment, including reduced fertility, especially in women.
To overcome such limitations, unrelated donors have been
used with some success and nonablative regimens have also
been employed, while, in order to preserve reproductive
potential in women, ovarian tissue preservation and subse-
quent implantation have been employed, obtaining successful
embryo development.37
More recently, sophisticated strategies, based on cell
engineering, have been developed to transfer correcting
genes in patients with a single gene defect. It is certainly
fair to mention some remarkable success obtained by gene
therapy in genetic immunodeficiency diseases.38
As far as
SCD is concerned, a search has been going on for a long time
to find an effective gene vector which would allow transfer
of a desired gene into hemopoietic stem cells. After early
attempts using gamma retroviral vectors to transduce globin
genes into dividing stem cells,39
lentiviral vectors, a subclass
of retroviruses capable of transducing not only proliferating
but also quiescent cells, proved more effective.40
It has been
stressed that lentiviral vectors should be erythroid-specific,
differentiation- and stage-restricted, position-independent,
and sustainable over time.41
This approach can be adopted for SCD, forcing the
expression of fetal hemoglobin, which, even at low con-
centration, has been shown to exert a potent ­antisickling
effect.42
On the other side, it has been noted that gene therapy
for SCD, to be effective, should induce a therapeutic gene
in the greatest part of the red cell population, because even
a small proportion of remaining sickle cells may cause
­vaso-occlusion and severe ischemia.43
As for the cell type to be used for such correction, the
most primitive progenitors, namely embryonic stem cells,
were used initially in mice with SCD by the ­technique of
gene targeting and homologous recombination.44
The clinical
limitation of this procedure is at present the restriction
on human embryonic stem cell research. ­However, great
­attention has been devoted recently to a special class
of hemopoietic stem cells, which can be used for cell
­engineering, namely induced pluripotent stem cells, which
can be obtained by reprogramming somatic cells and
restoring the potential to develop new differentiated cells.45
However, many ­questions are still unsolved about ­possible
applications of human induced pluripotent stem cells in cell
engineering and ­regenerative medicine, like the ­permanence
of foreign DNA in the host genome. New techniques have
therefore been developed to remove the integrated DNA
from the genome of induced pluripotent stem cells,46
making
them safer for clinical use.
It is apparent that a number of modalities are
now available to try to modify the genetic defects in
­hemoglobinopathies, including the sickle mutation. This
brings to the forefront the issue of safety requirements in
gene therapy. It is indeed well known that, in a few cases of
genetic ­immunodeficiency, a neoplastic proliferation was
triggered by insertional ­mutagenesis of a proto-oncogene,
raising the possibility that recombinant retroviral vectors
could influence the expression of nearby genes.47
Although
gamma-globin gene ­vectors seem less prone to induce the
expression of dangerous genes, this is a problem which
requires great attention and is ­presently the object of
intensive research.
Progress in methods for fetal
hemoglobin determination
Unfortunately, there is no international standardization
program for HbF, and no quality specifications have been
reported so far, although these are available for glycated
hemoglobin and total hemoglobin.Therefore, it is ­important
to outline criteria used for measurement units and the
­reference interval for the expression of HbF. a uniform
measurement unit, used worldwide, is the relative ­percentage
of total hemoglobin, although this is not in line with the
­international SI system. Every professional laboratory should
build its own reference interval, by measuring HbF in at
least 100 adults, who are not iron-depleted and not carriers
of alpha or beta thalassemia.
It is generally assumed that HbF above 1% in a healthy
adult individual could be due either to a genetic defect or to
some acquired condition. A review on this topic has been
proposed recently as a guide for the interpretation of clinical
HbF data and a valuable aid to correct diagnosis.48
Among the more sophisticated methods for the
­assessment of HbF levels, we may include the determination
of single nucleotide polymorphisms, whose variations have
received wide application in molecular genetics.49
It is to
be expected that studies of genomic regions ­associated
with HbF levels will provide interesting indications for
the diagnosis and perhaps the therapeutic approach to
hemoglobinopathies.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
28
Eridani and Mosca
Future directions
•	 Identification of the full set of genes controlling gamma-
globin synthesis and HbF production
•	 Optimization of the efficacy of compounds already used
for activating HbF production and exploration of new
drug combinations
•	 Reduction of the risk-benefit ratio of stem cell transplants,
making it possible to treat a larger number of patients
•	 Attempt to translate gene therapy from the experimental
arena to clinical reality, keeping into account its dangers
and limitations.
The first point implies further efforts along a pathway
which has already produced promising results. It has been
stressed, however, that only about half of the genetic factors
influencing HbF control has been identified and that multiple
loci, perhaps of limited relevance, still have to be located.5
Environmental factors also await to be clarified and in this
context more comparisons between affected populations in
different parts of the world and groups exposed to different
life situations should be profitable.50
As for the second point, the list of compounds which
have been proposed as therapeutic agents is quite ­impressive,
but so far hydroxyurea is the only one subjected to exten-
sive clinical trials and shown to produce satisfactory
results, although not in all cases. More research is needed
to ­elucidate the mechanism of action of hydroxyurea and
the other compounds, because a better pharmacological
treatment will reduce the need for the most difficult and
expensive forms of therapy. More combination treatments
will undoubtedly be tried (keeping hydroxyurea as the main
component) with the aim to formulate the best scheme for
any individual patient, according to age, gender, and severity
of disease. Further investigations will also be centered on
practical aspects of drug presentation, eg, the possibility to
give decitabine in an oral form,21
which has been already
tried in monkeys and is likely to prove more acceptable in
human patients.
Stem cell transplantation is commonly considered the only
curative treatment for SCD and, as such, is receiving special
attention.A number of reports have highlighted the problems
involved using reduced intensity preparative regimens for
treating these patients and many failures have been reported,
due in most cases to lack of sustained donor engraftment.51
However, in a recent study of ­nonmyeloablative allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, including total body
irradiation and treatment with immune suppressors, a stable,
mixed donor recipient chimerism was achieved, with reversal
of the sickle cell phenotype.52
Furthermore, in addition to “technical” problems, there
is a daunting issue of ethical impact pending on hemopoietic
stem cell transplantation, namely the opportunity of giving
birth to a sibling in order to provide a suitable donor for a
severely affected child.The morality of this practice has been
indeed questioned, particularly if programming a donor is
performed exclusively as a utilitarian operation.53
The problems involved in gene therapy designs are still
a great challenge and more research is certainly needed.
As for human trials, worries have been raised very recently,
because it was shown that a patient with beta thalassemia,
treated successfully with a lentivirus-modified beta-globin
gene in 2007, and presently transfusion-free, now produces
about 10% of blood cells with an insertion which may give
a growth advantage and thus tumorigenic potential.54
One area of investigation is therefore the search for
new types of vectors, possibly nonviral. In this respect, it is
worthwhile to mention very recent progress obtained using
biodegradable polymeric vectors, and a class of these vectors
has recently been developed and optimized for high trans-
fection efficiency.55
This may encourage more investigation
along this line.
Further developments are awaited following the ­previously
quoted attempts to correct the SCD mutation by homologous
recombination.Actually, this procedure, ­proposed earlier in a
mouse model,56
was performed recently in a patient with beta
thalassemia, with skin fibroblasts removed, ­transformed into
pluripotent stem cells, and then differentiated into hemopoietic
stem cells, capable of ­producing normal adult hemoglobin.
It was even suggested to collect cells from amniotic fluid
or chorionic villus sampling, used for prenatal diagnosis,
reprogram them into induced pluripotent stem cells, correct
the mutation, and reinfuse them during the perinatal period,
ie, an option for very early treatment before organ damage
takes place.57
As for the tools necessary to introduce specific changes
into the genome of patient-derived induced pluripotent stem
cells, a recent approach is based on zinc finger nuclease
technology, which enables targeting of a specific DNA
binding domain to a preselected chromosomal site.58,59
Both
approaches allowed the introduction of defined genetic
modifications in highly sensitive induced pluripotent stem
cells, without reported side effects on the pluripotency of
these cells or their genetic stability.
Mention was made before of an encouraging improve-
ment obtained with severe thalassemia by gene therapy.54
However, as far as SCD is concerned, 100  years have
passed since the first description of the disease and, despite
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
29
HbF induction and genetic engineering in sickle cell disease
remarkable progress in the knowledge of pathogenetic and
clinical aspects, a consistently effective treatment remains
elusive and requires further investigations.60
Acknowledgment
We are grateful to Miss Milena Tozzi at the University of
Milano for assistance in revising the literature and for editing
the manuscript. Work partially supported by a grant from the
Ministry of University and Research (M.I.U.R PRIN 2008,
A.M. recipient)
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Serjeant GR, Serjeant BE. Sickle cell disease. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2001.
	 2.	 Platt OS, Brambilla DJ, RosseWF, et al. Mortality in sickle cell disease.
Life expectancy and risk factors for early death. N Engl J Med. 1994;
330:1639–1644.
	 3.	 Fathallah H, Atweh GF. Induction of fetal hemoglobin in the treatment
of sickle cell disease. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2006;58–62.
	 4.	 Karlsson S, Nienhuis AW. Developmental regulation of human globin
genes. Annu Rev Biochem. 1985;54:1071–1108.
	 5.	 Thein SL, Menzel S, Lathrop M, Garner C. Control of fetal hemoglobin:
New insights emerging from genomics and clinical implications. Hum
Mol Genet. 2009;18:R216– R223.
	 6.	 Tasiopoulou M, Boussiou M, Sinopoulou K, Moraitis G, Loutradi-
Anagnostou A, Karababa P. G
γ-196 C → T, A
γ-201 C → T: Two novel
mutations in the promoter region of the γ-globin genes associated with
nondeletional hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin in Greece.
Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008;40:320–322.
	 7.	 Liu LR, Du ZW, Zhao HL, et al. T to C substitution at -175 or -173
of the gamma-globin promoter affects GATA-1 and Oct-1 binding
in vitro differently but can independently reproduce the hereditary
persistence of fetal hemoglobin phenotype in transgenic mice. J Biol
Chem. 2005;280:7452–7459.
	 8.	 Gazouli M, Katsantoni E, Kosteas T, Anagnou NP. Persistent fetal
gamma-globin expression in adult transgenic mice following deletion
of two silencer elements located 3′ to the human gamma-globin gene.
Mol Med. 2009;15:415–424.
	 9.	 De Andrade TG, Peterson KR, Cunha AF, et al. Identification of novel
candidate genes for globin regulation in erythroid cells containing large
deletions of the human β-globin gene cluster. Blood Cells Mol Dis.
2006;37:82–90.
	10.	 Gilman JG, Huisman TH. Two independent genetic factors in the beta-
globin gene cluster are associated with high G gamma-levels in the HbF
of SS patients. Blood. 1984;64:452–457.
	11.	 Ballas SK, Talacki CA, Adachi K, Schwartz E, Surrey S, Rappaport E.
The Xmn I site (-158, C–T) 5′ to the G gamma gene: Correlation with
the Senegalese haplotype and G gamma globin expression. Hemoglobin.
1991;15:393–405.
	12.	 Sampietro M, Thein SL, Contreras M, Pazmany L. Variation of HbF
and F-cell number with the G-gamma Xmn I (C-T) polymorphism in
normal individuals. Blood. 1992;79:832–833.
	13.	 Garner C, Mitchell J, HatzisT, Reittie J, Farrall M,Thein SL. Haplotype
mapping of a major quantitative-trait locus for fetal hemoglobin produc-
tion, on chromosome 6q23. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;68:1468–1474.
	14.	 Menzel S, Garner C, Gut I, et al. A QTL influencing F cell production
maps to a gene encoding a zinc-finger protein on chromosome 2p15.
Nat Genet. 2007;39:1197–1199.
	15.	 Uda M, Galanello R, Sanna S, et al. Genome-wide association study
shows BCL11A associated with persistent fetal hemoglobin and
­amelioration of the phenotype of beta-thalassemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2008;105:1620–1625.
	16.	 Solovieff N, Milton JN, Hartley SW, et al. Fetal hemoglobin in sickle
cell anemia: Genome-wide association studies suggest a regulatory
region in the 5′ olfactory receptor gene cluster. Blood. 2010;115:
1815–1822.
	17.	 Charache S, Dover G, Smith K, Talbot CC Jr, Moyer M, Boyer S.
Treatment of sickle cell anemia with 5-azacytidine results in increased
fetal hemoglobin production and is associated with nonrandom
­hypomethylation of DNA around the gamma-delta-beta-globin gene
complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983;80:4842–4846.
	18.	 Koshy M, Dorn L, Bressler L, et  al. 2-deoxy 5-azacytidine and
fetal ­hemoglobin induction in sickle cell anemia. Blood. 2000;96:
2379–2384.
	19.	 Belinsky SA, Klinge DM, Stidley CA, et al. Inhibition of DNA
­methylation and histone deacetylation prevents murine lung cancer.
Cancer Res. 2003;63:7089–7093.
	20.	 Saunthararajah Y, Hillery CA, Lavelle D, et al. Effects of 5-aza-
­deoxycytidine on fetal hemoglobin levels, red cell adhesion, and
hematopoietic differentiation in patients with sickle cell disease. Blood.
2003;102:3865–3870.
	21.	 Lavelle D, Chin J, Vaitkus K, et al. Oral decitabine reactivates expres-
sion of the methylated γ-globin gene in Papio anubis. Am J Hematol.
2007;82:981–985.
	22.	 Mabaera R, West RJ, Conine SJ, et al. A cell stress signaling model of
fetal hemoglobin induction: what doesn’t kill red blood cells may make
them stronger. Exp Hematol. 2008;36:1057–1072.
	23.	 Tang DC, Zhu J, Liu W, et al. The hydroxyurea-induced small GTP-
binding protein SAR modulates gamma-globin gene expression in
human erythroid cells. Blood. 2005;106:3256–3263.
	24.	 Voskaridou E, Christoulas D, Bilalis A, et al. The effect of prolonged
administration of hydroxyurea on morbidity and mortality in adult
patients with sickle cell syndromes: Results of a 17-year, single center,
trial (LaSHS). Blood. 2010;115:2354–2363.
	25.	 Costa FC, da Cunha AF, Fattori A, et al. Gene expression profiles
of erythroid precursors characterise several mechanisms of the
action of hydroxycarbamide in sickle cell anaemia. Br J Haematol.
2007;136:333–342.
	26.	 Moreira LS, de Andrade TG, Albuquerque DM, et al. Identification
of differentially expressed genes induced by hydroxyurea in reticulo-
cytes from sickle cell anaemia patients. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol.
2008;35:651–655.
	27.	 Little JA, McGowan VR, Kato GJ, et al. Combination erythropoietin-
hydroxyurea therapy in sickle cell disease: experience from the National
Institutes of Health and a literature review. Haematologica. 2006;91:
1076–1083.
	28.	 Weinberg RS, Ji X, Sutton M, et  al. Butyrate increases the
efficiency of translation of -globin mRNA. Blood. 2005;105:
1807–1809.
	29.	 Chenais B. Requirement of GATA-1 and p45 NF-E2 expression in
butyric acid-induced erythroid differentiation. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 1998;253:883–886.
	30.	 Sangerman J, Lee MS, Yao X, et al. Mechanism for fetal hemo-
globin induction by histone deacetylase inhibitors involves gam-
ma-globin activation by CREB1 and ATF-2. Blood. 2006;108:
3590–3599.
	31.	 Ataga KI. Novel therapies in sickle cell disease. Hematology Am Soc
Hematol Educ Program. 2009;54–60.
	32.	 Mai A, Jelicic K, Rotili D, et al. Identification of two new synthetic
histone deacetylase inhibitors that modulate globin gene expression
in erythroid cells from normal donors and thalassemic patients. Mol
Pharmacol. 2007;72:1111–1123.
	33.	 Witt O, Mönkemeyer S, Kanbach K, PekrunA. Induction of fetal hemo-
globin synthesis by valproate: Modulation of MAP kinase pathways.
Am J Hematol. 2002;7:45–46.
Journal of Blood Medicine
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/Journal-of-blood-medicine-journal
The Journal of Blood Medicine is an international, peer-reviewed, open
access, online journal publishing laboratory, experimental and clinical aspects
of all topics pertaining to blood based medicine including but not limited
to: Transfusion Medicine; Blood collection, Donor issues, Transmittable
diseases, and Blood banking logistics; Immunohematology; Artificial and
alternative blood based therapeutics; Hematology; Biotechnology/nanotech-
nology of blood related medicine; Legal aspects of blood medicine; Historical
perspectives. The manuscript management system is completely online and
includes a very quick and fair peer-review system.Visit http://www.dovepress.
com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
30
Eridani and Mosca
	34.	 Gabbianelli M, Morsilli O, MassaA, et al. Effective erythropoiesis and
HbF reactivation induced by kit ligand in β-thalassemia. Blood. 2008;
111:421–429.
	35.	 Moutouh-de Parseval LA,Verhelle D, Glezer E, et al. Pomalidomide and
lenalidomide regulate erythropoiesis and fetal hemoglobin ­production
in human CD34+ cells. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:248–258.
	36.	 Bathia M, Walters MC. Haematopoietic cell transplantation for
­thalassemia and sickle cell disease: Past, present and future. Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2008;4:109–117.
	37.	 Oktay K, Buyuk E, Veeck L, et  al. Embryo development after
­heterotopic transplantation of cryopreserved ovarian tissue. Lancet.
2004;363:837–840.
	38.	 Aiuti A, Cattaneo F, Galimberti S, et al. Gene therapy for immuno­
deficiency due to adenosine-deaminase deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2009;
360:447–458.
	39.	 Karlsson S, Bodine DM, Perry L, Papayannopoulou T, Nienhuis AW.
Expression of the human beta-globin gene following retroviral-mediated
transfer into multipotential hematopoietic progenitors of mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988;16:6062–6066.
	40.	 May C, Rivella S, Callegari J, et al. Therapeutic haemoglobin synthesis
in beta-thalassaemic mice expressing lentivirus-encoded human beta
globin. Nature. 2000;406:82–86.
	41.	 Sadelain M, Boulad F, Lisowski L, Moi M, Riviere I. Stem cell
­engineering for the treatment of severe haemoglobinopathies. Curr Mol
Med. 2008;8:690–697.
	42.	 Bunn HF. Induction of fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell disease. Blood.
1999;93:1787–1789.
	43.	 Persons DA, Tisdale JF. Gene therapy for the hemoglobin disorders.
Semin Hematol. 2004;41:279–286.
	44.	 Chang JC,Ye L, KanYW. Correction of the sickle cell mutation in embry-
onic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:1036–1040.
	45.	 Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from
mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell.
2006;126:663–676.
	46.	 Kaji K, Norrby K, Paca A, Mileikovsky M, Mohseni P, Woltjen K.
Virus-free induction of pluripotency and subsequent excision of repro-
gramming factors. Nature. 2009;458:771–775.
	47.	 Hacein-Bey-Abina S, GarrigueA, Wang GP, et al. Insertional oncogen-
esis in 4 patients after retrovirus-mediated gene therapy of SCID-X1. J
Clin Invest. 2008;118:3132–3142.
	48.	 MoscaA, Paleari R, Leone D, Ivaldi G. The relevance of hemoglobin F
measurement in the diagnosis of thalassaemias and related hemoglo-
binopathies. Clin Biochem. 2009;42:1797–1801.
	49.	 Long AD, Langley CH. The power of association studies to detect the
contribution of candidate genetic loci to variation in complex traits.
Genome Res. 1999;9:720–731.
	50.	 Creary LE, Ulug P, Menzel S, et al. Genetic variation on chromo-
some 6 influences F cell levels in healthy individuals of African
descent and HbF levels in sickle cell patients. PLoS One. 2009;4:
e4218.
	51.	 Locatelli F. Reduced-intensity regimens in allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation for hemoglobinopathies. HematologyAm Soc
Hematol Educ Program. 2006;398–401.
	52.	 Hsieh MM, Kang EM, Fitzhugh CD, et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic
stem-cell transplantation for sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;
361:2309–2317.
	53.	 Burgio GR, Locatelli F. Programming of a haemopoietic stem cell
donor: The evolution of a project over time. Haematologica. 2006;91:
1015–1016.
	54.	 Cavazzana-Calvo M, Payen E, Negre O, et al.Transfusion independence
and HMGA2 activation after gene therapy of human β-thalassaemia.
Nature. 2010;467:318–322.
	55.	 Yang F, Green JJ, Dinio T, et al. Gene delivery to human adult and
embryonic cell-derived stem cells using biodegradable nanoparticulate
polymeric vectors. Gene Ther. 2009;16:533–546.
	56.	 Hanna J,Wernig M, Markoulaki S, et al.Treatment of sickle cell anemia
mouse model with iPS cells generated from autologous skin. Science.
2007;318:1920–1923.
	57.	 Ye L, Chang JC, Lin C, Sun X, Yu J, Kan YW. Induced pluripotent
stem cells offer new approach to therapy in thalassemia and sickle cell
anemia and option in prenatal diagnosis in genetic diseases. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106:9826–9830.
	58.	 Zou J, Maeder ML, Mali P, et al. Gene targeting of a disease-related
gene in human induced pluripotent stem and embryonic stem cells. Cell
Stem Cell. 2009;5:97–110.
	59.	 Hockemeyer D, Soldner F, Beard C, et al. Efficient targeting of
expressed and silent genes in human ESCs and iPSCs using zinc-finger
nucleases. Nat Biotechnol. 2009;27:851–857.
	60.	 Orkin SH, Higgs DR. Sickle cell disease at 100 years. Science. 2010;329:
291–292.
