© 2011 Kwiatkowski, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.  This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 135–149
Journal of Blood Medicine Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
135
R e v i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/JBM.S13065
Management of transfusional iron overload –
differential properties and efficacy of iron
chelating agents
Janet L Kwiatkowski
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Division of Hematology and University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Correspondence: Janet L Kwiatkowski
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
3501 Civic Center Boulevard
Division of Hematology, Colket Building,
Room 11024, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA
Tel +1 215 590 5286
Fax +1 215 590 3992
Email kwiatkowski@email.chop.edu
Abstract: Regular red cell transfusion therapy ameliorates disease-related morbidity and can be
lifesaving in patients with various hematological disorders.Transfusion therapy, however, causes
progressive iron loading, which, if untreated, results in endocrinopathies, cardiac arrhythmias
and congestive heart failure, hepatic fibrosis, and premature death. Iron chelation therapy is used
to prevent iron loading, remove excess accumulated iron, detoxify iron, and reverse some
of the iron-related complications. Three chelators have undergone extensive testing to date:
deferoxamine, deferasirox, and deferiprone (although the latter drug is not currently licensed
for use in North America where it is available only through compassionate use programs and
research protocols). These chelators differ in their modes of administration, pharmacokinetics,
efficacy with regard to organ-specific iron removal, and adverse-effect profiles.These differential
properties influence acceptability, tolerability and adherence to therapy, and, ultimately, the
effectiveness of treatment. Chelation therapy, therefore, must be individualized, taking into
account patient preferences, toxicities, ongoing transfusional iron intake, and the degree of
cardiac and hepatic iron loading.
Keywords: transfusion, iron, chelation, magnetic resonance imaging
Iron overload
Transfusional iron overload
Regular red cell transfusions are used in the management of numerous hematological
disorders including beta-thalassemia major; sickle cell disease; other hemolytic anemias,
such as pyruvate kinase deficiency; bone marrow failure syndromes; and myelodysplastic
syndromes. Each milliliter of packed red blood cells contains 1.1 mg of iron. Because
humans lack physiological mechanisms to excrete excess iron, chronic red cell trans-
fusion therapy will lead to progressive iron accumulation in the absence of chelation
therapy. A typical regular transfusion regimen leads to an average iron accumulation
of approximately 0.3–0.5 mg/kg/day,1,2
although there is considerable interpatient
variability in iron loading. In one study of 541 patients with beta thalassemia, 61%
had transfusional iron intakes in the range 0.3–0.5 mg/kg/day, while 19% and 20%
had average iron intakes below and above this range, respectively.1
Chelation therapy is
necessary to remove this iron accumulation to prevent or treat its associated toxicity.
Nontransfusional iron overload
Iron overload also can result from hereditary causes that lead to increased intestinal
absorption of dietary iron. Dysregulation of hepcidin, a small peptide produced mainly
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Journal of Blood Medicine
20 September 2011
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
136
Kwiatkowski
in the liver that inhibits iron absorption, now appears to be
central in many of the hereditary forms of hemochromatosis.
The most common form of hereditary hemochromatosis is
caused by mutations in the HFE gene, which prevent the
appropriate upregulation of hepcidin expression in response
to increased iron levels.3
Homozygosity for the cysteine to
tyrosine substitution (C282Y) in the human hemochromatosis
(HFE) protein is associated with the development of iron
overload typically in the fifth to sixth decades of life, although
clinical penetrance is variable.4
The standard treatment for
hereditary hemochromatosis is phlebotomy to reduce iron
stores, although iron chelation therapy may be used in patients
who are unable to tolerate the procedure.5
Gastrointestinal iron absorption also is greatly increased
in patients with ineffective erythropoiesis such as thalassemia
intermedia and in some red cell enzyme deficiencies,
­particularly pyruvate kinase deficiency.The pathophysiology
may be related to elevated levels of GDF15, a bone marrow–
derived factor that suppresses hepcidin expression.6,7
The
resulting increased absorption of dietary iron can cause iron
overload, which may be further exacerbated by periodic
transfusions. Serial phlebotomy is impractical for many
patients with congenital anemias because of the level of
anemia, and chelation therapy is effective in reducing iron
burden in these patients.8–11
The remainder of this review focuses on the management
of transfusional iron overload including monitoring and
treatment with chelation. The majority of data regarding
chelation therapy has been derived from the thalassemia
population and is the focus of this review; important
differences relevant to other transfused populations are
highlighted where possible.
Toxicity related to iron overload
Free iron is toxic to cells; normally, in the body iron is tightly
complexed with proteins, protecting the cells from free iron.
The main storage complex of iron is ferritin, which is found
principally in the liver, reticuloendothelial cells, and red
cell precursors; small amounts of ferritin are also found in
the blood, allowing for easy measurement. In plasma, iron
is bound to transferrin, which transports iron to the cells.
In iron overload states, high levels of iron exceed the iron-
carrying capacity of transferrin within the plasma, leading
to the formation of nontransferrin-bound iron forms.12
These
nontransferrin-bound iron forms can be taken up into cells,
including liver, heart, and endocrine cells, where the iron
can participate in the generation of free radicals through
Fenton’s reaction:
Fe2+
 + H2
O2
→ Fe3+
 + OH-
 + HO•
These free radicals cause lipid peroxidation and organelle
damage leading to organ toxicity.The organs most susceptible
to iron-related injury include the heart, liver, and endocrine
organs. Cardiac toxicity includes congestive heart failure and
arrhythmias and is the leading cause of death related to iron
overload in patients with thalassemia major.13
Excess iron
deposition in the liver leads to inflammation, fibrosis, and
cirrhosis,14
which may be further exacerbated by concomitant
viral hepatitis, alcohol use, and other hepatotoxins. Iron
is also toxic to the endocrine organs, leading to growth
failure, delayed puberty,15
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
diabetes mellitus, osteopenia, hypothyroidism, and
hypoparathyroidism.16
Endocrinopathies are a significant
cause of morbidity in chronically transfused patients:
among 342  North American patients with transfusion-
dependent thalassemia, 38% had at least one endocrinopathy,
most commonly hypogonadism, and the prevalence of
endocrine abnormalities increased with age.16
Similarly, in
a French cohort of 215 chronically transfused patients with
thalassemia, 47.8% had hypogonadism, 6% diabetes, and
9.9% hypothyroidism.17
Monitoring iron burden
Multiple methods of assessing the degree of iron overload
exist, and each method has benefits and limitations. In clinical
practice, combinations of the different techniques and serial
measurements are utilized to assess iron burden and to adjust
chelation therapy. Tables 1 and 2 provide a summary of the
clinical implications of various iron measurements.
Serum ferritin level can be measured frequently via
blood testing and is particularly useful to monitor trends in
iron burden over time. The ferritin level correlates with total
body iron burden in chronically transfused patients, although
this correlation is not precise.18
Furthermore, changes in the
serum ferritin level in response to chelation have been shown
to parallel changes in liver iron concentration measured by
both liver biopsy and noninvasive means.19,20
The ferritin
level also has prognostic significance: sustained levels of over
2500 mg/mL are associated with an increased risk of cardiac
toxicity and death in patients with thalassemia.21,22
Unfortunately, a variety of disease states, including infec-
tion, inflammation, and ascorbate deficiency, can either raise
or lower serum ferritin levels. This limitation of ferritin in
predicting iron stores is particularly relevant for patients with
sickle cell disease. For example, great variability in the rate of
rise of serum ferritin level was evidenced among 50 children
with sickle cell disease receiving similar transfusion programs
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
137
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
for primary stroke prevention.23
Despite this ­limitation, the
serum ferritin level still may be useful in sickle cell disease:
very high ferritin levels above 3000 ng/mL generally predict a
liver iron concentration of 10 mg/g dry weight (dw) or higher,
while ferritin levels below 1500 ng/mL usually correlate with
a liver iron concentration below 10 mg/g dw.24
Serum ferritin
level also underestimates liver iron concentration in patients
with thalassemia intermedia and nontransfusion-associated
iron overload.25
Given that the liver is the major target organ for iron
accumulation following multiple transfusions, the liver iron
concentration is a good indicator of total iron burden.26
In
untransfused individuals, the normal liver iron concentration
ranges from 0.17 to 1.8 mg Fe/g dw. Traditionally, chelation
therapy has been dosed to maintain slightly higher liver
iron concentrations of 3 to ,7 mg Fe/g dw of liver, a
level of hepatic iron burden that is seen in asymptomatic
heterozygotes for hereditary hemochromatosis.27
More
aggressive chelation regimens have been advocated recently,
with a goal to achieve and maintain “normal” body iron
stores,28
although the risk of toxicity with “overchelation”
must be considered. Liver iron concentration also has
prognostic significance in patients with thalassemia. Levels
in excess of 15 mg Fe/g dw of liver are associated with
an increased risk of cardiac complications and death,21,22
although the inverse is not always true: high levels of cardiac
iron and iron-related cardiac disease can be seen despite low
liver iron concentrations, due to differential rates of iron
loading and unloading in these organs.29,30
Various methods are available to estimate liver iron
­concentration. Liver biopsy is generally considered to be
the gold standard for accurate iron measurement and allows
for direct assessment of liver inflammation and fibrosis.
However, a number of limitations to liver biopsy exist: it is
an invasive procedure, with risks including bleeding, bile
leak, and pain; liver fibrosis and cirrhosis cause an uneven
distribution of iron, which may lead to an underestimation
of liver iron in patients with advanced liver disease;31
and
sample size also affects the accuracy of iron measurement –
samples that are at least 1 mg dw correlate better with iron
burden than do smaller samples.26
The superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID) technique uses magnetometers to measure very
small magnetic fields and can be used as a noninvasive
technique to measure ferritin and hemosiderin in the liver.32
Estimation of liver iron concentration by SQUID correlates
linearly with concentrations measured by liver biopsy.32
Since
this is a noninvasive technique, repetitive iron concentration
measurements by SQUID have been utilized to monitor the
efficacy of chelation in a number of studies.20,33–35
The biggest
limitation to using SQUID is that it is a highly specialized and
expensive approach and few sites worldwide offer the tech-
nology, limiting its accessibility to patients. In recent clinical
trials, SQUID measurements also underestimated liver iron
concentrations obtained by biopsy by approximately 50%,19
though the correlation is good when accurate conversion
factors from wet to dry weight of liver are utilized.36
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is increasingly
being used to monitor iron overload. This technique takes
advantage of local inhomogeneities of the magnetic field
caused by iron deposition in tissues.37
Magnetic resonance
Table 2 Clinical implications of cardiac iron assessment by T2*
magnetic resonance imaging
Cardiac T2* (ms) Clinical implication
20 No significant cardiac iron loading; continue
current chelation
10 to ,20 Mild to moderate cardiac iron loading with
increased risk of cardiac complications;
consider intensification of chelation such as
increased dosea
and/or continuous infusion
(for deferoxamine); combination therapy with
deferiprone and deferoxamine if available
,10 Severe cardiac iron loading with high risk of
cardiac complications; intensify chelation such
as increased dosea
and/or continuous infusion
(for deferoxamine); combination therapy with
deferiprone and deferoxamine if available
Note: a
Chelator dose should not exceed approved range (see Table 3).
Table 1 Clinical implication of ferritin levels and liver iron
concentration
Liver iron
concentration
(mg/g dw)
Ferritin levela
(ng/mL)
Clinical implications
,2 ,500 Low iron stores; consider
decreasing or holding
chelation temporarilyb
2–7 500–1499 Ideal range; continue current
chelation
.7–15 1500–2500 Increased iron stores; increase
chelator dosec
and/or change
chelator if ferritin and/or liver
iron trend is not improving
.15 .2500 Elevated iron stores
associated with increased risk
of complications and death;
increase chelator dosec
and/
or change chelator; consider
combination chelation therapy
Notes: a
Ferritin should be obtained when patient is clinically well and vitamin C
replete; b
chelation should not be held if cardiac iron loading is present (cardiac
T2* ,20 ms) ; c
chelator dose should not exceed approved range (see Table 3).
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
138
Kwiatkowski
images darken at a rate proportional to the iron concentration.
T2 and T2* refer to the half-life of darkening and these
values are inversely proportional to the amount of iron
accumulation in the organ. The reciprocals of T2 and T2*,
known as R2 and R2*, respectively, refer to rates of signal
decay and are directly proportional to iron concentration.38
While MRI has been used to estimate iron levels in a
­variety of organs including the pituitary, pancreas, and bone
­marrow, it is most commonly used to measure hepatic39
and
cardiac iron.29,40
Studies using R2 to estimate liver iron have
shown good ­correlation with iron levels determined by liver
biopsy, as well as reproducibility across different scanners.39
Other approaches using T2* or R2* are also promising for
determining liver iron content.29,41
Most important, cardiac iron levels also can be ­estimated
using MRI, most commonly with T2* measurements.
Determination of cardiac iron is particularly helpful because
cardiac disease is the leading cause of death in patients with
thalassemia and transfusional iron overload.13
Cardiac T2*
values below 20 ms indicate mild to moderate cardiac iron
overload, while levels below 10 ms are associated with
an increased risk of cardiac disease including ventricular
­dysfunction and arrhythmias (Table 2).29,40
Patients with
T2* values below 6 ms have a 47% chance of developing
congestive heart failure within the next year.42
Thus, patients
with low cardiac T2* values require intensification of
chelation therapy.
Magnetic resonance scanners are more widely available
than SQUID, and this technique is now available in many
sites throughout the world. Limitations include the need
for specialized programming and expertise in these MRI
techniques. In addition, MRI is costly, making frequent
monitoring prohibitive.
Most knowledge of the complications of iron overload
comes from patients with thalassemia who require lifelong
red blood cell transfusions, which are usually initiated within
the first few years of life. Patients with different diseases
requiring chronic transfusions, particularly sickle cell disease
and Diamond–Blackfan anemia, appear to differ somewhat
with respect to organ-specific transfusional iron loading.43–45
For example, iron-related cardiomyopathy and diabetes
are less common in sickle cell disease than thalassemia
despite comparable transfusion burdens,43,46
a finding that is
paralleled by reduced iron loading in the heart and pancreas
in sickle cell patients.44,47
In contrast, it was observed that
liver iron concentration was higher in transfusion-dependent
Diamond–Blackfan anemia patients than in thalassemia
patients matched for age and iron intake.45
Variability in
the duration of iron exposure, treatment with chelation, or
processing of iron among underlying disease states may all
contribute to the differences in organ-specific iron loading.
Nonetheless, given the lack of substantial information about
disease-specific responses to iron overload, data from the
thalassemia population continue to guide monitoring and
treatment for other transfused patient populations, although
ongoing research studies may provide future insight into
better disease-specific approaches.
Overview of chelation
The goal of chelation therapy is to maintain “safe” body iron
levels to prevent the development of organ toxicities. Ideally,
for patients who are regularly transfused, chelation should be
administered in a manner to prevent excess iron accumulation
by matching the ongoing transfusional iron intake. Chelators
also bind nontransferrin-bound iron forms, protecting vul-
nerable organs such as the heart from damage by these toxic
iron forms, and continuous chelator exposure is optimal in
this regard. In practice, however, chelation therapy is often
utilized to remove excess stored iron. Once iron-related organ
toxicity has developed, chelation therapy can reverse some,
but not all, of the complications.28,48
Differential properties of chelators
A variety of factors differentiate the currently available iron
chelators. First, pharmacological properties, including the
stoichiometry of iron chelation, mode of administration,
dosing schedule, plasma half-life, and route of excretion, vary
amongchelators.Second,drugefficacyisvariable,particularly
with regard to organ-specific (hepatic, cardiac) iron removal.
Third, adverse-effect profiles differ among chelators.
These various drug properties ultimately contribute to
patient adherence, overall control of iron burden, and the
complication profile. Differential properties of the iron
chelators are summarized in Table 3 and the following
sections provide detailed information for each of the
currently available iron chelators. Chelation therapy needs
to be individualized; the choice of chelator(s) and dosing
should be made based on: drug availability and tolerability
(including adverse effects), patient preference and ability
to adhere to the regimen, ongoing transfusion burden, and
trends in organ-specific iron loading.
Deferoxamine
Pharmacology
Deferoxamine, a naturally occurring iron chelator produced
by Streptomyces pilosus, was the first approved iron chelator
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
139
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
and has been used in routine clinical practice for more
than 40 years.49
It is a hexadentate iron chelator that binds
iron stably in a 1:1 ratio (Table 3). Deferoxamine is not
well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract so it must be
administered parenterally.50
Furthermore, the drug’s plasma
half-life is very short at approximately 20 minutes.50
Thus,
deferoxamine is usually administered as a continuous
infusion of 25 to 50 mg/kg given over 8 to 12 hours, 5 to
7 days per week either subcutaneously or intravenously.
Because the drug’s half-life is short, the chelator is rapidly
cleared after the infusion is completed and the drug is no
longer available to bind and detoxify iron.Thus, intravenous
administration of longer durations of up to 24 hours daily
is often employed for patients with high iron burden and/
or evidence of cardiac iron loading or iron-related cardiac
toxicity. Very high dosing of deferoxamine (such as
10 mg/kg/hour) has been utilized in the past.51
However,
acute pulmonary and neurotoxicity may develop with higher
doses,52,53
so, in general, doses .60 mg/kg/day should be
avoided. Excretion of iron bound to deferoxamine occurs
through both the urine and feces.
The parenteral mode of administration is painful and time
consuming,whichcanadverselyaffecttreatmentadherence.To
overcome this limitation, alternative modes of administration
havebeeninvestigated.Twice-dailybolusinjectionsof1000 mg
of deferoxamine diluted in 10 mL of distilled water have been
administered. Iron excretion withbolusinjectionwassimilar to
that seen with subcutaneous infusion.54
­Unfortunately, painful
swelling that lasted for several hours following injection led
many patients to discontinue this treatment55
and, thus, this
mode of administration is infrequently utilized.
Efficacy
The efficacy of deferoxamine is well established. The drug
induces substantial iron excretion and can induce a net
negative iron balance56
in chronically transfused patients. Iron
excretion is hindered in the presence of vitamin C deficiency, a
common consequence of iron overload. Oral supplementation
with vitamin C increases urinary iron excretion with
deferoxamine, but excessive vitamin C can also increase the
toxicity of iron.57
Thus, patients with documented vitamin C
deficiency are usually treated with 100 mg of vitamin C
orally, given only at the time of deferoxamine infusion.
Multiple studies dating back over three decades have shown
that regular administration of deferoxamine effectively
lowers serum ferritin levels.19,58,59
Chelation therapy with
deferoxamine can also prevent other organ toxicities such as
diabetes and other endocrinopathies.49,60
Hepatic iron removal
In the 1970s, regular intramuscular administration of
deferoxamine therapy was shown to reduce hepatic iron
Table 3 Properties of iron chelators
Property Deferoxamine Deferasirox Deferiprone
Stoichiometry
(chelator: iron)
Hexadentate (1:1) Tridentate (2:1) Bidentate (3:1)
Usual dose 25–60 mg/kg/day
over 8–24 hours
20–40 mg/kg/day
once daily
75–100 mg/kg/day
in three divided doses
Route of administration Subcutaneous, intravenous Orally dispersible tablet Oral tablet or suspension
Half-life 20–30 minutes 7–16 hours 1.5–2.5 hours
Excretion Urinary, fecal Fecal Urinary
Ability to remove liver iron +++ +++ ++*
Ability to remove cardiac iron ++#
++**
+++
Typical adverse events Local reactions
Sensorineural hearing loss
Ophthalmic changes
Allergic reactions
Bone abnormalities
Increased risk of Yersinia
and Klebsiella infections
Pulmonary at high doses
Neurological at high doses
Gastrointestinal
Rash
Rise in creatinine
Proteinuria
Elevated hepatic enzymes
Gastrointestinal bleeding (rare)
Fulminant hepatic failure (rare)
Renal insufficiency (rare)
Gastrointestinal
Neutropenia/Agranulocytosis
Arthralgia
Elevated hepatic enzymes
Availability Licensed Licensed Licensed in Europe and Asia as
second-line agent; not licensed in North America
Notes: *Reports of insufficient liver iron removal in some patients at doses of 75 mg/kg/day, but higher dosing, especially for subjects with high transfusional iron burden
may be more effective; #
with continuous infusion; **data are limited regarding efficacy with very low cardiac T2* and in heart failure; cardiac iron removal also may be less
effective in patients with high liver iron concentration.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
140
Kwiatkowski
accumulation and slow the progression of hepatic fibrosis.61
Subsequently, in the early 1980s, daily subcutaneous continu-
ous infusion of deferoxamine was shown to reduce hepatic
iron content to normal or near-normal levels in chronically
transfused patients with thalassemia.62
Recent clinical trials
have continued to show the efficacy of deferoxamine in
hepatic iron removal in patients with transfusion-dependent
anemias.19,20
Nonetheless, the improvement in liver iron
concentration correlates with the rate of transfusional iron
intake.1
Patients with higher transfusional iron intake gener-
ally require more chelator, which may be achieved by admin-
istering deferoxamine for a greater number of days per week
and/or at the higher end of the therapeutic dose range.
Cardiac iron removal
Most important, the regular use of deferoxamine is associated
with a reduced incidence of cardiac complications and
death.21,49,59
In addition, deferoxamine, usually given in
higher doses up to 60 mg/kg/day as a continuous intravenous
infusion, can reverse cardiac complications.63
Cardiac
iron burden as measured by T2* MRI also improves with
continuous infusion of deferoxamine.48
Adverse effects
Local infusion site reactions, including induration and
erythema, are commonly seen with administration of
deferoxamine. Allergic reactions can also develop. Other
adverse effects – including high-frequency hearing loss;
ophthalmologic toxicity;64
growth retardation; and skeletal
changes, including rickets-like lesions and genu valgum in
growing children65
– are more common when patients receive
high doses of deferoxamine relative to their total body iron
burden. Ocular and audiological toxicity can be minimized
by maintaining a ratio of deferoxamine dose (mg per kg
of body weight) to the serum ferritin level below 0.025.66
Increased risk of infection with Yersinia and Klebsiella
species in patients with iron overload may be exacerbated
by use of this chelator.67,68
Low zinc levels can also develop
with deferoxamine use, and levels of this trace element
should be measured periodically. Acute pulmonary toxicity
with respiratory distress, hypoxemia, and a diffuse interstitial
pattern on chest roentgenogram, and acute neurotoxicity have
both been reported with the administration of very high doses
of deferoxamine (10–20 mg/kg/hr).52,53
Adherence
The greatest challenge with deferoxamine is patient
adherence, because the need for parenteral administration
is cumbersome, uncomfortable, inconvenient, and time
consuming. A recent review of published studies showed
compliance rates with deferoxamine to range from 59% to
78%.69
Older age70
and concomitant psychiatric disorders71
have been found to predict poor adherence. Patient-reported
reasons for missing deferoxamine doses included patients’
feelings and beliefs, adverse effects, and lack of support from
others.70
Considerable morbidity and preventable, premature
iron-related deaths continue to occur in patients treated with
deferoxamine, which are probably related to difficulties with
adherence.72,73
Deferiprone
Pharmacology
Deferiprone (1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid-4-one),
introduced into clinical trials in the 1980s, was the first
oral chelator to undergo extensive testing. This chelator
was designed by modifying siderophore chemistry.74
Most
studies of the drug have involved open-label, noncomparative
studies, often including patients with a history of inadequate
iron chelation, but a few randomized trials comparing
deferiprone with deferoxamine have been reported.
A substantial amount of data on the safety and efficacy of
the drug has been acquired but considerable controversy
surrounds the drug. Deferiprone is approved for use in the
European Union and other countries for patients in whom
deferoxamine therapy is inadequate or not tolerated, but the
drug has not been approved for use in North America and
is currently only available to a limited number of patients
through compassionate use programs or research trials.
Deferiprone is a bidentate chelator, meaning that three
molecules of the drug are required to bind iron fully. Given
its relatively short plasma half-life of 1.5 to 2.5 hours,75,76
the drug usually is dosed three times daily. The typical
daily dose is 75 mg/kg, but doses of up to 100 mg/kg/day
are approved in Europe. The drug is available as 500 mg
tablets or as an oral solution (100 mg/mL), which has been
shown to have a similar safety and efficacy profile to the
tablet form.77
Deferiprone induces iron excretion almost
exclusively in the urine, with minimal contribution from
fecal elimination.78,79
Efficacy
Urinary iron excretion with deferiprone at doses of
75 mg/kg is comparable to that induced by deferoxamine
at a dose of 50 mg/kg.78,79
The mean urinary iron excre-
tion with deferiprone at 75 mg/kg was 0.48 mg/kg/day in
one study,78
a level that would be predicted to maintain or
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
141
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
decrease iron stores in most patients; however, significant
interpatient variability exists. Higher doses of deferiprone,
90–119 mg/kg, induced greater urinary iron excretion and
may be beneficial for patients with inadequate responses
at lower doses.80–82
Current European product labeling,
however, cautions against using doses above 100 mg/kg/day
due to the potential for increased toxicity.
Short- and long-term studies of treatment with deferiprone
for transfusional iron overload have generally shown a
reduction35,80,83–86
or stabilization87–89
in mean serum ferritin
levels. Similar responses have been shown across different
disease states including sickle cell disease and thalassemia.
However, a small proportion of patients demonstrated a
significant increase in serum ferritin levels while receiving
long-term deferiprone.35,86,88,89
In a group of 151 Italian
patients who received deferiprone for 3 years or more, 20%
had clinically significant rises in ferritin levels.86
Hepatic iron removal
Studies on the effect of chelation with deferiprone on liver
iron concentration have also shown mixed results.35,84,88,90,91
In a report of 21 patients who received deferiprone at
75 mg/kg/day, mean liver iron concentration assessed by
biopsy or SQUID, decreased from 15 to 8.7 mg/g dw liver,
after a mean treatment duration of 3.1 years.35
With longer
follow-up of a mean of 4.6 years in 18 patients, there was an
overall reduction in liver iron concentration from baseline
(16.5–12.1 mg/g dw, P = 0.07), but the liver iron concentra-
tion still remained at a concerning level above 15 mg/g dw in
seven patients.91
In another report of 20 patients who received
deferiprone (70 mg/kg/day) for 1 year or more, the mean liver
iron concentration increased from 16 to 21 mg/g dw, although
this change did not reach statistical significance.90
Liver
iron content decreased in seven patients, rose in 12 patients,
and remained the same in one patient. Thus, chelation with
deferiprone at a dose of 70–75 mg/kg/day may not reduce
liver iron concentration effectively in some patients.
Although there are few randomized trials comparing
deferiprone with deferoxamine, these studies have generally
shown the two drugs have comparable efficacy with regard
to hepatic iron removal. In one study of 144 subjects, the
reduction in serum ferritin levels was similar between
treatment groups (deferiprone 75 mg/kg/day compared with
deferoxamine 50 mg/kg/day) and mean reduction in liver iron
concentration was also similar among a subset of 36 subjects
who underwent liver biopsy.84
Similarly, in a more recent
study of 61 patients randomized to receive either deferox-
amine at 50 mg/kg/day for 5 days per week or deferiprone
(75 mg/kg/day initially, then increasing to 100 mg/kg/day)
changes in liver iron concentration over the 1-year period did
not significantly differ between the two groups.92
The lack of reduction in serum ferritin levels or liver iron
concentration in some patients receiving deferiprone may
be explained by a variety of reasons including individual
differences in pharmacokinetics, inadequate adherence
with therapy, or higher transfusional iron intake. Increasing
the dosage of deferiprone might help overcome some of
these issues. In one study, increasing the daily dose of
deferiprone from 75 mg/kg to 83–100 mg/kg resulted in a
reduction in serum ferritin level in nine patients who had
received inadequate chelation at the lower dose.82
Similarly,
in a study of twelve transfused thalassemia patients, the
mean serum ferritin level significantly improved from
3901 ng/mL to 2205 ng/mL after 2 years of treatment with
deferiprone at 100 mg/kg/day and no increased toxicity
was observed.93
Cardiac iron removal
Deferiprone is a small molecule that is lipophilic, enabling
entry into myocytes, and this chelator appears to be
particularly efficacious in cardiac iron removal. Retrospective
studies have demonstrated reduced cardiac morbidity
and mortality94,95
and lower myocardial iron deposition96
among patients treated with deferiprone compared with
deferoxamine. Furthermore, in a randomized controlled
trial of 61 beta-thalassemia patients with moderate cardiac
siderosis (T2* 8 to ,20 ms) and normal cardiac function,
a significantly greater improvement in cardiac T2* and
left ventricular function was seen with treatment with
deferiprone compared with deferoxamine.92
In a large clinical
observational study, treatment with deferiprone resulted in
improvement in cardiacT2* among patients with all degrees
of cardiac iron loading (including severe iron loading with
T2* ,8 ms) and treatment with deferiprone resulted in
a significantly greater overall reduction in cardiac iron
compared with deferasirox.97
Adverse effects
The most serious adverse event associated with deferiprone
is agranulocytosis. In a multicenter study of 187 patients with
thalassemia major treated with deferiprone in which weekly
blood counts were monitored, the incidence of agranulocytosis
(absolute neutrophil count ,500 × 109
/L) was 0.6 per 100
patient-yearsandtheincidenceofmilderneutropenia ­(absolute
neutrophil count 500 to 1500 × 109
/L) was 2.8 per 100 patient-
years.87
In the largest study reported to date, similar rates of
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
142
Kwiatkowski
0.2 per 100 patient-years for agranulocytosis and 2.1 per
100 for neutropenia were reported.86
Neutropenia is usually
reversible with discontinuation of the drug but often recurs
with reinstitution of therapy.86,98
In clinical practice, weekly
blood counts are recommended, which can be inconvenient
for patients, to monitor for this side effect. Treatment with
deferiprone may not be appropriate for patients with under-
lying bone-marrow failure syndromes, such as Diamond–
Blackfan anemia or myelodysplastic syndromes, who may
be more likely to develop agranulocytosis or neutropenia.99,100
Similarly, caution should be exercised when using this drug
in combination with hydroxyurea, interferon, or other drugs
that can cause neutropenia.
Gastrointestinal symptoms including nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain are common side effects
reported with deferiprone, occurring in 33% of subjects in one
large study.89
These symptoms usually improve after the first
few weeks of treatment and rarely require discontinuation
of therapy.86,87
Arthropathy with pain and/or swelling of the
knees and other large joints is another common complication,
and can occur early or late in treatment.85,86,89
In a large
study of 532 patients, the prevalence of this complication
was only 4%,86
but other studies have reported higher rates
of up to 38.5%.80
The arthropathy is usually reversible with
discontinuation of the drug.80,87
Low plasma zinc levels have
also developed in a minority of patients receiving deferiprone,
thus periodic monitoring of zinc levels is warranted.80,87
Elevations in serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) can
occur with drug administration but are often transient and
resolve even with continued drug administration at the same
or reduced dose.85,86
Patients with hepatitis C infection86,87
or
higher hepatic iron concentrations86
may be more likely to
develop ALT elevations. Concerns have been raised about
the possible progression of hepatic fibrosis with deferiprone
therapy.91
In a retrospective study, progression of hepatic
fibrosis was seen among five of 14 patients after a mean
duration of 2.3 years of treatment with deferiprone; four of
the subjects with progression of fibrosis also had concomitant
hepatitis C infection.91
In contrast, no fibrosis was seen in
12 subjects treated with deferoxamine, five of whom were
hepatitis C seropositive.91
The contribution of deferiprone
to the development of fibrosis in these patients is difficult to
decipher given that the majority of subjects who developed
fibrosis had concomitant hepatitis C infection, which can
cause hepatic fibrosis itself. Furthermore, the effect of
deferiprone on hepatic fibrosis has not been confirmed
in follow-up studies.101,102
In the largest study to date, no
significant progression of  fibrosis was observed in 56 patients
(11 seropositive for hepatitis C) with liver biopsy specimens
obtained before and after treatment with deferiprone at a
mean interval of 3.1 years.102
Adherence
In a review of studies assessing adherence with treatment with
deferiprone, overall compliance ranged from 79% to 96%.69
In these studies, adherence was monitored by pill counts,
patient report, physician assessment, and/or medication
event monitoring system. Similarly, comparative studies of
adherence with deferoxamine versus deferiprone suggest
overall better compliance with the oral chelator.69
Deferasirox
Pharmacology
Deferasirox is the first oral iron chelator approved for use
in the USA, and it has also been approved in a number of
other countries (Table 3). Deferasirox, a triazole compound,
was designed using computer-aided molecular modeling.103
Deferasirox binds iron in a 2:1 ratio (tridentate chelator).
The drug has a high specificity for iron, with minimal
binding to copper and zinc. Deferasirox is supplied as
orally dispersible tablets that are dissolved in water or
juice and should be administered on an empty stomach
at least 1/2 hour before a meal.104
Deferasirox is rapidly
absorbed, achieving peak plasma levels within 1–3 hours
after administration. Its half-life ranges from 7 to 16 hours,34
and is longer with higher doses,103
supporting a once-daily
dosing regimen. The deferasirox-iron complex is excreted
almost exclusively in the feces, with minimal urinary
excretion.103
Mean iron excretion was 0.3 mg/kg/day with
a deferasirox dose of 20 mg/kg and rose to 0.5 mg/kg/day
with a 40 mg/kg dose.105
Efficacy
Hepatic iron and ferritin levels
Deferasirox in doses of 20–30  mg/kg/day was shown
to have similar efficacy to deferoxamine with regard to
reduction in liver iron concentration and serum ferritin
levels in a randomized trial of 586 patients with thalas-
semia major.19
In that trial, four different dose levels of
deferasirox were tested (5, 10, 20, and 30 mg/kg), with
initial dosing determined according to baseline liver iron
concentration (lower doses for lower liver iron concentra-
tions). A similar dosing algorithm was utilized for defer-
oxamine in that study, but subjects were allowed to remain
on their prestudy deferoxamine dose, which resulted in
proportionately higher deferoxamine than deferasirox
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
143
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
doses in the lowest two liver iron concentration groups.
The primary objective of noninferiority of deferasirox to
deferoxamine across all treatment groups was not attained,
which was probably related to this relative underdosing
of deferasirox in the lowest two dose groups. However,
noninferiority of deferasirox was demonstrated at the 20
and 30 mg/kg dose groups. The average reduction in liver
iron concentration over the 1-year treatment period with
deferasirox at 20 or 30 mg/kg was 5.3 ± 8.0 mg/g dw,
compared with a reduction of 4.3 ± 5.8 mg/g dw with
deferoxamine, P = 0.367.19
Trends in serum ferritin levels
over the course of the study paralleled the changes in liver
iron concentration.
Phase II studies in patients with other transfusion-
dependent anemias have demonstrated similar results. In
a multicenter study, 195 patients with sickle cell disease
were randomized to receive deferasirox (10–30 mg/kg/day)
or deferoxamine (20 to $50 mg/kg, 5 days per week) with
dosing based on the pretreatment liver iron content.20
A mean
reduction in liver iron concentration of 3 mg/g dw, was seen
after 1 year of treatment with deferasirox, comparable to
the decrease in liver iron concentration seen with defer-
oxamine (2.8 mg/g dw). Similarly, an overall significant
reduction in liver iron concentration was seen in a Phase II
study of 184 patients with myelodysplasia, thalassemia,
Diamond–Blackfan anemia, and other rare transfusion-
dependent anemias, in patients who received deferasirox at
20–30 mg/kg for a period of 1 year.2
Subsequent analyses have shown that the response
to deferasirox is dependent on ongoing tranfusional
requirements. For most patients with transfusional iron
intake averaging ,0.3 mg/kg/day, a dose of 20 mg/kg of
deferasirox was effective in reducing liver iron concentration,
while in over 50% of patients with the highest iron intake
of .0.5 mg/kg/day, the dose of 20 mg/kg/day did not reduce
liver iron concentration effectively.1
In addition to ongoing
transfusional iron intake, individual variability in drug
pharmacokinetics may impact response to deferasirox.106
Both of these factors might be addressed by using higher
doses of the drug.A subanalysis of 264 subjects treated with
deferasirox at doses .30 mg/kg/day for a median duration of
36 months demonstrated a reduction in serum ferritin levels
without increased toxicity.107
Currently, doses of deferasirox
of up to 40 mg/kg/day are approved for use. Dosing of
deferasirox should be guided by the goal of maintenance
or reduction of body iron stores, ongoing transfusional
requirements, and trends in ferritin and liver iron content
during treatment.
Cardiac iron removal
Early clinical data suggest that deferasirox is able to remove
cardiac iron. In a prospective study of 114 patients with
thalassemia and evidence of cardiac iron loading (cardiac
T2* values of 5 to ,20 ms) but normal left ventricular
function, cardiacT2* significantly improved from a mean of
11.2 to 12.9 ms after 12 months of treatment with deferasirox
at a mean dose of 32.6 mg/kg/day.108
A further improvement
in cardiac T2* to 14.8 ms was seen with an additional
year of treatment at a mean dose of 36.1 mg/kg/day.109
A concomitant significant reduction in serum ferritin
levels and liver iron concentration was demonstrated.
Interestingly, there was no significant improvement in left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) over the 2 years of study,
although the ejection fraction was normal at baseline.109
Nonetheless, significant improvement in LVEF has been
demonstrated with deferiprone in a group of patients with a
similar degree of cardiac iron loading and normal baseline
LVEF,92
suggesting that deferiprone may cause a more
rapid improvement in cardiac function than deferasirox.
In a second study of 27 patients with thalassemia and
cardiac T2* ,20 ms with LVEF of 56% or higher, cardiac
iron measurements improved by 16% (P = 0.06) following
18 months of treatment with deferasirox (mean ending dose
of 33.3 mg/kg/day).110
However, cardiac T2* worsened in
about 50% of these patients and this failure to respond was
predicted by higher baseline liver iron concentration and
ferritin levels.110
Similar to the previous study, no change in
LVEF was seen over the 18 months of treatment.A third study
of 19 patients with beta thalassemia and iron overload also
demonstrated improvement in cardiacT2* over 18 months of
treatment (17.2 to 21.5 ms).111
Administration of deferasirox
(mean dose 27.6 mg/kg/day) also can prevent cardiac iron
accumulation; in 78 patients with thalassemia without
evidence of cardiac iron loading (cardiac T2* $20 ms),
cardiac T2* did not worsen over a year of treatment (32 to
32.5 ms).108
Moreover, in that study, no subjects with normal
cardiac T2* at baseline developed an abnormal study
(T2* ,20 ms) over the follow-up period.
The ability of deferasirox to reverse cardiac disease has
not yet been investigated, as the prior studies all required
normal left ventricular function for inclusion. A case report
of a 15-year-old boy with beta thalassemia and conges-
tive heart failure showed improvement in LVEF from 33%
to 58% with 15 months of treatment with deferasirox at
30 mg/kg/day112
and a second report showed normalization
of LVEF following 3 years of treatment with deferasirox
in a 22-year-old woman with severe aplastic anemia and
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
144
Kwiatkowski
iron-related cardiac dysfunction (initial LVEF of 26.5%).113
Before a recommendation can be made regarding the use of
deferasirox to treat patients with iron-related cardiac disease,
prospective studies are needed that assess the rapidity and
degree of cardiac iron removal, improvement in left ventricular
function, and ability to reverse iron-related cardiac complica-
tions with deferasirox compared with other chelators.
Adverse effects
The toxicity profile of deferasirox generally is similar across
disease states.2,19,20
Gastrointestinal disturbances, including
nausea,vomiting,andabdominalpainarecommon.19
Although
usually transient and dose related, these symptoms have led to
discontinuationofthedruginsomepatients.Thegastrointestinal
side effects may be related to lactose intolerance in some
patients because lactose is present in the drug preparation.20
Diffuse, maculopapular skin rashes that usually resolve even
if the drug is continued, have been reported in approximately
10% of subjects receiving deferasirox.19,20,33
Nephrotoxicity
also can be seen with use of the drug. Approximately 33% of
patients experience mild elevations in serum creatinine levels,
although few patients have experienced elevations beyond the
normal range.19,20
Rare reports of renal impairment and renal
failure with deferasirox use have led to a black box warning
about this side effect. Intermittent proteinuria has also been
seen with the administration of the drug.19
Fanconi syndrome,
a proximal renal tubular dysfunction leading to electrolyte
abnormalities, has been reported in a several patients taking
deferasirox, sometimes in the setting of acute illness; this
toxicity resolved after discontinuation of the drug and
recurred in some patients with reinstitution of the drug.114–116
Elevations in hepatic transaminases to more than five times
baseline values also have been reported.19,20
Fulminant hepatic
failure has also been reported in rare cases, often in patients
with comorbidities. Gastrointestinal bleeding also has been
reported rarely with deferasirox use.Although more common
in older patients with significant comorbidities, this toxicity
has been reported in children as well.117
Cataracts or lenticular
opacities and audiotoxicity were reported at low rates, similar
to deferoxamine.19,20
Importantly, agranulocytosis has not
been seen with deferasirox administration and the rare reports
of neutropenia with deferasirox were thought unlikely to be
drug related but rather related to the underlying hematological
disorder.
Adherence
Adherence with deferasirox therapy has been reported to be
better than with deferoxamine.118
Similarly, patients reported
greater satisfaction and convenience with deferasirox in
comparison with deferoxamine.119
In a preliminary report of
patients participating in the Thalassemia Clinical Research
Network comprised of subjects living in North America
and London, UK, deferasirox was the most commonly used
chelator at the time of enrollment (2007–2009), being taken
by 57% of patients on chelation.118
Combination chelation therapy
Deferiprone and deferoxamine
The most extensively studied combination chelation therapy
is that of deferiprone and deferoxamine. A variety of
dosing regimens have been utilized82,120,121
and iron balance
studies have shown an additive effect when the two drugs
are administered together. A significant reduction in serum
ferritin levels was shown with combination therapy.120,121
Most
important, the combination of deferoxamine and deferiprone
appears to be particularly efficacious for cardiac iron removal
and treatment of iron-related cardiac disease. A shuttling
hypothesis, whereby deferiprone, a smaller molecule, enters
cardiac cells, binds iron, and then transfers it to deferoxamine
for excretion has been proposed.122,123
Significant reduction
in cardiac iron stores measured by MRI,121
and significant
improvement in left ventricular shortening fraction120,121
have
been reported using combination therapy, without unexpected
toxicities.
The largest randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial
compared the use of deferoxamine alone or in combination
with deferiprone in the treatment of 65 patients with mild to
moderate cardiac iron loading (cardiacT2* 8–20 ms).124
The
beneficial effect of combined therapy on cardiac iron removal
and improvement in cardiac function was confirmed. After
a 12-month treatment period, those receiving combination
therapy had significantly greater improvement in cardiacT2*
(from 11.7 to 17.7 ms compared with 12.4 to 15.7 ms) and
in LVEF (2.6% compared with 0.6%) than those receiving
deferoxamine alone. Furthermore, in a single arm trial of
15 patients with severe myocardial siderosis (T2* ,8 ms)
and myocardial dysfunction, treatment with deferoxamine
(mean dose 38 ± 10.2 mg/kg for 5.3 days/week) combined
with deferiprone (73.9 ± 4 mg/kg/day) resulted in significant
improvement in cardiacT2* (5.7 to 7.9 ms) and LVEF (51.2%
to 65.6%) as well as a reduction in serum ferritin and liver
iron concentration.125
A second, smaller, prospective study
of combination therapy with deferoxamine and deferiprone
compared with deferoxamine monotherapy for patients with
established cardiac disease showed a significantly lower
rate of cardiac events in heavily iron-loaded patients treated
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
145
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
with combined therapy (no events among nine subjects)
compared with monotherapy (four cardiac events with three
deaths among five subjects).126
Similarly, prospective and
retrospective analyses have supported that the combination
of deferoxamine and deferiprone is superior to other chelators
in reducing cardiac iron in clinical practice.97,127
Deferasirox and deferoxamine
Limited data, consisting mostly of animal studies, small
case series, and pilot studies, exist regarding treatment
with deferasirox combined with deferoxamine. In an iron-
overloaded gerbil model, the addition of deferoxamine to
deferasirox did not cause any detectable increase in organ
toxicity above treatment with deferasirox alone.128
However,
in that study, combination treatment with deferasirox
and deferoxamine did not show additive iron excretion,
suggesting that the chelators may simply compete for a
common iron pool.128
It is unclear if this will hold true in
humans but sequential (administered on different days)
rather than combination (administered on the same day)
therapy would be expected to be a better strategy if the two
chelators simply compete for a common iron pool. Such an
approach could limit toxicity associated with each chelator
and improve adherence.
Limited information is available regarding the use of
sequential or combined therapy with deferoxamine and
deferasirox in humans. In a retrospective study, seven
patients with thalassemia and iron overload were treated
with deferasirox (20–30 mg/kg/day) for 4 consecutive days
followed by deferoxamine (20–40 mg/kg/day, subcutaneously
over 8–12 hours) for 3 days with median treatment duration
of 25 months (range 8–32 months).129
A significant reduction
in serum ferritin levels was evidenced and no patients
experienced significant toxicity. In addition, overall costs
were reduced because deferasirox was significantly more
expensive than deferoxamine, even including the supplies
needed for administration.
In a second preliminary report, 14  subjects with
transfusion-dependent thalassemia with severe iron overload
and/or evidence of organ dysfunction were treated prospec-
tively with deferoxamine (35–50 mg/kg/day for 3–7 days/
week) and deferasirox (20–30 mg/kg daily, 7 days/week).130
In contrast to the previous report, the two drugs were given
on the same days, rather than sequentially.After 26 weeks of
combined therapy, a significant reduction in liver iron con-
centration from 12 to 10.6 mg/g dw was seen, but there was
no significant change in myocardialT2*, ejection fraction, or
serum ferritin. It remains to be seen whether these parameters
will improve with longer follow-up. One subject died from
sepsis and one interrupted drug treatment secondary to
abdominal pain, but no elevations in serum creatinine orALT
were seen. Additional safety and efficacy data are needed
before clinical recommendations for the combination of
deferasirox/deferoxamine can be made.
Deferasirox and deferiprone
Combination therapy with deferasirox and deferiprone
would be particularly desirable, as it would avoid the use
of parenteral therapy; however, data regarding such therapy
are lacking. In one report, two subjects who experienced
significant toxicity during monotherapy with each chelator
(deferoxamine, deferiprone, and deferasirox) individually
were treated with deferasirox (30 mg/kg/day) alternating
with deferiprone (75–85  mg/kg/day).131
The toxicities
experienced with monotherapy were not evidenced
and iron burden improved or remained well controlled.
In a second report, three subjects with severe cardiac
iron loading (T2* ,6 ms) were treated with deferasirox
(20–40 mg/kg/day) and deferiprone (75–100 mg/kg/day) for
7 days/week.132
After a treatment duration of 7–28 months,
a significant improvement in cardiac T2* was evidenced,
but with worsening of liver iron concentration in one,
and minimal to no improvement in the other two subjects.
Adverse events included gastrointestinal upset and
fluctuating transaminase levels, but renal dysfunction and
neutropenia were not seen. Prospective studies are needed to
determine the optimal dosing regimen, efficacy, and safety
of this treatment approach.
Other oral chelators in development
FBS0701 is a new oral chelator that has undergone Phase I
testing in patients with transfusion-dependent anemias.133
The
drug is a desferrithiocin derivative that has been modified
to minimize nephrotoxicity. It binds iron in a ratio of two
molecules of drug to one molecule of iron (tridentate). In a
Phase Ib dose escalation study, FBS0701 was administered
for a total of 7 days to patients with transfusion-dependent
anemias; four different dose levels were tested (3, 8, 16,
and 32 mg/kg).133
The mean half-life was 16.2–21.3 hours,
supportive of daily dosing. Adverse effects were rare and
included urinary discoloration, headache, and gastrointestinal
symptoms. One patient with sickle cell disease experienced
a mild prolongation of the QTc on electrocardiogram, which
was not clearly drug-related. One serious adverse event,
hospitalization for vaso-occlusive pain, occurred in a patient
with sickle cell disease, also thought to be unrelated to the
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
146
Kwiatkowski
drug. Further studies are needed to determine the effect of
FBS0701 on iron removal and a Phase II trial is ongoing.
Conclusion
Three iron chelators, deferoxamine, deferiprone, and
deferasirox, have undergone extensive study and are in
clinical use worldwide, although deferiprone is not currently
approved for use in North America. Individual properties
of the chelators, including efficacy at both cardiac and liver
iron removal, adverse-effect profile, tolerability, and patient
preference should be considered in tailoring an individual’s
chelation regimen. Trends in liver and cardiac iron burden
and ongoing transfusional iron intake should be utilized to
adjust the dosing of the chelator. Combination therapy with
deferiprone and deferoxamine has been shown to be the most
efficacious with regard to improvement in cardiac function
and cardiac iron removal. Other chelator combinations
require further study before routine clinical use can be
recommended.
Disclosure
The author reports no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Cohen AR, Glimm E, Porter JB. Effect of transfusional iron intake on
response to chelation therapy in {beta}-thalassemia major. Blood. 2008;
111(2):583–587.
	 2.	 Porter J, Galanello R, Saglio G, et al. Relative response of patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes and other transfusion-dependent
anaemias to deferasirox (ICL670): a 1-year prospective study. Eur J
Haematol. 2008;80(2):168–176.
	 3.	 Bridle KR, Frazer DM, Wilkins SJ, et al. Disrupted hepcidin regulation
in HFE-associated haemochromatosis and the liver as a regulator of
body iron homoeostasis. Lancet. 2003;361(9358):669–673.
	 4.	 Allen KJ, Gurrin LC, Constantine CC, et al. Iron-overload-related
disease in HFE hereditary hemochromatosis. N Engl J Med. 2008;
358(3):221–230.
	 5.	 Phatak P, Brissot P, Wurster M, et al. A phase 1/2, dose-escalation
trial of deferasirox for the treatment of iron overload in HFE-related
hereditary hemochromatosis. Hepatology. 2010;52(5):1671–1779.
	 6.	 FinkenstedtA, Bianchi P,Theurl I, et al. Regulation of iron metabolism
through GDF15 and hepcidin in pyruvate kinase deficiency. Br J
Haematol. 2009;144(5):789–793.
	 7.	 Tanno T, Bhanu NV, Oneal PA, et  al. High levels of GDF15  in
thalassemia suppress expression of the iron regulatory protein hepcidin.
Nat Med. 2007;13(9):1096–1101.
	 8.	 Akrawinthawong K, Chaowalit N, Chatuparisuth T, Siritanaratkul N.
Effectivenessofdeferiproneintransfusion-independentbeta-thalassemia/
HbE patients. Hematology. 2011;16(2):113–122.
	 9.	 Deeren D. Deferasirox in pyruvate kinase deficiency. Ann Hematol.
2009;88(4):397.
	10.	 Ladis V, Berdousi H, Gotsis E, Kattamis A. Deferasirox administration
for the treatment of non-transfusional iron overload in patients with
thalassaemia intermedia. Br J Haematol. 2010;151(5):504–508.
	11.	 Voskaridou E, Plata E, Douskou M, et al. Treatment with deferasirox
(Exjade) effectively decreases iron burden in patients with thalassaemia
intermedia: results of a pilot study. Br J Haematol. 2009;148(2):
332–334.
	12.	 BreuerW, Hershko C, Cabantchik ZI.The importance of non-transferrin
bound iron in disorders of iron metabolism. Transfus Sci. 2000;23(3):
185–192.
	13.	 Zurlo MG, De Stefano P, Borgna-Pignatti C, et al. Survival and causes
of death in thalassaemia major. Lancet. 1989;2:27–30.
	14.	 Jean G, Terzoli S, Mauri R, et al. Cirrhosis associated with multiple
transfusions in thalassaemia. Arch Dis Child. 1984;59(1):67–70.
	15.	 Borgna-Pignatti C, De Stefano P, Zonta L, et al. Growth and sexual
maturation in thalassemia major. J Pediatr. 1985;106(1):150–155.
	16.	 Cunningham MJ, Macklin EA, Neufeld EJ, Cohen AR. Complications
of beta-thalassemia major in North America. Blood. 2004;104(1):
34–39.
	17.	 Thuret I, Pondarre C, Loundou A, et al. Complications and treatment
of patients with beta-thalassemia in France: results of the National
Registry. Haematologica. 2010;95(5):724–729.
	18.	 Brittenham GM, Cohen AR, McLaren CE, et al. Hepatic iron stores
and plasma ferritin concentration in patients with sickle cell anemia
and thalassemia major. Am J Hematol. 1993;42(1):81–85.
	19.	 Cappellini MD, Cohen A, Piga A, et  al. A phase 3  study of
deferasirox (ICL670), a once-daily oral iron chelator, in patients with
beta-thalassemia. Blood. 2006;107(9):3455–3462.
	20.	 Vichinsky E, Onyekwere O, Porter J, et al.A randomised comparison of
deferasirox versus deferoxamine for the treatment of transfusional iron
overload in sickle cell disease. Br J Haematol. 2007;136(3):501–508.
	21.	 Olivieri NF, Nathan DG, MacMillan JH, et al. Survival in medically
treated patients with homozygous beta-thalassemia. N Engl J Med.
1994;331(9):574–578.
	22.	 Telfer PT, Prestcott E, Holden S, Walker M, Hoffbrand AV, Wonke B.
Hepatic iron concentration combined with long-term monitoring of
serum ferritin to predict complications of iron overload in thalassaemia
major. Br J Haematol. 2000;110:971–977.
	23.	 Files B, Brambilla D, Kutlar A, et al. Longitudinal changes in ­ferritin
during chronic transfusion: a report from the Stroke Prevention Trial
in Sickle Cell Anemia (STOP). J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2002;24(4):
284–290.
	24.	 Adamkiewicz TV, Abboud MR, Paley C, et al. Serum ferritin level
changes in children with sickle cell disease on chronic blood transfusion
are nonlinear and are associated with iron load and liver injury. Blood.
2009;114(21):4632–4638.
	25.	 Pakbaz Z, Fischer R, Fung E, Nielsen P, Harmatz P, Vichinsky E.
Serum ferritin underestimates liver iron concentration in transfusion
independent thalassemia patients as compared to regularly transfused
thalassemia and sickle cell patients. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007;49(3):
329–332.
	26.	 Angelucci E, Brittenham GM, McLaren CE, et  al. Hepatic iron
concentration and total body iron stores in thalassemia major. N Engl
J Med. 2000;343(5):327–331.
	27.	 Cartwright GE, Edwards CQ, Kravitz K, et al. Hereditary hemochro-
matosis. Phenotypic expression of the disease. N Engl J Med. 1979;
301(4):175–179.
	28.	 Farmaki K, Tzoumari I, Pappa C, Chouliaras G, Berdoukas V.
Normalisation of total body iron load with very intensive combined
chelation reverses cardiac and endocrine complications of thalassaemia
major. Br J Haematol. 2009;148(3):466–475.
	29.	 Anderson LJ, Holden S, Davis B, et al. Cardiovascular T2-star (T2*)
magnetic resonance for the early diagnosis of myocardial iron overload.
Eur Heart J. 2001;22(23):2171–2179.
	30.	 Chirnomas DS, Geukes-Foppen M, Barry K, et al. Practical implications
of liver and heart iron load assessment by T2*-MRI in children and
adults with transfusion-dependent anemias. Am J Hematol. 2008;
83(10):781–783.
	31.	 Villeneuve JP, Bilodeau M, Lepage R, Cote J, Lefebvre M.Variability in
hepatic iron concentration measurement from needle-biopsy specimens.
J Hepatol. 1996;25(2):172–177.
	32.	 Brittenham GM, Farrell DE, Harris JW, et al. Magnetic-susceptibility
measurement of human iron stores. N Engl J Med. 1982;307:
1671–1675.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
147
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
	33.	 Galanello R, Piga A, Forni GL, et al. Phase II clinical evaluation of
deferasirox, a once-daily oral chelating agent, in pediatric patients with
beta-thalassemia major. Haematologica. 2006;91(10):1343–1351.
	34.	 Piga A, Galanello R, Forni GL, et al. Randomized phase II trial of
deferasirox (Exjade, ICL670), a once-daily, orally-administered iron
chelator, in comparison to deferoxamine in thalassemia patients with
transfusional iron overload. Haematologica. 2006;91(7):873–880.
	35.	 Olivieri NF, Brittenham GM, Matsui D, et al. Iron-chelation therapy
with oral deferiprone in patients with thalassemia major. N Engl J Med.
1995;332:918–922.
	36.	 Nielsen P, Engelhardt R, Grosse R, Janka G, Harmatz P, Fischer R.
Italian Society of Hematology guidelines for thalassemia and non-
invasive iron measurements. Haematologica. 2009;94(2):294–295;
author reply 295–296.
	37.	 Brittenham GM, Badman DG. Noninvasive measurement of iron: report
of an NIDDK workshop. Blood. 2003;101(1):15–19.
	38.	 Wood JC. Magnetic resonance imaging measurement of iron overload.
Curr Opin Hematol. 2007;14(3):183–190.
	39.	 St Pierre TG, Clark PR, Chua-anusorn W, et  al. Noninvasive
measurement and imaging of liver iron concentrations using proton
magnetic resonance. Blood. 2005;105(2):855–861.
	40.	 Westwood MA, Wonke B, MaceiraAM, et al. Left ventricular diastolic
function compared with T2* cardiovascular magnetic resonance for
early detection of myocardial iron overload in thalassemia major.
J Magn Reson Imaging. 2005;22(2):229–233.
	41.	 Wood JC, Enriquez C, Ghugre N, et al. MRI R2 and R2* mapping
accurately estimates hepatic iron concentration in transfusion-dependent
thalassemia and sickle cell disease patients. Blood. 2005;106(4):
1460–1465.
	42.	 Kirk P, Roughton M, Porter JB, et al. Cardiac T2* magnetic resonance
for prediction of cardiac complications in thalassemia major.
Circulation. 2009;120(20):1961–1968.
	43.	 Fung EB, Harmatz PR, Lee PD, et al. Increased prevalence of iron-
overload associated endocrinopathy in thalassaemia versus sickle-cell
disease. Br J Haematol. 2006;135(4):574–582.
	44.	 Wood JC,Tyszka M, Carson S, Nelson MD, CoatesTD. Myocardial iron
loading in transfusion-dependent thalassemia and sickle cell disease.
Blood. 2004;103:1934–1936.
	45.	 Roggero S, Quarello P, Vinciguerra T, Longo F, Piga A, Ramenghi U.
Severe iron overload in Blackfan-Diamond anemia: a case-control
study. Am J Hematol. 2009;84(11):729–732.
	46.	 Fung EB, Harmatz P, Milet M, et al. Morbidity and mortality in
chronically transfused subjects with thalassemia and sickle cell disease:
A report from the multi-center study of iron overload. Am J Hematol.
2007;82(4):255–265.
	47.	 Noetzli LJ, CoatesTD, Wood JC. Pancreatic iron loading in chronically
transfused sickle cell disease is lower than in thalassaemia major. Br J
Haematol. 2011;152(2):229–233.
	48.	 Anderson LJ, Westwood MA, Holden S, et  al. Myocardial iron
clearance during reversal of siderotic cardiomyopathy with intravenous
desferrioxamine: a prospective study usingT2* cardiovascular magnetic
resonance. Br J Haematol. 2004;127(3):348–355.
	49.	 Brittenham GM, Griffith PM, Nienhuis AW, et  al. Efficacy of
deferoxamine in preventing complications of iron overload in patients
with thalassemia major. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(9):567–573.
	50.	 Lee P, Mohammed N, Marshall L, et al. Intravenous infusion pharma-
cokinetics of desferrioxamine in thalassaemic patients. Drug Metab
Dispos. 1993;21(4):640–644.
	51.	 CohenAR, Mizanin J, Schwartz E. Rapid removal of excessive iron with
daily, high-dose intravenous chelation therapy. Journal of Pediatrics.
1989;115(1):151–155.
	52.	 FreedmanMH,GrisaruD,OliveriN,MacLuskyI,ThornerPS.­Pulmonary
syndrome in patients with thalassemia major receiving intravenous def-
eroxamine infusions. Am J Dis Child. 1990;144(5):565–569.
	53.	 Levine JE, CohenA, MacQueen M, Martin M, Giardina PJ. Sensorimotor
neurotoxicity associated with high-dose deferoxamine treatment.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 1997;19(2):139–141.
	54.	 Franchini M, Gandini G, de Gironcoli M, Vassanelli A, Borgna–
Pignatti C,Aprili G. Safety and efficacy of subcutaneous bolus injection
of deferoxamine in adult patients with iron overload. Blood. 2000;95(9):
2776–2779.
	55.	 Franchini M, Gandini G, Veneri D, Aprili G. Safety and efficacy of
subcutaneous bolus injection of deferoxamine in adult patients with
iron overload: an update. Blood. 2004;103(2):747–748.
	56.	 Pippard MJ, Letsky EA, Callender ST,Weatherall DJ. Prevention of iron
loading in transfusion-dependent thalassaemia. Lancet. 1978;1(8075):
1178–1181.
	57.	 Nienhuis A. Vitamin C and Iron. N Engl J Med. 1981;304(3):
170–171.
	58.	 Taher A, Sheikh-Taha M, Koussa S, Inati A, Neeman R, Mourad F.
Comparison between deferoxamine and deferiprone (L1) in iron-loaded
thalassemia patients. Eur J Haematol. 2001;67(1):30–34.
	59.	 Wolfe L, Oliveri N, Sallan D, et al. Prevention of cardiac disease by
sucutaneous deferoxamine in patients with thalassemia major. N Engl
J Med. 1985;312(25):1600–1603.
	60.	 De Sanctis V, Eleftheriou A, Malaventura C. Prevalence of endocrine
complications and short stature in patients with thalassaemia major: a
multicenter study by the Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF).
Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2004;2 Suppl 2:249–255.
	61.	 Barry M, Flynn DM, Letsky EA, Risdon RA. Long-term chelation
therapy in thalassaemia major: effect on liver iron concentration, liver
histology, and clinical progress. Br Med J. 1974;2(5909):16–20.
	62.	 Cohen A, Martin M, Schwartz E. Depletion of excessive liver iron
stores with desferrioxamine. Br J Haematol. 1984;58:369–373.
	63.	 Davis BA, Porter JB. Long-term outcome of continuous 24-hour
deferoxamine infusion via indwelling intravenous catheters in high-risk
beta-thalassemia. Blood. 2000;95(4):1229–1236.
	64.	 Olivieri NF, Buncic JR, Chew E, et al.Visual and auditory neurotoxicity
in patients receiving subcutaneous deferoxamine infusions. N Engl
J Med. 1986;314(14):869–873.
	65.	 De Sanctis V, Pinamonti A, DiPalma A, et al. Growth and ­development
in thalassemia major patients with severe bone lesions due to
desferrioxamine. Eur J Pediatr. 1996;155(5):368–372.
	66.	 Porter JB, Jaswon MS, Huehns ER, East CA, Hazell JW.
Desferrioxamine ototoxicity: evaluation of risk factors in thalassaemic
patients and ­guidelines for safe dosage. Br J Haematol. 1989;73(3):
403–409.
	67.	 Adamkiewicz TV, Berkovitch M, Krishnan C, Polsinelli C,
­Kermack D, Olivieri NF. Infection due to Yersinia enterocolitica in a
series of patients with beta-thalassemia: incidence and predisposing
factors. Clin Infect Dis. 1998;27(6):1362–1366.
	68.	 Chan GC, Chan S, Ho PL, Ha SY. Effects of chelators (deferoxamine,
deferiprone and deferasirox) on the growth of Klebsiella pneumoniae
and Aeromonas hydrophila isolated from transfusion-dependent
thalassemia patients. Hemoglobin. 2009;33(5):352–360.
	69.	 Delea TE, Edelsberg J, Sofrygin O, et al. Consequences and costs of
noncompliance with iron chelation therapy in patients with transfusion-
dependent thalassemia: a literature review. Transfusion. 2007;47(10):
1919–1929.
	70.	 Ward A, Caro JJ, Green TC, et al. An international survey of patients
with thalassemia major and their views about sustaining life-long
desferrioxamine use. BMC Clin Pharmacol. 2002;2:3.
	71.	 Beratis S. Noncompliance with iron chelation therapy in patients with
beta thalassaemia. J Psychosom Res. 1989;33(6):739–745.
	72.	 Borgna-Pignatti C, Rugolotto S, DeStefano P, et al. Survival and ­disease
complications in thalassemia major. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998;850:
227–231.
	73.	 Ceci A, Baiardi P, Catapano M, et  al. Risk factors for death in
patients with beta-thalassemia major: results of a case-control study.
Haematologica. 2006;91(10):1420–1421.
	74.	 Kontoghiorghes GJ, Pattichis K, Neocleous K, KolnagouA.The design
and development of deferiprone (L1) and other iron chelators for clini-
cal use: targeting methods and application prospects. Curr Med Chem.
2004;11(16):2161–2183.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
148
Kwiatkowski
	75.	 Al-Refaie FN, Sheppard LN, Nortey P, Wonke B, Hoffbrand AV.
Pharmacokinetics of the oral iron chelator deferiprone (L1) in patients
with iron overload. Br J Haematol. 1995;89:403–408.
	76.	 Matsui D, Klein J, Hermann C. Relationship between the pharmacoki-
netics and iron excretion of the new oral iron chelator 1,2-dimethyl-3-
hydroxypyrid-4-1 in patients with thalassemia. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
1991;50(3):294–298.
	77.	 El Alfy M, Sari TT, Lee CL, Tricta F, El-Beshlawy A. The safety,
­tolerability, and efficacy of a liquid formulation of deferiprone in young
children with transfusional iron overload. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol.
2010;32(8):601–605.
	78.	 Collins AF, Fassos FF, Stobie S, et al. Iron-balance and dose-response
studies of the oral iron chelator 1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid-4-one
(L1) in iron-loaded patients with sickle cell disease. Blood. 1994;83(8):
2329–2333.
	79.	 Olivieri NF, Koren G, Hermann C, et al. Comparison of oral iron
chelator L1 and desferrioxamine in iron-loaded patients. Lancet. 1990;
336(8726):1275–1279.
	80.	 Agarwal MB, Gupte SS, Viswanathan C, et al. Long-term assessment
of efficacy and safety of L1, an oral iron chelator, in transfusion
dependent thalassaemia: Indian trial. Br J Haematol. 1992;82(2):
460–466.
	81.	 Al-Refaie FN, Wonke B, Hoffbrand AV, Wickens DG, Nortey P,
Kontoghiorges GJ. Efficacy and possible adverse effects of the oral
iron chelator 1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid-4-one (L1) in thalassemia
major. Blood. 1992;80(3):593–599.
	82.	 Wonke B, Wright C, HoffbrandAV. Combined therapy with deferiprone
and desferrioxamine. Br J Haematol. 1998;103:361–364.
	83.	 Kersten MJ, Lange R, Smeets ME, et  al. Long-term treatment
of transfusional iron overload with the oral iron chelator defer-
iprone (L1): a Dutch multicenter trial. Ann Hematol. 1996;73(5):
247–252.
	84.	 Maggio A, D’Amico G, Morabito A, et  al. Deferiprone versus
deferoxamine in patients with thalassemia major: a randomized clinical
trial. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2002;28(2):196–208.
	85.	 Al-Refaie FN, Hershko C, Hoffbrand AV, et al. Results of long-term
deferiprone (L1) therapy: a report by the International Study Group on
oral iron chelators. Br J Haematol. 1995;91(1):224–229.
	86.	 Ceci A, Baiardi P, Felisi M, et al. The safety and effectiveness of
deferiprone in a large-scale, 3-year study in Italian patients. Br J
­Haematol. 2002;118(1):330–336.
	87.	 Cohen AR, Galanello R, Piga A, DiPalma A, Vullo C, Tricta F. Safety
profile of the oral iron chelator deferiprone: a multicentre study. Br J
Haematol. 2000;108(2):305–312.
	88.	 Hoffbrand AV, Al-Refaie F, Davis B, et  al. Long-term trial of
deferiprone in 51 transfusion-dependent iron overloaded patients. Blood.
1998;91(1):295–300.
	89.	 Cohen AR, Galanello R, Piga A, DeSanctis V, Tricta F. Safety
and effectiveness of long-term therapy with the oral iron chelator
deferiprone. Blood. 2003;102(5):1583–1587.
	90.	 Mazza P, Amurri B, Lazzari G, et al. Oral iron chelating therapy.
A single center interim report on deferiprone (L1) in thalassemia.
­Haematologica. 1998;83(6):496–501.
	91.	 Olivieri NF, Brittenham GM, McLaren CE, et al. Long-term safety and
effectiveness of iron-chelation therapy with deferiprone for thalassemia
major. N Engl J Med. 1998;339(7):417–423.
	92.	 Pennell DJ, Berdoukas V, Karagiorga M, et al. Randomized ­controlled
trial of deferiprone or deferoxamine in beta-thalassemia major
patients with asymptomatic myocardial siderosis. Blood. 2006;107(9):
3738–3744.
	93.	 Taher A, Sheikh-Taha M, Sharara A, et al. Safety and effectiveness
of 100 mg/kg/day deferiprone in patients with thalassemia major:
a two-year study. Acta Haematol. 2005;114(3):146–149.
	94.	 Borgna-Pignatti C, Cappellini MD, De Stefano P, et al. Cardiac
­morbidity and mortality in deferoxamine- or deferiprone-treated patients
with thalassemia major. Blood. 2006;107(9):3733–3737.
	 95.	 Piga A, Gaglioti C, Fogliacco E, Tricta F. Comparative effects of
deferiprone and deferoxamine on survival and cardiac ­disease
in patients with thalassemia major: a retrospective analysis.
­Haematologica. 2003;88(5):489–496.
	 96.	 Anderson LJ, Wonke B, Prescott E, Holden S, Walker JM,
­Pennell DJ. Comparison of effects of oral deferiprone and subcutane-
ous desferrioxamine on myocardial iron concentrations and ventricular
function in beta-thalassaemia. Lancet. 2002;360(9332):516–520.
	 97.	 BerdoukasV, Chouliaras G, Moraitis P, Zannikos K, Berdoussi E, Ladis
V.The efficacy of iron chelator regimes in reducing cardiac and hepatic
iron in patients with thalassaemia major: a clinical observational study.
J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2009;11:20.
	 98.	 Al-Refaie FN, Wonke B, Hoffbrand AV. Deferiprone-associated
myelotoxicity. Eur J Haematol. 1994;53(5):298–301.
	 99.	 Henter JI, Karlen J. Fatal agranulocytosis after deferiprone therapy
in a child with Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Blood. 2007;109(12):
5157–5159.
	100.	 HoffbrandAV, BartlettAN,Veys PA, O’Connor NT, Kontoghiorghes GJ.
Agranulocytosis and thrombocytopenia in patient with Blackfan-
Diamond anaemia during oral chelator trial. Lancet. 1989;
2(8660):457.
	101.	 Tondury P, Zimmerman A, Nielsen P, Hirt A. Liver iron and fibrosis
during long-term treatment with deferiprone in Swiss thalassaemic
patients. Br J Haematol. 1998;101(3):413–415.
	102.	 Wanless IR, Sweeney G, Dhillon AP, et al. Lack of progressive
hepatic fibrosis during long-term therapy with deferiprone in subjects
with transfusion-dependent beta-thalassemia. Blood. 2002;100(5):
1566–1569.
	103.	 Galanello R, PigaA,Alberti D, Rouan MC, Bigler H, Sechaud R. Safety,
tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of ICL670, a new orally active iron-
chelating agent in patients with transfusion-dependent iron overload
due to beta-thalassemia. J Clin Pharmacol. 2003;43(6):565–572.
	104.	 Galanello R, Piga A, Cappellini MD, et al. Effect of food, type
of food, and time of food intake on deferasirox bioavailability:
recommendations for an optimal deferasirox administration regimen.
J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;48(4):428–435.
	105.	 Nisbet-Brown E, Olivieri NF, Giardina PJ, et  al. Effectiveness
and safety of ICL670 in iron-loaded patients with thalassaemia:
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation trial.
Lancet. 2003;361(9369):1597–1602.
	106.	 Chirnomas D, Smith AL, Braunstein J, et  al. Deferasirox
pharmacokinetics in patients with adequate versus inadequate
response. Blood. 2009;114(19):4009–4013.
	107.	 Taher A, Cappellini MD, Vichinsky E, et al. Efficacy and safety of
deferasirox doses of .30 mg/kg per d in patients with transfusion-
dependent anaemia and iron overload. Br J Haematol. 2009;147(5):
752–759.
	108.	 Pennell DJ, Porter JB, Cappellini MD, et al. Efficacy of deferasirox
in reducing and preventing cardiac iron overload in beta-thalassemia.
Blood. 2010;115(12):2364–2371.
	109.	 Pennell DJ, Porter JB, Cappellini MD, et al. Continued improvement
in myocardial T2* over two years of deferasirox therapy in beta-
thalassemia major patients with cardiac iron overload. Haematologica.
2011;96(1):48–54.
	110.	 Wood JC, Kang BP, Thompson A, et al. The effect of deferasirox on
cardiac iron in thalassemia major: impact of total body iron stores.
Blood. 2010;116(4):537–543.
	111.	 PathareA,TaherA, Daar S. Deferasirox (Exjade) significantly improves
cardiacT2* in heavily iron-overloaded patients with ­beta-thalassemia
major. Ann Hematol. 2010;89(4):405–409.
	112.	 Trad O, Hamdan MA, Jamil A, et al. Reversal of iron-induced dilated
cardiomyopathy during therapy with deferasirox in beta-thalassemia.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009;52(3):426–428.
	113.	 KiguchiT, ItoY, KimuraY, Ohyashiki K. Restoration of cardiac ­function
by an iron chelator, deferasirox, in a patient with ­aplastic anemia
and cardiac iron overload. Int J Hematol. 2009;89(4):546–548.
Journal of Blood Medicine
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/Journal-of-blood-medicine-journal
The Journal of Blood Medicine is an international, peer-reviewed, open
access, online journal publishing laboratory, experimental and clinical aspects
of all topics pertaining to blood based medicine including but not limited to:
Transfusion Medicine; Blood collection, Donor issues,Transmittable diseases,
and Blood banking logistics; Immunohematology; Artificial and alternative
blood based therapeutics; Hematology; Biotechnology/nanotechnology of
blood related medicine; Legal aspects of blood medicine; Historical perspec-
tives.The manuscript management system is completely online and includes
a very quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
Journal of Blood Medicine 2011:2 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
149
Managing transfusional iron overload with chelating agents
	114.	 Rheault MN, Bechtel H, Neglia JP, Kashtan CE. Reversible Fanconi
syndrome in a pediatric patient on deferasirox. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2011;56(4):674–676.
	115.	 Wei HY, Yang CP, Cheng CH, Lo FS. Fanconi syndrome in a patient
with beta-thalassemia major after using deferasirox for 27 months.
Transfusion. 2011;51(5):949–954.
	116.	 Yacobovich J, Stark P, Barzilai-Birenbaum S, et al.Acquired proximal
renal tubular dysfunction in beta-thalassemia patients treated with
deferasirox. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010;32(7):564–567.
	117.	 Bauters T, Mondelaers V, Robays H, Hunninck K, de Moerloose B.
Gastric ulcer in a child treated with deferasirox. Pharm World Sci.
2010;32(2):112–113.
	118.	 Kwiatkowski JL, Kim H-Y, Thompson AA. Chelation choices and
iron burden among patients with thalassemia in the 21st century:
a report from the Thalassemia Clinical Research Network (TCRN)
Longitudinal Cohort [Abstract]. Blood. 2009;114(22):4056.
	119.	 Cappellini MD, Bejaoui M, Agaoglu L, et al. Prospective evaluation
of patient-reported outcomes during treatment with deferasirox or
deferoxamine for iron overload in patients with beta-thalassemia. Clin
Ther. 2007;29(5):909–917.
	120.	 Origa R, Bina P, Agus A, et al. Combined therapy with deferiprone
and desferrioxamine in thalassemia major. Haematologica. 2005;
90(10):1309–1314.
	121.	 Kattamis A, Ladis V, Berdousi H, et al. Iron chelation treatment with
combined therapy with deferiprone and deferioxamine: a 12-month
trial. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2006;36(1):21–25.
	122.	 Breuer W, Ermers MJJ, Pootrakul P, Abramov A, Hershko C,
Cabantchik ZI. Desferrioxamine-chelatable iron, a component of
serum non-transferrin-bound iron, used for assessing chelation therapy.
Blood. 2001;97(3):792–798.
	123.	 Link G, Konijn AM, Breuer W, Cabantchik ZI, Hershko C. Exploring
the “iron shuttle” hypothesis in chelation therapy: effects of combined
deferoxamine and deferiprone treatment in hypertransfused rats with
labeled iron stores and in iron-loaded rat heart cells in culture. J Lab
Clin Med. 2001;138(2):130–138.
	124.	 Tanner MA, Galanello R, Dessi C, et al. A randomized, placebo-
controlled, double-blind trial of the effect of combined therapy with
deferoxamine and deferiprone on myocardial iron in thalassemia
major using cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Circulation. 2007;
115(14):1876–1884.
	125.	 Tanner MA, Galanello R, Dessi C, et al. Combined chelation therapy
in thalassemia major for the treatment of severe myocardial sidero-
sis with left ventricular dysfunction. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson.
2008;10:12.
	126.	 Lai ME, Grady RW, Vacquer S, et al. Increased survival and reversion
of iron-induced cardiac disease in patients with thalassemia major
receiving intensive combined chelation therapy as compared to
­desferoxamine alone. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010;45(2):136–139.
	127.	 Christoforidis A, Haritandi A, Tsatra I, Tsitourides I, Karyda S,
Athanassiou-Metaxa M. Four-year evaluation of myocardial and liver
iron assessed prospectively with serial MRI scans in young patients
with beta-thalassaemia major: comparison between different chelation
regimens. Eur J Haematol. 2007;78(1):52–57.
	128.	 Otto-Duessel M, Brewer C, Gonzalez I, Nick H, Wood JC. Safety
and efficacy of combined chelation therapy with deferasirox and
deferoxamine in a gerbil model of iron overload. Acta Haematol.
2008;120(2):123–128.
	129.	 Jetsrisuparb A, Komvilaisak P, Wiangnon S, Jetsrisuparb C.
Retrospective study on the combination of desferrioxamine and
deferasirox for treatment of iron-overloaded thalassemic patients:
first evidence of more than 2 years. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010;
32(5):400–403.
	130.	 LalA, Sweeters N, Herz M, et al. Safety of combined chelation therapy
with deferasirox and deferoxamine in transfusion-dependent thalas-
semia [Abstract]. Blood. 2009;114(22):2021.
	131.	 Balocco M, Carrara P, PintoV, Forni GL. Daily alternating deferasirox
and deferiprone therapy for “hard-to-chelate” beta-thalassemia major
patients. Am J Hematol. 2010;85(6):460–461.
	132.	 BerdoukasV, Carson S, NordA, et al. Combining two orally active iron
chelators for thalassemia. Ann Hematol. 2010;89(11):1177–1178.
	133.	 Rienhoff HY Jr, Viprakasit V, Tay L, et al. A phase 1 dose-escalation
study: safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of FBS0701, a novel
oral iron chelator for the treatment of transfusional iron overload.
Haematologica. 2011;96(4):521–525.
