JCB: Article
The Rockefeller University Press  $30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 191 No. 4  861–874
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201006102 JCB 861
Correspondence to Joseph E. Italiano Jr.: jitaliano@rics.bwh.harvard.edu
Abbreviations used in this paper: ANOVA, analysis of variance; CCD, charge-
coupled device; CMFDA, 5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate; DIC, differential
interference contrast; GPIX, glycoprotein IX; HSD, honestly significant difference;
MVB, multivesicular body; PP, proplatelet/preplatelet; PRP, platelet-rich plasma.
Introduction
Platelet production represents the final stage of megakaryocyte
development. This process, during which a giant endomitotic
cell converts into 102
–103
individual platelets, is highly special-
ized and has great clinical significance. Thrombocytopenia is a
major clinical problem encountered across several conditions,
including immune (idiopathic) thrombocytopenic purpura,
myelodysplastic syndromes, chemotherapy-induced thrombo­
cytopenia, aplastic anemia, human immunodeficiency virus
infection, and major cardiac surgery, among others. The mag-
nitude of the problem is not trivial. Platelet transfusions total
well over 10 million units per year in the United States, and
their steady increase in demand continues to challenge the U.S.
blood bank community (Sullivan et al., 2007). A better under­
standing of the mechanisms of platelet formation will likely
lead to improved therapies for thrombocytopenia. Furthermore,
the ability to control in vitro megakaryocyte expansion and
maturation into platelets could result in an important source of
platelets for transfusion.
The proplatelet model of platelet formation recognizes
that differentiated megakaryocytes extend long, branching pro-
cesses, designated proplatelets, which are comprised of platelet-
sized swellings in tandem arrays that are connected by thin
cytoplasmic bridges. Proplatelets have been identified both
in vitro and in vivo (Leven, 1987; Leven and Yee, 1987; Tablin
et al., 1990), and proplatelet-producing megakaryocytes yield
platelets that are structurally and functionally similar to blood
platelets (Behnke, 1969; Becker and De Bruyn, 1976; Radley
and Scurfield, 1980; Tavassoli and Aoki, 1981; Choi et al.,
1995; Italiano et al., 1999). Mice lacking distinct hematopoietic
transcription factors have severe thrombocytopenia and fail to
produce proplatelets in culture, underscoring the correlation to
platelet biogenesis in vivo (Shivdasani et al., 1995; Shivdasani and
Orkin, 1996; Lecine et al., 1998; Shivdasani, 2001). Because of the
M
egakaryocytes generate platelets by remodel-
ing their cytoplasm into long proplatelet ex-
tensions, which serve as assembly lines for
platelet production. Although the mechanics of proplatelet
elongation have been studied, the terminal steps of pro-
platelet maturation and platelet release remain poorly
understood. To elucidate this process, released proplate-
lets were isolated, and their conversion into individual
platelets was assessed. This enabled us to (a) define
and quantify the different stages in platelet maturation,
(b) identify a new intermediate stage in platelet production,
the preplatelet, (c) delineate the cytoskeletal mechan-
ics involved in preplatelet/proplatelet interconversion,
and (d) model proplatelet fission and platelet release.
Preplatelets are anucleate discoid particles 2–10 µm across
that have the capacity to convert reversibly into elongated
proplatelets by twisting microtubule-based forces that can
be visualized in proplatelets expressing GFP–1-tubulin.
The release of platelets from the ends of proplatelets occurs
at an increasing rate in time during culture, as larger
proplatelets undergo successive fission, and is potentiated
by shear.
Cytoskeletal mechanics of proplatelet maturation
and platelet release
Jonathan N. Thon,1,3
Alejandro Montalvo,1
Sunita Patel-Hett,1,2,3
Matthew T. Devine,1
Jennifer L. Richardson,1
Allen Ehrlicher,1,3
Mark K. Larson,4
Karin Hoffmeister,1,3
John H. Hartwig,1,3
and Joseph E. Italiano Jr.1,2,3
1
Translational Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115
2
Vascular Biology Program, Department of Surgery, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115
3
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
4
Augustana College, Sioux Falls, SD 57197
© 2010 Thon et al.  This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub-
lication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a
Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license,
as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
THEJOURNALOFCELLBIOLOGY
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 862
populations were prepared from megakaryocyte cultures at times
of maximal proplatelet elaboration and characterized for the
presence/absence of a nucleus, morphology, and size (Fig. 1 A)
after double staining for nuclei and tubulin (microtubules). This
enabled us to define and quantify different stages in platelet
maturation and identify a new intermediate stage in platelet
production, the preplatelet. Preplatelets are anucleate discoid
particles considerably larger (2–10 µm) than platelets that have
the capacity to reversibly convert into proplatelets (anucleate
beaded strings with platelet-sized tear drops at each end) during
cell culture. Fig. 1 B shows the distribution of cellular elements
in a fresh preparation after the removal of most megakaryocytes;
a few megakaryocytes (<1% of the total number of objects)
contaminate the cultures, although immature intermediates
(proplatelets and preplatelets) and platelets make up the bulk
of the culture. Proplatelets were subdivided into two groups by
their perimeter, large (>50 µm) or small (30–50 µm), with large
proplatelets initially dominant. Preplatelets and platelets were
distinguished by their diameters (>2 µm or ≤2 µm, respectively).
Large preplatelets were subdivided into four groups based on their
diameters (8–10, 6–8, 4–6, or 2–4 µm). These were quantified
and normalized to total proplatelet/preplatelet (PP) counts to
account for variability in density between different preparations.
Proplatelets and preplatelets were equally distributed and com-
prised 62% of the total number of objects. The majority (69%)
of preplatelets have small (2–4 µm) diameters, approaching the
size of mature platelets. The rest of the preplatelets were distrib-
uted as follows, based on their diameters: 4–6 (25%), 6–8 (4%),
and 8–10 µm (2%). EM revealed that preplatelets are discoid
because they have a cortical micro­tubule band and contain ma-
terials destined for platelets, such as secretory granules, invagi-
nated membranes, and mitochondria (Fig. 1 C). This is expected
if larger PPLT progenitors generate multiple smaller intermedi-
ates, which themselves go on to release two or more individual
platelets. From estimates of cytoplasmic volume based on EM
images, the largest preplatelets carry sufficient material to gen-
erate 6–20 mature platelets. 37% of the elements in the enriched
proplatelet culture were platelet sized and appeared identical to
platelets from mouse blood after tubulin staining. These were
presumably left over after the final centrifugation step and rep-
resent platelets generated at an earlier point in culture.
Proplatelets/preplatelets can mature into
platelets in vivo
Although proplatelet release (Junt et al., 2007) suggests frag-
mentation into platelets in blood, this supposition has not ever
been observed or formally demonstrated. To establish that
platelet release/maturation can occur within the blood vas-
culature, freshly enriched preplatelet/proplatelet isolates were
5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate (CMFDA) labeled (Fig. 2,
A and C [top]) and transfused into mice. CMFDA-labeled blood
platelets were used as a control in parallel transfusions. Fig. 2 C
(bottom) shows combined immunofluorescence and differential
interference contrast (DIC) photographs of the platelet frac-
tion from the blood of these mice 2 h after the proplatelet or
platelet transfusion. CMFDA-labeled platelets recovered in the
blood of recipient mice are identified, and when proplatelets
dramatic morphological changes that occur during proplatelet
production, the cytoskeletal mechanics that drive these trans-
formations have been the focus of many studies. Nevertheless,
the terminal stages of proplatelet maturation and platelet release
remain poorly understood. This is due in part to significant
limitations in the field, such as the asynchronous maturation
of hematopoietic stem cells in culture and our inability to syn-
chronize proplatelet production. Megakaryocyte cultures always
contain a complex mix of hematopoietic stem cells, immature
megakaryocytes, proplatelet-producing megakaryocytes, re-
leased proplatelets (which can range dramatically in size and
shape), and platelets (Behnke and Forer, 1998; Italiano et al.,
2007). As there are currently no methods available to isolate
the multiple intermediate stages in platelet release, most stud-
ies to date have focused on the qualitative aspects of mega-
karyocyte maturation.
Physiological evidence of proplatelet production has been
supported by multiple images of proplatelets extending into the
sinusoidal blood vessels of the bone marrow (Behnke, 1969;
Becker and De Bruyn, 1976; Kessel and Kardon, 1979). Never­
theless, these represent only static snapshots of megakaryo-
cyte maturation in situ and have yielded competing mechanistic
models of platelet release. Junt et al. (2007) recently used live
imaging with multiphoton intravital microscopy to visualize
platelet production in vivo. Although they demonstrate that
bone marrow megakaryocytes will extend proplatelets and
release fragments into the vasculature, the observations they
present raise questions of their own. For example, most of the
shed megakaryocyte fragments appear to greatly exceed platelet
dimensions, suggesting that proplatelet morphogenesis contin-
ues in peripheral blood. Because blood is moving, individual
platelet release may be assisted by intravascular shear forces as
proplatelets enter and become trapped in capillaries. The larg-
est capillary bed is in lung, and it has been reported that pro-
platelet counts are higher in prepulmonary vessels compared
with postpulmonary vessels (Handagama et al., 1987), whereas
platelet counts are higher in the latter. However, evidence of a
dependence of proplatelet fragmentation into platelets on hydro­
dynamic forces is missing.
In vivo observations that validate the proplatelet model
and provide clues into the final steps of platelet production also
raise several questions: how do proplatelets mature into indi-
vidual platelets, is there an intermediate structure as proplate-
lets convert into platelets, what cytoskeletal forces are involved,
and does vascular shear regulate individual platelet release?
This study defines the multiple intermediate stages in proplate-
let maturation and begins to identify relevant mechanistic inter-
actions leading to platelet release from proplatelets.
Results
Characterization of the morphological
stages as proplatelets mature
into platelets
To study distinct stages in platelet production in vitro, released
proplatelets were isolated by a novel centrifugation and gra-
dient sedimentation protocol (Fig. S1). Enriched proplatelet
863The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
Further analysis of the flow cytometry data reveals that the PP
fraction is rapidly sequestered after its infusion into mice; e.g.,
PPs are not found in blood in the initial 1:1 ratio to platelets
present in the samples. In addition, the increase in CMFDA-
labeled platelet counts is faster in vivo than occurs for platelets
in culture (Fig. S2, B, C, and E), suggesting that blood flow–
induced shear stress and/or receptor-mediated signaling may
accelerate platelet release.
Platelet release in culture
The variety of different-sized preplatelets in the proplatelet culture
suggested to us that we were observing an ongoing maturation pro-
gram and that by studying it in vitro, we could establish precursor–
product relationships between the various intermediates. We first
qualified proplatelet fission (Fig. 3 A) and platelet release
(Fig. 3 B) in the proplatelet cultures by video-enhanced DIC
microscopy. During this process, the connection between swell-
ings on proplatelets thins dramatically and then snaps, at which
point the fragmented ends retract toward their daughter cells.
were infused, this demonstrates platelet formation in blood.
To quantitate platelet release, CMFDA-labeled proplatelets were
transfused into mice, and blood samples were collected at regu-
lar intervals over a period of 72 h, commencing <2 min after in-
fusing the proplatelets. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was isolated
from the obtained blood samples, and the PPs and platelet-sized
fractions were dissected and analyzed by flow cytometry (Fig. 2,
A and B; Baker et al., 1997; Hoffmeister et al., 2003a). The
percentage of labeled platelets in the blood at the first time point
(2 min) after transfusion is used as 100%. When platelets are
transfused, they rapidly distribute in the blood volume and their
blood concentration decreases thereafter, depending on the cir-
culatory lifespan of the platelets (half-life, 1.5–2 d in mice).
However, when the immature PPs were transfused, there was a
time-dependent increase in the number of labeled platelet-sized
particles in blood as the infused proplatelets convert into plate-
lets. Platelet release from the infused proplatelets was maximal
by 12 h, after which the labeled platelet numbers begin to de-
crease, as expected again from the platelet lifetimes in blood.
Figure 1.  Identification and quantification of intermediates in platelet release by immunofluorescence microscopy. The released proplatelet-enriched
fraction and washed mouse platelets (control) were probed with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against detyrosinated tubulin and analyzed by immuno-
fluorescence microscopy for different-sized objects. Intermediates in platelet release were categorized based on perimeter (proplatelets) or diameter
(megakaryocytes, preplatelets, and platelets). (A) Representative pictures of a day 5 proplatelet-enriched culture before (left) and after (middle) thresholding
of anti-tubulin–labeled intermediates using MetaMorph software and washed mouse platelets (0.5–2-µm diameter; right). (B) Relative distribution of inter-
mediates at day 5 of culture after proplatelet enrichment. (C) Representative pictures of the tubulin cytoskeleton of mouse preplatelets (2–10-µm diameter;
immunofluorescence microscopy; inset), their ultrastructure (thin-section EM; bottom), and cytoskeleton (rapid-freeze EM; top).
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 864
to identify mature platelet-sized particles (2 µm in diameter)
expressing the platelet-specific glycoprotein IX (GPIX) on
their surface and/or having a cortical microtubule coil in the
cultures. Mouse blood platelets served as size controls for
these experiments (Fig. S2 A). Morphometry and flow cytom-
etry showed that the number of large PP progenitors decreased
In certain thin-section electron micrographs, a small constric-
tion, resembling a cleavage furrow (similar to that described
previously; Schwertz et al., 2010), is found in the proplatelet
shaft (Fig. 3 C).
Platelet production was quantified using the combination
of flow cytometric analysis and immunofluorescence microscopy
Figure 2.  Released proplatelets mature into multiple individual platelets in vivo. (A) Washed mouse whole blood platelets were run directly on the flow
cytometer (negative control) or labeled with 5 µM CMFDA before analysis (CMFDA+ control). The CMFDA+ mouse whole blood platelet population was
used to establish forward/side scatter and fluorescent intensity parameters used to identify newly released platelets. Released proplatelets from mouse fetal
liver cell culture were labeled with 5 µM CMFDA and transfused into live mice. PRP was collected immediately after transfusion (CMFDA+ <2 min) and
6 h after transfusion (CMFDA+ 6 h), and analyzed by flow cytometry. CMFDA+ platelets were identified using the aforementioned gates. CMFDA-labeled
platelet counts were comparable at <2 min after transfusion in CMFDA-labeled platelet and cultured proplatelet transfused mice (≥1% platelet recovery
and ≥0.1% of circulating platelets). (B) CMFDA-labeled proplatelets were transfused into mice, and whole blood samples were collected via retro-orbital
bleeding at regular intervals over a period of 72 h, commencing with a <2-min time point. PRP was isolated, and platelets were analyzed by flow cytometry
and immunofluorescence microscopy. (C) Representative pictures of CMFDA-labeled proplatelets before transfusion and mouse PRP after CMFDA-labeled
proplatelet and platelet transfusions. Fluorescence and DIC images were overlaid and merged. Arrows indicate CMFDA-labeled platelets recovered
from recipient mice 2 h after transfusion, demonstrating maturation of released proplatelets into multiple individual platelets within the circulatory system.
Released PPs were also stained for tubulin (red) and DAPI (blue) to confirm CMFDA labeling of proplatelets before transfusion. CMFDA fluoresces at
458 nm and is shown in green. Immunofluorescence images are exhibited as a montage of representative cells from the same sample slide. Error bars
indicate mean ± standard deviation.
865The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
Figure 3.  Direct visualization of proplatelet/platelet release in culture. (A and B) Isolated proplatelets were diluted with a semisolid culture medium and
maintained in custom BSA-coated chambers at 37°C. They were examined on an inverted microscope, and frames were captured at 30-s intervals. (A) The
separation of proplatelet cytoplasm and associated release of a shorter proplatelet fragment. The arrows highlight the site of proplatelet division. (B) The
release of an individual platelet (arrows) from the end of a larger released proplatelet. (C and D) Thin-section electron micrographs showing the ultrastructure of
a barbell-shaped proplatelet in the process of platelet release. Black arrows highlight the formation of a constricted region resembling a cleavage furrow
along the long shaft of a cultured proplatelet. (C, inset) A higher magnification view of the boxed area is shown. (D) A similarly shaped barbell proplatelet
immediately after cleavage. The arrow highlights the site of proplatelet division.
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 866
the underlying mechanisms.Three types of behaviors were studied
in detail: (1) the proplatelet–preplatelet interconversions, (2) fission
of small proplatelets into platelets, and (3) shear-facilitated
proplatelet fission and platelet release. Proplatelets and preplate-
lets are distinguished from their elongated or discoid shapes, re-
spectively. However, both have prominent cortical microtubule
bundles. In preplatelets, these bundles rim the cytoplasmic surface
of the membrane on the disc face. In proplatelets, the bundles also
rim the cell membranes of the bulbous particles, but they collapse
together and interact along the shafts. The exponential accumula-
tion of smaller PPs and platelets in our culture system over time
implies a model in which larger proplatelet progenitors under­go
continuous fission, producing an increasing number of sequential
platelet release sites.
Direct visualization of microtubule dynamics
during the conversion of preplatelets to
barbell proplatelets
To visualize the microtubule cytoskeleton directly during pre-
platelet to barbell proplatelet conversion and to confirm this
relationship between the two intermediate structures, cultured
megakaryocytes were retrovirally directed to express GFP–
1-tubulin. Released proplatelet fractions were isolated, and GFP–
1-tubulin–labeled preplatelets were monitored by fluorescence
time-lapse microscopy. Fig. 5A depicts a representative preplate-
let of 7 µm in diameter over a period of 4 min. In this time, the
oval marginal band was observed to twist about its center several
times in a clockwise fashion to ultimately yield a barbell-shaped
proplatelet with two well-defined platelet-sized (2-µm diameter)
microtubule loops at each end. This was confirmed by thin-
section EM (Fig. 5 B). Fig. 5 C shows the microtubule cyto-
skeleton twisting about the preplatelet center to yield a “figure 8”
structure comparable with Fig. 5 A (1 min) and suggests an
intermediate stage in preplatelet to proplatelet interconversion.
To establish whether microtubules continue to polymer­ize
throughout released proplatelets once defined micro­tubule
loops have formed, mouse megakaryocyte cultures were retro­
virally directed to express EB3-GFP. EB3-GFP localizes only
at polymerizing microtubule plus ends in a characteristic comet
staining pattern with a bright front and dim tail (Fig. S3). Fig. S3
shows the first frame from Video 4, a time-lapse video of
a cultured proplatelet expressing EB3-GFP. Multiple comets
are observed moving bidirectionally in the cytoplasmic bridge
and within the microtubule coil at the ends of the proplatelet,
confirming continued dynamic assembly and reorganization of
microtubule coils at a late stage of proplatelet development.
Comet movement rates are estimated to be 8.9–12.3 µm/min.
Multivesicular bodies (MVBs) are present
and granules continue to sort in released
proplatelet/preplatelet intermediates
The biogenesis and distribution of platelet-specific granules into
nascent platelets are essential to platelet production. In mega-
karyocytes, MVBs represent a developmental stage in -granule
and dense-granule maturation (Heijnen et al., 1998; Youssefian
and Cramer, 2000). Indeed, differences in intragranular protein
distribution of MVBs, -granules, and dense granules have been
with culture time as platelet counts increased about fourfold
(Fig. S2, B and C).
Fig. S4 B illustrates the distribution of PP/platelet prog-
eny (1–137 µm2
) and proplatelet progenitors (138–227 µm2
)
binned by object area and normalized to day 5 counts after 2,
24, 48, and 72 h in a representative culture and confirms an
inverse relationship between smaller and larger object counts
over time. Fig. S4 C illustrates the distribution of proplatelet/
platelet progeny (1–137 µm2
) after 2, 24, 48, and 72 h in culture
and demonstrates proplatelet fission and platelet release at an
increasing rate in time.
Reversible conversions between preplatelets
and proplatelets
Because the intermediates in platelet production distribute evenly
between elongated proplatelets and discoid preplatelet in the cul-
tures, we hypothesized that the two forms were interrelated. To test
this hypothesis, we asked whether manipulation of microtubules
within these structures could convert barbell proplatelets to pre-
platelets and vice versa. Released proplatelet cultures were incu-
bated at either 37°C (normal control), 4°C for 1 h to depolymerize
microtubules, or at 4°C for 1 h and then 37°C for 1 h to depoly-
merize and repolymerize microtubules. Fig. 4 displays log differ-
ence in total proplatelet, preplatelet, and platelet counts at 4°C
(Fig. 4 A) and 4–37°C (Fig. 4 B) relative to 37°C control. Counts
of proplatelets and preplatelets were performed as previously de-
scribed,andallvalueswerenormalizedto37°Ccontrols.Datawere
subject to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for three inde-
pendent samples and Tukey honestly significant difference (HSD)
analysis (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05). Depolymerization of tubulin at
4°C significantly shifted the proplatelet population to preplatelet
forms (Fig. 4 A). The proplatelet population returned to normal
when the samples were returned to 37°C (Fig. 4 B), indicating that
the proplatelet structure is a result of tubulin polymerization and
microtubule organization about its midbody.
This observation was confirmed using a second method of
microtubule manipulation, wherein released proplatelet cul-
tures were incubated at 37°C in the presence of a microtubule-
stabilizing agent (5 µM taxol) or a tubulin-depolymerizing agent
(5 µM nocodazole) for 1 h. Counts of proplatelets and preplate-
lets were performed, and all values were normalized to no-drug
controls. Fig. 4 C illustrates a shift in the distribution of the re-
leased proplatelet culture population toward smaller proplatelet
or preplatelet forms in the presence of taxol or nocodazole, respec-
tively. Representative pictures of proplatelet-enriched cultures
after taxol or nocodazole incubations appear in Fig. 4 D. These
results suggest that the microtubule cytoskeleton of inter­
mediates in platelet production undergo a dramatic reorganiza-
tion during their interconversion between preplatelet and barbell
proplatelet forms. Moreover, the pharmacological regimen used
suggests that the reorganization of microtubules plays an essen-
tial role in this morphogenesis.
Mechanisms of proplatelet maturation and
platelet release
Having established a precursor–product relationship between
proplatelets–preplatelets and proplatelets–platelets, we investigated
867The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
(Figs. 6 A and S5), which may suggest ongoing granule biogen-
esis in these cells.
Transport of organelles along proplatelets involves move-
ment along microtubules and translocation of linked micro­tubules
relative to one another (Richardson et al., 2005). Barbell pro-
platelets have a dynamic microtubule cytoskeleton that continues
to assemble and reorganize during late-stage platelet development.
reported previously (van Nispen Tot Pannerden et al., 2010)
and may reflect effective sorting and/or retention mechanisms
in their formation. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether granule
biogenesis occurs in preplatelets or released proplatelets.
To address this question, we looked for MVBs in released pro-
platelets and preplatelets. Thin-section EM revealed the pres-
ence of MVBs in structural intermediates of platelet production
Figure 4.  Preplatelets reversibly convert into proplatelets using microtubule-based forces. (A and B) Proplatelet-enriched fractions were probed with a rab-
bit polyclonal antibody against detyrosinated tubulin and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy for different-sized objects. Samples were incubated
at 37°C (normal control), 4°C for 1 h, or 4°C for 1 h and returned to 37°C for 1 h. All values were normalized to the 37°C controls. (A) Depolymerization
of tubulin at 4°C shifted the proplatelet population into preplatelet forms. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. Arrows indicate values compared and significance
level of difference. (B) The proplatelet population returned to normal upon repolymerization of tubulin at 37°C. Data were subject to one-way ANOVA for
three independent samples and Tukey HSD analysis. (C) Released proplatelet/platelet fraction from second gradient sedimentation probed with a rabbit
polyclonal antibody against detyrosinated tubulin and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy for different-sized objects. Distribution of proplatelet
and preplatelet forms after 1 h in culture with 5 µM taxol (promotes microtubule polymerization; left), a vector control (middle), or 5 µM nocodazole (pro-
motes microtubule depolymerization; right). Microtubule stabilization and depolymerization shifted the population toward proplatelet and preplatelet forms,
respectively. (D) Representative pictures of cultured intermediates after taxol (proplatelet) or nocodazole (preplatelet) incubations.
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 868
culture after 0, 60, and 120 min of shear. Compared with the no
shear control, platelet numbers increased, whereas the number
of proplatelets decreased over time (Fig. 7 D). Platelet and PP
progeny (1–137 µm2
; Fig. 7 E) and proplatelet progenitors (138–
227 µm2
; Fig. 7 F) were binned by size (area), and their relative
counts over time were spread across multiple bins to resolve the
mechanism of platelet release. The data describe an inverse rela-
tionship between smaller and larger object counts that suggests
dynamic proplatelet fission and continuous platelet release under
shear with time. Flow cytometric analysis of cultured samples
agree with immunofluorescence microscopy data and reveal a sig­
nificant decrease in the number of large proplatelets and PP inter­
mediates (small ProPLTs) after 2 h relative to no shear control
(Fig. 7, G and H). Fig. 8 summarizes the model of platelet pro-
duction from proplatelets supported by these experiments.
Discussion
The presence of proplatelets in blood implies that they frag­
ment into individual platelets. To evaluate the mechanisms by
which released proplatelets mature platelets and to identify inter­
mediate stages in this process, we developed a novel centrifugation
and gradient sedimentation protocol to separate megakaryo­
cytes and residual megakaryocyte cell bodies from released
proplatelets. This enabled us to define and quantify different
stages in proplatelet maturation and platelet release, relate these
temporal changes to cytoskeletal rearrangements, and begin to
describe some of the mechanistic events that ultimately lead to
platelet release.
To define the relative distribution of these different-sized
objects over time and to place the appearance and accumula-
tion of individual platelets in a temporal context, intermediates
in platelet release were categorized by their morphologies and
size. This allowed changes in distribution to be tracked over a
period of 5 d in culture. In addition to mature discoid platelets
and elongated proplatelets, we identified a large, intermediate
discoid stage in platelet production, which we have named the
“preplatelet.” Preplatelets are large anucleate discs, 2–10 µm in
diameter, that have a thick cortical microtubule coil and retain
the capacity to reversibly convert into barbell-shaped proplate-
lets. Continued bidirectional polymerization of microtubules
at each end of the barbell proplatelet forms two well-defined
platelet-sized (2-µm diameter) microtubule loops at each end.
These become two individual platelets after a fission event.
Interestingly, interconversion between preplatelet and proplate-
let forms occurs only at preplatelet diameters 2–10 µm across.
Thus, preplatelets represent an intermediate stage in platelet
production that may be responsible for regulating platelet size.
Although larger microtubule coils may undergo twisting to ac-
commodate continued microtubule polymerization/elongation
within a constrained volume, forming barbell proplatelets,
smaller, more constricted microtubule coils are unable to do so.
As megakaryocyte fragments divide (thus becoming smaller),
this results in a size limit beyond which new platelets are no
longer capable of fission and may therefore provide an artificial
margin from which platelets can be classified as distinct from
their progenitors.
This raised the question of whether organelles continue to
sort between platelet-sized swellings in these structural inter­
mediates. To resolve the localization and distribution of se-
cretory granules in the preplatelet and released proplatelet
during interconversion, cultures were either labeled with a fluor­
escent human fibrinogen conjugate (taken up and stored in
-granules) or probed for serotonin (present in dense granules)
and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy. The distri-
bution and dynamics of the labeled -granules were followed
using time-lapse fluorescence microscopy and demonstrate
ongoing, bidirectional -granule movement during preplatelet–
proplatelet conversion (Fig. 6 B). Video 1 also demonstrates the
elongation that precedes the fission-like process that accompanies
preplatelet to barbell proplatelet conversion. -Granules localize
to the microtubule cytoskeleton and are generally confined to
the periphery of the cell. Fig. 6 C illustrates continued and bi-
directional translocation of fluorescently labeled -granules in
a barbell proplatelet over a period of 36 min. Red dots highlight
-granule movement toward the top end of the proplatelet, whereas
green dots highlight movement toward the bottom end. Labeled
organelles moved bidirectionally along the microtubule tracks
of cytoplasmic bridges and cortices of developing proplatelets
at a rate of 0.13–0.26 µm/min, implying continued reorgani-
zation of platelet contents through late stages of the maturation
process. This is also true of dense granules, which distribute
within the preplatelet and along the cytoplasmic bridges and
bulbous tip of released proplatelets (Fig. 6 D). Like the -granules,
these continue to translocate throughout maturation.
Shear forces accelerate proplatelet fission
and platelet release in vitro
To determine whether platelet production from released PP
intermediates could be accelerated by circulatory shear forces,
isolated PPs were maintained in culture under static conditions
or with continuous shear (0.5 Pa) for 2 h and analyzed by
immunofluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry at 20-min
intervals. Fig. 7 (A–C) shows composite images of the proplatelet
Figure 5.  Microtubule dynamics during the conversion of preplatelets to
barbell-proplatelets. (A) Fluorescent time-lapse microscopy of a released
preplatelet isolated from megakaryocytes retrovirally directed to express
GFP–1-tubulin. The oval preplatelet microtubule marginal band is ob-
served to twist about its center several times in a clockwise fashion over
the course of 4 min to yield a barbell-shaped proplatelet with well-defined
microtubule loops at each end. (B) Rapid-freeze and thin-section electron
micrographs showing the cytoskeleton and ultrastructure of microtubules
in proplatelets. (C) High magnification electron micrograph of the boxed
region in B shows microtubules twisting about the proplatelet center to
yield a “figure 8” structure.
869The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
These subsequently decrease in size over time to that of nor-
mal platelets as the count returns to baseline (Patel-Hett et al.,
2008). When CMFDA-labeled proplatelets are transfused into
recipient mice, platelets rapidly release for a period of 12–24 h.
In vitro, proplatelets slowly mature into multiple individual
platelets over a 5-d culture period, as total proplatelet and
preplatelet counts decrease about sevenfold, whereas platelet
counts increase about fourfold. Thus, this intermediate stage
may correlate to the young, large platelets found during recovery
from acute thrombocytopenia, such as that in immune-mediated
platelet destruction (Patel-Hett et al., 2008), and they may rep-
resent the submegakaryocyte fragments observed previously in
PRP (Behnke and Forer, 1998).
As proplatelets are not generally seen at concentrations
comparable with those of platelets in healthy human and mouse
Interestingly, Schwertz et al. (2010) have recently published
findings demonstrating that platelets isolated from circulating
human blood may duplicate through a process that morphologi-
cally resembles preplatelet to proplatelet interconversion. Their
observation that 5% of washed platelets extended projections
with distinct cell bodies after only 6 h of culture is consistent with
the relative proportion of large platelets identified in circulating
blood (unpublished data). As megakaryocyte cell fragments
2–10 µm in diameter are able to interconvert between preplatelet
and barbell proplatelet forms, it is tempting to speculate that our
observations are related.
In vivo, released proplatelets and preplatelet-like structures
significantly larger than platelets are often observed in mouse
whole blood at elevated concentrations 96 h after thrombo­
cytopenia induced by rabbit anti–mouse platelet serum injection.
Figure 6.  Granules are synthesized, packaged, and continue to sort in released proplatelets. (A) High magnification electron micrographs show the pres-
ence of MVBs in released preplatelets (top) and proplatelets (bottom). (B and C) Mouse preplatelet/proplatelet labeled with a fluorescent human fibrinogen
conjugate, which is taken up and stored in -granules. The distribution and dynamics of the labeled -granules were followed using time-lapse fluorescence
microscopy and demonstrate ongoing, bidirectional -granule movement during preplatelet to proplatelet conversion. (C) Red dots highlight -granule
movement toward the top end of the proplatelet, whereas green dots highlight movement toward the bottom end. Labeled organelles moved bidirectionally
along the microtubule tracks of cytoplasmic bridges and cortices of developing proplatelets at a rate of 0.13–0.26 µm/min, implying continued orga-
nization of platelet contents through late stages of the maturation process. The width of the field is 10 µm. (D) Released proplatelet/platelet fraction from
second gradient sedimentation probed with a rabbit monoclonal antibody against serotonin. Fluorescence and DIC images were overlaid and merged.
Images are exhibited as a montage of representative cells from the same sample slide. Dense granules distribute evenly within the preplatelet and along
the cytoplasmic bridges and bulbous tip of released proplatelets and continue to translocate throughout maturation.
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 870
Figure 7.  Shear force promotes proplatelet fission and platelet release. (A–H) Proplatelets released from fetal liver–derived megakaryocytes were cultured
for 2 h in the presence or absence of shear (0.5 Pa). Every 20 min, samples were removed and probed with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against
1-tubulin and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy for different-sized objects (A–D) or labeled with a CD42a-specifc, FITC-conjugated antibody
and analyzed by flow cytometry (G and H). (A–C) Representative micrographs of the culture after 0 (A), 60 (B), and 120 (C) min of shear. (insets) High
magnification views of the composite images are shown. (D) Compared with no shear controls, platelet numbers increased over time, whereas proplatelet
numbers decreased (n = 4). (E and F) Representative quantification of culture intermediates under shear with time. Platelet and PP progeny (cells of area =
1–137 µm2
; E) and proplatelet progenitors (138–227 µm2
; F) were binned by size (area), and their relative counts over time were spread across multiple
bins to resolve the mechanism of platelet release. The data describe an inverse relationship between smaller and larger object counts that reveal dynamic
proplatelet fission and continuous platelet release under shear with time. (G) Flow cytometric analysis of cultured proplatelet intermediates under shear with
time (n = 3). (H) Representative quantification of cultured proplatelet intermediates by flow cytometry. Samples support immunofluorescence microscopy
data and reveal a significant decrease in the number of large proplatelets and PP intermediates (small ProPLTs) after 2 h relative to no shear control. Error
bars indicate mean ± standard deviation.
whole blood smears, it stands to reason that the rate of platelet
production in our culture system remains relatively low as com-
pared with suspected platelet release rates in vivo. Modeling of
this effect revealed that during cell culture, platelets are gener-
ated at an increasing rate in time, and large proplatelets undergo
continuous fission to produce more ends from which platelets
871The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
from proplatelet ends as proplatelets undergo continuous fission
in culture. Therefore, proplatelets contain all of the program-
ming and material required to make and release platelets, which
is in accordance with the observations that bone marrow mega-
karyocytes extend and release large cellular processes, exceed-
ing platelet dimensions, into blood (Junt et al., 2007).
Nevertheless, how small proplatelets, barbell-shaped pro-
platelets, and platelets release from larger proplatelets has never
been detailed. Our video-enhanced DIC images of proplatelets in
culture reveal that large proplatelets divide into shorter proplate-
lets and release individual platelets. As a proplatelet elongates,
its long, narrow shaft will sometimes snap, dividing the structure
into two pieces. This snapping and retraction is characteristic of
the release of mechanical tension being applied along the pro-
cess by internal cytoskeletal motors. Measured rates of pro-
platelet fission and platelet release show that cleavage events
are released. Indeed, relatively weak hydrodynamic forces of
maximally 0.5 Pa were found to promote proplatelet fission,
which is likely necessary in regulating the rate of platelet re-
lease in vivo. Flow cytometric analysis of CMFDA-labeled pro-
platelets transfused into live mice supports this hypothesis and
suggests that blood flow–induced shear stress may contribute to
platelet release in vivo by promoting proplatelet fission events.
Indeed, observations that proplatelet counts are higher in pre­
pulmonarythaninpostpulmonaryvessels(Handagamaetal.,1987),
whereas platelet counts are higher in the latter, imply that shear
forces act on released proplatelets in the vasculature to mediate
platelet production.
The geometric decay of larger proplatelet progenitors and
accumulation of smaller PPs and released platelets in our cul-
ture system over time (under both static and continuous shear
conditions) implies that platelets are predominately released
Figure 8.  Proplatelet fission model of platelet release. Model of platelet production suggested by these experiments and previous studies (see Results).
(A) Released proplatelets undergo successive rounds of fission along their midbody and at their ends. This process is mediated by the formation of a cleav-
age furrow at the point of division and results in platelet release from proplatelet ends at an increasing rate in time as more ends become available after
each fission event. Shear promotes proplatelet fission and drives platelet release. (B) Barbell proplatelets of 30–50-µm perimeter reversibly convert into
preplatelets. This process is driven by twisting microtubule-based forces and may represent a novel mechanism of microtubule reorganization and granule
redistribution after each fission event. (C) During barbell proplatelet formation, dynamic and bidirectional assembly and reorganization of microtubule
coils mediate platelet cytoskeleton arrangement as - and dense granules track to distal proplatelet tips. Platelets release from proplatelet ends after the
final fission event.
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 872
centrifuged (200 g for 5 min) to further separate released proplatelet (pellet)
and platelet (supernatant) fractions. Samples were washed and resuspended
in culture media. Cultures were kept at 37°C and 5% CO2 throughout.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
Mouse megakaryocytes, culture intermediates, and whole blood platelets
were purified and probed as previously described (Patel-Hett et al., 2008).
In brief, samples were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and centrifuged onto 1 µg/ml
poly-l-lysine–coated coverslips, permeabilized, and blocked (Italiano et al.,
2003) before antibody labeling. Released proplatelet-enriched fractions were
incubated with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against detyrosinated tubulin
(SuperGlu; provided by C. Bulinski, Columbia University, New York, NY) or
a rabbit monoclonal antibody against serotonin (YC5/45; Abcam) for dense-
granule localization and treated with secondary goat anti–rabbit antibody
conjugated to an Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen). DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) was
used to label the megakaryocyte nucleus. Samples were examined with a
microscope (Axiovert 200; Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped with a 63× NA 1.4 oil
immersion objective. Images were obtained using a charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera (Hamamatsu Photonics) and analyzed using the MetaMorph
image analysis software (MDS Analytical Technologies). Intermediates in
platelet release were categorized based on perimeter (proplatelets) or diam-
eter (megakaryocytes, preplatelets, and platelets) using the MetaMorph soft-
ware thresholding, integrated morphometry analysis, and software calipers
tools. Experiments represent one standard deviation about the mean for at
least seven independent cultures.
EM
Released proplatelet-enriched cultures in suspension were fixed with 1.25%
paraformaldehyde, 0.03% picric acid, and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4, for 1 h, postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide,
dehydrated through a series of alcohols, infiltrated with propylene oxide,
and embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections were stained and exam-
ined with an electron microscope (G2 Spirit BioTwin; Tecnai) at an accel-
erating voltage of 80 kV. Images were recorded with a CCD camera (2K;
Advanced Microscopy Techniques) using digital acquisition and analysis
software (Advanced Microscopy Techniques). Rapid-freeze EM samples
were prepared as previously described (Italiano et al., 1999). Tantalum
tungsten and carbon replicas were picked up on carbon formvar–coated
copper grids and examined.
Flow cytometry
Released proplatelet fractions were isolated and cultured as described in
“Isolation of released proplatelets/preplatelets” and sampled daily over a
period of 5 d. Platelet counts were determined by flow cytometric analysis
with a primary rat IgG antibody specific for mouse GPIX (provided by
B. Nieswandt, University of Wurzberg, Wurzberg, Germany) and a sec-
ondary goat anti–rat antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen).
Secondary antibody specificity controls were performed. Gates were set
using 0.5–10-µm microspheres (Spherotech) and confirmed by DIC micros­
copy at 63× and 100×. Platelets were isolated from culture intermediates
by their characteristic forward and side scattering as they passed through
the flow cytometer, and their total fluorescence intensity was calculated
after subtraction of the secondary antibody specificity control. Platelet
counts were based on GPIX-positive objects 0.5–2.0 µm in size and
normalized to proplatelet (GPIX positive, 3.3–10-µm particle) counts at
0 d after proplatelet enrichment. Analysis of platelet counts were per-
formed for at least 15 different cultures. Data were subject to one-way
ANOVA for four independent samples and Tukey HSD analysis. Experi-
ments represent one standard deviation about the mean for at least three
independent samples.
Released proplatelet transfusion
For proplatelet transfusion and platelet production/survival experiments,
cultured released proplatelets and wild-type whole blood platelets were
labeled with 5 µM CMFDA (Invitrogen) for 45 min at 37°C (Hoffmeister et al.,
2003a,b; Josefsson et al., 2005) Unincorporated dye was removed by cen-
trifugation, and (cultured) released proplatelets or (whole blood) platelets
were resuspended in 300 µl of culture media or platelet buffer, respectively.
CMFDA-labeled released proplatelets or control platelets were injected
into syngeneic CD61 mice via retro-orbital vein. For recovery and survival
determination, blood samples were collected immediately (<2 min) and 1,
2, 4, 6, 24, 48, and 72 h after transfusion into 0.2 vol Aster-Jandl anti­
coagulant. Whole blood PRP analysis using flow cytometry was performed,
and the percentage of CMFDA-positive platelets was determined (Baker et al.,
1997; Hoffmeister et al., 2003a). A total of 200,000 events were collected
in each sample. CMFDA-positive platelet counts were normalized to the <2-min
occur continuously throughout the different intermediate stages
of platelet production, resulting in mixed proplatelet popula-
tions of various different sizes.
Proplatelets must not only produce and replicate the spe-
cialized cytoskeleton of the mature platelet, but they must also
load each platelet with a reproducible and appropriate allotment
of organelles and granules essential for their hemostatic func-
tion. Our experiments demonstrate the presence of MVBs in
late-stage intermediates, which represent a developmental step
in - and dense-granule maturation. One of the most surprising
findings is that even at the very final stages of platelet produc-
tion, when two putative platelets are connected by a cytoplasmic
bridge,thegranulecontentoftheplateletisstillbeingadjusted.
It has recently been shown that platelets contain distinct sub-
populations of -granules that undergo differential release
during activation (Italiano and Battinelli, 2009). Interconver-
sion between barbell proplatelet and preplatelet forms might
therefore represent a novel mechanism of granule redistribution
and sorting before platelet release from proplatelet ends.
In summary, this study defines the multiple intermediate
stages in proplatelet maturation and identifies several relevant
mechanical interactions, which govern individual platelet re-
lease. Our understanding of the final stages of platelet produc-
tion is still far from perfect, and there remain many questions
that still need to be answered: (a) what factors and signal trans-
duction pathways are involved in reorganizing the microtubule
cytoskeleton to mediate PP interconversion and platelet release,
(b) how do shear forces in the circulation contribute to this pro-
cess, (c) is platelet production in vivo a result of sequential lib-
eration from proplatelet ends or a product of successive fission
of the released proplatelet, and (d) how do preplatelets identi-
fied in culture correlate with immature platelets observed in
thrombocytopenia and large platelets observed in many macro-
thrombocytopenias? Nevertheless, the development of new meth-
ods to isolate and quantify the multiple intermediate stages in
platelet release holds promise that these questions can now
begin to be addressed.
Materials and methods
Megakaryocyte suspension cultures
Mouse fetal liver cells were recovered on embryonic day 13.5. Single-cell
suspensions were prepared by successive passage through 22- and 25-G
syringes and cultured for 4 d in DME (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10%
fetal calf serum, 2 mmol/liter l-glutamine, 50 U/ml penicillin, and 50 µg/ml
streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2 in the presence of 0.1 µg/ml puri-
fied recombinant mouse c-Mpl ligand (day 0; Lecine et al., 2000). All
experiments were complied with institutional guidelines approved by the
Children’s Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee and the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Isolation of released proplatelets/preplatelets
Fetal liver cell cultures were layered on a single-step gradient (1.5–3.0%
BSA) on day 4, and megakaryocytes were allowed to sediment for 1 h as
previously described (Drachman et al., 1997). The megakaryocyte pellet
was resuspended in fresh media and cultured for an additional 24 h, during
which proplatelet production was readily observed. Megakaryocyte cultures
were layered on a second single-step gradient (1.5–3.0% BSA) on day 5.
Megakaryocytes were allowed to sediment for 1 h, during which intermedi-
ate stages in platelet production were resolved within different fractions of
the gradient. Proplatelet-producing megakaryocytes localized to the BSA
fraction, whereas released proplatelets and individual platelets remained
in the top (culture media) fraction. This top-most layer was removed and
873The final stages of platelet production • Thon et al.
Preparation of photomicrographs
The digital images produced in MetaMorph were assembled into com­
posite images using ImageJ and Photoshop (CS3; Adobe). Dividing lines
explicitly separate different images or separate regions of the same image.
No specific features within an image were enhanced, obscured, moved,
removed, or introduced, and adjustments made to the brightness, contrast,
and color balance were linearly applied to the whole image.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 illustrates the isolation of specific stages of megakaryocyte devel-
opment and platelet production. Fig. S2 shows the quantification of platelet
release during cell culture. Fig. S3 shows EB3-GFP movements in a released
barbell proplatelet. Fig. S4 demonstrates the quantitation of cultured pro-
platelets by immunofluorescence microscopy. Fig. S5 shows multivesicular
bodies present in human proplatelets. Video 1 shows microtubule dynam-
ics during the conversion preplatelets into barbell proplatelets. Video 2
shows -granule sorting during preplatelet to proplatelet interconversion.
Video 3 shows -granules sorting between the platelet-sized ends of a bar-
bell proplatelet. Video 4 shows EB3-GFP movements in a released barbell
proplatelet. Online supplemental material is available at http://www.jcb
.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.201006102/DC1.
A. Ehrlicher gratefully acknowledges support from Thomas Stossel.
This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health
(grant HL68130 to J.E. Italiano and training grant HL007680 to A. Ehrlicher),
the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (short-term research
training grant DE07268 to A. Montalvo), and the American Society of Hema-
tology (2005 Trainee Award to A. Montalvo). We gratefully acknowledge
D.A. Weitz and the Harvard Materials Research and Engineering Center
(DMR-0213805) for confocal imaging. J.E. Italiano is an American Society of
Hematology Junior Faculty Scholar.
Submitted: 16 June 2010
Accepted: 18 October 2010
References
Baker, G.R., P.M. Sullam, and J. Levin. 1997. A simple, fluorescent method to
internally label platelets suitable for physiological measurements. Am.
J. Hematol. 56:17–25. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-8652(199709)56:1<17::
AID-AJH4>3.0.CO;2-5
Becker, R.P., and P.P. De Bruyn. 1976. The transmural passage of blood cells
into myeloid sinusoids and the entry of platelets into the sinusoidal cir-
culation; a scanning electron microscopic investigation. Am. J. Anat.
145:183–205. doi:10.1002/aja.1001450204
Behnke, O. 1969. An electron microscope study of the rat megacaryocyte. II.
Some aspects of platelet release and microtubules. J. Ultrastruct. Res.
26:111–129. doi:10.1016/S0022-5320(69)90039-2
Behnke, O., and A. Forer. 1998. From megakaryocytes to platelets: platelet
morphogenesis takes place in the bloodstream. Eur. J. Haematol. Suppl.
61:3–23.
Choi, E.S., J.L. Nichol, M.M. Hokom, A.C. Hornkohl, and P. Hunt. 1995.
Platelets generated in vitro from proplatelet-displaying human mega-
karyocytes are functional. Blood. 85:402–413.
Drachman, J.G., D.F. Sabath, N.E. Fox, and K. Kaushansky. 1997. Thrombo­
poietin signal transduction in purified murine megakaryocytes. Blood.
89:483–492.
Handagama, P.J., B.F. Feldman, N.C. Jain, T.B. Farver, and C.S. Kono. 1987.
Circulating proplatelets: isolation and quantitation in healthy rats and in
rats with induced acute blood loss. Am. J. Vet. Res. 48:962–965.
Harrison, P., B. Wilbourn, N. Debili, W. Vainchenker, J. Breton-Gorius, A.S.
Lawrie, J.M. Masse, G.F. Savidge, and E.M. Cramer. 1989. Uptake of
plasma fibrinogen into the alpha granules of human megakaryocytes and
platelets. J. Clin. Invest. 84:1320–1324. doi:10.1172/JCI114300
Heijnen, H.F., N. Debili, W. Vainchencker, J. Breton-Gorius, H.J. Geuze, and
J.J. Sixma. 1998. Multivesicular bodies are an intermediate stage in the
formation of platelet alpha-granules. Blood. 91:2313–2325.
Hoffmeister, K.M., T.W. Felbinger, H. Falet, C.V. Denis, W. Bergmeier, T.N.
Mayadas, U.H. vonAndrian, D.D. Wagner, T.P. Stossel, and J.H. Hartwig.
2003a. The clearance mechanism of chilled blood platelets. Cell. 112:87–
97. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(02)01253-9
Hoffmeister, K.M., E.C. Josefsson, N.A. Isaac, H. Clausen, J.H. Hartwig, and
T.P. Stossel. 2003b. Glycosylation restores survival of chilled blood plate-
lets. Science. 301:1531–1534. doi:10.1126/science.1085322
time point (100%), and analyses of platelet counts were performed for at
least three different transfusion events. Recoveries from CMFDA-labeled
platelet and proplatelet transfusions were ≥1%, and the percentage of
circulating labeled platelets, determined at <2 min, was ≥0.1%.
DIC live cell microscopy
Isolated proplatelets were diluted in a semisolid medium (60% Leibowitz
L-15 medium and 40% DME with 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 U/ml peni-
cillin, and 50 µg/ml streptomycin) in chambers formed by mounting a
glass coverslip coated with 3% BSA onto a 10-mm petri dish with a 1-cm
hole. Preparations were maintained at 37°C and examined on an inverted
microscope (Axiovert 200) equipped with a 63× NA 1.4 objective, an
XL-3 incubation chamber, and a 100-W mercury lamp (Carl Zeiss, Inc.).
Images were obtained using a CCD camera (Hamamatsu Photonics), and
frames were captured at 30-s intervals. Videos 1–4 were generated using
the MetaMorph image analysis program.
Stabilization/depolymerization of released proplatelet
microtubule cytoskeletons
Released proplatelet cultures were incubated at (a) 37°C (normal control) or
4°C for 1 h and again at 37°C for 1 h or (b) in the presence of 5 µM taxol
or 5 µM nocodazole for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were centrifuged onto poly-l-
lysine–coated glass coverslips and probed with a rabbit polyclonal antibody
against detyrosinated tubulin then analyzed by immunofluorescence micros-
copy for different-sized objects. All values were normalized to the 37°C
(normal) controls, and experiments were performed in triplicate. Box and
whisker plots illustrate sample minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quar-
tile, and sample maximum for samples cultured at 4°C. Data were subject to
one-way ANOVA for three independent samples and HSD analysis.
Expression of GFP–1-tubulin and EB3-GFP constructs
GFP–1-tubulin was cloned into pWZL plasmids containing the sequence
for enhanced GFP using previously described methods (Schulze et al.,
2004). The released proplatelet fraction was isolated from megakaryocytes
that were retrovirally directed to express GFP–1-tubulin and analyzed by
fluorescence time-lapse microscopy. Semliki Forest virus–mediated gene
delivery was used to express EB3-GFP in mouse megakaryocytes (Patel-Hett
et al., 2008). Cultured megakaryocytes were infected by the addition of
1 µl Semliki Forest virus infectious replicons to 400 µl day 2.5 cultures.
EB3-GFP movements were visualized by fluorescence microscopy 8–48 h
after infection.
Live cell imaging of GFP–1-tubulin, EB3-GFP, and -granule movements
Infected megakaryocytes were transferred onto video chambers maintained
at 37°C. Cells were viewed on a microscope (Axiovert 200) equipped with
a 63× oil immersion objective, and images were obtained using a CCD
camera (Hamamatsu Photonics). Videos 1–4 were prepared using Meta-
Morph. Pictures of preplatelets expressing GFP–1-tubulin were captured
at 30-, 45-, or 60-s intervals over a course of 4 min. Pictures of EB3-GFP–
expressing proplatelets were acquired every 2–5 s with a mean image
capture time of 500 ms. The velocity of EB3-GFP comets was determined
by dividing the distances traveled by the time elapsed. We included only
comets that could be followed for a minimum of 15 s. To visualize -granules,
isolated megakaryocytes (day 4 in culture) were incubated overnight with
150 µg/ml Oregon green 488 human fibrinogen conjugate (Invitrogen)
and 100 U/ml Hirudin from leeches (Sigma-Aldrich) in DME (Harrison
et al., 1989). Megakaryocytes were then washed by albumin gradient
sedimentation, and the resuspended pellet was placed in a video chamber.
Images were acquired at 1-min intervals over a course of 36 min.
Released proplatelets cultured under continuous shear
Released proplatelets isolated from fetal liver–derived megakaryocytes
were cultured at 37°C for up to 2 h in an incubator shaker (C24KC;
New Brunswick Scientific) at 150 rpm, and shear forces were estimated
to reach 0.5 Pa maximally. Sample aliquots were collected every 20 min,
and proplatelet counts were determined by flow cytometric analy­sis.
Samples were then fixed, centrifuged, and probed with a rabbit poly-
clonal antibody against the C-terminal sequence of mouse 1-tubulin
(LEDSEEDAEEAEVEAEDKDH; Genemed Synthesis, Inc.). Images were
acquired using a confocal microscope (TCS SP5; Leica) equipped with
a programmable xyz stage using a 20× 0.40 NA dry objective. Quan-
titative analysis was performed in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc.) and
ImageJ (National Institutes of Health) using author-coded software. Ob-
jects were categorized based on area measurements and normalized
to initial (time 0) object counts.
JCB • VOLUME 191 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 874
van Nispen tot Pannerden, H., F. de Haas, W. Geerts, G. Posthuma, S. van Dijk,
and H.F. Heijnen. 2010. The platelet interior revisited: electron tomog-
raphy reveals tubular alpha-granule subtypes. Blood. 116:1147–1156.
doi:10.1182/blood-2010-02-268680
Youssefian, T., and E.M. Cramer. 2000. Megakaryocyte dense granule compo-
nents are sorted in multivesicular bodies. Blood. 95:4004–4007.
Italiano, J.E. Jr., and E.M. Battinelli. 2009. Selective sorting of alpha-granule
proteins. J. Thromb. Haemost. 7:173–176. doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009
.03387.x
Italiano, J.E. Jr., P. Lecine, R.A. Shivdasani, and J.H. Hartwig. 1999. Blood
platelets are assembled principally at the ends of proplatelet processes
produced by differentiated megakaryocytes. J. Cell Biol. 147:1299–1312.
doi:10.1083/jcb.147.6.1299
Italiano, J.E. Jr., W. Bergmeier, S. Tiwari, H. Falet, J.H. Hartwig, K.M. Hoffmeister,
P. André, D.D. Wagner, and R.A. Shivdasani. 2003. Mechanisms and
implications of platelet discoid shape. Blood. 101:4789–4796. doi:10
.1182/blood-2002-11-3491
Italiano, J.E. Jr., S. Patel-Hett, and J.H. Hartwig. 2007. Mechanics of pro-
platelet elaboration. J. Thromb. Haemost. 5:18–23. doi:10.1111/j.1538-
7836.2007.02487.x
Josefsson, E.C., H.H. Gebhard, T.P. Stossel, J.H. Hartwig, and K.M. Hoffmeister.
2005. The macrophage alphaMbeta2 integrin alphaM lectin domain me-
diates the phagocytosis of chilled platelets. J. Biol. Chem. 280:18025–
18032. doi:10.1074/jbc.M501178200
Junt, T., H. Schulze, Z. Chen, S. Massberg, T. Goerge, A. Krueger, D.D. Wagner,
T. Graf, J.E. Italiano Jr., R.A. Shivdasani, and U.H. von Andrian. 2007.
Dynamic visualization of thrombopoiesis within bone marrow. Science.
317:1767–1770. doi:10.1126/science.1146304
Kessel, R.G., and R.H. Kardon. 1979. Circulating blood, blood vessels, and bone
marrow. In Tissues and organs: a text-atlas of scanning electron micros-
copy. W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco. 35–50.
Lecine, P., J.L. Villeval, P. Vyas, B. Swencki, Y. Xu, and R.A. Shivdasani. 1998.
Mice lacking transcription factor NF-E2 provide in vivo validation of the
proplatelet model of thrombocytopoiesis and show a platelet production
defect that is intrinsic to megakaryocytes. Blood. 92:1608–1616.
Lecine, P., J.E. Italiano Jr., S.W. Kim, J.L. Villeval, and R.A. Shivdasani. 2000.
Hematopoietic-specific beta 1 tubulin participates in a pathway of plate-
let biogenesis dependent on the transcription factor NF-E2. Blood. 96:
1366–1373.
Leven, R.M. 1987. Megakaryocyte motility and platelet formation. Scanning
Microsc. 1:1701–1709.
Leven, R.M., and M.K. Yee. 1987. Megakaryocyte morphogenesis stimulated
in vitro by whole and partially fractionated thrombocytopenic plasma: a
model system for the study of platelet formation. Blood. 69:1046–1052.
Patel-Hett, S., J.L. Richardson, H. Schulze, K. Drabek, N.A. Isaac, K.
Hoffmeister, R.A. Shivdasani, J.C. Bulinski, N. Galjart, J.H. Hartwig,
and J.E. Italiano Jr. 2008. Visualization of microtubule growth in living
platelets reveals a dynamic marginal band with multiple microtubules.
Blood. 111:4605–4616. doi:10.1182/blood-2007-10-118844
Radley, J.M., and G. Scurfield. 1980. The mechanism of platelet release. Blood.
56:996–999.
Richardson, J.L., R.A. Shivdasani, C. Boers, J.H. Hartwig, and J.E. Italiano Jr.
2005. Mechanisms of organelle transport and capture along proplate-
lets during platelet production. Blood. 106:4066–4075. doi:10.1182/
blood-2005-06-2206
Schulze, H., M. Korpal, W. Bergmeier, J.E. Italiano Jr., S.M. Wahl, and R.A.
Shivdasani. 2004. Interactions between the megakaryocyte/platelet-
specific beta1 tubulin and the secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor
SLPI suggest a role for regulated proteolysis in platelet functions. Blood.
104:3949–3957. doi:10.1182/blood-2004-03-1179
Schwertz, H., S. Köster, W.H. Kahr, N. Michetti, B.F. Kraemer, D.A. Weitz,
R.C. Blaylock, L.W. Kraiss, A. Greinacher, G.A. Zimmerman, and A.S.
Weyrich. 2010. Anucleate platelets generate progeny. Blood. 115:3801–
3809. doi:10.1182/blood-2009-08-239558
Shivdasani, R.A. 2001. Molecular and transcriptional regulation of mega-
karyocyte differentiation. Stem Cells. 19:397–407. doi:10.1634/
stemcells.19-5-397
Shivdasani, R.A., and S.H. Orkin. 1996. The transcriptional control of hemato-
poiesis. Blood. 87:4025–4039.
Shivdasani, R.A., M.F. Rosenblatt, D. Zucker-Franklin, C.W. Jackson, P.
Hunt, C.J. Saris, and S.H. Orkin. 1995. Transcription factor NF-E2 is
required for platelet formation independent of the actions of thrombo­
poietin/MGDF in megakaryocyte development. Cell. 81:695–704.
doi:10.1016/0092-8674(95)90531-6
Sullivan, M.T., R. Cotten, E.J. Read, and E.L. Wallace. 2007. Blood collection
and transfusion in the United States in 2001. Transfusion. 47:385–394.
doi:10.1111/j.1537-2995.2007.01128.x
Tablin, F., M. Castro, and R.M. Leven. 1990. Blood platelet formation in vitro.
The role of the cytoskeleton in megakaryocyte fragmentation. J. Cell Sci.
97:59–70.
Tavassoli, M., and M. Aoki. 1981. Migration of entire megakaryocytes through
the marrow—blood barrier. Br. J. Haematol. 48:25–29. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2141.1981.00025.x
