HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT: T-CELL
REQUIREMENT FOR PROLIFERATION IN VITRO*
BY DAVID G. NATHAN, LEONARD CHESS, DIANE G. HILLMAN,
BRYAN CLARKE, JACQUELINE BREARD, EZIO MERLER,
AND DAVID E. HOUSMAN
(From the Divisions of Hematology and Oncology and Immunology, Children's Hospital Medical
Center, the Divisions ofPediatric Oncology and Immunology, Sidney Farber Cancer Institute, the
Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
and the Cancer Research Center and Department of Biology of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139)
Recent studies of human erythropoiesis in vitro have provided evidence that
the common hematopoietic stem cell (CFU-S)1 differentiates to a primitive
erythroid precursor with a high proliferative capacity. This precursor, known
as the erythroid burst-forming unit (BFU-E), was described by Stephenson et
al., Axelrad et al., and by Iscove et al. in murine marrow (1-4). The colony
formed by a single BFU-E has a unique morphology characterized by multiple
subcolonies, the number and size of which are functions of the erythropoietin
concentration in the culture medium (5, 6).2 BFU-E colonies with very low
hemoglobin content in subcolonies begin to appear in plasma clot cultures of
human marrow at about day 7 and reach full maturity of cell number and
hemoglobinization by day 12-14 of incubation (6).2 We assume, therefore, that
during the first 7 days of culture, single BFU-E divide several times. The
daughter cells form the nidus of each subcolony (7). Then each of the daughter
cells becomes committed to further proliferation and hemoglobin synthesis,
both of which occur over the next 7 days. After 7 days, the growth characteristics
of the committed BFU-E subcolonies are very similar to the growth character-
istics of the more familiar single erythroid colony-forming units observed in
human marrow cultures. These colonies, known as CFU-E, grow to full
maturity and hemoglobinization in 7 days. Their size and number are also
proportional to the erythropoietin concentration in the culture medium (8).
Both BFU-E and CFU-E are deficient in various clinical disorders of erythro-
poiesis including Diamond-Blackfan 2 (9, 10) and aplastic anemia (11). It appears
likely, though complete proof is lacking, that BFU-E give rise to CFU-E
* Supported by U. S. Public Health Service grants AM-15322, AI-05877, CB-43964, CB-53881,
and CA-18662, and National Science Foundation grant PCM-761-7747.
Address reprint requests to: David G. Nathan, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 300 Long-
wood Avenue, Boston, Mass. 02115.
~Abbreviations used in this paper: BFU-E, erythroid burst-forming unit; CFU-S, common
hematopoietic stem cell; CSA, colony-stimulating activity; EAC, antibody-coated sheep erythro-
cyte. IU, international units; SCID, severe combined immune deficiency.
2 D. G. Nathan, B. J. Clarke, D. G. Hillman, B. P. Alter, and D. E. Housman. Erythroid
precursors in congenital hypoplastic Diamond-Blackfan anemia. J. Clin. Invest. In press.
324 THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE • VOLUME 147, 1978
NATHAN ET AL. 325
which, in turn, are the precursors to the recognizable marrow erythroid cells.
Recent studies in our laboratories and elsewhere have shown that the BFU-
E, though predominantly a marrow cell,2 is not restricted to the marrow cell
population. BFU-E can be detected in plasma clot cultures of mononuclear cells
derived from peripheral blood (5, 12).2 This fact provides an opportunity to
define the surface characteristics of BFU-E and to evaluate possible interactions
of various blood mononuclear cells in the development of the hemoglobinized
colonies.
In this communication, we provide evidence that BFU-E reside in the null
cell fraction of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, but their prolifera-
tive capacity and erythroid differentiation in culture are dependent upon
erythropoietin and a helper effect derived from the addition of T cells to the
null cell population. Both isogeneic and allogeneic T cells can function in this
helper role, and a soluble product of peripheral blood nucleated cells incubated
in the presence of tetanus toxoid can substitute for intact T cells in this in vitro
model of erythropoiesis.
Materials and Methods
Mononuclear cells were separated from fresh blood anticoagulated with preservative-free
heparin at 10 U per ml. The separation was performed by centrifugation of the blood at 600 g for
20 rain afteritwas layered atop an equal volume of Ficoll-400(5.7g) and sodium diatrizoate (9.0
g) per 100 ml of water (Ficoll-Hypaque). The recovered mononuclear cellswere washed in alpha
medium (13)minus nucleosides (a-) to which 5% fetalcalfserum was added.
The whole population of mononuclear cellswas separated at room temperature intoIg-positive
and Ig-negative subpopulations by Sephadex G-200 anti-human Fab column immunoabscrbent
chromatography as previously described (14).Each cellpopulation was contaminated with the
other to an extent of less than 2%. The nonimmunoglobulin-bearing (Ig-negative) lymphocyte
population was further fractionated into E-rosette-forming cellsover a Ficoll-Hypaque density
gradient (15).The E-rosette-depleted subpopulation (null cells)usually contained less than 2%
Ig-positive cells,less than 10% E-rosette-positivecells,and varied between 30 and 60% EAC°
positive cells.These lattercellsare additionally heterogeneous and may contain pre B cellsas
well as monocytes. Highly purifiedT cells(92% E-positive)were prepared by ammonium chloride
lysisofthe pelletedE-rosetting cells.All cellpopulations were washed four times and resuspended
in a- medium with 2% fetalcalfserum. All cellpopulation were washed four times and resus-
pended in a- medium with 2% fetalcalfserum at convenient concentrations foraddition of0.1 ml
of cellsuspension to 0.8 ml of the plasma clotincubation system described by McLeod and co-
workers (16)as modified by Clarke and Housman (5).In several experiments, T or B cellswere
cocultured with null cells.The culture system contained 2 international units (IU) of erythropoi-
etin with asp act of approximately 50 IU per mg of protein. (Prepared by Dr. Peter Dukes and
provided by Dr. Anne Ball, Blood Diseases and Resources Branch, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute,National Institutesof Health, Bethesda, Md.).
Clotting was initiated by the addition of 0.1 ml of NCTC 109 (Microbiological Associates,
Bethesda, Md.) containing i U of grade I bovine thrombin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Mo.).
The 1.0 ml clottingmixture was dispensed in 0.1-ml portions into 0.2 ml microtiter culture wells
(Linbro plates-Linbro ScientificCo., New Haven, Conn.) and incubated under 5% COs in high
humidity.
The plasma clotswere incubated for up to 14 days. On day 14, the clotswere fixed and stained
as described by McLeod and co-workers (16).Erythroid colonies in four to six clotswere counted
and the resultsexpressed as the mean and standard error ofthe mean ofthe number of erythroid
colonies per 10s cellsplated. In most of the experiments, the majority of the observed erythroid
colonieshad the typical appearance of large BFU-E as described by Clarke and Housman (5).In
certain experiments, however, particularly those in which null cellpreparations were cultured
in the absence of added T cells,most ofthe erythroid colonieswere either singleor contained less
326 HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT
than three subcolonies. Therefore, total erythroid colonies and typical large BFU-E colonies were
separately counted, but both types of colonies were considered BFU-E derived because they were
obtained from peripheral blood and were present in 14-day cultures. When varied numbers of T
or B cells were added to null cells in the system, the results were expressed as the number of
BFU-E colonies per 10~ null cells. Throughout the experiments the standard errors of the means
ranged between 4 and 15% of the mean BFU-E colony scores. Photographs were taken of the
entire dehydrated fixed and stained plasma clots or of representative colonies within the clots.
Results
The Morphology ofErythroid Colonies. The erythroid colonies that emerged
in erythropoietin-dependent plasma clot cultures of unfractionated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells had the characteristic morphology of BFU-E colonies
(5). At 14 days, such colonies contained more than 3 (usually 10 or more)
subcolonies of well hemoglobinized nucleated erythroid cells (designated as 3-
4+ BFU-E colonies). However, when separated null cells were so cultured, the
characteristics of erythroid colony growth were quite different. Most of the
colonies were either single or contained only three or less unevenly hemoglobin-
ized subcolonies (designated as 1-2+ BFU-E colonies). When T cells were
added to null cells, the erythroid colonies progressively acquired the prolifera-
tive thrust of the BFU-E in unfractionated mononuclear cells and hemoglobini-
zation of the subcolonies approached completion. Examples of the most fre-
quently observed erythroid colonies that emerged in null cell cultures to which
zero and increasing numbers of T cells were added are shown in Fig. 1.
Enumeration of Colonies. Table I shows the results of five experiments in
which unfractionated and fractionated mononuclear cells of normal individuals
were incubated at various cell concentrations for 14 days in the presence of
erythropoietin as described. The data show that BFU-E colonies were evident
in cultures of unfractionated cells to the same extent as previously described
(5). They were also present in the Ig-negative fractions, but recovery was
irregular. BFU-E colonies of any size did not appear in cultures of Ig-positive
(B cell) or T-cell populations. Well developed BFU-E colonies were observed to
a variable extent in the isolated null cell fractions. In two studies, the cultures
were nearly devoid of large (3-4+) BFU-E colonies but such colonies were
present in three other studies. Furthermore, numerous small erythroid colonies
(1-2+ BFU-E) were present in four of the five null cell preparations. These
data are shown in Fig. 2 in which the number and quality of the BFU-E
colonies in null cells are compared to the colonies in unfractionated cells. The
total number of BFU-E colonies per 105 null cells was often greater than the
BFU-E colonies per 105 unfractionated mononuclear cells, but small BFU-E
colonies predominated in the null cell fractions whereas large BFU-E colonies
constituted all of the erythroid growth in unfractionated mononuclear cell
cultures. Photomicrographs of the general extent of erythroid colony growth in
representative unfractionated, null, T-, and B-cell fractions are shown in Fig.
3 A. The more detailed morphology of erythroid colonies that vary in size and
number of subcolonies is shown in Fig. 1.
Results of Mixtures of B and T Cells with Null Cells. The data presented
above suggested to us that BFU-E reside in the null cell fraction, but stimula-
tion of their proliferation and differentiation requires T cells in vitro. The low
BFU-E colony yield in the Ig-negative fractions was due, we thought, to the
NATHAN ET AL. 327
FIG. 1. The effects of serial additions of T cells on BFU-E subcolony size and number.
Null cells were cultured at 10~per ml of clot in the presence of 2 IU of erythropeietin per
ml with the addition of T cells as follows.
T cells
Panel added/ml Symbol
A none +
B 5 x 104 ++
C 106 + + +
D 5 × 106 ++++
Description
Single 8-20 cell "CFU-E-like" colony with detecta-
ble but variable hemoglobinization;
Cluster of three 8-20 cell colonies with detectable
but variable hemoglobinization;
Small BFU-E colony with three to five subcolonies
each larger than 20 cells with variable but definite
hemoglobinization;
Typical BFU-E colony with multiple subcolonies of
greater than 20 cells, fully hemoglobinised.
low percentage of null cells in this fraction. Conversely, the well developed
BFU-E observed in certain null cell preparations could have been due to the
interaction of the T cells that variably contaminate the null cell preparation.
Therefore, in three experiments serial additions of either T cells or B cells were
made to null cells. The total number of BFU-E colonies of all sizes per 105 null
cells plated was determined. The results are shown in Fig. 4. In each experi-
ment, there was striking stimulation of BFU-E colony formation by the
328 HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT
TABLE I
BFU-E Colonies in Cell Fractions
Cell type
Unfrac-
tion- Ig- B T Null
Study ated
number
Number of cellsplated per ml of clot
3 x 105 106 5 x 106 105 5 x 106 106 5 x 106 106 5 x 106
BFU-E colonies per 105 cells plated
1 21 2 15 0 0 0 1 7 20
2 9 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 1
3 7 3 7 0 0 0 0 0 1
4 23 ND* 14 0 0 0 0 8 1
5 16 ND 3 0 0 0 0 15 23
BFU-E colony formation in unfractionated and fractionated peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from five normal individuals. The cells were plated at the indicated concentrations per ml of
clot.The number of BFU-E of a sizeconsidered 3+ to 4+ as defined in the legend to Fig. 1 are
included in the score. The standard errors were lessthan 10% of the mean in all cases.
* ND, not done.
g
o:
mrr
IJJ
Unfractioned Cells
451~40 .'
~ ~, 3~-
o, ~3c
~ 25
' ~2c
rn~ 15
rr IC
1 2 3 4
STUDY NUMBER
FIG. 2. Total BFU-E and 3-4+ BFU-E colonies in cultures of (top) unfractionated
mononuclear cells and (bottom) null cell fractions derived from the same samples. The
height of each bar represents the total number of BFU-E colonies regardless of size. The
solid areas represent the proportion of 3-4+ BFU-E colonies. The data are expressed as
the number of observed colonies per 105 cells plated.
NATHAN ET AL. 329
addition of T cells but not by the addition of equal numbers of B cells. The
different effectsof B and T cellsat 5 × 106 per ml of cloton the number of BFU-
E colonies formed by null cells at 106 per ml of clot is also illustrated by the
photomicrographs in Fig. 3 B. The colonies that occurred after B-cell addition
were nearly all granulocyte colonies. These are compared to erythroid colonies
in Fig. 5. In addition to the effectsof T cellson the number of BFU-E colonies
in T:null cell mixtures, there was also a marked effect of T cells on the
morphology of the induced colonies. The subcolonies in the individual BFU-E
colonies increased in number and sizeas the T-cellconcentration was increased.
This effect is illustrated in the photomicrographs in Fig. 1.
Effects of Different T-Cell Preparations on BFU-E Formation. Having
established that fresh isogeneic T cells enhance the proliferation and differentia-
tion of the BFU-E in null cells, the influences of gamma irradiation (3,000 rads
in 2 min), removal of adherent cells and allogeneic effects were next investi-
gated. Separated null cells at 106 per ml of clot were either cultured alone or
cocultured with fresh isogeneic T cells, irradiated T cells, nylon filtered T cells,
or allogeneic T cells. In one study, irradiated null cells were cocultured with 5
x 106 nonirradiated isogeneic T cells. The results are shown in Fig. 6.
Allogeneic and nylon filteredT cellswere as effective as fresh isogeneic T cells
in the induction of large BFU-E colony formation. In a separate experiment
(data not shown), null cellswere nylon filteredand cultured at 106 cellsper ml
with 5 × 106 T cells.The removal of adherent cellsdid not reduce the effectof T
cells on BFU-E colony formation by null cells. In contrast, irradiated T cells
did not enhance BFU-E colony formation and prior irradiation of the null cells
rendered them completely incapable of any erythroid colony formation even
when fresh isogeneic T cellswere present (Fig. 6).
Effects of T-Cell Conditioned Medium. The experiments described above
suggested that T cells capable of DNA synthesis must render the BFU-E in the
null cell population capable of proliferation and differentiation in vitro. Re-
moval of adherent cells from the T or null cell fractions did not influence this
phenomenon. B cells were ineffective. To determine whether a soluble factor
released by dividing T cells might induce BFU-E colony formation in null cells,
we studied the effects of a conditioned medium in which T cells had been
stimulated to divide by tetanus toxoid (17, 18).3 This conditioned medium
contains a factor(s) that is known to stimulate the proliferation and differentia-
tion of T and B cells. The factor(s) has been called lymphocyte mitogenic
factor. The conditioned medium was prepared exactly as described by Geha
and his co-workers (17) except that NCTC 109 was utilized in the preparative
procedure instead of medium RPMI 1640. Addition of this conditioned medium
to null cells was made by substituting it for NCTC 109 in the plasma clot
system up to 20% of the total volume of the clot. Four such studies were
performed. Representative examples of the data are shown in Figs. 3 B and 7.
Erythroid colonies particularly large BFU-E colonies were clearly induced to
proliferate and differentiate by T-cell conditioned medium. In fact the medium
was as potent as 2.5 × 106 fresh T cells per ml. Tetanus toxoid had no direct
effect on BFU-E colony formation. In addition, an extract of human fetal
s R. S. Geha, F. Mudawwar, and E. Schneeberger. 1977. The specificity ofT-cell helper factor in
man. J. Exp. Med. 145: 1436.
330
NATHAN ET AL. 331
f :- ~-T cellso d d ~
40 c---o Bcells
2O
0 , J ,U~-CW-~T','YT,7-1-- T , 47T,'r~
,~ z z i
~ 0 ........ I , , ,,,,,I ........ I
,~ 60-
40-
"g
0 J J ,,~,,,l , i ..... I ~-~-~.r~
2 5 t0 t00 1000
T OR 8 CEllS ADDED TO CULTURE (x fO~)
Fie. 4. Three examples of the effects of varying numbers of isogeneic T (@) and B (O)
cells on the formation of BFU-E colonies. The T or B cellswere added to 106 null cellsper
ml of plasma clot in the presence of 2 IU of erythropoietin at the cellconcentrations shown
in the abscissa. The ordinate represents the total number of BFU-E colonies of all sizes
observed after 14 days of culture of the cellmixtures. In addition to the numerical increase
in BFU-E colonies observed when T cells were added to null cells, there was also an
increase in the average size of individual colonies. The effect of T cells on BFU-E colony
size is illustrated in Fig. 1.
kidney that is regularly utilized as a source of human granulocyte colony-
stimulating activity (CSA) was also examined in this system. This preparation
of CSA had no such stimulating effect (data not shown). Finally, the effects of
the T-cell conditioned medium on a CSA-dependent human granulocyte colony-
forming system (19) was evaluated. The medium did not provide granulocyte
Fz~. 3A. Photomicrographs of fixed and stained 0.1-ml plasma clots of various prepara-
tions of blood mononuclear cells after 14 days of culture. The darkly stained colonies are
benzidine positive.
Panel Description
A 3 x 106/ml unfractionated cells
B 106/ml null cells
C 5 × 106/ml T cells
D 5 × 10e/ml B cells
Note the extensive growth of BFU-E colonies in panel A and the small "CFU-E-like"
colonies in panel B, the null cell fraction. Some large (3-4+) BFU-E colonies are also pres-
ent in the null cell fraction.
332 HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT
FIG. 5. Typical granulocyte colony induced by addition of 5 × 10e B cells to 106 null cells
(panel B). The insert provides a better definition of the granulocyte morphology. The
colony is compared to a typical BFU-E colony induced by 5 × 106 T cells (panel A).
colony-stimulating activity in these experiments in which serial dilutions of
the conditioned medium up to 20% vol/vol did not substitute for a human
macrophage feeder layer in granulocyte colony formation. (Data kindly pro-
vided by Dr. Peter Quesenberry, Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, Boston, Mass.).
NATHAN ET AL. 333
W
(D
.J
..J
W
.J
Z
rr
UJ
09
tu
J
O
m
Fro. 6.
60
5O
40 !!;!;!;i~i~i~il
- - -C=-::--
20 : _-:-i:" T
- . .:::.-.
lO i !:i!i!ii-ii
=:=:_:_-- =_-
Null Null Cells Null Cells
4" ÷
Cells 107TCells 107Irradiated
T Cells
Irradiated
Null Cells
4-
107 T Cells
,:o:o:,:.:°:.:,
°:,:°:,:°:°:,:, ,:,:,:,:.:,:,:,
,:,:,:,:,:,-,:, ,:o:,:°:,:,:,:o
,:,:,:°:,:,:o:, ,:,:,:o>:,:,:,
,:°:°:,:,:°:,:. ,:,:,:,.,:,:,:,
,:,:°:,:°:,>:, ,:°:,:,:°:,:°:,
:::-:-: :.:_:-: ,:,:,:o:,:,:o:,
-___:_:_-..._: :=:_-_:~:=:~:=:
.__: ....... .... =::.:.:.-
:. _:_:_: .... _.............
:.__:_:_- - __ . . . . . . .
:-:-:-:-:-:_:-. . . . . . . .
.:.:,:o:o:°:,:, ---_ .....
,To:o:°-o-o-°:, ..-.-.- . . . .
Null Cells Null Cells
* .107 *107 Nylon AIIogeneic
Filtered T Cells
T Cells
Influence of various T-cell preparations and the effects of irradiation on 3-4+
BFU-E colony growth in null cells. The fresh or irradiated null cells were incubated at l0 s
cells per ml, and 107 variously treated isogeneic or allogeneic T cells were added to them.
The cell mixtures were incubated for 14 days in the presence of 2 IU of erythropoietin.
Only 3-4+ BFU-E colonies were included in the colony scores.
Discussion
The hematopoietic precursor cells that are contained among peripheral blood
mononuclear cells include totipotential hematopoietic stem cells (20) and
committed granulocyte (21) and erythroid precursors (5, 12).2 Recent studies of
human marrow and peripheral blood in culture show that approximately 1% of
the earliest recognizable erythroid precursors, the BFU-E may be found in
peripheral blood3 These cells require the addition of erythropoietin to induce
their proliferation and differentiation.
In previous studies of separated human null, T and B cells, it was reported
that the erythroid and granulocyte committed stem cell populations reside in
the null cell fraction (21, 22). The data presented in Table I support that
impression with respect to the erythroid precursors. However, the growth
characteristics of erythroid colonies observed when null cells are cultured with
erythropoietin in the absence of added T cells indicate that the proliferative
capacity and extent of differentiation of blood BFU-E are severely curtailed in
this setting. Under these conditions, most of the erythroid colonies are small
and single. Only when T cells are added to null cells are typical BFU-E
colonies regularly observed in large numbers, and this effect of T cells is
concentration dependent. Neither T nor B cells alone induce any erythroid
colonies at any cell concentration tested, but as shown in Figs. 1, 3 B and 4 the
addition of T cells to null cell cultures dramatically influences the number and
quality of BFU-E colonies derived from a given number of null cells. B cells do
not share this helper function.
334
NATHAN ET AL. 335
8C
o
6c
t-
O
UJ
LL
rn
No Tetanus
Addition Toxoid
Conditioned
Medium
2.5x10e
T Cells
FIG. 7. Influence ofT-cell conditioned medium and intact T cells on 3-4+ BFU-E colony
growth in null cells. The null cells were incubated at 106cells per ml ofclot in the presence
of2 IU erythropoietin. The different additives were tetanus toxoid, at a final concentration
of4/~g per ml ofclot, T-cellconditioned medium, prepared as described in the text, at 20%
vol/vol or 2.5 × 106T cells per ml of clot. The mixtures were cultured for 14 days and the
3-4+ BFU-E colonies were enumerated.
That T cells provide a helper function in antibody synthesis by B cells is well
established. Recent experiments have also provided evidence that lymphocyte
populations influence the production of eosinophils in vivo (23-26). Schimpl
and Wecker (27) recognized that helper T-cell function could be replaced by
soluble products elaborated by T cells in culture. Such factors have been
explored in some depth by Geha and his co-workers (17, 18).3 In this report we
demonstrate that a soluble factor elaborated by antigen-stimulated T cells in
culture induces erythropoietin-dependent BFU-E colony growth in a null cell
preparation that exhibits minimal erythroid colony growth in response to
erythropoietin alone. Johnson and Metcalf (27 A) have shown that pokeweed
mitogen-stimulated murine spleen-conditioned medium markedly enhances
erythroid colony formation in cultures of murine liver cells. In fact they found
that such a conditioned medium may substitute for the addition of erythropoi-
etin to the culture system. That lymphocytes may produce granulocyte colony
stimulation factor under certain circumstances is also well established (27B,
27C).
FIG. 3B. See legend to Fig. 3A.
Panel
A 106/ml null cells
B 106/ml null cells + 5 × 106/mlT cells
C 106/mlnull cells + T-cell conditioned medium
D 106/ml null cells + 5 × 106/mlB cells
Note extensive growth of BFU-E colonies in null cell cultures to which either T cells or T-
cell conditioned medium is added. The two large grey areas on the right-hand side ofpanel
D are artefacts and the colonyin the center is a granulocyte colony.
336 HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT
Neither the mechanism nor the specificity of the erythropoietic-inducing
product(s) elaborated by T cells is defined in this initial report. Possibly the
elaborated factor(s) somehow render putative erythropoietin receptors on com-
mitted stem cell surfaces more accessible to erythropoietin. At the concentra-
tions explored here, this T-cell conditioned medium appeared relatively specific.
It did not support granulocyte colony growth, but other T-cell mitogens might
produce different products that may stimulate both erythroid and granulocyte
colony growth.
The significance of these in vitro findings with respect to erythropoiesis in
vivo is presently unknown. Certain data suggest that thymocytes may influence
murine hematopoiesis in vivo (28-30). In fact, it has recently been shown that
an anti-theta serum blocked the reconstitution by marrow transplantation of
the erythroid marrow of W/Wv anemic mice. The addition of thymocytes to
anti-theta serum-treated normal marrow reduced the deleterious effects of this
antiserum (31). An argument against a governing role of T cells in human
erythropoiesis in vivo is posed by the fact that infants with severe combined
immune deficiency (SCID) or the DiGeorge syndrome, who lack mature T cells,
are not anemic unless they are infected or have grai~ versus host disease.
However, recent studies have shown that infants with SCID do have cells in
their peripheral blood that are precursors to T cells (32, 33). Perhaps in such
patients the precursor cells can elaborate an erythroid colony growth factor in
vivo. Though in vivo significance is yet to be understood, our data demonstrate
that isogeneic and allogeneic T cells influence the proliferation and differentia-
tion of the erythroid precursors in null cells in vitro. This new finding now
permits us to examine a variety of human disorders of erythroid cell production
to determine whether a particular defect resides in the null or stem cell
fraction or in the T or helper-suppressor fraction.
Summary
Human mononuclear leukocytes were fractionated into populations of null, T
and B cells by immunoabsorbent column chromatography followed by E-rosette
formation and purification of T cells by differential centrifugation and osmotic
lysis. The unfractionated and fractionated cell populations were first separately
cultured for 14 days in plasma clots in the presence of two international units
erythropoietin. Typical erythroid burst-forming unit (BFU-E)-derived colonies
grew in the unfractionated cell cultures but not from T- or B-cell cultures.
BFU-E colonies grew in null cell cultures but most of the colonies were small
and variably hemoglobinized with less than three subcolonies. When intact T
cells were added to null cells and cocultured, many typical large BFU-E
colonies with more than 10 well homogenized subcolonies appeared. Increasing
numbers of large BFU-E colonies in null cell cultures were induced by stepwise
addition of T cells but not by the addition of B cells. A conditioned medium in
which T cells had been induced to divide by tetanus toxoid substituted for
intact T cells in this T-cell-dependent BFU-E colony formation observed in null
cells.
These findings demonstrate that the BFU-E, a committed erythroid stem
cell, resides in the null cell fraction of peripheral blood, but its proliferative
NATHAN ET AL. 337
capacity and differentiation in vitro requires a soluble product of T cells.
Such experiments now permit a new approach to the assessment of various
disorders of erythropoiesis. Erythroid hypoplasia in a particular case may be
due to dysfunction of the committed precursor cell or to a failure of a helper
effect induced by T cells.
The authors are grateful for the advice and assistance of Doctors Fred S. Rosen and Stuart F.
Sehlossman.
Received for publication 19 September 1977.
References
1. Stephenson, J. R., A. A. Axelrad, D. L. McLeod, and M. M. Shreeve. 1971.
Induction of colonies of hemoglobin-synthesizing cells by erythropoietin in vitro.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 68:1542.
2. Axelrad, A. A., D. L. McLeod, M. M. Shreeve, and D. S. Heath. 1974. Properties of
cells that produce erythrocyte colonies in plasma culture. In Proceedings of the
Second International Workshop on Hematopoiesis in Culture. W. A. Robinson,
editor. Grune & Strattom, Inc., New York. In press.
3. Iscove, N. N., and F. Seiber. 1974. Macroscopic erythroid colony formation in
cultures of mouse bone marrow cells. Exp. Hematol. (Copenh.). 2:278. (Abstr.).
4. Iscove, N. N., F. Seiber, and K. H. Winterhalter. 1974.'Erythroid colony formation
in cultures of mouse and human bone marrow. Analysis of the requirement for
erythropoietin by gel filtration and affinity chromatography on agarose concanavalin
A. J. Cell Physiol. 83:309.
5. Clarke, B. J., and D. Housman. 1977. Characterization of an erythroid precursor
cell of high proliferative capacity in normal peripheral blood. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 74:1105.
6. Gregory, C. J., and A. C. Eaves. 1977. Human marrow cells capable of erythropoietic
differentiation in vitro. Definition of three erythroid colony responses. Blood.
49:855.
7. Papayannopoulou, Th., M. Brice, and G. Stamatoyannopoulos. 1977. Hemoglobin F
synthesis in vitro: Evidence for control at the level of primitive erythroid stem cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74:2923.
8. Tepperman, A. D., J. E. Curtis, and E. A.McCulloch. 1974. Erythropoietic colonies
in cultures of human marrow. Blood. 44:659.
9. Hoffman, R., E. D. Zanjani, J. Vila, R. Zalusky, J. D. Lutton, and L. R. Wasserman.
1976. Diamond-Blackfan syndrome: Lymphocyte-mediated suppression of erythro-
poiesis. Science (Wash. D. C.). 193:899.
10. Freedman, M. H., D. Amato, and E. F. Saunders. 1976. Erythroid colony growth in
congenital hypoplastic anemia. J. Clin. Invest. 57:673.
11. Hoffman, R., E. D. Zanjani, J. D. Lutton, R. Zalusky, and L. R. Wasserman. 1977.
Suppression of erythroid-colony formation by lymphocytes from patients with aplas-
tic anemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 296:10.
12. Ogawa, M., O. C. Grush, R. F. O'Dell, and J. Sexton. 1976. Circulating erythropoietic
precursors in patients with hemoglobinopathies: Absence of correlation with reticu-
locyte indices. Exp. Hematol. (Suppl.). 4:41 (Abstr.).
13. Stanners, C. P., G. L. Elicieri, and H. Green. 1971. Two types of ribosomes in
mouse-hamster hybrid cells. Nat. New Biol. 230:52.
14. Chess, L., and S. F. Schlossman. 1976. Methods for the separation of unique human
lymphocyte populations. In Manual of Clinical Immunology. N. R. Rose, and H.
338 HUMAN ERYTHROID BURST-FORMING UNIT
Friedman, editors. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D. C. 77.
15. Mendes, N. F., M. E. A. Tolnai, N. P. Silveira, R. B. Gilbertsen, and R, S.
Metizgar. 1973. Technical aspects of the rosette tests used to detect human comple-
ment receptor (B) and sheep erythrocyte-binding (T) lymphocytes, g. Immunol.
111:860.
16. McLeod, D. L., M. M. Shreeve, and A. A. Axelrad. 1974. Improved plasma culture
system for production of erythrocytic colonies in vitro: quantitative assay method
for CFU-E. Blood. 44:517.
17. Geha, R. S., E. Schneeberger, F. S. Rosen, and E. Merler. 1973. Interaction of
human thymus-derived and non-thymus-derived lymphocytes in vitro. Induction of
proliferation and antibody synthesis in B lymphocytes by a soluble factor released
from antigen-stimulated T lymphocytes. J. Exp. Med. 138:1230.
18. Geha, R. S., and E. Merler. 1974. Human lymphocyte mitogenic factor: Synthesis by
sensitized thymus-derived lymphocytes, dependence of expression on the presence of
antigen. Cell. Immunol. 10:86.
19. Robinson, W., D. Metcalf, and T. R. Bradley. 1967. Stimulation by normal and
leukemic mouse sera of bone marrow cells. J. Cell Physiol. 69:83.
20. Calvo, W., T. M. Fliedner, E. Herbst, E. Hfigl, and C. Bruch. 1976. Regeneration of
blood-forming organs after autologous leukocyte transfusion in lethally irradiated
dogs. II. Distribution and cellularity of the marrow in irradiated and transfused
animals. Blood. 47:593.
21. Barr, R. D., J. Whang-Peng, and S. Perry. 1975. Hemopoietic stem cells in human
peripheral blood. Science (Wash. D. C.). 190:284.
22. Richman, C., and L. Chess. 1975. Concentration of human peripheral blood stem
cells in the null cell fraction. Blood. 46:1011 (Abstr.).
23. Basten, A., and P. B. Beesen. 1970. Mechanism of eosinophilia II. Role of the
lymphocyte. J. Exp. Med. 131:1288.
24. Kazura, J. W., A. A. F. Mahmoud, K. S. Karb, and K. S. Warren. 1975. The
lymphokine eosinophil stimulation promoter and human schistosomiasis mansoni.
J. Infect. Dis. 132:702.
25. Miller, A. M., D. G. Calley, and M. P. McGarry. 1976. Spleen cells from Schistosoma
mansoni-infected mice produce diffusible stimulator of eosinophilopoiesis in vivo.
Nature (Lond.). 262:586.
26. Mahmoud, A. A. F., M. K. Stone, and R. W. Kellermeyer. 1977. Eosinophilopoietin:
a circulating low molecular weight peptide-like substance which stimulates the
production of eosinophils in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 60:675.
27. Schimpl, A., and E. Wecker. 1972. Replacement of T cell function by a T cell
product. Nat. New Biol. 237:15.
27A.Johnson, G. R., and D. Metcalf. 1977. Pure and mixed erythroid colony formation
in vitro stimulated by spleen conditioned medium with no detectable erythropoietin.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74:3879.
27B.Cline, M. J., and D. W. Golde. 1974. Production of colony stimulating activity by
human lymphocytes. Nature (Lond.). 248:703.
27C.Ruscetti, F. W., and P. A. Chervenick. 1975. Release of colony-stimulating activity
from thymus-derived lymphocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 55:520.
28. Lord, B. I., and R. Schofield. 1973. The influence of thymus cells in hemopoiesis:
Stimulation of hemopoietic stem cells in a syngeneic, in vivo, situation. Blood.
42:395.
29. Resnitzsky, P., D. Zipori, and N. Trainin. 1971. Effect of neonatal thymectomy on
hemopoietic tissue in mice. Blood. 37:634.
30. Pritchard, L. L., S. G. Shinpock, and J. W. Goodman. 1975. Augmentation of
marrow growth by thymocytes separated by discontinuous albumin density-gradient
NATHAN ET AL. 339
centrifugation. Exp. Hematol. (Copenh. ). 3:94.
31. Wiktor-Jedrzejczak, W., S. Sharkis, A. Ahmed, and K. W. Sell. 1977. Theta°
sensitive cells and erythropoiesis: Identification of a defect in W/Wv anemic mice.
Science (Wash. D. C.). 196:313.
32. Gatien, J. G., E. E. Schneeberger, R. Parkman, and E. Merler. 1975. Isolation on
discontinuous gradients of bovine albumin of a subpopulation of human lymphocytes
exhibiting precursor characteristics. Eur. J. Immunol. 5:306.
33. Gatien, J. G., E. E. Schneeberger, and E. Merler. 1975. Analysis of human
thymocyte subpopulations using discontinuous gradients of albumin: precursor
lymphocytes in human thymus. Eur. J. Immunol. 5:312.
