ALLOSUPPRESSOR- AND ALLOHELPER-T CELLS IN ACUTE
AND CHRONIC GRAFT-VS.-HOST (GVH) DISEASE
III. Different Lyt Subsets of Donor T Cells Induce Different
Pathological Syndromes*
BY ANTON G. ROLINK* ANDERNST GLEICHMANN
From the Department oflmmunohistopathology, Central Laboratory of the Netherlands Red Cross
Blood Transfusion Service and Laboratoryfor Experimental and Clinical Immunology of the
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
The graft-versus-host reaction (GVHR) 1 is initiated by immune responses of
donor T cells towards allogeneic histocompatibility antigens of the recipient.
One of the possible outcomes of a systemic GVHR is acute graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD), which is termed lethal GVHD (LGVHD) when fatal. Acute
GVHD is characterized by a brief initial lymphoid stimulation during the first
week of the GVHR (1-3), which rapidly thereafter turns into severe hypoplasia
of the entire lympho-hemopoietic tissue (1-5). The clinical symptoms of acute
GVHD include weight loss, aplastic anemia (1-4), hypogammaglobulinemia (1,
4), and sepsis (4). A different form of the GVHR is referred to as chronic GVHD.
It is characterized by long-term stimulatory symptoms of the lymphoid tissue (1-
4, 6), the formation of autoantibodies characteristic of systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE), and the development of various pathological lesions including
immune-complex glomerulonephritis (ICGN) (3, 6-9). Both forms of GVHR are
known to be induced by donor T cells (4, 6, 9-11), but little is known about the
T cell subpopulations involved.
The dissection of the cellular mechanisms that are responsible for the hyper-
plastic and hypop|astic pathological GVH symptoms requires GVH-mode| sys-
tems that consistently induce either stimulatory or suppressive pathological
symptoms. Several different GVH systems approaching this goal have been
elaborated in our laboratory. In each system, parental strain T cells were injected
into nonirradiated adult FI hybrid mice differing at H-2. The results of these
studies indicated that those inocula of donor cells that preferentially reacted by
the alloreactive T helper (T H) cells caused the stimulatory symptoms of chronic
*Thisworkwassupportedbya grant givenio E.Gleichmannfromthe DutchKidneyFoundation,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Present address: Basel Institute for Immunology, 487, Grenzacherstrasse, CH-4058 Basel,
Switzerland.
~Abbreviationsusedin thispaper:BI0, C57BL/10ScSn;BDFh(B10 X DBA/2)FI;C, rabbit serum
complement; dsDNA, double-stranded DNA; GVHD, graft-vs.-hostdisease; GVH Fl, FI mice
undergoing GVH reaction; GVHR, GVH reaction; 1CGN,immune-complexglomerulonephritis;
LGVHD, lethal GVHD; N Fi, noninjected Fi; NMS,normal mouse serum; PFC, plaque-forming
cell(s);SLE,systemiclupuserythematosus;SRBC,sheeperythrocyte(s);Ttt, T-helper; TK,T-killer,
Ts, T-suppressor.
546 J. ExP.MED.©The RockefellerUniversityPress • 0022-1007/83/08/546"/13 $1.00
Volume 158 August1983 546-558
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 547
GVHD, whereas donor cell inocula that appeared to preferentially react by their
alloreactive T suppressor (Ts) cells caused the suppressive pathological symptoms
of acute GVHD (2-4, 7, 8, 10). Moreover, when unselected donor T cells were
injected into F1 recipients, which differed solely at class II H-2 antigens (I-A/I-
E), exclusively stimulatory GVHD was found; in contrast, a difference in the Fl
recipients at both class I (H-2 K/D) and class II antigens was needed for the
induction of acute GVHD (3, 8). Neither clear-cut stimulatory nor suppressive
GVH symptoms were found in those FI recipients that differed from the donor
solely at class I H-2 antigens (3).
From studies on the allogenetic effect in vitro it is known that class II (I-A/I-
E) antigenic differences activate Lyt-1+2- T H cells, which then provide maximal
allohelp (12, 13). By contrast, the activation of alloreactive T s cells requires the
presence of Lyt-l+2+ cells as well as incompatibility, on the allogeneic B cells, at
class I H-2 antigens (12, 13). Moreover, it seems from these studies in vitro that
in order to become fully activated, the class I-reactive Lyt-l+2÷ T s cells must be
induced by class II-reactive Lyt-1÷2- cells (13, 14). These findings suggest that
the class II (I-A/I-E) incompatibilities in the F1 recipients previously studied (3,
8) selectively activated the alloreactive T H cells out of the pool of unselected
donor T cells; the activated T H cells might then have caused the formation of
SLE-like autoantibodies and the development of other stimulatory GVH symp-
toms. In contrast, an incompatibility in the Fl recipient at both class II (I-A/I-E)
and class I (K/D) antigens might have activated both the class II-reactive T H or
inducer cells and the class I-reactive T s effector cells (3). It should be noted here
that alloreactive donor T s cells, and not cytotoxic T cells, appear to be important
effector cells in acute GVHD. These T s cells seem to be the effector cells, because
they suppress the physiologic proliferation of lympho-hemopoietic cells and thus
cause the pancytopenia of acute GVHD (4).
The intra-H-2 requirements for the induction of either stimulatory (chronic)
GVHD or suppressive (acute) GVHD (3, 8) parallel those for the induction of
positive and negative allogeneic effects in vitro (12, 13). The missing link between
the studies performed in vitro and the GVH experiments in vivo concerns the
Lyt subsets of donor T cells that are required for the induction of either
stimulatory or suppressive GVHD. We therefore injected different Lyt subsets
of B10 donor T cells into (B10 X DBA/2)F1 (BDFI) mice. The results indicate
that Lyt-l+2- T cells are able to induce SLE-like GVHD, but are incapable of
inducing acute GVHD and LGVHD. The induction of acute GVHD and
LGVHD on the other hand required unseparated donor T cells, which comprise
both Lyt-l+2- and Lyt-l÷2+ cells.
Materials and Methods
Mice. B10 mice (H-2b/b, Lyt-l.2, Lyt-2.2, Thy-l.2) and BDFI hybrids (H-2b/a) were
purchased from Olac 1976 Ltd. (Bicester, Oxon, U.K.). Female mice, 8-10-wk old, were
used.
Preparation of Donor Cells. For induction of GVHR, single-cell suspensions of donor
spleen and lymph node cellswere prepared, as described (7).
MonoclonalAntibodies. Monoclonal murine anti-Lyt-1.2 (IgG2b, no. NEI-017) and anti-
Lyt-2.2 (IgM, No. NEI-006) antibodies were obtained from New England Nuclear (Boston,
MA). Monoclonal murine anti-Thy-l.2 (IgM, clone F7D5) was purchased from Olac 1976
548 LytSUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
Ltd. (Bicester, Oxon, U.K.).
Pretreatmentof Donor Cellswith MonoclonalAntibodiesand Complement(C). Donor cells
consisted either of spleen cells or of a mixture of spleen cells (2 parts) and lymph node
cells (1 part). For treatment with antiserum, cell suspensions were prepared in Hepes-
buffered RPMI 1640 that contained 5% fetal calf serum. Suspensions of 3 x 107 live
cells/ml were incubated for 45 rain on ice with either anti-Thy-l.2 serum, diluted 1 in
1,000, or anti-Lyt-l.2 or anti-Lyt-2.2 serum, each diluted 1 in 3,000. As a control, cells
were treated with normal mouse serum (NMS) diluted 1 in 3,000. After incubation, the
cells were spun down and resuspended with 6 ml rabbit C, which had been selected for
low cytotoxicity and was diluted 1 in 12 in Hepes-buffered RPMI 1640 (not containing
fetal calf serum). The suspensions were incubated for 45 min at 37 °C, and thereafter the
cells were washed three times. In some experiments the donor cells were treated twice
with antisera and C, according to this procedure. Hereafter, cells treated with anti°Lyt-
1.2 and C, anti-Lyt-2.2 and C, anti°Thy-l.2 and C, or NMS and C will be referred to as
anti-Lyt-l-, anti-Lyt-2°, anti°Thy-l-, and NMS-treated cells, respectively. Unless men-
tioned otherwise, these cells had been treated once.
Nylon-woodPassageofPretreatedDonorCells. In one experimental approach, B10 spleen
cells, which had been pretreated twice with either NMS or anti-Lyt antibodies, were
passed through nylon-wool columns (13) in order to reduce the fraction of non-T cells.
InductionofGVHR. All donor cells were injected intravenously. In the first experiment
(Fig. I and Table I) nonirradiated mice were used as recipients. In the second experiment
(Fig. 3 and Table II) the prospective BDF~ recipients were first irradiated with 750 rad
by using 662-KeV gamma rays, emitted from a ~37Cs source (gammator, model 381,
Isomedic) at a dose of 375 rad/min. Within the next 3 h, these mice were repopulated
with 3 x 107 live untreated spleen cells obtained from syngeneic (BDF~) donors; 1 d later,
the GVHR was induced by injection of B10 T cells. The donor cell inocula are specific in
the results section.
PrimaryAnti-SheepErythrocyte(SRBC)Response. The primary plaque-forming cell (PFC)
response to SRBC in vitro was performed as described elsewhere (13).
ClinicalSignsofGVHR. Twice a week, the F1 mice undergoing GVHR (GVH Fi) were
inspected for symptoms of acute GVHD, such as weakness, diarrhea, and ruffled fur;
weight loss was determined by weighing the mice weekly. The number of dead mice was
recorded. Anemia was determined by two-weekly measurements of hematocrit. At weekly
intervals, the GVH F~ mice were tested for elevated proteinuria (5300 mg protein per
100 ml urine) by means of Albustix test sticks (no. 2872, Ames, Div. of Miles). Elevated
proteinuria in GVH F1 mice is a reliable indicator of ICGN (9).
DetectionofAutoantibodies. The presence ofautoantibodies in the serum was determined
at two-weekly intervals, starting at week 2 and lasting until week 16 after the initiation of
the GVHR. Autoantibodies to erythrocytes were detected by the direct Coombs' test
using anti-mouse IgG serum, as described (7). Autoantibodies to thymocytes were detected
by a C-dependent cytotoxicity test, as described (7); using 5~Cl-labeled thymocytes of
normal BDF 1 mice as target cells. Mice were scored positive for autoantibodies against
thymocytes when a 1 in 5 dilution of their serum lysed 40% or more of the target cells.
IgG antibodies against nuclear antigens were detected by an indirect immunofluorescence
technique using cryostat sections of mouse liver as antigenic substrate, as described (7).
IgG autoantibodies against double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) were determined by an
indirect immunofluorescence technique using the extranuclear dsDNA of Crithidialuciliae
as antigenic substrate, as described (7). For the determination of both antinuclear and
anti-dsDNA antibodies, the initial dilution of mouse serum was 1 in 10; the highest serum
dilution at which specific immunofiuorescence was seen was called the titer.
Results
Lyt Subsets of Donor T Cells Involved in the Induction of LGVHD in Nonirradiated
F1 Mice. In order to determine which donor T-cell subset(s) is (are) responsible
for the induction of LGVHD, groups of nonirradiated BDFI mice were injected
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 549
100 .0--0 NMS A
anti-Thy 1
80 .Z~P,-~anti-Lyt 2
60 ,- =anti-Lytl
40 /
"~ 0 , ~ _ _ w . m
,,,.
>z 100 .41~di~twice NMS B
o--o twice anti-Lyt 1
80.
i 60-
40.
20-
0;
I I i I ;2
2 4 6 8 10
weeks after the first injection of BI0 donorceils
FIGURE l. Induction of LGVHD as a function of the Lyt subsets of parental T cells
administered. Groups of nonirradiated BDF~micewere injected on both day 0 and day 7 with
a mixture of 5 x 107viable Bl0 donor cells;the original mixture was composed of one-third
lymph node cellsand two-thirds spleen cells.The B10 donor cellshad been pretreated either
once (A)or twice (B),as indicated. Eachof the groups of BDFamice,which had received the
donorcellspretreated once, consistedof 15 mice;the groups ofBDFtmice,whichhad received
the donor cellspretreated twice,consistedof 10 miceeach.
with various inocula, each of which contained 10a viable B 10 cells. As expected,
the vast majority (73%) of the F1 recipients of B10 cells that had been treated
once with NMS succumbed to a typical acute GVHD (Fig. 1A); their LGVHD
was always preceded by a 20-30% reduction of the hematocrit values (hematocrit
values of N FI mice ranging from 43 to 48). None of the FI recipients of anti-
Thy-l-treated B10 cells developed acute GVHD, not to mention LGVHD (Fig.
1A); consistent with this observation, the hematocrit values of these F~ recipients
were normal (ranging from 42 to 48). Treatment of the B10 donor cells with
anti-Lyt-2 completely abolished their capacity to induce acute GVHD and
LGVHD; none of the GVH F] mice of this group had reduced hematocrit values.
After a single treatment of the B10 donor cells with anti-Lyt-1, one-third of the
FI recipients still developed acute GVHD (hematocrit values between 30 and 35)
and eventually died from acute GVHD (Fig. 1A). After the donor cells had been
treated twice with anti-Lyt-1, however, the inoculum of 108 viable B10 cells had
lost its capacity to induce LGVHD (Fig. 1B) and even acute GVHD (hematocrit
values ranging from 43 to 48). Donor cells, which had been treated twice with
550 Lyt SUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
TABLE I
Development of SLE-like GVHD in Nonirradiated BDF~Mice as a Function of the Lyt Subset of
Parental T CellsAdministered
Nonirradiated BDFI recipients:* Cumulative percentage of surviving mice (week 16)
with autoantibodies against Percentage
Pretreatment of
Group BI0 donor cells:t Number of mice
of mice Thymo- Erythro- Nuclear antigens dsDNA (titer)I with ICGNi
tested! cytes cytes (titer)I
1 NMS 4 0 0 50 (1/40-1/160) 0 (-) 0
2 Anti-Thy-I 15 0 0 20 (1/20-1/160) 0 (-) 0
3 Anti-Lyt-I 10 10 0 20 (1/40-1/160) 0 (-) 0
4 Twice anti-Lyt-I 10 0 0 10 (1/80) 0 (-) 0
5 Ami-Lyt-2 15 100 93 100 (1/160-1/2,560) 40 (1/20-1/160) 33
* All mice received a total of 10s viable donor cells; the cells were administered in two equal portions on day 0 and day 7. The original
donor-cen inocula were composed of 2 parts of spleen cells and 1 part of lymph node cells.
;t Unless mentioned otherwise, the donor cell inocula were pretreated once. After treatment, all inocula were adjusted to the number
of viable cells.
! Represents the number of mice that did not die from acute GVHD (see Fig. 1). Group 1, 2, 3, and 5 initially consisted of 15 recipient
mice; group 4 initially consisted of 10 recipient mice.
I Range of maximal titers in positive mice.
I Mice showing elevated proteinuria for at least 3 subsequent weeks as well as distinct granular deposits of IgG along the glomerular
basement membrane when examined by immunofiuorescence technique, as described elsewhere (9).
NMS, had retained their capacity to induce LGVHD (Fig. 1B). These findings
indicate that the donor T cells involved in the induction of acute GVHD must
be Lyt-2÷ as well as Lyt-1+.
The Donor T Cells That Cause SLE-Like GVHD in Nonirradiated F1 Recipients Carry
the Lyt-l+2- Phenotype. The above-described nonirradiated F1 recipients, which
had been studied for acute GVHD and LGVHD, were also studied for the
development of SLE-like GVHD (Table I). In addition, we studied control
groups, each of which consisted of eight syngeneically injected BDF1 or B10
recipient mice. The syngeneic cells injected were either NMS-, anti-Lyt-l-, or
anti-Lyt-2-treated. None of these control mice produced antibodies to thymo-
cytes, erythrocytes, or dsDNA, let alone developed ICGN. Only one or two
animals out of each of these groups produced autoantibodies against nuclear
antigens. The maximal titer of these antibodies ranged from 1 in 40, to 1 in 160
(data not shown).
All groups of FI mice injected with antiserum-treated B10 donor cells initially
consisted of 10 or 15 mice but, as already described in Fig. 1, many of the FI
recipients in groups 1 and 3 of Table I had died from acute GVHD before the
end of the experiment (week 16 after the first administration of B10 cells).
However, none of these mice showed detectable amounts of lupus-like autoanti-
bodies in their sera or had developed elevated proteinuria as a sign of ICGN
(data not shown).
Group 5 in Table I shows that treatment with anti-Lyt-2 rendered the B10
cells capable of inducing an SLE-iike autoimmune disease in the BDF~ recipients.
Already 2 wk after the first injection of donor cells, 53% of the FI mice had
autoantibodies to thymocytes, nuclear antigens, and erythrocytes. At 4 wk after
the induction of the GVHR, 100% of the F1 recipients had autoantibodies to
thymocytesand nuclear antigens in their serum, and 93% were Coombs'-positive.
All F1 recipients in this group remained positive for autoantibodies to thymocytes
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 551
and nuclear antigens until week 16. Moreover, 40% of the F1 recipients had
autoantibodies to dsDNA in their serum at one or more times tested; and severe
ICGN, as indicated by elevated proteinuria and immunofluorescence studies,
was observed in 33% of the F1 recipients.
In marked contrast, none of the other GVH Fl mice shown in Table I (groups
1 to 4) had comparable symptoms of SLE-like GVHD. None of them showed
elevated proteinuria or immunohistoiogical evidence of ICGN, and none of them
had autoantibodies against erythrocytes and dsDNA. The titers of antinuclear
antibodies, if present at all, did not exceed the titers found in syngeneically
injected control mice. Although the percentage of GVH F~ mice with antinuclear
antibodies was increased in the F~ recipients of NMS-treated BI0 donor cells
(group 1), this percentage (50%) represents only two long-term survivors out of
the initial group of 15 GVH F~ mice. As expected, treatment of the B10 donor
cells with anti-Lyt-1 did not render them capable of inducing SLE-like GVHD
(groups 3 and 4).
Subpopulations of Donor T Cells Involved in the Induction of LGVHD in Irradiated
Fi Recipients. Since "-,70% of the peripheral T cells in the mouse express the
Lyt-2 antigen (l 5), the total number of T cells among 108 viable Lyt-2-depleted
B 10 cells comprised only about one-third of the total number of T ceils in NMS-
treated cells. This total number of donor T cells after the anti-Lyt-2 treatment
might therefore have been too low to induce acute GVHD and thus caused SLE-
like GVHD in the nonirradiated F1 recipients used. This explanation is unlikely
though because small doses of untreated B10 donor cells (5 x 106 to 30 x 106,
2 parts spleen cells and 1 part lymph node cells) induced only a limited autoan-
tibody formation and failed to induce SLE-like GVHD (data not shown). To
further exclude this possibility comparable numbers of viable antiserum-treated
B10 T cells were injected into irradiated BDF~ recipients. In order to adjust the
various donor cell inocula to comparable numbers of viable T cells, B10 spleen
cells that had been treated twice with either NMS, anti-Lyt-l, or anti-Lyt-2, were
passed through nylon-wool columns.
First, we determined the ailoreactivity of these three suspensions of B10 T
cells by means of the primary anti-SRBC response in vitro (Fig. 2). Low numbers
of NMS-treated B10 T cells induced aIlobelp; higher numbers induced allo-
suppression. The anti-Lyt-2-treated B10 T cells exclusively induced allohelp, and
the anti-Lyt-l-treated B 10 T cells were ineffective. These results are consistent
with those reported elsewhere (12, 13).
Fig. 3 shows the different capacities of the same three suspensions of B10 T
cells to induce LGVHD in irradiated BDF~ mice were used, because they
irradiated F~ recipients are much more susceptible than nonirradiated ones to
the induction of LGVHD (11, 16). Whereas 90% of the F1 recipients of the
NMS-treated B10 T cells developed LGVHD, only one (10%) of the recipients
of anti-Lyt-2-treated T cells died, and none of the F1 recipients of anti-Lyt-1-
treated B10 T cells died.
Subset of Donor T Cells Causing Chronic GVHD in Irradiated F1 Mice. The same
groups of irradiated BDFI mice that had been used for studying LGVHD were
also used for testing the presence of SLE-like autoantibodies in the serum (Table
II). None of the F~ recipients that died from acute GVHD before the end of the
552 Lyt SUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
•o--o NMS
ZY--~anti-Lyt 2
anti-Lyt 1
ID
0.04 0.15 0.6 1.2 25 5 15
Tcells(x 105)
FIGURE 2. Allogeneic effects caused by Lyt subsets of B10 T cells in vitro. The effects of
B10 T cells on the primary PFC responses of SRBC-stimulated BDF1 B cells were compared.
Each culture contained 3 × 106 T cell-depleted BDFI spleen cells (B cells). As a source of T
cells, graded numbers of live B10 spleen cells that had been treated twice, as indicated, were
used; after the second treatment, these cells were passed through nylon-wool columns, adjusted
to the same number of live cells, and added to the B cell cultures. The three T-cell suspensions
tested here are the same that were used to perform the GVH experiments described in Fig. 3
and Table II.
/
10o J-o~o NMS
I
e~ ] ~,--~anti- Lyt 2
~ 80 t- - a n t i - L y t l ~
g°I
1" i a i i I ;2
2 4 6 8 10
weeks after the first injedion ofBIOdonorcells
FIGURE 3. Induction of LGVHD in irradiated BDF] recipients as a function of the Lyt
subsets of parental T cells administered. Groups of 750-tad irradiated BDF] mice were first
rel~opulated with 3 × 10~syngeneic (BDFI) spleen cells and on the following day injected with
10' viable B10 cells as a source of T cells. The T cells were obtained from B10 spleen cells
that had been pretreated twice, as indicated; thereafter, the cells had been passed over nylon-
wool. The resulting cell suspensions were adjusted to the same concentration of live cells and
then injected into the recipients. Each group of recipients initially consisted of 10 Fl mice.
observation period (week 16) had shown autoantibodies before they died. In
Table II, therefore, only the results obtained from the surviving GVH F] mice
are shown. It is evident from the Table that the vast majority of the F] recipients
of anti-Lyt-2-treated donor cells showed a vigorous formation of SLE-like auto-
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 553
TABLE II
Formation of SLE-lihe Autoantibodies in Irradiated BDFt Mice as a Function of the Lyt Subsets of
BIO T Cells Administered
T cellsobtained from Irradiated BDF~recipients:*Cumulativepercentage of survivingF~mice
B10donors* withautoantibodiesagainst
Number of
livecellsadmin- Pretreat- Number Thymo- Erythro- Nuclearantigens
ment of cells tested0 cytes cytes (titer)!
istered
(x 106)
dsDNA(titer)!
0 -- 10 0 0 20 (1/20-1/160) 0 (-)
10 NMS 1 0 0 100 (1/160) 0 (-)
10 Anti-Lyt-I 10 0 0 20 (1/40-1/160) 0 (-)
10 Anti-Lyt-2 9 100 78 100 (1/40-1/2,560) 78 (1/40-1/80)
* Samecellsas those usedfor the experimentsdescribedin Figs.2 and 3.
*Samemiceas those usedfor the experiment shownin Fig. 3.
Represents the numbers of F~ recipients that had survived until the end of the experiment, i.e.
week 16, after the injectionof B10 cells.At the start of the experiment, each group consistedof
10 Fl mice.
nRangeof maximalserum titers of positiveF~mice.
antibodies. In contrast, neither N MS-treated nor anti-Lyt-l-treated B10 T cells
were capable of inducing a comparable autoantibody formation in the recipients.
Discussion
The results of the present study indicate that, depending on the Lyt phenotype
of the parental T lymphocytes injected, the F1 recipients developed either acute
or chronic GVHD.
Stimulatory or Chronic GVHD. In previous studies, it was shown that injection
into nonirradiated BDF1 recipients of unseparated B 10 T cells led to only limited
autoantibody formation (2) and failed to induce ICGN but, instead, caused acute
GVHD and LGVHD (10). Using the same parent ---* F~ combination, now we
showed that depletion of the allosuppressive Lyt-2+ cells rendered the B 10 donor
cells capable of inducing a severe SLE-like autoimmune disease that included the
development of ICGN (Table I). The mechanism underlying the formation of
autoantibodies during the GHVR is thought to be a positive allogeneic effect
caused by abnormal T-B-cell cooperation (3, 7, 8, 17-21). In this process, T cell
help is provided by parental T cells that react against the allogeneic class-II (I-
A/I-E) antigens of the F1 recipient's H-2 complex (3, 8). The excess of T cell
help generated by this reaction, in combination with certain self-antigens, triggers
those F~ B cells capable of producing autoantibodies characteristic of SLE (3, 7,
8, 17, 21). The autoantibodies in turn form immune complexes and cause ICGN
(9). In the present study, we showed that the production of multiple autoanti-
bodies and ICGN during a GVHR requires the injection of Lyt-l+2- donor cells;
that Lyt phenotype is commonly associated with T n cells (15, 22, 23), including
the T n cells that react against allogeneic class-II antigens (Fig. 2; 12, 13). In
contrast, the B10 cells that had been pretreated with anti-Lyt-1 were unable to
induce vigorous autoantibody formation in the recipients (Table I and II). The
latter finding is hardly surprising, however, because virtually all T cells express
554 LytSUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
at least small amounts of Lyt-1 (24). The low level of antinuclear antibodies
observed after the injection of anti-Lyt-1-treated cells barely exceeded that found
in syngeneically injected or noninjected BDF~ mice. This low level of spontaneous
autoantibody formation conforms with previous reports (25, 26) that normal
mice, especially at higher ages, may have antinuclear antibodies in the serum.
The different forms of GVHD induced by different Lyt subsets of donor T
cells argue against the pathogenesis of chronic GVHD postulated by Elkins (1,
27). He proposed that the symptoms of chronic GVHD are only late indirect
consequences of the cytotoxic damage and the subsequent infections caused by
the initial alloaggression by donor T cells. The data presented in the present
paper, however, as well as other data (2-4, 7, 8) indicate that stimulatory GVH
symptoms can appear already at 2 wk after the initiation of the GVHR and do
not require a preceding phase of lymphohemopoietic depletion (acute GVHD);
instead, these symptoms are direct consequences of the allo-stimulation induced
by donor T Hcells. In fact, we observed that removing the Lyt-2+ donor T cells,
the very cells that are needed for the induction of acute GVHD, was a prerequisite
for the induction of SLE-like GVHD by B10 T cells. Nevertheless, viral infec-
tions, including those acquired during GVHD, might lead to a GVH-like patho-
genesis so that their symptoms are (almost) indistinguishable from those caused
by alloreactive donor T cells (6, 17, 21).
Acute GVHD. Following an initial phase of stimulatory symptoms in the first
week of the GVH R (1, 2), acute GVHD rapidly produces suppressive pathological
symptoms, such as pancytopenia accompanied by aplastic anemia and hypogam-
maglobulinemia (1-5, 10). This biphasic course has led us to the concept (2) that
acute GVHD in H-2-different recipients is due to a sequential activation, first of
class-II-reactive donor T n or T inducer cells and, thereafter, of class-I-reactive
donor T s cells. The activated donor T H cells might cause the initial phase of
stimulatory symptoms, and, analogous to other systems (14), induce class-II-
reactive donor T s cells. Optimally activated donor T s cells appear to cause the
suppressive pathological symptoms of GVHD (2-4, 10, 28, 29).
In the present paper, we showed the alloreactive B10 cells carrying the Lyt-
1+2- phenotype were unable, or almost unable, to induce acute GVHD and
LGVHD in either nonirradiated or irradiated H-2-different F1 mice (Figs. 1 and
3). This finding is consistent with the results published by Korngold and Sprent
(30), who showed that Lyt-l+2- donor T cells were unable to induce LGVHD in
irradiated recipients differing from the donor at multiple non-H-2 loci. Our
findings differ, however, from the studies reported by Valera et al. (16). Valera
et al. studied the Lyt phenotype of the donor T cells responsible for the induction
of LGVHD in irradiated recipients, which differed from the donor at all of H-2
as well as non-H-2 loci. They found that treatment of the donor cells with anti-
Lyt-2 did not protect the recipient mice from LGVHD. The most likely expla-
nation for this discrepancy with our data is that the single anti-Lyt-2 treatment
of the donor cells used by Valera et al. (16) was not sufficient to remove all of
the Lyt-2+ T cells and that the few spared T cells were responsible for the
observed LGVHD in the irradiated recipients. In our hands, a single treatment
with anti-Lyt-2 or alloreactive T cells often proved to be ineffective in abolishing
their allosuppressor capacity in vitro (data not shown). In fact, Valera et al. (16)
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 555
reported that their treatment with anti-Lyt-2 did not completely abrogate the
capacity of the donor cells to generate anti-host T killer cells in vitro. Others
(15, 31), by contrast, have shown that T cells properly depleted of Lyt-2÷ cells
were no longer capable of generating cytotoxic T cells across an H-2 difference.
The possibility that, indeed, a very low number of spared Lyt-2÷ T cells might
have caused the LGVHD observed by Valera et al. (16) receives further support
by previous findings made by Korngold and Sprent (11). These authors observed
that parental bone marrow cells, which contained as few as 0.3% mature T cells,
i.e. 3 X 104 T cells, sufficed to induce LGVHD in irradiated F1 recipients that
differed at multiple non-H-2 loci only. Moreover, very similar observations have
recently been made in human recipients of HLA-different bone marrow grafts
(32).
In agreement with Korngold and Sprent (30) and Valera et al. (16) we found
that Lyt-l-2 + T cells, too, are unable to induce LGVHD. Together with the
observed inability of Lyt-1+2- cells to induce LGVHD, the combined results lead
to the conclusion that donor T cells carrying the Lyt-l+2+ phenotype must be
involved in the pathogenesis of LGVHD. This conclusion is identical with that
of Korngold and Sprent (30). It is not yet known, however, whether Lyt-l+2-
inducer T cells are required in addition to the Lyt-l÷2+ donor cells.
As already mentioned, we think that alloreactive donor T s cells are the effector
cells that cause the pancytopenia of acute GVHD (3, 4, 10). Our conclusion that
donor Lyt-1÷2+ cells must be involved in the pathogenesis of LGVHD is consist-
ent with this concept, because several groups of investigators showed that the
severe aliosuppression at the beginning of the second phase of acute GVHD, i.e.
at about day 7, is caused by Lyt-l+2÷ donor T cells (33-35). Furthermore,
recently we provided evidence that allosuppression induced in vitro also requires
Lyt-l+2+ cells, because neither Lyt-l-2 + cells alone nor a mixture consisting of
Lyt-l+2- cells and increasing numbers of Lyt-l-2 ÷ cells were able to induce
allosuppression across a full H-2 difference (13). These studies also showed that
a class-II-reactive Lyt-l+2- cell causes allohelp, whereas allosuppression in vitro
appears to be caused by a class-I-reactive Lyt-l+2+ cells. Thus, the data of the
present study have closed the gap between the studies performed in vitro (13)
and the GVH experiments performed in vivo. In combination with previous
findings (3, 8), we conclude that stimulatory GVHD is caused by class-II-reactive
Lyt-l+2- donor T H cells. In contrast, the development of suppressive GVHD
seems to require class-I-reactive Lyt-l÷2+ T s cells and, possibly also class II-
reactive Lyt-l+2- inducer cells of the donor. However, experiments involving
positively selected Lyt-1+2÷ ceils will have to be performed in order to verify this
concept.
Summary
Previous work from this laboratory has led to the hypothesis that the stimula-
tory pathological symptoms of chronic graft-vs.-host disease (GVHD) are caused
by ailoreactive donor T helper (Tn) cells, whereas the suppressive pathological
symptoms of acute GVHD are caused by alloreactive T suppressor (Ts) cells of
the donor. In the present paper we analyzed the Lyt phenotypes of B10 donor
T cells required for the induction of either acute or chronic GVHD in H-2-
556 Lyt SUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
different (B10 x DBA/2)F1 recipients. First, nonirradiated F1 mice were used as
the recipients. We found that unseparated B10 T cells induced only a moderate
formation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like autoantibodies, but a high
percentage of lethal GVHD (LGVHD). In contrast, Lyt-1+2- donor T cells were
unable to induce LGVHD in these recipients; these cells were capable, however,
of inducing a vigorous formation of SLE-like autoantibodies and the formation
of severe immune-complex glomerulonephritis. Lyt-l-2 + T cells were incapable
of inducing either acute or chronic GVHD.
In another experiment, the sensitivity and accuracy of the GVH system were
increased by using irradiated F1 mice as recipients and by comparing donor-cell
inocula that contained similar numbers of T lymphocytes. In addition, donor-
cell inocula were used that had been tested for their alloheiper and allosuppressor
effects on F~ B cells in vitro. In the irradiated FI recipients, too, unseparated
donor T cells were superior to T cell subsets in inducing LGVHD; Lyt-l-2 +
donor cells were completely and Lyt-1+2- donor cells were almost incapable of
doing so. In contrast, Lyt-l+2- T cells, but neither unseparated T cells nor Lyt-
1-2+ T cells, were capable of inducing a vigorous formation of SLE-like auto-
antibodies. We conclude that the stimulatory pathological symptoms of chronic
GVHD are caused by Lyt-l+2- allohelper T cells. In contrast, the development
of the suppressive pathological symptoms of acute GVHD appears to involve
ailoreactive Lyt-1+2+ T suppressor cells.
We thank Walter van der Meer for giving excellent technical assistance. Drs. L. Aarden,
C.J.M. Melief, and M. Schreier are thanked for critical reading of the manuscript.
Receivedfor publication 8 February 1983 and in revisedform 2 May 1983.
References
1. Elkins, W. L. 1971. Cellular immunology and the pathogenesis of graft versus-host
reactions. Prog. Allergy. 15:78.
2. Pals, S. T., T. Radaszkiewicz, and E. Gieichmann. 1982. Induction of either acute or
chronic graft-versus-host disease due to genetic differences among donor T cells. In
In vivo Immunology: Histopathology of the Lymphoid System. P. Nieuwenhuis, A.
A. van den Broek, and M. G. Hanna Jr., editors. Plenum Press, New York. p. 537.
3. Rolink, A. G., S. T. Pals, and E. Gleichmann. 1983. Allosuppressor- and allohelper
T cells in acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease. II. Fl recipients carrying
mutations at H-2K and/or I-A.J. Exp. Med. 157:755.
4. Rolink, A. G., T. Radaszkiewicz, S. T. Pals, W. G.J. van der Meer, and E. Gleichmann.
1982. Allosuppressor and ailohelper T cells in acute and chronic graft-versus-host
disease. I. Alloreactive suppressor cells rather than killing T cells appear to be the
decisive effector cells in lethal graft-versus-host disease. J. Exp. Med. 155:1501.
5. Armstrong, M. Y. K., R. S. Schwartz, and L. Beldotti. 1967. Neoplastic sequence of
allogeneic disease. III. Histological events following transplantation of allogeneic
spleen cells. Transplantation. 5:1380.
6. Gleichmann, E., H. Gleichmann, and W. Wilke. 1976. Autoimmunization and iym-
phomagenesis in parent ---*F~ combinations differing at the major histocompatibility
complex: model for spontaneous disease caused by altered self-antigens? Transplant.
Rev. 31:156.
7. Gieichmann, E., E. H. van Elven, andJ. P. W. van der Veen. 1982. A systemic lupus
ROLINK AND GLEICHMANN 557
erythematosus-like disease in mice induced by abnormal T-B cell cooperation. Pref-
erential formation of autoantibodies characteristic of SLE. Eur. J. Immunol. 12:152.
8. Rappard-van der Veen, F. M. van, A. G. Rolink, and E, Gleichmann. 1982. Diseases
caused by reactions of T lymphocytes towards incompatible structures of the major
histocompatibility complex. VI. Autoantibodies characteristic of systemic lupus ery-
thematosus induced by abnormal T-B-cell cooperation across I-E. J. Exp. Med.
155:1555.
9. Rolink, A. G., H. Gleichmann, and E. Gleichmann. 1983. Diseases caused by reactions
of T lymphocytes to incompatible structures of the major histocompatibility complex.
VII. Immune-complex glomerulonephritis. J. Immunol. 130:209.
10. EIven, E. H. van, A. G. Rolink, F. van der Veen, and E. Gieichmann. 1981. The
capacity of genetically different T lymphocytes to induce lethal graft-versus-host
disease correlates with their capacity to generate suppression but not their capacity
to generate anti-F1 killer cells. A non-H-2 locus determines the inability to induce
lethal graft-versus-host disease. J. Exp. Med. 153:1474.
11. Korngold, R., andJ. Sprent. 1978. Lethal graft-versus-host disease after bone-marrow
transplantation across minor histocompatibility barriers in mice. Prevention by re-
moving mature T cells from marrow.J. Exp. Med. 148:1687.
12. Cantor, H., and E. A. Boyse. 1976. Regulation of cellular and humoral immune
responses by T-cell subclasses. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 41:23.
13. Rolink, A. G., W. G. J. van der Meer, C. J. M. Melief, and E. Gleichmann. 1983.
Intra-H-2 and T-cell requirements for the induction of maximal positive and negative
ailogeneic effects in vitro. Eur. J. Immunol. 13:191.
14. Cantor, H., and D. K. Gershon. 1978. Immunological circuits: cellular composition.
Fed. Proc. 38:2058.
15. Cantor, H., and E. A. Boyse. 1975. Functional subclasses of T cells bearing different
Ly antigens. I. The generation of functionally distinct T-cell subclasses is a differen-
tiative process independent of antigen. J. Exp. Med. 141 :1376.
16. Valera, D. A., C. C. B. Soderling, andJ. H. Kersey. 1982. Bone-marrow transplan-
tation across major histocompatibility barrier in mice. II. Treatment of donor grafts
with monoclonal antibodies directed against Lyt determinants.J. Immunol. 128:871.
17. Gleichmann, E., and H. Gleichmann. 1980. Spectrum of diseases caused by alloreac-
tive T cells, mode of sensitization to the drug diphenylhydantoin, and possible role
of SLE-typical self-antigens in B-cell triggering. In Immunoregulation and Autoim-
munity. R. S. Krakauer and M. K. Cathcart, editors. Elsevier/North-Holland, New
York. p. 73.
18. Bretscher, P. 1973. Hypothesis: a model for generalized autoimmunity. CellImmunol.
6:1.
19. Allison, A. C., A. M. Denman, and R. D. Barnes. 1971. Cooperating and controlling
functions of thymus-derived lymphocytes in relation to autoimmunity. Lancet. 2:135.
20. Katz, D. H. 1977. Lymphocytedifferentiation, recognition, and regulation. Academic
Press Inc., New York. p. 482.
21. Gleichmann, E., A. G. Rolink, S. T. Pals, and H. Gleichmann. 1983. Graft-versus-
host reactions: clues to the pathogenesis of a broad spectrum of immunological
disease. Transplant. Proc. 15:1436.
22. Shiku, H., P. Kisielow, M. A. Bean, T. Takahashi, E. A. Boyse, H. F. Oettgen, and
L.J. Old. 1975. Expression of T-cell differentiation antigens on effector cells in cell-
mediated cytotoxicity in vitro. Evidence for functional heterogeneity related to the
surface phenotype ofT cells.J. Exp. Med. 141:227.
23. Kisielow, P., J. A. Hirst, H. Shiku, P. C. L. Beverly, M. K. Hoffmann, E. A. Boyse,
and H. F. Oettgen. 1975. Ly antigens as markers for functionally distinct subpopu-
558 Lyt SUBSETS OF DONOR T CELLS IN GVH REACTIONS
lations of thymus-derived lymphocytes of the mouse. Nature (Lond.). 253:219.
24. Ledbetter, J. A., R. V. Rouse, H. S. Micklem, and L. A. Herzenberg. 1980. T-cell
subsets defined by expression of Lyt 1,2,3 and Thy-1 antigens. Two parameter
immunofluorescence and cytotoxicity analysis with monoclonal antibodies modifies
current views.J. Exp. Med. 152:280.
25. Veen, J. L. ten, and T. E. W. Feltkamp. 1972. Studies on drug-induced lupus
erythematosus in mice. I. Drug-induced antinuclear antibodies. Clin. Exp. Immunol.
11:265.
26. Shulman, L. E., J. M. Grumpel, W. A. D'Angelo, R. L. Sokhami, M. B. Stevens, A.
S. Townes, and A. T. Masi. 1964. Antinuclear factor in inbred strains of mice: the
possible role of environmental influence. Arthritis Rheum. 7:758.
27. Elkins, W. L. 1979. Tolerance and the fate of the allogeneic bone-marrow chimaera.
In Immunological Tolerance and Enhancement. F. P. Stuart, and F. W. Fitch, editors.
MTP Press Ltd., Lancaster, U. K. p. 1.
28. Tigelaar, R. E., and R. Asofsky. 1972. Synergy among lymphoid cells mediating the
graft-versus-host response. IV. Synergy in the GVH reaction quantitated by a mor-
tality assay in sublethally irradiated recipients. J. Exp. Med. 135:1059.
29. Pickel, K., and M. K. Hoffmann. 1977. Suppressor T cells arising in mice undergoing
a graft-versus-host response. J. hnmunol. 118:653.
30. Korngold, R., and J. Sprent. 1982. Features of T cells causing H-2-restricted lethal
graft-versus-host disease across minor histocompatibility barriers. J. Exp. Med.
155:872.
31. Simon, M. M., and K. Eichmann. 1980. T cell subsets partlclpatmg~n the generation
of cytotoxic T cells. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 3:39.
32. Reinherz, E. L., R. Geha, J. M. Rappeport, M. Wilson, A. C. Penta, R. E. Hussey, K.
A. Fitzgerald, J. F. Daley, H. Levine, F. S. Rosen, and S. Schlossman. 1982.
Reconstitution after transplantation with T-lymphocyte-depleted HLA haplotype-
mismatched bone-marrow for severe combined immunodeficiency. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 79:6047.
33. Hurtenbach, U., and G. M. Shearer. 1983. Analysis of murine T lymphocyte markers
during the early phases of GVH-associated suppression of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
responses. J. Immunol. 130:1561.
34. Shand, F. L. 1977. Ly and Ia phenotype of suppressor T cells induced by graft-
versus-host reaction. Eur. J. Immunol. 7:746.
35. Pickel, K., and M. K. Hoffmann. 1977. The Ly phenotype of suppressor T cells
arising in mice subjected to a graft-versus-host reaction. J. Exp. Med. 145:1169.
