Brief Definitive Report
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX-RESTRICTED
H-Y-SPECIFIC ANTIBODIES AND
CYTOTOXIC T LYMPHOCYTES MAY
RECOGNIZE DIFFERENT SELF DETERMINANTS
BY E. GOULMY, A. VANLEEUWEN, E. BLOKLAND, J. j. VANROOD, AND
W. E. BIDDISON*
From the Department of Immunohaematology, University Hospital Leiden, The Netherlands;and
Neuroimmunology Branch, National Institute of Neurologicaland CommunicativeDisordersand Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20205
Many lines of evidence from several species have demonstrated that gene products
of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) play a crucial role in immune
responses. In man, influenza virus-immune cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) recognize
virus in conjunction with self antigens that are highly associated with the serologically-
defined HLA-A and -B antigens (HLA restriction) (1, 2). However, previous studies
had shown that the association between the serologically-defined antigens and the
CTL restriction antigens is not absolute (3). Those studies demonstrated that influ-
enza-immune CTL from a large number of HLA-A2 positive individuals lysed 14 out
15 virus-infected targets obtained from unrelated individuals matched only for HLA-
A2. They consistently failed to lyse the virus-infected target lymphocytes from donor
M7. Extensive serological analyses of the HLA-A2 antigen of donor M7 have not
revealed any detectable differences from the HLA-A2 antigens of the other unrelated
donors (3, and G. M. Th. Schreuder, personal communication). However, isoelectric
focusing of the HLA-A2 molecule from donor M7 revealed a clear difference in the
heavy polypeptide chain when compared with the HLA-A2 molecules of other donors
(4). These findings were interpreted as evidence for the absence of determinants on
the M7 HLA-A2 molecule, which are recognized by the influenza-immune CTL of
"normal" HLA-A2-positive donors.
Human CTL reponses to the male-specific antigen, H-Y, have also been shown to
require recognition of self HLA-A and -B specificities (5, 6). Goulmy et al. (5) and
Van Leeuwen et al. (7) have demonstrated that both HLA-A2 restricted anti-H-Y
specific CTL and an antiserum with specificity for HLA-A2 plus the H-Y antigen
could be obtained from a female aplastic anemia patient after multiple transfusions.
In the present study, the antiserum and CTL specific for HLA-A2 plus anti H-Y were
examined for reactivity with the cells of the HLA-A2 "variant" male donor M7. The
results show that the HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y CTL fail to lyse HLA-A2-matched
M7 male target cells. In contrast, the HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific antiserum lysed the
M7 cells to an extent comparable to that of other "nonvariant" HLA-A2-positive
*Supported in part by the Dutch Organization for Health Research(TNO), the Dutch Foundation for
Medical Research(FUNGO;subsidizedby the Dutch Foundation for the Advancementof Pure Research
[ZWO]),and the J. A. Cohen Institute for Radiopathotngyand Radiation Protection ORS).
Journal ofExperimentalMedicine • Volume 155,May 1982 1567-1572 1567
1568 GOULMY ET AL. BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT
TABLE I
Specific Lysis by HLA-A2-restricted c~H- Y CTL
Seriological typing Sex of HLA-A2-positive
for HLA-A2 target cells
A2+ A2- Male Female
+ 45 0 43 2*
CML - 33 47 1~ 32
* We have shown previously (5) that among the HLA-A2-positivemale donors, two HLA-
A2-positive females were killed marginally by she HLA-A2-restricted antVH-Y CTL.
z~The variant HLA-A2 (M7) male target cells demonstrate the only exception that could
be detected to this point in a panel of randomly selected HLA-A2-positive male target
cells.
male cells. These results suggest that in systems involving HLA restriction, recognition
by CTL and antibody are regulated by separate epitopes that are preferentially
recognized by T and B cells, or that different receptor repertoires are used by the
MHC-restricted T and B cells for the recognition of foreign antigens such as H-Y.
Materials and Methods
Peripheral blood lymphocytes were obtained from a female patient with aplastic anemia, in
partial remission (HLA phenotype A2, Bw44, B40, Cw3, Cw5, Dw4, Dw6, DR4, DRw6) (5).
The lymphocytes were separated from her peripheral blood by Ficoll-Isopaque (Pharmacia
Fine Chemicals, Div. of Pharmacia, Inc., Piscataway, NJ) -gradient eentrifugation. We have
shown previously (9) that her cells (after a 6-d in vitro sensitization against the irradiated PBL
from an HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DR-identical but mixed lymphocyte reaction [MLR] -positive
unrelated male donor) were able to lyse cells from HLA-A2 positive male donors but not from
other donors. These HLA-A2 restricted anti-H-Y CTL were, on the day of assay, mixed with
the target cells in different effector/target cell ratios. The target cells were 51Cr labeled or
nonlabeled (i.e., cold inhibitor cells) PHA-stimulated lymphoblasts.
The indirect immunofluorescence method used for detection of HLA-A2 restricted anti-H-Y
antibody and the cell-mediated lympholysis (CML) assay were performed as described previ-
ously (7, 8). Continuous growing of the 6-d specific cytotoxic effector cells was carried out, and
cytotoxic T cell lines were obtained with specific HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y cytotoxic activity
stronger than that seen with the bulk cultures (10).
Results
The results of testing the HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y CTL against a panel of
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) blast target cells from males and females (HLA-A2
positive or negative) are summarized in Table I. They show that, with the exception
of cells from the male donor M7, all male target cells that expressed HLA-A2 and
H-Y antigens were lysed by CTL.
In cold target inhibition experiments, the lysis of 51Cr-labeled HLA-A2-positive
male target cells by the HLA-A2-restricted H-Y-specific CTL was inhibited by a
panel of unlabeled cold inhibitor cells (Fig. 1). No significant inhibition ofcytotoxicity
was obtained by the addition of cold M7 inhibitor cells, whereas normal HLA-A2-
positive male cells strongly inhibited cytotoxicity. The level of inhibition obtained
with cold M7 cells is comparable to the level of inhibition obtained by the addition
of HLA-A2-negative male cold target cells.
These experiments with CTL generated in bulk culture were repeated using a
cytotoxic T cell line established from this same patient. The results (Table II)
GOULMY ET AL. BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT 1569
80.
03
70,
50'
50'
40-
30-
2(3-
10-
0
/~ .... hot A2+ o~
.... cold A2- oq
//,':,~=..-cotd M7 #
"'cold .2.*
x°.;-
X"
j//
s
x.. ~
p i i
5~1 2o:1 /~o:1
Ef lector/target ratio
.x-- - cold A2 * o~
FIG. 1. Inhibition of HLA-A2-restricted H-Y-specific lysis by cold target inhibitor cells. CTL
generated in bulk culture (see Materials and Methods) was tested against ~Cr-labeled PHA-
stimulated target cells at different effector/target cell ratios. Several PHA-stimulated unlabeled
inhibitor cells were added in a 1:10 hot/cold target cell ratio. The lower line in the figure represents
the amount of inhibition obtained by three normal HLA-A2-positive male cold target inhibitor
cells.
TABLE II
Lysis Pattern of the HLA-A2-restricted Anti-H-Y Cytotoxic T Cell Line
Percent Cold inhibitors Percent specific
5~Cr-labeled target cells specific lysis added lysis
M7 male "A2"* + l ND:~
Female A2+ -4 ND
Male A2+ +64 ND
Male A2+ +67 None +67
Male A2- +61§
Male M7 +61
Male A2+ +20
* The HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y cytotoxic T cell line has been used as effector cells at
a 40:1 effector/target cell ratio.
:~Not done.
§ Both hot target cells and cold inhibitor cells were PHA-stimulated blast cells and were
used at a l:10 hot/cold target cell ratio.
demonstrate (a) that the cytotoxic T cell line could not lyse M7 targets, and (b) that
M7 cold targets could not inhibit the cytotoxic activity of the cell line assayed on
normal male HLA-A2-positive target cells. Taken together, these results indicate that
the HLA-A2-associated H-Y determinant, recognized by anti-H-Y-specific CTL and
cytotoxic T cell line on normal HLA-A2-positive male cells, are not detectable on the
male M7 target cells. These findings are comparable to those previously reported for
the absence of recognition of HLA-A2-positive M7 target cells by influenza-immune
CTL from HLA-A2 donors (3).
In previous studies of this female aplastic anaemia patient (7) (whose lymphocytes
generate anti-H-Y, HLA-A2-restricted CTL), we found a serum IgM antibody that
reacted only with HLA-A2-positive male cells. The specificity of this antiserum
1570 GOULMY ET AL. BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT
TABLE III
Reactivity Pattern of the HLA-2-restricted Anti-H-Y Antiserum*
Donor Sex
Percentage of cytotoxicity
on
B cells~ T cells
1. M7§ Male 36 7
2. Z Male 45 8
3. G Male 41 5
4. A Female i I 8
control AB serum 4 6
Results are the means of three experiments.
* The presence of lympholytic antibodies, directed against a subset of the B cells from
male HLA-A2 positive males, have been described earlier (7).
It was found that complement-dependent cytolytic antibodies react with part of the B
cells stained with anti-Ig fluorescein isothiocyanate (6). The monocytes were differen-
tiated from the B cells by treatment of the blood with latex.
§ Donors 1-4 carry the serologically defined HLA-A2 antigen.
(designated serum R) was virtually indistinguishable from that of the anti-H-Y CTL
obtained from the same patient. Serum R specifically detects an antigen that consists
of components contributed by both HLA-A2 and H-Y. Cells from donor M7 were
tested for reactivity with serum R to determine if such an HLA-A2 plus H-Y
association could be demonstrated on the cell surface. The results in Table III
demonstrate that the HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific antiserum did react with M7 cells,
and that the level of cytotoxicity was comparable to that obtained with control
normal HLA-A2 positive male cells. The antibody activity appeared to be directed
mainly against B cells, which is consistent with our earlier observations (7). These
results indicate that the association of HLA-A2 and H-Y detected by serum R is
present on the surface of M7 B cells.
Discussion
A crucial point in this study is whether or not M7 carries the male Y chromosome
and expresses the H-Y antigen on the cell surface. Karotype analyses of M7 cells that
were Q-banded (11) and G-banded (12) were performed on air-dried chromosome
preparations of 72-h stimulated lymphocyte cultures. All cells examined, in 15
metaphases, showed a normal male karotype. The cell-surface expression of the H-Y
antigen on M7 cells was examined by the use of a rat anti-H-Y antiserum (13), which
is cytotoxic for human male peripheral blood lymphocytes. This anti-H-Y antiserum
lysed M7 cells to the same extent as other male cells, indicating a normal expression
of the H-Y antigen on the surface of M7 cells.
The failure of the HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific CTL to lyse male M7 target cells
could be explained by the inability of the structurally distinct M7 HLA-A2 molecule
to form a physical association with the H-Y antigen on the cell surface. However, the
finding that the anti-HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific antiserum reacted normally with the
M7 targets suggests that at least some degree of HLA-A2 H-Y association exists on
the surface of the M7 cells. Therefore, a structural variation in the M7 HLA-A2
molecule may have produced a loss of the restricting antigenic determinants recog-
nized as self by normal HLA-A2-restricted H-Y-specific CTL, but has not affected
the HLA-A2 H-Y structural epitope(s) recognized by the HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific
antibody. Another possible explanation for the failure of HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y
GOULMY ET AL. BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT 1571
CTL to lyse M7 target cells could be that there has been a qualitative or quantitative
alteration in the expression of the cell surface membrane HLA-A2 and H-Y deter-
minants, resulting in interference with CTL but not with antibody recognition. In
this context, it should be remembered that the antibody recognizes a MHC H-Y
complex on a part of the B cells (7), and the CTL, a similar complex on PHA-
stimulated T cells. However, the CTL were also tested against unstimulated T cells
and B cell lines of the donor M7 with negative results (data not shown). Taken
together, the most likely interpretation of our findings appears to be that MHC-
restricted anti-H-Y CTL and antibody can recognize different self HLA-A2 determi-
nants. The dichotomy observed between the self specificity of the anti-H-Y CTL and
the antibody responses of the same individual further supports the concept that the
HLA-A2 plus H-Y-specific receptor repertoire expressed by CTL and B cells may be
different.
Summary
Previous studies have shown that influenza virus-immune cytotoxic T lymphocytes
can recognize virus in conjunction with self HLA-A2 antigens. Nevertheless, the virus-
infected target cells from one HLA-A2-positive male donor (designated MT) could
not be lysed by the virus-immune cytotoxic lymphocytes from any HLA-A2-matched
unrelated donors. Although extensive serological analyses showed no difference be-
tween the HLA-A2 antigens of donor M7 and other HLA-A2-positive donors,
isoelectric focusing of the HLA-A2 molecule from donor M7 revealed a clear difference
in the heavy polypeptide chains when compared with the HLA-A2 molecules of other
donors.
The present study demonstrates that the HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y cytotoxic T
lymphocytes obtained from a female aplastic anaemia patient fail to lyse the male
M7 target cells, whereas the HLA-A2-restricted anti-H-Y antibodies from the same
patient react with the cells of donor M7. These results suggest that: (a) HLA-A2-
restricted anti-H-Y antibodies can recognize self determinants on the HLA-A2
molecule that are distinct from those that are recognized by HLA-A2-restricted anti-
H-Y cytotoxic T cells; and (b) HLA-restricted T and B cells may use different receptor
repertoires for the recognition of foreign antigens such as H-Y.
The authors wish to thank Dr. M. Fellous for providing the rat anti-H-Y serum; Dr. J. P. M.
Geraedts for the karyotype analyses; Dr. J. D'Amaro for critical reading of the manuscript; Dr.
M. J. Giphart, Dr. F. H. Bach, Dr. G. Shearer, and Dr. R. Levy for informative discussions;
and Mrs. A. Pesant for typing the manuscript. This study could not have been performed
without the generous blood donations of Mrs. Reethuis, Mrs. Wamelink, and Mr. Van Delft,
and the technical assistance of Ms. T. Goekoop.
Receivedfor publication 17 November 198l and in revisedform 17 February 1982.
References
1. McMichael, A. J., A. Ting, H. J. Zweerink, and B. A. Askonas. 1977. HLA-restriction of
cell-mediated lysis of influenza virus-infected human cells. Nature (Lond.). 270,524.
2. Biddison, W. E., S. M. Payne, G. M. Shearer, and S. Shaw. 1980. Human cytotoxie T cell
responses to trinitrophenyl hapten and influenza virus. Diversity of restriction antigens and
specificity of HLA-linked genetic regulation.J. Exp. Med. 152:204s.
1572 GOULMY ET AL. BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT
3. Biddison, W. E., F. E. Ward, G. M. Shearer, S. Shaw. 1980. The self determinant recognized
by human virus-immune T cells can be distinguished from the serologically-defined HLA
antigens.J. Immunol. 124:548.
4. Biddison, W. E., M. S. Krangel, J. L. Strominger, F. E. Ward, G. M. Shearer, and S. Shaw.
1980. Virus-immune cytotoxic T cells recognize structural differences between serologically
indistinguishable HLA-A2 molecules. Hum. lmmunol. 3:225.
5. Goulmy, E., A. Termijtelen, B. A. Bradley, and J. J. van Rood. 1977. Y-antigen killing by
women is restricted by HLA. Nature (Lond.). 266:544.
6. Goulmy, E., J. D. Hamilton, and B. A. Bradley. 1979. Anti-self HLA may be clonally
expressed. J. Exp. Med. 149:545.
7. Leeuwen, A. van, E. Goulmy, andJ. J. van Rood. 1979. Major histocompatibilitycomplex-
restricted antibody reactivity mainly, but not exclusively, directed against cells from male
donors.J. Exp. Med. 150:1075.
8. Goulmy, E. 1982. HLA-A, -B restriction ofcytotoxic T cells. In HLA Typing: Methodology
and Clinical Relevance. S. Ferrone and B. G. Solheim, editors. CRC Press, Inc., West Palm
Beach.
9. Goulmy, E., B. A. Bradley, Q. Lansbergen, and J. J. van Rood. 1978. The importance of
H-Y incompatibility in human organ transplantation. Transplantation (Baltimore).25:315.
10. Goulmy, E., E. Blokland, J. J. van Rood, D. Charmot, B. Malissen, and C. Mawas. 1980.
Production, expansion, and clonal analysis of T cells with specific HLA retricted male lysis.
J. Exp. Med. 152:182s.
11. Geraedts, J. P. M., and P. L. Pearson. I974. Fluorescent chromosome polymorphism:
frequencies and segregations in a Dutch population. Clin. Genet.6:247.
12. Geraedts, J. P. M., and H. L. Haak. 1976. Trisony 6 associated with aplastic anaemia.
Hum. Genet.35:113.
13. Fellous, M., E. Gfinther, R. Kemler, J. Wiels, J. L. Guenet, H. Jakob, and F. Jacob. 1978.
Association of the H-Y male antigen with 2-microglobulin on human lymphoid and
differentiated mouse teratocarcinoma cell lines.J. Exp. Med. 148:58.
