DECAY-ACCELERATING FACTOR IS PRESENT ON
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA
ERYTHROID PROGENITORS AND LOST DURING
ERYTHROPOIESIS IN VITRO
BY JEFFREY G. MOORE,* MICHAEL M. FRANK,*
HANS J. MI]LLER-EBERHARD,g AND NEAL S. YOUNG*
From the *Cell BiologySection, Clinical HematologyBranch, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute and the *Laboratoryof Clinical Investigation, National Institute ofAllergy and
Infectious Diseases,National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20205; and the
~Departmentof Immunology, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, LaJolla, California 92037
In the disease paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH), 1erythrocytes and
other blood elements have an acquired defect that renders them abnormally
sensitive to the lytic action of complement. A number of erythrocyte membrane
abnormalities have been shown to be associated with the PNH defect: (a) the
PNH cell's membrane is a better acceptor of activated C3 than is the membrane
of a normal cell (1); (b) the C3, once deposited on the membrane, is more stable
than C3 deposited on a normal cell (2, 3); (c) the PNH cell membrane may allow
more effective insertion of the late-acting lytic components than do normal cell
membranes (4).
Recently, two intrinsic cell membrane proteins have been reported to influence
the stability of complement enzymes and proteins deposited on normal human
erythrocytes. CR1, the receptor for the complement components C4b and/or
C3b, acts to control the degradation of these important protein fragments when
deposited on cell surfaces (reviewed in 5 and 6). Recent work has suggested that
erythrocytes (RBC) from patients with PNH have decreased red cell CR1 (7, 8);
however, we have reported a patient with absent erythrocyte CR1 without
evidence of a PNH-like red cell defect (8). A second protein, DAF, originally
described as a factor accelerating the decay of the classical pathway C3 convertase,
recently has been found to accelerate the destruction of the alternative pathway
convertase as well (8). Work from two laboratories has suggested that this protein
is partially or completely absent from the membranes of PNH RBC (8, 9). A
total of three patients has been reported with absent DAF in their PNH RBC
population. In addition, antibody to this protein has been reported to induce a
PNH-like abnormality of normal cells (8). Defective regulation of the membrane-
bound convertase would at least partly explain the abnormal sensitivity of PNH
RBC to complement-mediated lysis.
JAbbreviations used in this paper: BFU-E,erythroid burst-formingcell; CFU-E, late erythroid
colony-formingcell;DAF,decay-acceleratingfactor; FACS,fluorescence-activatedcellsorter; PBS,
phosphate-bufferedsaline;PNH, paroxysmalnocturnal hemoglobinuria;RBC,red bloodcell.
1182 J. ExP. MED.©The RockefellerUniversityPress • 0022-1007/85]10/1182/11 $1.00
Volume 162 October1985 1182-1192
MOORE ET AL. 1183
TABLE [
Clinical Status of PNH Patients
Percent Percent Percent
Patient Age Sex Status BM PNH DAF-
cellularity RBC RBC
3 33 F Moderate pancytopenia 80 33 43
4 40 M Mild thrombocytopenia; re- 40 17 40
current hemolytic crises
10 34 M Mild hemolysis; androgen Rx 75 28 29
14 30 F Moderate pancytopenia 70 22 10
15 26 M Moderate pancytopenia; re- 70 37 44
current hemolytic crises;
steroid Rx
17 26 M Recovered aplastic anemia; 10 19 21
mild pancytopenia
Patient numbers refer to a larger series of individuals with PNH to be reported.~ All patients had
positive Ham tests. PNH RBC were determined spectrophotometrically. DAF- RBC were determined
using a specific anti-DAF antiserum and flow microfluorometry.
We used a specific antiserum to DAF to study the generation of cells lacking
DAF during erythropoiesis. DAF expression was measured on the erythroid
progenitors, their in vitro progeny normoblasts, and the circulating RBC of the
PNH patients.
Materials and Methods
Patients and Controls. The clinical and laboratory features of the patients in the
current study are described elsewhere~ and the corresponding patient identification
numbers are used here. All six patients (Table I) had a positive Ham test, and variable
proportions of PNH cells could be measured in the circulation by a quantitative, spectro-
photometric analysis of complement lysis (10). All patients showed evidence of either
chronic or recurrent episodes of hemolysis or bone marrow failure manifested by pancy-
topenia. At the time of study one patient was receiving corticosteroids, and another,
anabolic steroids; four patients were untreated. Studies were reproduced in part on
separate occasions in two of the cases studied. Individuals who served as controls were
normal volunteers. Protocols for obtaining blood and bone marrow from patients and
volunteers were approved by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute institutional
review board.
Tissues. Peripheral blood was collected in preservative-free heparin (Forest Pharma-
ceuticals, Inc., St. Louis, MO), 1,500 U/30 ml. Bone marrow was aspirated from the
posterior iliac crest directly into syringes containing 1.5 ml Iscove's modification of
Dulbecco's medium with 100 U/ml of heparin or, in some cases, into 1.5 ml of EDTA in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to a final concentration of 10 raM. Mononuclear cells
were isolated by density gradient sedimentation on Ficoli (Lymphocyte Separation Me-
dium; Litton Bionetics, Inc., Charleston, SC).
Erythroid Colony Cultures. Bone marrow mononuclear cells were cultured to detect
the primitive erythroid progenitor, the erythroid burst-forming cell (BFU-E), and the
more mature progenitor, the erythroid colony-forming cell (CFU-E), in methylcellulose
as described.2 CFU-E-derived colonies were recognized by their characteristic morphology
at day 8; BFU-E-derived bursts consisted of a minimum of three clusters at day 18.
Erythroid colonies were removed from culture using a 10 #1 voi micropipette or a tapered
Pasteur pipette.
Moore, J. G., R. K. Humphries, M. M. Frank, and N. S. Young. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
1184 DAF LOSS DURING PNH ERYTHROPOIESIS
FlowMicrofluorometry. Flow microfluorometric analysis was performed on three dif-
ferent cell populations: peripheral blood erythrocytes, bone marrow mononuclear cells,
and normoblast progeny in colonies removed from methylcellulose cultures. The charac-
teristics of rabbit anti-DAF antibody used in these studies have been reported elsewhere
(8). The antiserum recognizes a 73,000 moi wt structure on all normal RBC that represents
the DAF molecule. Binding of this antiserum renders normal red blood cells PNH-iike,
making them susceptible to lysis by acidified serum. The antiserum was first absorbed
with PNH RBC membranes from patient 3 to remove the minor contaminating antibody
specificity directed against the complement receptor CRI. The fluorescein-conjugated
mouse anti-rabbit IgG (HyCIone Laboratories, Logan, UT) was repeatedly absorbed with
normal peripheral blood red cells to reduce nonspecific binding. RBC (2 × 107 to 6 ×
107), bone marrow mononuclear cells (4 × 106), or individual bursts (150-60,000+ cells
per colony) were incubated with anti-DAF diluted 1:10 in PBS for 30 rain at 4 °C, washed
twice in PBS, and incubated with anti-rabbit IgG at optimal concentrations, followed by
two final washes and suspension in PBS. Erythrocytes were analyzed and bone marrow
mononuclear cells were analyzed and sorted using a fluorescence-activated cell sorter
(FACS II; Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems, Mountain View, CA). For
technical reasons, the small numbers of cells that constituted mature erythroid colonies
were analyzed using an Epics V (Coulter Electronics, Hialeah, FL).
Erythroid progenitor cells have been reported to lack Fc receptors (11). In confirmation
of these findings, we found that an undetectable number of bone marrow mononuclear
cells bound aggregated human IgG and fluoresceinated anti-human IgG (data not shown).
To control for nonspecific binding of rabbit antibodies, human bone marrow mononuclear
cells from patient 14 were incubated with an irrelevant rabbit antiserum and fluorescein-
ated anti-rabbit IgG, sorted by flow cytometry, and the antibody-binding and -nonbinding
fractions cultured for the presence of erythroid progenitors. No hematopoietic colony-
forming cells were found in the positive fraction of cells (data not shown). In other
experiments, the same cell population incubated with fluoresceinated antibody alone
served as a control.
Results
Detection ofDAF- RBC in PNH Blood. To determine cell surface DAF expres-
sion, RBC were incubated with a specific rabbit antiserum to DAF followed by a
fluoresceinated anti-rabbit IgG antibody and analyzed using a FACS. Two
discrete populations of RBC were detected in all six patients with PNH (Fig. 1,
A and C). The less fluorescent population of DAF- cells coincided with the
negative control consisting of RBC exposed to the second antibody only (Fig.
1F). In contrast, a single, DAF + population of RBC was observed in normal
blood (Fig. 1E).
Relationship of Absence of DAF to Complement Sensitivity. The amount of im-
munoprecipitated DAF has been correlated with the relative sensitivity of differ-
ent populations of PNH RBC (9). To test the relationship between the absence
of DAF and the sensitivity of RBC to lysis in acidified serum, we measured the
size of the DAF + and DAF- RBC populations before and after complement lysis
(Figs. 1 and 2). In all patients tested, incubation in acidified serum under optimal
conditions for lysis of PNH cells resulted in reduction in the proportion of DAF-
cells; the average reduction in relative DAF- populations was 52 + 5%, as
calculated from the respective ratios of negative cells. In no case was the DAF-
population completely eliminated by prior acidified serum treatment.
DAF Expression of Erythroid Progenitor Cells. A variable proportion of PNH
bone marrow cells was DAF- (25-79%, x _+SEM = 40 -_+11%; normal range, 5-
20%, x + SEM = 9 + 5%). As hematopoietic stem cells are extremely infrequent
MOORE ET AL.
1.60
1.20 f
0.80 ~- 40%
0 . 4 0 ~
A.
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.40
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.40
B.
I .I
C. D.
i I I I
1000 0 200 400 600 800 1000
J
!A200 400 600 800
1185
CHANNEL NUMBER
FIGURE I. DAF expression on erythrocytes. Erythroyctes were incubated with a specific
rabbit antiserum to DAF followed by a fluoresceinated anti-rabbit IgG antibody, and then
analyzed by flow microfluorometry (see Materials and Methods). Two discrete populations of
red cells were detected in all six PNH patients; data from two representative patients are
shown in A and C. The population of DAF- cells coincided with the negative controls consisting
of red cells exposed only to the second antibody (E). Incubation of the patients' red cells in
acidified serum before analysis reduced the DAF- population (B, D). A single DAF+ population
of RBC was observed in normal blood (F).
50
40
_=. 3O
8
< 20
10
~ (3)
(4)
(151
Untreated Complement-treated
FIGURE 2. Relationship of the absence of DAF to complement sensitivity. To test the
relationship between the absence of DAF and the sensitivity of red cells to lysis in acidified
serum, the DAF+ and DAF- RBC populations were measured before and after complement-
mediated lysis. Data from six patients studied have been plotted schematically; patient numbers
are shown in parentheses. Incubation in heat-treated serum did not alter the proportion of
DAF- cells (data not shown).
1186 DAF LOSS DURING PNH ERYTHROPOIESIS
in the bone marrow, we tested for the presence of DAF on erythroid progenitors
using the FACS. PNH and normal bone marrow mononuclear cells labeled with
anti-DAF were separated by flow microfluorometry, and the DAF + and DAF-
populations each cultured in methylcellulose for the detection of erythroid
colonies. All erythroid colonies were grown from the DAF + populations of both
normal and PNH bone marrow mononuclear cells, indicating that the BFU-E
and CFU-E progenitor cells expresed the DAF antigen (Table II).
DAF Expression on Normoblasts that Develop In Vitro. Failure to detect a
discrete population of DAF- erythroid progenitors in PNH bone marrow sug-
gested that DAF might be lost during erythroid differentiation. To test for this
possibility, individual bursts, representing the progeny of a single erythroid
progenitor cell, were removed from culture and analyzed for DAF expression
(Fig. 3, Table III). The mature erythroid progeny of bursts grown from normal
bone marrow were a single population of DAF + cells (Fig. 3E). In contrast,
normoblasts from PNH bursts showed two discrete populations of cells by the
criterion of DAF positivity, and most cells were DAF-. Of the total progeny cells
in three PNH patients analyzed, 79 ___ 4% were DAF-. Only 3 of 27 bursts
analyzed, one in each patient, showed >50% DAF + or normal cells. The occur-
rence of DAF- progeny in colonies derived from DAF + progenitors indicated
TABLE II
DAF Expression on Erythroid Progenitors
Patients Progenitor
Colonies per 105
mononuclear ceils
DAF+ DAF-
10 CFU-E 41 0
BFU-E 3 0
14 CFU-E 17 0
BFU-E 7 0
15 CFU-E 29 0
BFU-E 23 0
17 CFU-E 89 0
BFU-E 20 0
Normals
1 CFU-E 146 0
BFU-E 116 0
2 CFU-E 92 0
BFU-E 87 0
Bone marrow mononuclear cells were separated by a FACS after labeling
with anti-DAF antiserum and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-
rabbit lgG. The DAF÷ and DAF- cells were plated in methylcellulose to
determine the proportion of erythroid progenitors (BFU-E and CFU-E)
in each population. To control for loss during sorting experiments, colo-
nies obtained were compared to cultures of unsorted cells for each of the
persons tested and there was no significant difference (recovery was 94 -+
11%).
MOORE ET AL.
7.90 A. B.
5.93 1.88
3.95 1.25 43%
6.05 3.85 97%
m 4.03 2.5"/
z
_ __4¢,~._ = i I i _ I I
E. 5.33 ~-
4.00 t 99%
, ,\
lOO o ,oo
1.12
0.84
0.56
0.28
,I I I
0 150 200 250
CHANNEL NUMBER
FIGURE 3. DAF expression or normoblasts that develop in vitro. Individual bursts, containing
mature normoblasts, were removed from methylcellutose culture of bone marrow mononuclear
cells on day 18 using a 10-#1 micropipette and incubated with a specific antiserum to DAF,
followed by a fluoresceinated anti-rabbit lgG, and then analyzed for DAF expression by flow
microfluorometry. A representative burst from a normal person contains mostly DAF+ cells
(E). The small number of apparently DAF- in the normal burst are probably artifactual,
resulting from the inability to completely remove methylcellulose by washing of this small
number of cells. In contrast, the normoblasts within individual bursts in PNH patients were
mostly DAF- (A, B, C, D), corresponding to cells exposed to second antibody alone (F).
1187
that DAF expression had been lost, and this PNH characteristic acquired, during
in vitro erythropoiesis.
The RBC of patients with the rare hematologic disorder termed HEMPAS
(hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with positive acidified serum test)
resemble PNH RBC in their sensitivity to antibody-mediated lysis by complement.
However, in contrast to DAF expression on cells from patients with PNH, DAF
expression on HEMPAS RBC, bone marrow mononuclear cells, and progeny
normoblasts in vitro was normal (data not shown).
Discussion
In these studies we have used flow microfluorometry in combination with a
highly specific polyclonal anti-DAF antibody to precisely quantitate the expres-
sion of DAF on circulating RBC, bone marrow mononuclear cells, erythroid
progenitors, and their in vitro progeny. Blood samples from normal individuals
showed only DAF+ (or normal) RBC. The DAF- RBC were partially eliminated
by prior incubation with acidified serum, confirming the abnormal sensitivity of
1188 DAF LOSS DURING PNH ERY'THROPO1ESIS
TABLE III
DAF Expression on Normoblastsfrom Individual Bursts
Percent PNH Percent normal
DAF+ (No. of DAF+ (No. of
cells) cells)
Patient 4 5 (1,829) Normal 1 71 (3,170)
9 (1,428) 80 (1,339)
12 (2,242) 84 (7,806)
20 (595) 86 (23,028)
21 (542) 89 (57,656)
21 (3,120) 96 (805)
24 (489)
26 (2,448)
33 (2,487)
83 (io,ooo+)
x-SEM 25+7% 84_+3%
n 10 6
Patient 14 9 Normal 2
11
24
31
33
33
64
73
81
89
x + SEM 19 _+7%
n 7
81 _+8%
2
Patient 17 3 (3,026) Normal 3
3 (19,274)
4 (1,027)
7 (2,964)
8(1,158)
10 (289)
14(1,161)
15 (256)
18 (188)
57 (939)
68 (714)
72 (2,545)
73 (4,203)
82 (4,203)
x + SEM 14- 5% 73 -+ 3%
n 10 4
Mature erythroid bursts were removed from methylcellulose culture and
subjected to flow microfluorometry after staining with anti-DAF antiserum
and anti-rabbit IgG fluorescein isothiocyanate. Results in three patients
and three concurrent normal controls are expressed as the proportion of
DAF+ ceils in each burst tested; shown in parentheses are the number of
normal blasts in each burst.
DAF- cells to acid hemolysis. The resistance of some DAF- RBC to complement
|ysis might be due to suboptimal conditions for complement-mediated lysis or
may reflect the presence of other fluid phase or RBC membrane-bound regu-
latory mechanisms.
MOORE ET AL. 1189
DAF was also found expressed on all of the bone marrow mononuclear cells
of normal individuals. In the PNH patients, both DAF+ and DAF- populations
of mononuclear cells were found in the bone marrow (DAF- PNH marrow cells,
x + SEM = 40 -+ 11%; 9 + 5%). Surprisingly, all of the erythroid progenitor
cells from both normals and PNH patients, as detected by clonogenic and highly
specific colony assays, were present in the DAF+ population, and therefore the
erythroid progenitor cell in PNH was phenotypically normal by the criterion of
DAF expression. The normoblast progeny obtained by in vitro culture of
erythroid progenitor cells from normal individuals were mostly DAF+ by flow
microfluorometric analysis. However, unlike the in vitro findings with normal
individuals, the phenotypically normal progenitors from PNH patients gave rise
to mostly DAF- or PNH-type normoblasts. Therefore, loss of DAF and acquisi-
tion of this PNH-associated defect were shown to be developmental phenomena.
A residual normal population of erythroid progenitors may have been indicated
by the single near-normal burst, containing mostly DAF+ normoblasts, in each
patient.
Our results using DAF as a marker of the PNH phenotype during in vitro
erythropoiesis confirm our earlier experiments using acidified serum lysis,z In
those studies, unlike Dessypris et al. (12), we were unable to detect a large
proportion of hematopoietic progenitors in PNH bone marrow susceptible to
acidified serum or isotonic sucrose lysis. Analogous to the results with DAF
expression, experiments using complement-mediated lysis showed that erythroid
progenitors that do not lyse in acidified serum give rise in vitro to normoblast
progeny that are abnormally susceptible to complement lysis. Therefore, by both
the DAF phenotype and the functional complement sensitivity defect, phenotyp-
ically normal progenitor cells from PNH bone marrow generate PNH-type
progeny cells in vitro.
The loss of DAF and acquisition of complement sensitivity during erythropoi-
esis by PNH progenitor cells is analogous to a few previously described alterations
in cell function and membrane phenotype detectable in vitro. For example,
synthesis of fetal hemoglobin as the major globin species is a capacity of cells
derived from the more primitive erythroid progenitor, the BFU-E, and not of
normoblasts grown from the later progenitor, the CFU-E (13). Similarly, the
HLA-DR antigen is expressed on BFU-E but is not present on CFU-E or more
mature erythroid cells (14). However, the loss during differentiation of a cell
surface marker and related functional capacity in association with a specific
disease is, thus far, unique to PNH.
Only one burst of ~ 10 analyzed in each PNH patient contained mainly normal
or DAF+ progeny. In the patients' blood, however, the majority of RBC were
normal, with PNH cells representing 17-37% of the total cells. Thus, the
proportion of PNH RBC detected in the circulation of patients was always much
lower than the proportion in the bone marrow, presumably reflecting the
selective destruction in the bone marrow of both mature and immature erythroid
cells, perhaps by a complement-mediated mechanism. These results are consistent
with a model in which all the erythroid progenitors in PNH are phenotypically
normal by the criteria of DAF positivity and resistance to complement, but only
a minority (-10%) are genotypically normal, as reflected by their ability to give
1190 DAF LOSS DURING PNH ERYTHROPOIESIS
rise to entirely normal progeny. The genotypically abnormal PNH cells produce
the majority of progeny in tissue culture, either because they have a growth
advantage or, more likely, because their progeny are not lysed as they are in the
bone marrow of a patient. The patient's erythron, therefore, may be dependent
for maintenance on a normal stem cell pool of very limited size. In another
report, 2we measured very low numbers of progenitor cells and also a remarkably
high cell cycling rate of PNH bone marrow BFU-E, even in comparison with
other hemolytic diseases. The demands placed on normal progenitor cells indi-
cated by this rapid turnover and small pool size may provide the laboratory
explanation for the close clinical relationship between PNH and aplastic anemia.
Based on studies of a limited number of PNH patients heterozygous at the
G6PD locus (15, 16), the generation of the PNH population of RBC has been
characterized as clonal. Our data clearly do not contradict such a somatic cell
genetic defect. In other clonal erythropoietic disorders, the presence of function-
ally distinct red cell populations also has not correlated with similarly distinct
populations of progenitor cells. For example, individual primitive erythroid stem
cells in polycythemia vera generate both erythropoietin-independent as well as
normally erythropoietin-dependent progeny (17). Studies of DAF synthesis in
developing erythroid cells should permit a more precise localization of the defect
in PNH cells and perhaps allow modulation of DAF expression both in vitro and
in vivo.
Summary
A glycoprotein that regulates the deposition of C3b on the erythrocyte surface,
called decay-accelerating factor or DAF, is absent from the red blood cells (RBC)
of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH), explaining in part
their abnormal sensitivity to complement. We used a specific antiserum to DAF,
flow microfluorometry, and clonogenic assays for erythroid progenitor cells to
study PNH erythropoiesis in vitro. By fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis,
all RBC from normal individuals are DAF+. In contrast, the RBC of six patients
with PNH showed discrete populations of DAF- cells (10-44%; x + SEM = 31
_+ 6%). The DAF- RBC population was partly eliminated by prior acidified
serum lysis. To determine whether erythropoietic progenitors expressed DAF,
bone marrow cells were sorted by flow microfluorometry and the separated
DAF + and DAF- populations then cultured in vitro. In two normal individuals,
but also in six patients with PNH, erythroid colonies formed only from cells in
the DAF+ fraction. However, a variable proportion of the normoblast progeny
of these DAF+ progenitor cells from patients with PNH was DAF-. Individual
bursts removed from cultures of PNH bone marrow showed two discrete popu-
lations by fluorescence; the majority of normoblasts were DAF-, only 3 of 27
individual bursts bad >50% DAF+ cells, and in three patients, DAF- normoblasts
averaged 79%. In contrast, the progeny of individual bursts from normal
individuals comprised a unimodal DAF+ population. In each PNH patient, one
normal burst (>80% DAF+ normoblasts) was detected, possibly reflecting a
normal residual population of erythroid progenitors. By the criterion of DAF
expression, there was no evidence of separate populations of normal and PNH
MOORE ET AL. 1191
type progenitor cells. The phenotypically normal erythroid progenitors of PNH
bone marrow acquire the PNH characteristics during differentiation in vitro.
We are grateful for the technical assistance in flow microfluorometry provided by Mr.
Alessio Pallini. Mrs. Imogene Surrey provided expert secretarial assistance. This work
partially fulfills the Ph.D. requirements at George Washington University forJ. G. Moore.
Receivedfor publication 19 March 1985 and in revisedform 19June 1985.
References
1. Rosse, W. F., G. L. Logue, J. Adams, and J. H. Crookston. 1974. Mechanism of
immune ]ysis of the red cells in hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with a
positive acidified serum test and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglohinuria.J. Clin. Invest.
53:31.
2. Rosse, W. F., J. P. Adams, and A. M. Thorpe. 1974. The population of cells in
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria of intermittent sensitivity to complement
lysis. Br. J. Haematol. 28:181.
3. Parker, C.J., P.J. Baker, and W. F. Rosse. 1982. Increased enzymatic activity of the
alternative pathway convertase when bound to the erythrocytes of paroxysmal noc-
turnal hemoglobinuria.J. Clin. Invest. 69:337.
4. Packman, C. H., S. I. Rosenfeld, D. E. Jenkins, R. A. Thiem, andJ. P. Leddy. 1977.
Complement lysis of human erythrocytes. Differing susceptibility of two types of
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria cells to C56-9. J. Clin. Invest. 64:428.
5. Fearon, D. T., and W. W. Wong. 1983. Complement ligand-receptor interactions
that mediate biological responses. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1:243.
6. Berger, M., T. A. Gaither, and M. M. Frank. 1983. Complement receptors. Clin.
Immunol. 1:471.
7. Pangburn, M. K., R. D. Schreiber, J. S. Trombold, and H. J. Muller-Eberhard. 1983.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: deficiency in factor H-like functions of the
abnormal erythrocytes.J. Exp. Med. 157:1971.
8. Pangburn, M. K., R. D. Schreiber, and H.J. Muller-Eberhard. 1983. Deficiency of
an erythrocyte membrane protein with complement regulatory activity in paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 80:5430.
9. Nicholson-Weller, A.,J. P. March, S. I. Rosenfeld, and K. F. Austen. 1983. Affected
erythrocytes of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria are deficient in
the complement regulatory protein, decay accelerating factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 80:5066.
10. Rosse, W. F. 1977. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. In Hematology. W. J.
Williams, E. Beutler, A. J. Ersley, and R. W. Rundles, editors. McGraw-Hill Book
Co., New York. Second edition. 560-570.
11. Pistoria, V., R. Ghio, A. Nocera, A. Leprini, A. Perata, and M. Ferrarini. 1985.
Large granular lymphocytes have a promoting activity on human peripheral blood
erythroid burst-forming units. Blood. 65:464.
12. Dessypris, E. N., D. A. Clark, L. C. McKee, Jr., and S. B. Krantz. 1983. Increased
sensitivity to complement of erythroid and myeloid progenitors in paroxysmal noc-
turnal hemoglobinuria. N. Engl. J. Med. 309:690.
Papayannopoulou, T., M. Brice, and G. Stamatoyannopoulos. 1977. Hemoglobin F
synthesis in vitro: evidence for control at the level of primitive erythroid stem cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74:2923.
14. Sieff, C., D. Bicknell, G. Caine, G. Lam, and M. F. Greaves. 1982. Changes in cell
surface antigen expression during hemopoietic differentiation. Blood. 60:703.
13.
1192 DAF LOSS DURING PNH ERYTHROPOIESIS
15. Oni, S. B., B. O. Osunkoya, and L. Luzzato. 1970. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglo-
binuria: evidence for monoclonal origin of abnormal red cells. Blood. 36:145.
16. Rosse, W. F. 1980. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria--present status and future
prospects. West. J. Med. 132:219.
17. Cashman,J., D. Henkleman, K. Humphries, C. Eaves, and A. Eaves. 1983. Individual
BFU-E in polycythemic vera produce both erythropoietin dependent and independ-
ent progeny. Blood. 61:876.
