TheJournalofExperimentalMedicine
ARTICLE
© 2008 Tang et al.
The Rockefeller University Press $30.00
J. Exp. Med. Vol. 205 No. 7 1611-1619 www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20080297
1611
A proper level of apoptosis is required for the
maintenance of normal hematopoietic homeo-
stasis by removing aged or abnormal cells. The
balance between proapoptotic and antiapop-
totic mechanisms is tightly controlled in hema-
topoietic cells, including hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) and progenitor cells (HSC/Ps) by
intrinsic signals that are subject to regulation by
signals emanating from the BM microenviron-
ment (1–3). Hematopoietic cytokines such as
stem cell factor, IL-3, and thrombopoietin pro-
vide a survival signal for hematopoietic cells (4, 5)
by inducing the activation of PI3K/AKT (6)
and NF-␬B (7) signaling, and by up-regulating
antiapoptotic genes, such as members of the
Bcl2 family (1–3). Proinflammatory cytokines,
including TNF-␣ (8) and IL-1␤ (9), as well as
Fas ligand (10), all mediate dual signals for
HSC/P functions. A negative signal induces
programmed cell death and/or differentiation,
whereas a positive signal promotes proliferation
and survival. Disruption of this balance will re-
sult in hematopoietic disorders, including BM
failure and leukemia (1–3).
TGF-␤–activated kinase 1 (TAK1) is a key
mediator of stress and proinflammatory signals
(11). The proinflammatory cytokines induce
both proapoptotic and antiapoptotic signals
in their target cells. TAK1 mediates the pro-
survival signal of the proinflammatory cytokines
by inducing the nuclear localization of NF-␬B
and the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases
(JNKs)/AP1 (11), whereas the proapoptotic sig-
nal is mediated by the activation of the caspase
cascade (12). Studies have demonstrated that
TAK1-transduced signals from TCRs and B cell
receptors, as well as antigen stimulation, play
a role in T and B cell activation and survival,
T regulatory cell development, and B cell–
mediated innate immunity (13–16). The role of
CORRESPONDENCE
J. Zhang:
jzhang@lumc.edu
Abbreviations used: APC, al-
lophycocyanin; CP, committed
hematopoietic progenitor; Hb,
hemoglobin; HSC, hematopoi-
etic stem cell; HSC/P, HSC
and progenitor cell; JNK, c-Jun
N-terminal kinase; LK,
lineageϪSca1Ϫc-kit+ cell; LSK,
lineageϪSca1+c-kit+ cell; plt,
platelet number; polyI:C, poly-
inosinic:polycytidylic acid;
TAK1, TGF-␤–activated kinase 1;
TNC, total nucleated cell num-
ber; TUNEL, terminal deoxy-
nucleotidyltransferase-mediated
UTP end-labeling; WBC, white
blood cell.
M. Tang, X. Wei, and Y. Guo contributed equally
to this paper.
X. Wei’s present address is Henan Tumor Hospital, 127
Dongming Road, Zhengzhou 450008, China.
Y. Guo’s present address is Dept. of Respiratory and Molec-
ular Biology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, China.
The online version of this article contains supplemental material.
TAK1 is required for the survival of
hematopoietic cells and hepatocytes in mice
Minghui Tang,1 Xudong Wei,1 Yinshi Guo,1 Peter Breslin,1,3 Shubin Zhang,1
Shanshan Zhang,1 Wei Wei,1 Zhenbiao Xia,1 Manuel Diaz,1 Shizuo Akira,4
and Jiwang Zhang1,2
1Oncology Institute, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, and 2Pathology Department, Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL 60153
3Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60626
4Department of Host Defense and Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology (ERATO), Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
Transforming growth factor ␤–activated kinase 1 (TAK1), a member of the MAPKKK fam-
ily, is a key mediator of proinflammatory and stress signals. Activation of TAK1 by proin-
flammatory cytokines and T and B cell receptors induces the nuclear localization of nuclear
factor ␬B (NF-␬B) and the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/AP1 and P38,
which play important roles in mediating inflammation, immune responses, T and B cell
activation, and epithelial cell survival. Here, we report that TAK1 is critical for the survival
of both hematopoietic cells and hepatocytes. Deletion of TAK1 results in bone marrow (BM)
and liver failure in mice due to the massive apoptotic death of hematopoietic cells and
hepatocytes. Hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors were among those hematopoietic
cells affected by TAK1 deletion–induced cell death. This apoptotic cell death is autono-
mous, as demonstrated by reciprocal BM transplantation. Deletion of TAK1 resulted in the
inactivation of both JNK and NF-␬B signaling, as well as the down-regulation of expression
of prosurvival genes.
1612 TAK1 IN HEMATOPOIETIC AND HEPATIC CELLS | Tang et al.
RESULTS
TAK1 expression and activity in hematopoietic cells
To study whether TAK1 is involved in normal hematopoie-
sis, we first examined whether TAK1 is expressed in hemato-
poietic cells by using quantitative RT-PCR assays. TAK1
knockout BM cells were used as a negative control. We
found that TAK1 RNA is expressed in all lineages of
hematopoietic cells, including HSCs (lineageϪSca1+c-kit+
cells [LSKs]), committed hematopoietic progenitors (CPs)
(lineageϪSca1Ϫc-kit+ cells [LKs]), mature myeloid cells
(Gr1+), B cells (B220+), B cell progenitors (B220+c-kit+),
nucleated erythroid cells (Ter119+), and T cells (CD3+). Its
level of expression is also increased in progenitors including
CPs and B cell progenitors (Fig. 1 I). Furthermore, by using
a flow cytometry–based intracellular protein detection assay,
we found that the expression of TAK1 protein in c-kit+
HSC/Ps (including HSCs and CPs) and Gr1+ myeloid cells
was higher than that in B220+ B cells (Fig. 1, A–C); yet,
TAK1 activity (indicated by p-TAK1 levels) (20) is higher in
TAK1 in hematopoiesis is still not fully understood. Although
previous studies suggested that proinflammatory cytokines
might play a negative role in hematopoiesis and contribute
to some of the BM failure syndromes (17, 18), recent stud-
ies demonstrate that HSC/Ps are resistant to proinflammatory
and stress signal–induced apoptosis (10, 19). We propose that
TAK1 is expressed and activated in hematopoietic cells, in-
cluding HSC/Ps, thus protecting them from apoptosis.
The TAK1-null phenotype is lethal early in embryonic
development (11, 13), impeding exploration of the role of
TAK1 in adult hematopoiesis. To investigate whether TAK1
plays a role in the regulation of normal hematopoietic homeo-
stasis, we generated inducible TAK1 knockout mice. We found
that inducing the deletion of TAK1 in adult mice results in BM
and liver failure due to massive cell-autonomous apoptotic
death of hematopoietic cells, including HSC/Ps, and hepato-
cytes. Further study demonstrated that TAK1 mediates the sur-
vival signal in HSC/Ps via activation of JNK/AP1 and NF-␬B
signal pathways and up-regulation of survival gene expression.
Figure 1. TAK1 is expressed and activated in hematopoietic cells, including HSC/Ps. BM cells were collected into lyse/fix buffer immediately after
the mice were killed to fix the BM cells and lyse the RBCs simultaneously. BM-nucleated cells were washed three times with PBS containing 5% FBS to
completely remove all traces of the lyse/fix buffer. The cells were stained with cell surface markers as indicated and then permeabilized using permeabili-
zation buffer for TAK1 and p-TAK1 staining. (A–C) High level of TAK1 protein expression in c-kit+ hematopoietic cells and Gr1+ myeloid cells, but low ex-
pression in B220+ B cells. (D–F) TAK activity (shown here by p-TAK1 levels) is higher in c-kit+ hematopoietic cells (including B220+c-kit+ B cell progenitors,
red arrow in F). (G and H) No obvious difference in TAK1 expression in LSK-HSC/Ps and LK-CPs, but increased TAK1 activity in LK-CPs compared with LSK-
HSC/Ps. (I) TAK1 is expressed in all lineages of hematopoietic cells, including HSC/Ps, as shown by quantitative RT-PCR. BM cells from TAK1 knockout mice
(4 d after mutation induction) were used as negative controls. Compared with differentiated cells, including Gr1+ myeloid cells, B220+ B cells, Ter119+-
nucleated erythoid cells, and CD3+ T cells, TAK1 RNA expression was significantly higher in LK-CPs and B cell progenitors (B220+c-kit+). Both * and **
are P < 0.01. *, compared with TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM cells; **, compared with mature hematopoietic cells, including Gr1+, B220+, and CD3+ cells.
JEM VOL. 205, July 7, 2008
ARTICLE
1613
by Cre-mediated recombination. Mx1Cre mice are an inter-
feron-inducible Cre mouse line in which Cre expression can
be induced at any time after birth by injecting the mice with
the interferon inducer polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (polyI:
C) (21). Mx1Cre-mediated recombination of loxp sites is
very efficient in hematopoietic cells from the BM, spleen,
and thymus, including HSC/Ps as well as liver cells (21).
By proper mating, we generated TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ, heterozygous
(Mx1Cre+TAK1fx/+, TAK1+/Ϫ hereafter), and WT control
mice (Mx1CreϪTAK1fx/fx or Mx1CreϪTAK1fx/+, WT hereaf-
ter) in the same litter. Therefore, all of the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice
analyzed had both TAK1+/Ϫ and WT littermate controls. At
6–8 wk of age, the mice (including TAK1+/Ϫ and WT con-
trols) were injected with polyI:C either once or three times
(once every other day) to induce the TAK1 deletion. To
control for the possibility that polyI:C injection itself might
c-kit+ HSC/Ps than in differentiated Gr1+ myeloid cells and
B220+ B lymphocytes (Fig. 1, D–F). We further separated
HSCs and CPs by sca1 and c-kit staining followed by lineage
depletion and found that, although TAK1 protein levels were
comparable in HSCs and CPs, p-TAK1 levels were higher in
CPs than in HSCs (Fig. 1, G and H). Interestingly, we also
found that among B220+ cells, B cell progenitors displayed
higher levels of TAK1 activity (Fig. 1 F).
Generation of inducible TAK1؊/؊ mice
To study whether TAK1 plays a role in hematopoiesis, we
generated inducible TAK1 knockout mice (Mx1Cre+TAK1fx/fx,
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ hereafter) by crossing TAK1fx/fx mice with
Mx1Cre mice. The second exon of the TAK1 gene (which
encodes the enzyme’s catalytic domain) is flanked with two
loxp sites in the TAK1fx/fx mice (13) and thus can be deleted
Figure 2. Hepatocyte apoptosis and liver failure in TAK1؊/؊ mice. TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice were killed on day 8 after the first polyI:C injection. (A) Both jaun-
dice and ascites were observed in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice. Livers of the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice were pale and jaundiced (left specimen, arrowhead) compared with TAK1+/Ϫ
control (right specimen, arrow). Nuclear condensation due to apoptosis was observed in >30–50% of hepatocytes of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice as shown by hema-
toxylin and eosin staining of liver sections (B), which is confirmed by TUNEL staining (D). Liver sections from TAK1+/Ϫ mice were used as controls.
(C and E) Bars, 100 μm.
1614 TAK1 IN HEMATOPOIETIC AND HEPATIC CELLS | Tang et al.
notion, we observed that the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipient mice that
received normal BM did not show any signs of bleeding but
did show evidence of significant hepatocyte apoptosis (not
depicted). These mice also died 8–10 d after their first polyI:C
injection. This also suggests that the bleeding observed in the
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice was not due to the liver defects and was not
the cause of mortality.
BM failure in TAK1 knockout mice due to the apoptotic
loss of hematopoietic cells
To investigate whether TAK1 deletion affects hematopoiesis,
we first examined white blood cell (WBC) counts, platelet
number (plt), RBC counts, and hemoglobin (Hb) concentra-
tions at 8 d after the first polyI:C injection. We found that
both WBCs and plt were significantly reduced in the
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice (Fig. 3, A and B). We believe that the de-
crease in plt counts was the reason for the bleeding seen in
multiple organs in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice because their plt counts
were <200 × 109/ml. Human patients showing such severe
thrombocytopenia typically present with severe bleeding.
However, RBCs and Hb were slightly lower in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
than in WT and TAK1+/Ϫ controls (not depicted). These
data suggest that TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ results in a pancytopenic effect.
affect hematopoiesis, at least one mouse in each litter was
maintained without injection and served as noninjected con-
trol. All mice were checked daily for phenotypic changes.
Liver failure in inducible TAK1 knockout mice
due to increased hepatocyte apoptosis
We found that all the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice died within 8–10 d af-
ter the first polyI:C injection, regardless of whether they
were injected once or three times; however, the TAK1+/Ϫ
mice showed no significant defects. By careful dissection of
the mice, we found that all of the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice had both
jaundice and ascites (Fig. 2 A). The livers of the knockout
mice were relatively smaller and stiff, and they appeared a
pale, jaundiced color. Destruction of normal liver histological
structure was evident upon microscopic analysis. The nuclei
of >30–50% of the hepatocytes were condensed because of
apoptosis, which was demonstrated by terminal deoxynucle-
otidyltransferase-mediated UTP end-labeling (TUNEL)
staining (Fig. 2, B–E). Although, >30% of the mice showed
intestinal, urinary bladder, and/or gallbladder hemorrhaging
(not depicted), we believe that acute liver failure, as a conse-
quence of massive hepatocyte apoptosis, was the major cause
of mortality among the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice. In support of this
Figure 3. Pancytopenia and BM failure in TAK1؊/؊ mice. Peripheral blood, BM, spleens, and thymuses were collected on day 8 after the first polyI:C
injection. WBC count (A), plt in peripheral blood (B), and nucleated cell number in the BM (C), spleen (D), and thymus (E) were measured in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ,
TAK1+/Ϫ, and WT mice, as well as in noninjected control mice. BM sections from TAK1+/Ϫ (F) and TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ (G) mice at day 8 after the first polyI:C injection
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. BM sections from TAK1+/Ϫ (H) and TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ (I) mice at day 4 after the first polyI:C injection were stained with
TUNEL to display the apoptotic cells (indicated by red color staining). Bars, 100 μm. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
JEM VOL. 205, July 7, 2008
ARTICLE
1615
mus, which was 1/20 to 1/100 of the number of TNCs ob-
tained from each control mouse thymus.
Histological sectioning showed that BM from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
mice was hypocellular and BM structure was destroyed, simi-
lar to the myelodepletion phenotype seen in mice after high-
dose chemotherapy or irradiation (Fig. 3, E and G). These
data suggest that the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice had BM failure. In situ
TUNEL staining demonstrated that the BM failure of the
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice was due to the massive apoptotic death of
hematopoietic cells (Fig. 3 I).
Because no significant difference was observed between
TAK+/Ϫ and WT mice, and similar to TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice,
TAK1+/Ϫ mice also express Cre after polyI:C injection, we
considered TAK1+/Ϫ mice to be better controls than WT
mice. Therefore we used TAK1+/Ϫ mice as controls in most
of our subsequent studies.
HSC/Ps are among those hematopoietic cells affected
by TAK1 deletion–induced apoptosis in TAK1؊/؊ mice
To investigate whether HSC/Ps were affected in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
mice, we first examined HSC/P numbers by cell surface
marker staining and flow cytometric analysis. We found that
both LSK-HSCs and LK-CPs were significantly reduced in
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice (Fig. 4, A–D). The obvious reduction in
HSCs and CPs could be observed at day 4 after the first dose
of polyI:C injection (Fig. 4 B). There were almost no HSCs
nor CPs detectable at day 8. The reduction in HSC/Ps in
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice was confirmed by CFU assay (Fig. 4 E). We
found that the CFU number (counted at day 12 after seeding,
which reflects the number of functional HSC/Ps) was signifi-
cantly reduced in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM. Upon further analysis using
annexin V staining, we found a three- to fivefold increase in
apoptosis (shown as annexin V+) in the c-kit+ population
(consisting of HSCs and CPs) from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice compared
To study whether the pancytopenia in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice
was due to BM hematopoietic defects, we collected BM,
spleens, and thymuses from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and control mice at
day 8 after the first polyI:C injection. The total nucleated
cell number (TNC) of BM, spleens, and thymuses were ana-
lyzed. We found that the TNC of BM, spleens, and thymuses
was significantly decreased in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice compared with
TAK1+/Ϫ and WT control mice, as well as noninjected
control mice (Fig. 3, C–E, and Fig. S1, which is available at
http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20080297/DC1).
Although the TNCs in the BM, spleens, and thymuses in
the polyI:C-injected groups were more diverse from mouse
to mouse, shown by the relatively larger standard deviations,
no significant differences were observed between TAK1+/Ϫ
and WT, the latter being comparable to noninjected con-
trol mice. This indicates that heterozygous TAK1 deletion
did not affect hematopoiesis in the mice. It also suggests that
polyI:C injection itself likely contributes negligibly to the
phenotypes we observed in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice. This notion
was supported by cell surface staining and flow cytometric
analysis. We found that there were no significant differences
among TAK1+/Ϫ, WT, and noninjected control mice in the
percentage of myeloid cells and T and B lymphocytes in
all hematopoietic tissues examined including the peripheral
blood, BM, and spleen. However, in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice, sig-
nificant increases in T cell percentage were consistently ob-
served in the peripheral blood, BM, and spleen (the absolute
T cell number in all these tissues was still dramatically lower
than controls; Fig. S2, available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/
content/full/jem.20080297/DC1). We believe that the in-
crease in T cell percentage in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice has noth-
ing to do with thymic T cell production because the thymus
gland in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice was very small. Only 1–4 × 106
TNCs could be obtained from each TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mouse thy-
Figure 4. HSC/Ps are affected by TAK1 deletion–induced apoptotic cell death in TAK1؊/؊ mice. BM was collected from TAK1+/Ϫ and TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
mice on days 4, 6, and 8 after the first polyI:C injection. After lysis of RBCs, BM-nucleated cells were stained with cell surface markers and analyzed by
flow cytometry for HSCs and CPs. Progressive loss of HSCs and CPs in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mouse BM is shown by lineage marker and Sca1 c-kit staining (B–D).
Day 8 TAK1+/Ϫ BM cells were used as a control (A). (E) Progressive reduction of colony-forming ability of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM cells after TAK1 deletion. (F) BM
cells were collected from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and TAK1+/Ϫ mice 16 h after a single polyI:C injection, and apoptosis was checked by annexin V staining. *, P < 0.05;
**, P < 0.01.
1616 TAK1 IN HEMATOPOIETIC AND HEPATIC CELLS | Tang et al.
the recipients were given three polyI:C injections, once ev-
ery other day, and the livers, peripheral blood, spleens, and
BM were harvested for analysis on day 8 after the last injec-
tion. We found significant apoptosis of hepatocytes in all
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients (not depicted). However, the normal
BM hematopoiesis in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients suggested that the
TAK1 deletion BM microenvironment has a normalizing
hematopoietic supportive function (Fig. 5, C and D). Con-
sistent with this observation, we found that plt counts and Hb
concentrations in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients were comparable
to those of the TAK1+/Ϫ recipients (Fig. 5, E–H). Further-
more, we found that the livers of the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients
that had received WT BM had obvious myeloid cell infiltra-
tion (not depicted). The WBC counts, neutrophil percent-
ages, and neutrophil/lymphocyte ratios were significantly
increased in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients compared with the
TAK1+/Ϫ recipients (Fig. 5 E and not depicted). We believe
that the increase in WBC counts and neutrophils as well as
the myeloid infiltration of liver tissue in the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recip-
ients were due to inflammatory reactions induced by hepato-
cyte apoptosis.
DISCUSSION
TAK1 was originally identified as a key regulator of TGF-␤/
bone morphogenic protein signals (23). It is known to play
an important role in early embryonic development (13).
TAK1-null mice die at embryonic day 11.5 with significant
with control mice at 16 h after a single polyI:C injection.
Upon further analysis by separating HSCs from CPs within
the c-kit+ population, we found apoptosis among both of
these cell types to be significantly increased (Fig. 4 F) com-
pared with such cells taken from control mice.
Hematopoietic cells of TAK1؊/؊ mice show intrinsic defects
Previously, we have found that Mx1Cre can mediate gene
deletion in both hematopoietic and BM stromal cells (22).
To address whether the defects of hematopoietic cells in
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice were intrinsic to the cells, reciprocal BM
transplantations were performed. We transplanted TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
BM cells (before deletion was induced) into lethally irradi-
ated syngeneic WT recipients. Because in these mice the BM
microenvironment is normal, we were able to test the func-
tion of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ hematopoietic cells within this normal BM
microenvironment. 1 mo after transplantation, the recipients
received polyI:C injections every other day for a total of
three injections and were killed for analysis on day 8 after the
first injection. We found pancytopenia and BM failure in
the recipients that had received the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM; however, the
TAK1+/Ϫ BM recipients were normal (Fig. 5, A, B, and E–H).
This suggests that the hematopoietic cells from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ
mice have cell-intrinsic defects that prohibit their survival in
a normal BM microenvironment. We also transplanted BM
from WT mice into the lethally irradiated TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipi-
ents (before deletion induction). 1 mo after transplantation,
Figure 5. Cell-autonomous defects of TAK1؊/؊ HSC/Ps. Reciprocal transplantation assay was performed by transplantation of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM (before
mutation was induced) into lethally irradiated WT mice (A) and, reciprocally, WT BM into lethally irradiated TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice (before mutation was induced; C).
TAK1 deletion was induced 1 mo after transplantation by injecting the recipient mice with polyI:C every other day for a total of three injections. TAK1+/Ϫ
mice were used as respective controls in this experiment (B and D). On day 8 after the first polyI:C injection, recipient mice were killed for analysis. BM
sections from the recipients showed that TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ HSC/Ps failed to grow in the WT BM environment (A), whereas the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM microenvironment was
able to support the growth of WT HSC/Ps (C). (E–H) Significant reduction of WBC counts and plt in peripheral blood, and nucleated cells in the BM and
spleen in WT recipients that received TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM. (E) Obvious increase in WBC counts in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ recipients that received WT BM. (I and J) Equal numbers
of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM cells (CD45.2+, before mutation was induced) were mixed with WT (CD45.1+) BM cells and transplanted into lethally irradiated WT
(CD45.1+) recipients. 6 wk after transplantation, TAK1 mutation was induced by injecting the recipient mice with polyI:C every other day for a total of
three injections. TAK1+/Ϫ BM cells were transplanted in parallel as a control. The contribution of the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ BM HSC/Ps to hematopoiesis in the recipient
mice (shown as CD45.2+ percentage in peripheral blood) was significantly lower than that of control BM HSC/Ps. Data shown in I and J were analyzed on
day 15 after the first polyI:C injection. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
JEM VOL. 205, July 7, 2008
ARTICLE
1617
Studies using tissue-specific TAK1 knockout mice have
demonstrated that TAK1, mediating B cell receptor signaling
and antigen responses in B cells and TCR signaling in T cells,
is essential for B cell–mediated innate immunity and both
peripheral T cell and T-regular cell activation, survival, and
function (13–16). However, in these knockout mice, signifi-
cant reductions of nucleated cells in the thymus and of B cells
in the BM and spleen were not observed (13–16). In our in-
ducible TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice, we found significant reductions in
the numbers of all lineages of hematopoietic cells, including
myeloid cells and B cells and T cells in the spleen and BM.
We also found a dramatic reduction in thymus size due to
decreased numbers of thymocytes (Fig. 3). We speculate that
c-kit+ progenitors might possibly rely more on TAK1 for
their survival, and that these were not targeted in the B cell–
and T cell–specific knockout mice. In support of this idea,
our data showed higher TAK1 activity in HSC/Ps and B cell
progenitors than mature myeloid and B cells. But further
study will be needed to establish this definitively. Whether
cells with higher TAK1 activity are more sensitive to TAK1
deletion–induced apoptosis than cells with lower TAK1 ac-
tivity will require further detailed investigation.
Both JNK and NF-␬B have been found to be activated in
many malignant disorders and inflammatory diseases (29, 30).
We predict that TAK1, which is upstream of JNK and NF-
␬B, might also be involved in these disorders. Further study
may also reveal whether the BM failure phenotype seen in
our TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice might also be involved in some BM fail-
ure syndromes such as aplastic anemia. Further examination
of TAK1 expression profiles and activities in clinical samples
could be expected to provide new insights into the important
roles TAK1 might play in these diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of inducible TAK1 knockout (TAK1؊/؊) mice. TAK1fx/fx
mice were described previously (13). Exon-2 of the TAK1 gene was flanked
by two loxp sites. Mx1Cre mice were purchased from JAX Laboratories (21).
All mice were maintained according to the standards set forth in the National
Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of Animals in the animal
facility at Loyola University Medical Center in a CD57B6 background. All
experiments performed on animals were approved in advance by Loyola
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol no.
108832). By crossing Mx1Cre mice with TAK1fx/fx mice and then backcross-
ing, we generated interferon-inducible TAK1 knockout mice, including
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ, TAK1+/Ϫ (heterozygous, Mx1Cre+TAK1fx/+) and WT (WT,
MX1CreϪTAK1fx/fx or MX1CreϪTAK1fx/+) animals in the same litter, so that
all the TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice analyzed had proper controls. 6–8 wk after birth, one
mouse from each litter was maintained without injection as noninjected
control, and all other mice, including TAK1+/Ϫ and WT controls, were in-
jected with 5 μg/g body weight of polyI:C for either a single injection or
every other day for a total of three injections to induce TAK1 deletions.
Mouse hematopoietic phenotype analysis. Mice were killed at the
indicated time points to collect peripheral blood, spleen, thymus, and BM.
Peripheral blood was analyzed for WBC counts, plt, RBC counts, and Hb
concentration by using Hemavet 950FS (Drew Scientific Inc.). After lysis of
RBCs, nucleated cells from peripheral blood, spleen, thymus, and BM were
counted and further stained with cell surface markers for phenotype analysis
by using flow cytometry as described previously (22). All the fluorescent anti-
bodies used in flow cytometric analysis were purchased from eBioscience.
vascular defects, reminiscent of the mouse phenotype in
which the TGF-␤1 receptors ALK-1 and endoglin have been
knocked out. Moreover, TAK1 overexpression can compen-
sate for the TGF␤1 receptor knockout phenotype (24).
However, in vitro biochemical and in vivo genetic studies
suggest that TAK1 is also a significant mediator of inflamma-
tory cytokine signals (11).
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts from TAK1-null mice ex-
hibit dramatically impaired NF-␬B and JNK activation
through TNFR-1, IL-1R, and Toll-like receptors. These cells
are also highly sensitive to TNF-␣–induced apoptosis (11).
TAK1 has also been found to be critical for keratinocyte
survival. Keratinocytes with TAK1 deletions are inactivated
for NF-␬B and JNK, and are sensitive to TNF-␣–induced
apoptosis (25).
Our data suggest that TAK1 might mediate a general sur-
vival signal for many tissue cells, although the sensitivity of dif-
ferent types of cells to TAK1 deletion varies. In our inducible
TAK1 knockout mice, massive apoptotic cell death was ob-
served in hematopoietic cells in the BM, spleen, and thymus,
as well as in hepatocytes, where Cre-mediated TAK1 deletion
occurred. We also found that in hematopoietic cells and hepa-
tocytes, TAK1 stimulated a survival signal also mediated by
up-regulating the expression of survival genes via the IKK␬–
NF-␬B and JNK–AP1 signaling pathways (not depicted).
It has been reported that NF-␬B mediates a very important
survival signal to protect cells from TNF-␣–induced apop-
tosis. Inactivation of NF-␬B by gene mutation or pharma-
cological inhibition sensitizes such cells to TNF-␣–induced
apoptosis. However, NF-␬B knockout mice (Mx1Cre-me-
diated polyI:C-inducible knockout, the same system we used
in our present studies) developed normally under normal
husbandry without differences in gross anatomy, histologi-
cal organization, or hepatic function (26). In contrast to the
acute liver failure of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice, the syndrome of hepatic
failure resulting from hepatocyte apoptosis seen in NF-␬B
knockout mice occurred only when the mice were treated
with TNF-␣ (26). Moreover, as opposed to the BM failure
phenotype of our TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice, which was secondary to
cell-autonomous apoptosis, the mice with IKK␣/NF-␬B sig-
nal inactivation showed stress-related B and T cell depletion,
whereas HSC/Ps remained unaffected in this condition (27).
In fact, the myeloid cells of NF-␬B–inactivated mice show
a high proliferative index and multiple tissue inflammation
reactions due to autocrine secretion of inflammatory cyto-
kines (such as TNF-␣) (27). This suggests that IKK␤/NF-␬B
signaling is not essential for the survival of HSC/Ps and my-
eloid cells.
In TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ HSC/Ps, in addition to the inactivation of
NF-␬B signals, JNK signals were also inactivated. The role of
JNK signaling is cell context dependent. Both proapoptotic
and prosurvival effects of JNK signals have been reported
(28). The role of JNK in HSC/Ps has not yet been addressed.
We predict that both JNK and NF-␬B signals are required
for HSC/P survival in mice. This needs to be further con-
firmed by conditional compound knockout mouse studies.
1618 TAK1 IN HEMATOPOIETIC AND HEPATIC CELLS | Tang et al.
Online supplemental material. Fig. S1 shows reduction of BM-nucle-
ated cell numbers in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ mice after the induction of TAK1 deletion.
Fig. S2 shows analyses of the percentage of mature hematopoietic cells in the
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and littermate control mice. Figs. S1 and S2 are available at http://
www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20080297/DC1.
We appreciate the excellent animal care services provided by the staff of the
Department of Comparative Medicine at Loyola University Medical Center. Ms.
Patricia Simms helped with flow cytometric sorting of HSCs and progenitors, as well
as in the analysis of flow cytometry data. We appreciate the ongoing professional
collaborations of Drs. Nancy Zeleznik-Le and Andrew Dingwall, whose scientific
suggestions and discussions improved the present studies.
P. Breslin is supported in part by a grant from the Jimmy Burns Foundation.
The authors have no conflicting financial interests.
Submitted: 13 February 2008
Accepted: 7 May 2008
REFERENCES
1. Orelio, C., and E. Dzierzak. 2007. Bcl-2 expression and apoptosis in the
regulation of hematopoietic stem cells. Leuk. Lymphoma. 48:16–24.
2. Motoyama, N., F. Wang, K.A. Roth, H. Sawa, K. Nakayama, K.
Nakayama, I. Negishi, S. Senju, Q. Zhang, S. Fujii, et al. 1995. Massive
cell death of immature hematopoietic cells and neurons in Bcl-x-defi-
cient mice. Science. 267:1506–1510.
3. Opferman, J.T., H. Iwasaki, C.C. Ong, H. Suh, S. Mizuno, K. Akashi,
and S.J. Korsmeyer. 2005. Obligate role of anti-apoptotic MCL-1 in the
survival of hematopoietic stem cells. Science. 307:1101–1104.
4. Brandt, J.E., K. Bhalla, and R. Hoffman. 1994. Effects of interleukin-3
and c-kit ligand on the survival of various classes of human hematopoi-
etic progenitor cells. Blood. 83:1507–1514.
5. Kimura, S., A.W. Roberts, D. Metcalf, and W.S. Alexander. 1998.
Hematopoietic stem cell deficiencies in mice lacking c-Mpl, the recep-
tor for thrombopoietin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 95:1195–1200.
6. Blume-Jensen, P., R. Janknecht, and T. Hunter. 1998. The kit receptor
promotes cell survival via activation of PI 3-kinase and subsequent Akt-
mediated phosphorylation of Bad on Ser136. Curr. Biol. 8:779–782.
7. Kerzic, P.J., D.W. Pyatt, J.H. Zheng, S.A. Gross, A. Le, and R.D.
Irons. 2003. Inhibition of NF-kappaB by hydroquinone sensitizes
human bone marrow progenitor cells to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis.
Toxicology. 187:127–137.
8. Rusten, L.S., F.W. Jacobsen, W. Lesslauer, H. Loetscher, E.B. Smeland,
and S.E. Jacobsen. 1994. Bifunctional effects of tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF alpha) on the growth of mature and primitive human hema-
topoietic progenitor cells: involvement of p55 and p75 TNF receptors.
Blood. 83:3152–3159.
9. Hangoc, G., D.E. Williams, J.H. Falkenburg, and H.E. Broxmeyer.
1989. Influence of IL-1 alpha and -1 beta on the survival of human bone
marrow cells responding to hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors.
J. Immunol. 142:4329–4334.
10. Pearl-Yafe, M., J. Stein, E.S. Yolcu, D.L. Farkas, H. Shirwan, I. Yaniv,
and N. Askenasy. 2007. Fas transduces dual apoptotic and trophic signals
in hematopoietic progenitors. Stem Cells. 25:1448–1455.
11. Shim, J.H., C. Xiao, A.E. Paschal, S.T. Bailey, P. Rao, M.S. Hayden,
K.Y. Lee, C. Bussey, M. Steckel, N. Tanaka, et al. 2005. TAK1, but not
TAB1 or TAB2, plays an essential role in multiple signaling pathways in
vivo. Genes Dev. 19:2668–2681.
12. Wallach, D. 1997. Cell death induction by TNF: a matter of self con-
trol. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22:107–109.
13. Sato, S., H. Sanjo, K. Takeda, J. Ninomiya-Tsuji, M. Yamamoto, T.
Kawai, K. Matsumoto, O. Takeuchi, and S. Akira. 2005. Essential func-
tion for the kinase TAK1 in innate and adaptive immune responses. Nat.
Immunol. 6:1087–1095.
14. Liu, H.H., M. Xie, M.D. Schneider, and Z.J. Chen. 2006. Essential role
of TAK1 in thymocyte development and activation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 103:11677–11682.
15. Sato, S., H. Sanjo, T. Tsujimura, J. Ninomiya-Tsuji, M. Yamamoto,
T. Kawai, O. Takeuchi, and S. Akira. 2006. TAK1 is indispensable for
Reciprocal BM transplantation. To test the role of TAK1 in HSC/Ps,
BM from either TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ or TAK1+/Ϫ mice (before induction of TAK1
deletion) was transplanted into lethally irradiated WT mice. Each recipient
mouse received 5 × 106 nucleated BM cells. 6 wk after transplantation, the
recipients were injected with polyI:C every other day for a total of three in-
jections. Hematopoietic phenotypes were analyzed on day 8 after the first
injection. To test the role of TAK1 on the function of the BM microenvi-
ronment, BM from WT mice was transplanted into lethally irradiated
TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and TAK1+/Ϫ recipient mice (before mutation was induced). 6 wk
later, TAK1 deletion was induced by three polyI:C injections. Both liver and
hematopoietic phenotypes were analyzed on day 8 after the first injection.
Competitive BM transplantation. Equal numbers of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ (CD45.2+,
before induction of TAK1 deletion) and WT (CD45.1+) mouse BM cells
were mixed and transplanted into lethally irradiated WT (CD45.1+) recipi-
ent mice. Control TAK1+/Ϫ mice were transplanted in the same manner.
6 wk after transplantation, the contribution of donor HSC/Ps to hematopoie-
sis in recipients was assessed by analyzing the CD45.2+ cell percentage in the
peripheral blood of recipients. As expected, both TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and TAK1+/Ϫ
HSC/Ps contributed close to 50% of hematopoietic cells in the recipients
(TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ HSC/Ps contribute ‫ف‬46.8% ± 5.6%, whereas TAK1+/Ϫ HSC/Ps
contribute ‫ف‬51.6% ± 6.1%). Recipients were next injected with three polyI:C
injections as described above, and the contributions of TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ HSC/Ps
to hematopoiesis in recipient mice were evaluated again on day 15 after the
first injection.
Apoptosis analysis. Hepatocyte apoptosis was analyzed by counting the
percentage of hepatocytes with small, condensed nuclear and TUNEL+
staining. TUNEL staining was performed using the DeadEnd Colorimetric
TUNEL System (Promega) according to the protocol supplied. To analyze
apoptosis in BM HSC/Ps, BM was collected from TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ and control
mice at 15–18 h after a single polyI:C injection. BM cells were collected into
lyse/fix buffer (BD Biosciences) for not more than 10 min to fix the nucle-
ated cells and lyse the RBCs simultaneously. After two washes with cold
PBS/2% FBS, the nucleated cells were adjusted to a concentration of 5 ×
106/ml in 1× Binding Buffer (BD Biosciences) and aliquotted into 5-ml
staining tubes, 100 μl of cells per tube. Cells were then stained with allophy-
cocyanin (APC)–c-kit and FITC–annexin V (BD Biosciences) or PECy5.5-
lineage+ markers (including Gr1, B220, Ter119, CD3, and CD8), PE-Sca1,
APC–c-kit, and FITC–annexin V for 20 min at room temperature. After
two washes with 1× Binding Buffer, cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
for annexin V+ cell percentage in different cell populations.
Intracellular protein analysis. BM cells were collected into lyse/fix buffer
(BD Biosciences) to simultaneously fix the nucleated cells and lyse the RBCs.
After two washes with cold PBS/2% FBS, BM cells were stained with cell
surface markers as indicated for 30 min. Cells were then permeabilized using
a fixation/permeabilization kit (BD Biosciences) for 20 min at room temper-
ature. Cells were then washed with wash buffer twice and stained with anti-
bodies against intracellular proteins, followed by APC-conjugated secondary
antibody staining. The levels of intracellular proteins were detected by flow
cytometry comparing the APC intensity in different populations of the BM
cells. Rabbit anti-TAK1, rabbit anti–p-TAK1, rabbit anti–p-NF-␬B P65,
rabbit anti–p-P38 (Thr180/Tyr182), and rabbit p-JNK (Thr183/Tyr185)
antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
RT-PCR to detect gene expression. RNA was extracted using RNeasy
Plus Mini kit (QIAGEN). cDNA was prepared using SuperScript First-
Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen). Quantitative PCR was performed by
using SYBR Green PCR master (Applied Biosystems). Each sample was a
mixture of LSK-HSCs from three mice with the same phenotype. Triplicate
RT-PCRs were performed.
Statistical analyses. t tests were performed to assess the significance of changes
in TAK1Ϫ/Ϫ group data compared with both TAK1+/Ϫ and WT groups.
JEM VOL. 205, July 7, 2008
ARTICLE
1619
development of T cells and prevention of colitis by the generation of
regulatory T cells. Int. Immunol. 18:1405–1411.
16. Wan, Y.Y., H. Chi, M. Xie, M.D. Schneider, and R.A. Flavell. 2006.
The kinase TAK1 integrates antigen and cytokine receptor signaling for
T cell development, survival and function. Nat. Immunol. 7:851–858.
17. Mori, T., T. Nishimura, Y. Ikeda, T. Hotta, H. Yagita, and K. Ando.
1998. Involvement of Fas-mediated apoptosis in the hematopoietic pro-
genitor cells of graft-versus-host reaction-associated myelosuppression.
Blood. 92:101–107.
18. Dufour, C., A. Corcione, J. Svahn, R. Haupt, V. Poggi, A.N.
Beka’ssy, R. Scime, A. Pistorio, and V. Pistoia. 2003. TNF-alpha and
IFN-gamma are overexpressed in the bone marrow of Fanconi anemia
patients and TNF-alpha suppresses erythropoiesis in vitro. Blood. 102:
2053–2059.
19. Pearl-Yafe, M., E.S. Yolcu, J. Stein, O. Kaplan, H. Shirwan, I. Yaniv,
and N. Askenasy. 2007. Expression of Fas and Fas-ligand in donor he-
matopoietic stem and progenitor cells is dissociated from the sensitivity
to apoptosis. Exp. Hematol. 35:1601–1612.
20. Sakurai, H., H. Miyoshi, J. Mizukami, and T. Sugita. 2000. Phos-
phorylation-dependent activation of TAK1 mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase kinase by TAB1. FEBS Lett. 474:141–145.
21. Kuhn, R., F. Schwenk, M. Aguet, and K. Rajewsky. 1995. Inducible
gene targeting in mice. Science. 269:1427–1429.
22. Zhang, J., C. Niu, L. Ye, H. Huang, X. He, W.G. Tong, J. Ross, J.
Haug, T. Johnson, J.Q. Feng, et al. 2003. Identification of the hae-
matopoietic stem cell niche and control of the niche size. Nature.
425:836–841.
23. Yamaguchi, K., K. Shirakabe, H. Shibuya, K. Irie, I. Oishi, N. Ueno,
T. Taniguchi, E. Nishida, and K. Matsumoto. 1995. Identification of a
member of the MAPKKK family as a potential mediator of TGF-beta
signal transduction. Science. 270:2008–2011.
24. Jadrich, J.L., M.B. O’Connor, and E. Coucouvanis. 2006. The TGF
beta activated kinase TAK1 regulates vascular development in vivo.
Development. 133:1529–1541.
25. Omori, E., K. Matsumoto, H. Sanjo, S. Sato, S. Akira, R.C. Smart,
and J. Ninomiya-Tsuji. 2006. TAK1 is a master regulator of epidermal
homeostasis involving skin inflammation and apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem.
281:19610–19617.
26. Geisler, F., H. Algul, S. Paxian, and R.M. Schmid. 2007. Genetic in-
activation of RelA/p65 sensitizes adult mouse hepatocytes to TNF-
induced apoptosis in vivo and in vitro. Gastroenterology. 132:2489–2503.
27. Horwitz, B.H., M.L. Scott, S.R. Cherry, R.T. Bronson, and D.
Baltimore. 1997. Failure of lymphopoiesis after adoptive transfer of NF-
kappaB-deficient fetal liver cells. Immunity. 6:765–772.
28. Liu, J., and A. Lin. 2005. Role of JNK activation in apoptosis: a double-
edged sword. Cell Res. 15:36–42.
29. Guzman, M.L., S.J. Neering, D. Upchurch, B. Grimes, D.S. Howard,
D.A. Rizzieri, S.M. Luger, and C.T. Jordan. 2001. Nuclear factor-
kappaB is constitutively activated in primitive human acute myelogenous
leukemia cells. Blood. 98:2301–2307.
30. Hartman, A.D., A. Wilson-Weekes, A. Suvannasankha, G.S. Burgess, C.A.
Phillips, K.J. Hincher, L.D. Cripe, and H.S. Boswell. 2006. Constitutive
c-jun N-terminal kinase activity in acute myeloid leukemia derives from
Flt3 and affects survival and proliferation. Exp. Hematol. 34:1360–1376.
