ARTICLE
The Rockefeller University Press  $30.00
J. Exp. Med. Vol. 206 No. 5  1181-1199
www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20082521
1181
Granulopoiesis is a dynamic process leading
to the production of 120 billion granulocytes
daily in humans; its synthetic capacity can be
increased at least 10-fold in response to certain
stress conditions, such as infection. Granulo-
poiesis follows an orchestrated program of cell
proliferation, dif­ferentiation, and apoptosis,
resulting in the expansion of a small pool of
stem cells that evolve from granulocytic pro-
genitors/precursors to mature granulocytes.
Neutrophils are the most abundant type of
granulocyte, whereas eosinophils and basophils
are much rarer. Originating from stem cells and
progenitors, neutrophils in the bone marrow
are comprised of a precursor pool and a storage
pool. Peripheral blood neutrophils, which are
postmitotic, consist of a free circulating pool
and a marginal pool.
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) plays a major role in regulating granu­
lopoiesis (1). G-CSF not only stimulates the
pro­lif­eration of granulocytic precursors (2), but
also prolongs neutrophil survival (3) and reduces
the mean transit time from granulocytic pro-
genitors/precursors to mature granulocytes (4).
The importance of G-CSF in granulopoiesis
was dem­on­strated in G-CSF KO mice. These
mice only have 20% of the normal circulating
neutrophils and a correspondingly small neutro-
phil precursor pool in their bone marrow (5).
The biological action of androgens is me-
diated through the androgen receptor (AR), a
CORRESPONDENCE
Chawnshang Chang:
chang@urmc.rochester.edu
Abbreviations used: AAD,
amino-actinomycin-D; AR,
androgen receptor; ARKO, AR
knockout; CMP, common
myeloid progenitor; DHT,
dihydrotestosterone; FSC, for-
ward scatter; G-CSF, granulo-
cyte-colony stimulating factor;
GMP, granulocyte/macrophage
progenitor; GST, glutathione
S-transferase; M-CSF, macro-
phage-colony stimulating factor;
MIP-2, macrophage-inflamma-
tory protein-2; Q-PCR, quanti-
tative PCR; si, small interfering;
SSC, side scatter; Tfm, testicular
feminization mutant.
Neutropenia with impaired host defense
against microbial infection in mice lacking
androgen receptor
Kuang-Hsiang Chuang,1 Saleh Altuwaijri,1,2 Gonghui Li,1,3 Jiann-Jyh Lai,1
Chin-Yi Chu,1 Kuo-Pao Lai,1 Hung-Yun Lin,1 Jong-Wei Hsu,1
Peter Keng,1 Ming-Chi Wu,4 and Chawnshang Chang1
1George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology, and The Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642
2Clinical Research Laboratory, Saad Specialist Hospital, Al-Khobar, Saudi Arabia 31952
3Department of Urology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 310016
4The Development Center for Biotechnology, Taipei, Taiwan 221
Neutrophils, the major phagocytes that form the first line of cell-mediated defense against
microbial infection, are produced in the bone marrow and released into the circulation in
response to granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). Here, we report that androgen
receptor knockout (ARKO) mice are neutropenic and susceptible to acute bacterial infec-
tion, whereas castration only results in moderate neutrophil reduction in mice and humans.
Androgen supplement can restore neutrophil counts via stabilizing AR in castrated mice,
but not in ARKO and testicular feminization mutant (Tfm) mice. Our results show that
deletion of the AR gene does not influence myeloid lineage commitment, but significantly
reduces the proliferative activity of neutrophil precursors and retards neutrophil matura-
tion. CXCR2-dependent migration is also decreased in ARKO neutrophils as compared with
wild-type controls. G-CSF is unable to delay apoptosis in ARKO neutrophils, and ARKO mice
show a poor granulopoietic response to exogenous G-CSF injection. In addition, AR can
restore G-CSF–dependent granulocytic differentiation upon transduction into ARKO pro-
genitors. We further found that AR augments G-CSF signaling by activating extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and also by sustaining Stat3 activity via diminishing the inhibi-
tory binding of PIAS3 to Stat3. Collectively, our findings demonstrate an essential role for
AR in granulopoiesis and host defense against microbial infection.
© 2009 Chuang et al.  This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribu-
tion–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months
after the publication date (see http://www.jem.org/misc/terms.shtml). After six
months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncom-
mercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
TheJournalofExperimentalMedicine
1182 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1183
Figure 1.  AR-targeted disruption and analysis of peripheral neutrophils in ARKO mice. (A) Schematic representation of murine AR protein do-
mains and corresponding exons in AR mRNA. The AR mRNA is composed of seven exons; exon 2 is removed in ARKO mice. DBD, DNA-binding domain.
LBD, ligand-binding domain. (B) The purity of isolated bone marrow neutrophils from WT and ARKO mice is >90%. (C) Using the primers 5-AAT-
GGGACCTTGGATGGAGAAC-3 and 5-TCCCTGCTTCATAACATTTCCG-3, an AR transcript of 305 bp will be obtained from WT AR, but only 153 bp when
floxed exon 2 is deleted. Full-length AR mRNA is not expressed in neutrophils isolated from bone marrow of AR-deficient mice. (D) Intracellular AR pro-
tein is not detected in neutrophils isolated from bone marrow of AR-deficient mice. Nonspecific IgG was used as primary antibody for the control.
(E) FACS analysis of peripheral blood from 8-wk-old WT and ARKO mice. FSC and SSC of peripheral leukocytes show significant decreases of high-SSC
granulocytic population in ARKO mice (n = 4) compared with WT littermates (n = 4). (F) FACS analyses with neutrophil-specific antibodies (clone 7/4) and
anti-CD11b antibodies. Neutrophils are drastically reduced in ARKO mice (n = 4) compared with WT littermates (n = 4). (G) Representative photomicro-
graphs of Wright-Giemsa–stained cells on cytospins from blood after erythrocyte lysis. Neutrophils (arrow heads) are rarely found on leukocyte cytospins
from ARKO mice compared with WT controls. Bar, 10 µm. (H) Manual differential counting of neutrophils was performed on blood smears from 9-wk-old
sex-matched (WT), ARKO (KO), and Tfm male mice. Results are representative of four separate experiments (n = 4 per group). Data represent the mean ± SD.
**, P < 0.01 compared with WT mice. ***, P < 0.001 compared with WT mice.
 
ligand-inducible nuclear receptor that regulates the expression
of target genes at the transcriptional level via binding to an
androgen-response element. Protein kinase A activators, such
as cAMP, could activate AR transactivation activity in an
androgen-independent manner (6). In addition, AR could be
activated in a ligand-independent manner by epidermal growth
factor, Her2/Neu, insulin-like growth factor 1, keratinocyte
growth factor, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (7–9). Another
study also suggested that activated G protein–coupled receptors
could induce ligand-independent AR activity (10). On the other
hand, it has been suggested that a nongenomic effect of AR may
occur through the interaction with c-Src to induce the MAPK
signal cascade (11). However, transcription-independent func-
tions of AR remain largely unclear.
The AR gene is located on the X chromosome and plays
an important role in male sexual differentiation and pubertal
sexual maturation, the maintenance of spermatogenesis, and
male gonadotropin regulation. Phenotype analysis shows that
AR knockout (ARKO) male mice exhibited a femalelike ex-
ternal appearance, including a vagina with a blind end, without
penis and scrotum (12). Male reproductive organs, including
seminal vesicles, vas deferens, epididymis, and prostate, were
lacking in ARKO male mice. Their testes are significantly
smaller and serum testosterone concentrations are lower in
ARKO male mice compared with WT mice. Also, spermato-
genesis is arrested at pachytene spermatocytes in ARKO male
mice. In female ARKO mice, retarded development of mam-
mary glands with reduced ductal branching is shown in the
prepubertal stages (13). The ovarian dysfunction and the lower
mean number of pups per litter were observed in adult ARKO
female mice (14, 15). In addition to reproductive defects, the
number/size of adipocytes and the body weight were also
found to be decreased in ARKO mice (12).
It has been reported that AR broadly expresses in neutro-
phil-lineage cells from the myeloblast stage to the mature neu-
trophil stage with no difference in the pattern of AR expression
between male and female (16). Androgen was found to stimulate
proliferation of committed erythrocytic and granulocytic precur-
sors in vitro (17–20), and accelerate recovery of leukocytes after
radiation or chemotherapy (21–25). Clinical observations with
androgens in the treatment of aplastic anemia (26, 27), Fanconi’s
anemia (28, 29), and during therapy with myelosuppressive
agents (30, 31) suggest that androgen might increase neutrophil
production. A clinical study with polycystic ovary syndrome
patients who have high serum androgen levels showed higher
neutrophil counts (32), also suggesting that androgen/AR might
be associated with granulopoiesis. However, it is still unclear how
androgen and AR regulate neutrophil homeostasis.
RESULTS
Targeted disruption of the AR gene in ARKO mice
Because male infertility is observed in testicular feminization mu-
tant (Tfm) mice, which carry an unstable truncated AR mutant
(33), it is impossible to generate female homologous AR dele-
tion mice by conventional gene disruption methods. To solve
this difficulty, we used the Cre–loxP technique to generate a
mouse model with the targeted disruption of AR (ARKO) (12).
We successfully generated ARKO mice of both genders and
WT littermates, and further used these mice to investigate if loss
of AR influences neutrophil production. In ARKO mice, the
deletion of exon 2 in AR (Fig. 1 A) results in a splice between
exon 1 and exon 3, creating two sequential nonsense mutations
at new amino acid positions 533 and 534, leading to premature
termination of the AR protein. RT-PCR analyses of total RNA
extracted from isolated bone marrow neutrophils (Fig. 1 B)
showed that the mRNA from ARKO neutrophils lacked the
305-bp fragment from exon 2 of AR (Fig. 1 C), evidence that
the intact AR is not expressed in ARKO neutrophils and pre-
cursors. Intracellular analysis of endogenous AR protein by flow
cytometry further confirmed that AR protein expression occurs
in WT, but not ARKO, bone marrow neutrophils (Fig. 1 D).
ARKO mice have low numbers of neutrophils in circulation
We then examined circulating neutrophils in ARKO and
WT mice by FACS analyses. On the basis of forward scatter
(FSC) and side scatter (SSC), FACS analyses of peripheral
blood leukocytes showed that a high-SSC population (i.e., a
granulocyte population) was barely detectable in ARKO
mice (Fig. 1 E). Using FACS analysis with neutrophil-spe-
cific monoclonal antibodies (clone 7/4) and anti-CD11b anti­
bodies, we found that only 3% of leukocytes were neutrophils
in ARKO mice, in contrast to 26% neutrophils in WT mice
(Fig. 1 F). Neutrophils were rarely found in cytospin smears
of blood leukocytes from ARKO mice (Fig. 1 G). As shown
1184 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
sults demonstrated that loss of AR results in significant reduc-
tion of neutrophils in bone marrow.
To learn if both androgen and AR are required for neutro-
phil production, we examined the effects of castration and an-
drogen supplementation on neutrophil counts in WT, ARKO,
and Tfm mice. We found that castration of normal mice only
results in a relatively moderate reduction of neutrophils as
compared with neutropenia in ARKO and Tfm mice (Fig. 2,
C–E), and supplement of exogenous dihydrotestosterone
(DHT) restores neutrophils in castrated mice, but not in ARKO
and Tfm mice (Fig. 2, C–E). These results suggest that AR, but
not androgen, is required for neutrophil homeostasis.
Androgen ablation reduces neutrophil counts, but does not
result in neutropenia in humans
We also compiled blood cell counts from 33 advanced prostate
cancer patients before and after the surgical castration therapy.
Those patients had no prior history of chemotherapy and radia-
tion therapy, and had no sign of infection (WBC counts were
<10,000 per l). The results showed that their neutrophil dif-
ferential counts only moderately decreased after surgical castra-
tion therapy (Fig. 2 F). The decrease of neutrophil counts in
those patients with surgical castration was not as significant as
that observed in ARKO mice, further supporting that androgen
is less important than AR in neutrophil homeostasis.
by examination of blood smears with Wright-Giemsa staining,
male and female ARKO mice have normal white blood cell
counts, but very low percentages of neutrophils in peripheral
blood (Fig. 1 H). Examining blood smears from Tfm mice
(Fig. 1 H), we confirmed that loss of AR results in a significantly
reduced neutrophil abundance in peripheral leukocytes. Auto-
mated blood analysis revealed that the numbers of total white
blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets remained comparable in
ARKO mice (Table I A). The mean differential ratio of periph-
eral lymphocytes in ARKO mice was increased from 75 to 94%
without obvious alterations in monocyte and eosinophil num-
bers (Table I B). However, there was a significant reduction of
neutrophils in blood compared with WT mice (Table I B).
These results suggest that the AR might play a critical role in
sustaining a normal number of circulating neutrophils in vivo.
Neutrophils are reduced in bone marrow of ARKO mice
We then sought to determine if the neutropenia in ARKO
mice was caused by a defect in granulopoiesis in the bone
marrow. We found that the high SSC granulocyte popula-
tion in bone marrow was markedly decreased in ARKO
mice (Fig. 2 A). Further analysis of the granulocyte popula-
tion with clone 7/4 and CD11b antibodies demonstrated a
50% decrease of neutrophils in bone marrow of ARKO mice
compared with those in WT littermates (Fig. 2 B). These re-
Table I.  Blood and bone marrow analysis
Blood/bone marrow WT ARKO Statistics
A. Blood parameters WT (n = 24) ARKO (n = 18) P-value
  WBC (×103/l) 1.83 ± 0.77 1.93 ± 0.78 0.690
  RBC (×106/l) 9.18 ± 0.97 9.31 ± 0.6 0.603
  Platelets (×103/l) 643 ± 192 573.8 ± 156 0.203
  Hemoglobin (g/dl) 13.69 ± 1.04 13.43 ± 0.86 0.391
  Hematocrit (%) 49.88 ± 4.66 47.06 ± 2.88 0.021
  MCV (fl) 54.5 ± 2.73 50.61 ± 3.15 <0.001
  MCH (pg) 15.17 ± 1.05 14.39 ± 0.7 0.006
  MCHC (g/dl) 27.54 ± 1.64 28.61 ± 1.58 0.039
  Lymphocytes (per l) 1359 ± 565 1815 ± 717 0.033
  Neutrophils (per l) 420 ± 247 76 ± 59 < 0.001
B. Differential WBC WT (n=24) ARKO (n = 18) P-value
  Lymphocytes (%) 74.6 ± 7.7 94.7 ± 3.2 <0.001
  Neutrophils (%) 22.6 ± 7.2 3.7 ± 2.2 <0.001
  Eosinophils (%) 0.7 ± 0.6 0.6 ± 0.5 0.776
  Monocytes (%) 2 ± 1.7 1.2 ± 0.8 0.730
C. Bone marrow analysis WT (n=6) ARKO (n = 6) P-value
  Myeloblasts (%) 0.6 ± 0.3 0.5 ± 0.3 0.381
  Promyelocytes (%) 2.3 ± 0.6 2.2 ± 0.4 0.583
  Myelocytes and metamyelocytes (%) 15 ± 1.6 10.3 ± 1.4 <0.001
  Neutrophils (include Band form) (%) 32 ± 2.5 12 ± 1.8 <0.001
  Bone Marrow Nucleated Cells (×106) 33.3 ± 1.24 34.1 ± 0.8 0.244
All mice for blood and bone marrow analysis range from 8 to 12 wks old. Blood parameters from blood samples obtained from heart punctures were measured using an Abbot
CELL-DYN 4000 system. 100-count leukocyte differentials were examined on blood smears from 18–24 mice in each genotype. Bone marrow analysis was based on 1,000-
count manual leukocyte differentials performed on bone marrow–nucleated cells recovered from femurs of age-matched mice from each genotype. Mean values ± SD
obtained from the indicated number of mice (n) are given. WBC, white blood cell count; RBC, red blood cell count; MCV, mean cell volume; MCH, mean corpuscular
hemoglobin; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1185
Figure 2.  Analysis of bone marrow neutrophils in ARKO mice. (A) FSC/SSC analysis of bone marrow cells shows reduction of a cell population with
granulocyte characteristics in 8-wk-old ARKO mice (n = 4) compared with WT littermates (n = 4). (B) Gated with CD45+, FACS analyses show that bone
marrow neutrophils are significantly decreased in AR-deficient mice (n = 4) compared with WT littermates (n = 4). (C) FACS analysis with antibodies
against neutrophils in peripheral blood from 10-wk-old sham-operated WT, castrated (WT-Cas), castrated mice implanted with DHT-releasing pellet (WT-
Cas+DHT), sham-operated ARKO (ARKO), and sham-operated ARKO mice implanted with DHT-releasing pellet (ARKO+DHT). For each group, 105 cells from
each of four mice were pooled and analyzed. Data were analyzed using CellQuest software; neutrophil populations are shown as histograms. DHT supple-
mentation restores neutrophil numbers in peripheral blood of castrated mice, but not in ARKO mice. (D) DHT supplementation restores bone marrow neu-
trophils (neutrophil-specific antibody, clone 7/4, labeled) in castrated mice, but not in ARKO mice. (E) DHT supplementation also restores neutrophils (Gr-1
labeled) in bone marrow of castrated mice, but not in those of Tfm mice. (F) Neutrophil differential counts are only moderately reduced in patients after
androgen ablation therapy. Blood analysis data were collected from 33 advanced prostate cancer patients before and after surgical castration. Neutrophil
differential counts are shown and presented as the mean ± SD. Animal experiments were independently performed at least three times, and representa-
tive results from one experiment are shown.
1186 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
Figure 3.  AR knockdown in WT myeloid progenitors by RNA interference (RNAi) suppresses neutrophil differentiation, and restoring AR in
ARKO cells induces neutrophil differentiation. (A) Bone marrow cells were plated in methylcellulose-containing media supplemented with the indicated
cytokine and hematopoietic colonies containing >30 cells were scored after 7 d. We analyzed bone marrow cells from five 9-wk-old animals of each geno-
type. (B) Effect of adding various concentrations of DHT on colony formation of mouse bone marrow cells in methylcellulose-containing media supple-
mented with G-CSF. (C) The populations of GMPs and CMPs are comparable in bone marrow between WT and ARKO mice. GMPs were further isolated from
WT and ARKO bone marrow using FACS sorting. (D) Representative photomicrographs of isolated neutrophils and precursors from bone marrow stained
with Wright-Giemsa. A decrease of nuclei-segmented neutrophils (arrow heads) in ARKO bone marrow is observed when compared with the control. Bar,
10 µm. (E) GMPs were infected with retroviruses carrying pBabe vector, pBabe-AR, pSuperior vector, pSuperior-siAR, and pSuperior-scramble. Transduced
GMPs were cultured in the presence of G-CSF (10 ng/ml) with or without 10 nM DHT for 7 d. Green fluorescent colony cells were then collected and
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1187
AR-small interfering (si)RNA to see if knockdown of endoge-
nous AR retards neutrophil differentiation. We confirmed the
AR-siRNA knockdown efficiency with reporter assays (Fig. S1)
and immunoblot analyses of AR protein expression in cells in-
fected with retroviruses carrying AR-siRNA and scramble
siRNA control (Fig. S2). Colonies from sorted WT GMPs in-
fected with retroviruses carrying AR-siRNA and GFP showed
fewer mature neutrophils than those infected with retroviruses
carrying scrambled siRNA and GFP or GFP alone (Fig. 3 E).
These results are consistent with the ARKO mouse data, sug-
gesting that knockdown of endogenous AR by siRNA in GMPs
could retard neutrophil maturation. Results from these comple-
mentary methods of AR manipulation in cultured cells are con-
sistent with our in vivo ARKO mice data showing that loss of
AR results in retardation of neutrophil differentiation.
Reduced proliferative activity in neutrophil precursors
in bone marrow of ARKO mice
We next examined granulocytic proliferation via analysis of
the cell cycling status of granulocytes within bone marrow,
by labeling cells with anti–Gr-1 antibodies and propidium
iodide. The proportion of cells in S and G2/M phase was lower
in Gr-1+ bone marrow cells from ARKO mice (Fig. 4 A), sug-
gesting that the rate of granulocytic proliferation in bone
marrow from ARKO mice is lower than in WT mice.
To learn more about the dynamics of neutrophil production
in WT and ARKO mice, we labeled mitotic progenitors/pre-
cursors in vivo by intraperitoneal injection of BrdU, which only
labels proliferating cells. Cells derived from the neutrophil pre-
cursor pool can be labeled with BrdU because these cells are
proliferating and have matured into granulocytes, which are
then released from the bone marrow into the circulation. At
96 h after the injection, the BrdU-labeled granulocytes reached
a maximum in the peripheral blood (Fig. 4 B). It is known that
BrdU labeling intensity is diluted by half with every cell division
after BrdU incorporation. Consequently, by tracking the changes
in relative BrdU intensity, we can determine how many division
cycles the neutrophils from precusor cells have undergone. Cells
in the BrdUbright region correspond to granulocytes that incor-
porated BrdU in their last mitosis, whereas those in the BrdUdim
region have gone through one or more divisions after BrdU in-
corporation. As shown in Fig. 4 C, 40% of neutrophils were in
the BrdUdim pool in WT mice, whereas only 22% of neutrophils
from ARKO mice were BrdUdim, suggesting a markedly re-
duced mitotic cell division of neutrophil precursors in bone
marrow of ARKO mice.
Granulocytes from bone marrow of ARKO mice
are susceptible to apoptosis
To determine if neutropenia in ARKO mice is partly caused
by neutrophil apoptosis, we examined the bone marrow cell
ARKO mice have a defect in granulopoiesis between
proliferative precursors and mature neutrophils with normal
numbers of myeloid progenitors
We next asked which stages during granulopoiesis in bone
marrow are responsible for neutropenia in ARKO mice. Using
colony-forming assays, we discovered that adding G-CSF, GM-
CSF, macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF), IL-3,
and IL-6 induced similar levels of colony formation in ARKO
bone marrow cells and WT cells in low-androgen methylcellu-
lose medium (Fig. 3 A). Adding DHT did not influence colony
numbers induced by G-CSF (Fig. 3 B). These results suggest
that the populations of early granulocytic and monocytic pro-
genitor cells are comparable in WT and ARKO bone marrow
cells. Thus, we conclude that neutrophil lineage commitments
in ARKO mice must be similar to those in WT mice. In addi-
tion, using FACS analyses, we found that the abundance of both
common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and granulocyte/macro-
phage progenitors (GMPs) in bone marrow is also comparable
between WT and ARKO mice (Fig. 3 C). Using Wright-Gi-
emsa staining of bone marrow smears, we found that fewer iso-
lated bone marrow neutrophils from ARKO mice than from
WT mice had segmented nuclei (Fig. 3 D). Differential count-
ing of bone marrow cells showed that ARKO mice had a de-
crease in myelocytes/metamyelocytes and a marked decrease in
mature neutrophils as compared with bone marrow cells from
WT mice (Table I C). Although we observed that cancellous
bone volumes of ARKO male mice are reduced compared with
WT littermates (12), there is no difference in bone marrow cel-
lularity (Table I C). These results suggest that the defect in gran-
ulopoiesis of ARKO mice occurs during the transition between
proliferation of precursors (myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and my-
elocytes) and maturation of neutrophils (metamyelocytes, band
forms, and neutrophils), leading to a defect in terminal differen-
tiation of neutrophils.
Restoration and knockdown of AR in GMPs influence
neutrophil differentiation
To see if restoration of AR rescues neutrophil differentiation,
we infected FACS-sorted ARKO GMPs with retroviruses car-
rying the cDNA for AR and GFP or retroviruses carrying GFP
alone, and then seeded infected cells into methylcellulose me-
dium in the presence of G-CSF. Fluorescent colonies were har-
vested after 7 d. ARKO colonies infected with retroviruses
carrying GFP alone exhibited fewer mature neutrophils
(Fig. 3 E). In contrast, colonies from ARKO GMPs infected
with retroviruses expressing functional AR consisted of more
mature neutrophils, suggesting that the defects in neutrophil
maturation resulting from ablation of AR can be rescued by AR
overexpression. Again, we found that adding androgen did not
result in an additional rescue on neutrophil maturation (Fig. 3 E).
Also, we infected WT GMPs with retroviruses carrying
counted. 200-count manual leukocyte differentials were examined after Wright-Giemsa staining. Numbers of neutrophils and precursor cells were calcu-
lated by multiplying neutrophil differential ratios by the total green fluorescent cell count. Triplicate experiments were performed and the error bars repre-
sent the SD.
 
1188 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
apoptosis using a FACS-based assay with Annexin V and
7-amino-actinomycin-D (AAD) staining. We did not observe a
significant number of apoptotic Gr-1+ cells in fresh bone mar-
row from either WT or ARKO mice (Fig. 5 A), which might
be caused by rapid clearing of apoptotic cells by macrophages in
vivo. We then examined survival of mature bone marrow neu-
trophils in vitro and found that 25% of ARKO neutrophils were
apoptotic cells as compared with 19% in WT cells in culture
without G-CSF treatment, indicating that ARKO neutrophils
are moderately more susceptible to spontaneous apoptosis than
WT cells (Fig. 5 B). On the other hand, with G-CSF treatment
for 48 h, only 10% of WT neutrophils, but 20% of ARKO
neutrophils, remained apoptotic (Fig. 5 B). These results suggest
that G-CSF is unable to delay apoptosis in ARKO neutrophils.
Together, the proliferation and apoptosis assays suggest
that neutropenia resulting from loss of AR might be caused
by decreased proliferation of neutrophil precursors and in-
creased apoptosis of neutrophils in bone marrow.
The response to G-CSF is impaired in granulocytes
lacking AR
G-CSF–mediated apoptosis protection might be less effective
in ARKO granulocytes because of impaired response to G-CSF.
To investigate the granulopoietic response to G-CSF in
Figure 4.  Proliferative potential of neutrophil precursor and progenitor cells. (A) Cell cycle analysis of total bone marrow Gr-1+ cells from WT and
ARKO mice. Comparison of cell cycle distributions shows that 9-wk-old ARKO mice have a lower percentage of cells in the S-phase and the G2/M phase
of the cell cycle compared with WT littermates. Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviations (SD) of three independent experiments in the right
panel. (B) Kinetics of BrdU labeled neutrophils in the blood of WT and ARKO mice after BrdU injection. (C) Comparison of BrdU incorporation in WT and
ARKO blood neutrophils. At 96 h post injection, the ratio of BrdUdim in blood neutrophils is lower in 9-wk-old AR-deficient mice (n = 4) as compared with
WT littermates (n = 4). For each group, 105 cells from each of four mice were pooled and used for analysis. The results are presented as percentage of
blood neutrophils from four-replicate experiments and the error bars represent the SD in the right panel.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1189
to G-CSF signaling in AR-deficit myeloid cells. Using real-
time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR), we measured the mRNA
expression of G-CSF–downstream target genes, such as
SOCS3, flotillin, chemokine (C-C motif) receptor-like 2,
glycerol kinase, and complement component 3a receptor 1,
WT and ARKO littermates, we monitored blood neutrophil
counts with daily injections of G-CSF for 9 d (Fig. 5 C). We
observed that ARKO mice had lower increasing rate of blood
neutrophils in response to G-CSF as compared with WT
mice. These results suggest that there might be an inhibition
Figure 5.  Insensitivity to G-CSF signaling in ARKO neutrophils. (A) Only few apoptotic neutrophils can be found in freshly isolated WT and ARKO
bone marrow cells. (B) G-CSF protection against apoptosis in ARKO bone marrow neutrophils was less than in WT cells in vitro. Isolated mature bone mar-
row neutrophils were cultured in RPMI medium with 20% FCS without or with G-CSF (100 ng/ml) for 48 h. Neutrophils were then stained with Annexin
V and 7-AAD, and analyzed by flow cytometry. (C) A lower increasing rate of blood neutrophils was found in ARKO mice in response to G-CSF injection.
(D) G-CSF target genes are down-regulated in ARKO neutrophils. Data represent mean ± SD for three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
(E) SOCS3 protein expression is decreased in ARKO neutrophils. (F) mRNA expression of G-CSFR is comparable between WT and ARKO neutrophils.
(G) G-CSF binding to WT and ARKO neutrophils is similar.
1190 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1191
mice, which is more than that from WT mice (Fig. 6 D).
This result suggests that loss of AR in ARKO granulocytes re-
sults in increased PIAS3-mediated sequestering of pY-Stat3,
leading to the suppression of G-CSF signaling. A reporter assay
further showed that suppression of constitutively active Stat3
(CA-Stat3) transactivation by PIAS3 was relieved by AR in a
dose-dependent manner (Fig. 6 E). Notably, the major induc-
tion of Stat3 reporter is through increasing AR and is only
slightly enhanced by adding androgen (Fig. 6 E), suggesting
that androgen is not required for the AR’s rescue of stat3 activ-
ity from the inhibition by PIAS3.
Stat3 activation has been demonstrated to promote dif-
ferentiation of myeloid cell lines (34, 35, 40–43). To further
investigate if increased activated Stat3 can rescue differentia-
tion of ARKO myeloid progenitors, we infected primary bone
marrow GMPs with retroviruses carrying CA-Stat3, dominant-
negative Stat3 (DN-Stat3), or retroviruses carrying pMSCV
vector alone. We seeded infected cells into methylcellulose me-
dium in the presence of G-CSF, and harvested colonies after
7 d. WT and ARKO colonies infected with retroviruses carry-
ing DN-Stat3 exhibited fewer mature neutrophils (Fig. 6 F). In
contrast, WT and ARKO colonies infected with retroviruses
expressing CA-Stat3 contained more mature neutrophils
(Fig. 6 F). These results suggest that blocking endogenous
Stat3 function by overexpression of DN-Stat3 could retard
neutrophil differentiation, whereas increase of CA-Stat3
could rescue neutrophil differentiation.
To further explore the relationship between AR and PIAS3
in granulocytic differentiation, we examined differential counts
of neutrophils in colonies infected with PIAS3 and PIAS3-
siRNA. We infected primary WT and ARKO GMPs with
retroviruses carrying PIAS3, PIAS3-siRNA, and controls. We
then seeded infected cells into methylcellulose medium with
G-CSF for 7 d, and then examined differential counts of fluo-
rescent colony cells. We found PIAS3 overexpression reduced
mature neutrophils, but increased AR could rescue the reduc-
tion (Fig. 6 G). We also found that PIAS3 knockdown by
PIAS3-siRNA could restore mature neutrophil numbers in
ARKO colonies (Fig. 6 H).
The binding of G-CSF to its receptor activates not only
the Jak–Stat3 pathway (44) but also the Ras–Raf–ERK sig-
naling cascade (45). No ERK1/2 activation was found in WT
and ARKO neutrophils before G-CSF treatment (Fig. 7 A).
We observed that ERK1/2 phosphorylation was significantly
decreased in ARKO bone marrow granulocytes with G-CSF
and found their mRNA expressions were decreased in ARKO
granulocytes (Fig. 5 D). Protein expression of SOCS3, a major
downstream target of G-CSF, was also significantly reduced
(Fig. 5 E) in isolated bone marrow granulocytes from ARKO
mice compared with those from WT littermates. These results
suggest that G-CSF signaling could be suppressed in ARKO
granulocytes. We then examined the expression of G-CSFR
using semiquantitative RT-PCR and a flow cytometric–based
G-CSF binding assay. We saw no difference in mRNA and
surface protein expression of G-CSFR between granulocytes
from ARKO and WT mice (Fig. 5, F and G).
Stat3 activity and ERK activation in G-CSF signaling
are reduced in ARKO granulocytes
To investigate if downstream mediators of G-CSF signaling
are suppressed by AR deficiency, we examined the expression
of Stat3, a proximal mediator of the G-CSF signaling (34, 35).
We found that the expression of both total Stat3 and the tyro-
sine-phosphorylated form of Stat3 (pY-Stat3) were similar be-
tween isolated bone marrow neutrophils from WT and those
from ARKO mice in the absence or presence of G-CSF stim-
ulation (Fig. 6 A). Similar levels of Stat3 and pY-Stat3 proteins
were also observed in bone marrow neutrophils from castrated
mice and those from WT and ARKO in the presence of
G-CSF (Fig. 6 B). These results suggest that loss of AR does
not influence the expression or the function of G-CSFR. Inter-
estingly, we found that endogenous AR of granulocytes from
castrated mice is less abundant (Fig. 6 B), which could be
caused by the decrease of AR protein stability in the prolonged
absence of androgen (36, 37). This is further supported by the
finding that castration resulted in a significant reduction of AR
expression and that exogenous DHT administration restored
the reduced AR expression (38).
Because early studies have demonstrated that PIAS3 could
inhibit Stat3 signaling via blocking Stat3 DNA binding (39),
we sought to explore if AR interacts with PIAS3 and affects its
inhibition on Stat3 activity. The glutathione S-transferase
(GST) pull-down data shows that there is a direct protein–pro-
tein interaction between PIAS3 and AR (Fig. 6 C). The PIAS3
interaction with AR possibly occurs through the PIAS3 N ter-
minus, which contains a LXXLL motif, an -helical protein
interaction module that mediates interactions between AR co-
regulators and AR. Using a coimmunoprecipitation assay, we
found that anti-PIAS3 antibodies can precipitate more pY-Stat3
in granulocytes from ARKO, followed by that from castrated
Figure 6.  Stat3 transcriptional activity is reduced in ARKO neutrophils. (A) PIAS3, Stat3, and pY-Stat3 proteins are comparable in WT and ARKO
bone marrow neutrophils. Cells were isolated from mice and then incubated with G-CSF (40 ng/ml) at 37°C for the indicated period. (B) AR protein ex-
pression is lower in bone marrow neutrophils of castrated mice than those of WT mice, while Stat3 and pY-Stat3 levels are comparable. Bone marrow
Gr-1+ cells were isolated from mice and then incubated with G-CSF (40 ng/ml) at 37°C for 30 min. (C) AR interacts with the GST-PIAS3 in the GST pull-down
assay. (D) Binding of Stat3 by PIAS3 is more in ARKO bone marrow neutrophils. The result of band intensities of Stat3, pY-Stat3, and AR in the coimmuno­
precipitation experiment was normalized with band intensities of PIAS3 and shown in the right panel. (E) AR can relieve the PIAS3 inhibition of acti-
vated Stat3 action. The results are presented as fold induction of luciferase activity from triplicate experiments using CV-1 cells and the error bars
represent the SD. ***, P < 0.001. (F) CA-Stat3 induces but DN-Stat3 inhibits neutrophil maturation. (G) PIAS3 inhibits neutrophil maturation, while in-
creased AR rescues the inhibition. (H) PIAS3-siRNA increases neutrophil maturation. Results are presented as cell numbers of neutrophils and precursors
from triplicate experiments and the error bars represent the SD. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 
1192 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
Figure 7.  AR is essential for ERK1/2 activation in G-CSF induced neutrophil proliferation. (A) With G-CSF (40 ng/ml) treatment for the indicated
times, ERK1/2 phosphorylation status was examined in bone marrow neutrophils of WT, castrated WT, and ARKO mice. (B) AR is required for G-CSF-
induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation. By immunoblotting, the expression status of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and total ERK1/2 were compared among each group
of G-CSF–induced granulocytes derived from WT or ARKO bone marrow cells infected with retroviruses carrying AR, AR-siRNA, or control vectors. v, vec-
tor alone; Sc, pSuperior-scrambled siRNA; Si-AR, pSuperior-AR siRNA. (C) U0126 almost abolishes G-CSF–induced proliferation of bone marrow cells. In
the presence or absence of G-CSF (10 ng/ml), bone marrow cells (106/ml) were incubated with or without 1 µM U0126 for 3 d. Proliferative activity was
then examined by 3H-thymidine incorporation. (D) Effects of AR deficiency on the human myeloblastic cell line, KG-1. Stably transfected cells were plated
at 5 × 105 cells/ml in RPMI medium and the number of total viable cells was calculated each day. Results are the mean of three independent experiments
and the error bars represent the SD. (E) Schematic representation of the role of AR in G-CSF signaling.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1193
ARKO neutrophils show reduced neutrophil migration
in response to CXCR2 ligands, but exhibit normal
neutrophil degranulation
The chemokine receptor CXCR2 plays an important role in
neutrophil migration (46). Neutrophil chemoattractants macro-
phage-inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and KC/CXCL1 can
specifically bind to CXCR2, whereas fMLP signals through a
different G protein–coupled receptor (47–50). To test the mi-
gration capability of ARKO neutrophils, we examined the che-
motactic response toward MIP-2, KC, and fMLP. As shown in
Fig. 8 D, ARKO neutrophils demonstrated reduced migration
activities toward the chemoattractants MIP-2 and KC compared
with WT cells; however, ARKO and WT neutrophils had simi-
lar responses to fMLP. It has been shown that lack of Stat3 can
impair CXCR2-dependent neutrophil migration (51), and our
results are correlated with that finding because the Stat3 activity
is mostly inhibited in ARKO neutrophils.
We then examined the release of -glucuronidase and
lactoferrin as the markers of primary and secondary granules
from isolated mature neutrophils after stimulation. We found
that WT and ARKO neutrophils showed no differences in
the release of -glucuronidase or lactoferrin induced by
fMLP, C5a, and PMA (Fig. 8 E).
ARKO mice are more susceptible to microbial infection
To explore if neutropenic ARKO mice have impaired host re-
sistance to acute bacterial infection, we injected 9-wk-old
ARKO mice and age-matched WT controls (10 animals per
group) intraperitoneally with a virulent strain of E. coli. Survival
of the mice was monitored over 60 h. At 12 h after injection,
all 10 ARKO mice showed signs of severe infection, including
diarrhea, hunchback, imbalance, ruffled fur, and eye infection,
but only 3 out of 10 WT mice exhibited signs of infection
(Fig. 8 F). Moreover, all 10 ARKO mice were dead within
36 h, and only 1 WT mouse died within that time frame
(Fig. 8 G). All remaining WT mice were still alive at 60 h. The
inability of the ARKO mice to survive the E. coli challenge
shows that these animals are more susceptible than WT con-
trols to bacterial infection.
Discussion
It is interesting that neutropenia was observed in ARKO and
Tfm mice, whereas castrated male mice only have moderate
reduction of neutrophil counts in both blood and bone mar-
row (Fig. 2, C–E), suggesting that AR, but not androgen, is
critical for neutrophil homeostasis. Other evidences to support
our hypothesis include the following: (a) Exogenous androgen
can restore neutrophil counts in castrated WT mice, but not
ARKO mice (Fig. 2, C–E). (2) Female ARKO mice have
neutropenia, but WT female mice, with 10-fold less androgen
levels compared with male, still maintain normal neutrophil
counts (Fig. 1 H). (3) Our mechanistic studies indicate that AR
reduces the inhibition of PIAS3 to Stat3 transcriptional activ-
ity, and adding androgen only mildly enhances the AR effect
on Stat3 signaling (Fig. 6 E). (4) Without adding androgen,
AR overexpression still increases granulocytic differentiation
treatment (Fig. 7 A). We then found that in the presence of
G-CSF, there is a decrease in phosphorylated ERK1/2 in
WT bone marrow cells carrying AR-siRNA, whereas exog-
enous AR promotes ERK1/2 activation in ARKO bone
marrow cells (Fig. 7 B). Next, we examined the effects of AR
deficiency on the G-CSF–induced proliferation of primary
bone marrow cells and the human myeloblastic cell line KG-1.
Compared with ARKO cells, WT bone marrow cells
showed a significantly higher proliferative activity in response
to G-CSF (Fig. 7 C). Similarly, under G-CSF treatment, WT
KG-1 cells also showed higher cell proliferation than the
KG-1 clone carrying hAR-siRNA (Fig. 7 D). Furthermore,
we found that U0126 (MEK kinase inhibitor) abolished a
large part of G-CSF-induced cell proliferation for those cells
containing AR (Fig. 7 C and D). All of these results suggest
that AR is essential for the G-CSF–induced ERK activa-
tion and subsequent granulocytic proliferation. It has been
reported that AR is important for the activation of c-Src–
Ras–Raf–ERK signaling cascade through the interaction be-
tween the proline-rich motif of AR and the SH3 domain of
c-Src (11). Also, our previous studies have demonstrated
that AR contributes to ERK activation in an androgen-
independent manner (13).
Together, these results indicate that AR not only releases
the PIAS3 inhibition of the Stat3 but also promotes ERK ac-
tivation in G-CSF signaling (Fig. 7 E).
Granulocytes from ARKO mice are capable of phagocytosis
and oxidative burst, but have reduced chemokine
and cytokine production
We then asked if any functions of neutrophils derived from
ARKO mice were impaired as compared with WT controls.
First, we examined the oxidative burst and phagocytic activi-
ties of granulocytes derived from ARKO and WT mice by in-
cubating granulocytes with fluorescein-labeled Escherichia coli
at 37°C (Fig. 8 A). In addition, we assessed the oxidative burst
in response to PMA, fMLP, or anaphylatoxin C5a stimulation
by monitoring the production of H2O2, which converts 2,7-
dichlorofluorescein acetate, a nonfluorescent precursor, to
2,7-dichlorofluorescein. The fluorescence intensity of 2,7-
dichlorofluorescein was comparable in the WT and ARKO
neutrophils as stimulated by PMA (Fig. 8 B), fMLP (Fig. S3),
or C5a (Fig. S3), showing that the oxidative burst capacity of
the two genotypes was similar. These results suggest that both
phagocytosis and the oxidative burst are normal in granulo-
cytes from ARKO mice.
Chemokines and cytokines are important for leukocyte
migration and inflammatory response. To assess the expres-
sion of chemokines and proinflammatory cytokines in the
current study, we used Q-PCR to measure the mRNA levels
in WT and ARKO granulocytes. ARKO cells had lower lev-
els of IL-1, IL-6, TNF- mRNA, and several chemokines
than WT cells (Fig. 8 C), suggesting that reduced production
of chemokines and proinflammatory cytokines might influ-
ence the functions of neutrophils or other leukocytes through
autocrine or paracrine pathways.
1194 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1195
Figure 8.  Neutrophil function and host defense against infection in the absence of AR. (A) Uptake of fluorescein-labeled E. coli by WT and ARKO
neutrophils at 37°C. (B) Flow cytometric analysis of oxidant production and subsequent 2,7-dichlorofluorescein generation in WT and ARKO granulo-
cytes after PMA stimulation. (C) Relative mRNA expression of chemokines and cytokines in isolated WT and ARKO bone marrow granulocytes. *, P < 0.05.
(D) Mature bone marrow neutrophils from WT or ARKO mice were tested for migration in Transwell chambers toward the indicated chemoattractant
(200 ng/ml MIP-2, 1 µg/ml KC, or 100 µM fMLP). The number of cells migrated through the Transwell was determined by cell counting. Data from six indepen-
dent experiments are presented and the error bars represent the SD. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. (E) Neutrophil degranulation of WT and ARKO neutrophils
was examined without or with stimulation by fMLP, C5a, or PMA. (top) The release of the primary granules was examined using the -glucuronidase ac-
tivity in the supernatant of stimulated neutrophils. Data are presented as the percentage of total cellular -glucuronidase content. (bottom) Release of
the specific granule marker lactoferrin in the supernatant of stimulated neutrophils was quantified by ELISA. Both degranulation assays were performed
in six independent experiments. (F) Representative photograph of WT and ARKO mice after 12-h intraperitoneal injection with E. coli. ARKO mice showed
signs of severe infection, such as hunchback, ruffled fur, and eye infection; however, WT mice remained normal. (G) Kaplan-Meier survival curve of WT
and ARKO mice in response to intraperitoneal challenge with E. coli. We examined the time course of survival following E. coli infection. Survival over time
is shown as percentage mice remaining.
 
in colony formation assays (Fig. 3 E). With these observations,
we believe that AR confers a direct and more profound effect
than androgen. We note with interest that neutropenia result-
ing from AR ablation contrasts with the effect of knocking out
the estrogen receptor . The estrogen receptor  KO mice
show an overproduction of mature granulocytes (52). These
opposing effects on granulopoiesis suggest that both AR and
ER are required to maintain neutrophil homeostasis.
In vitro and transgenic mouse studies have demonstrated
that Stat3 plays an essential role in G-CSF–dependent granu-
lopoiesis (35, 51, 53–56). Moreover, several reports have
shown that SOCS3 KO mice, in which Stat3 activity is per-
sistent, developed severe neutrophilia (57–59). Paradoxically,
mice with targeted deletion of the Stat3 gene in hematopoi-
etic cells were also found to develop neutrophilia (60–63).
Nevertheless, ERK1/2 hyperphosphorylation was found in
bone marrow cells of Stat3 conditional KO mice, and it has
been shown to contribute to neutrophilia in those animals
(63). It is possible that the ERK1/2 hyperactivation results
from SHP–Grb2–Src binding to available Stat3 docking sites
on G-CSF receptor and overactivating the Ras–Raf–ERK
signaling cascade. This possible signal crossover has been sug-
gested in some reports showing that G-CSFR truncated mu-
tants lacking the receptor C terminus, which contains tyrosine
Y764 (the default docking site for SHP-2/Grb2), still have
the ability to activate p21Ras via the SHP/Grb2 route linked
to Y704 (the stat3 docking site) of the G-CSFR (41, 64).
Clearly, further investigation is still required to determine the
precise role of Stat3 in neutrophil development.
Several KO models have been established for genes in-
volved in the regulation of myelopoiesis. C/EBP/ mice
have circulating myeloblast-like cells but lack mature neutro-
phils in vivo at birth. Although it was found that a lower
PU.1:C/EBP ratio directs granulocytic differentiation over
macrophage differentiation in myeloid cell fate determina-
tion, a PU.1/ mice study demonstrated that PU.1 is not
essential for neutrophil lineage commitment, but is necessary
for normal development, maturation, and function of neu-
trophils. Gfi/ mice are severely neutropenic and accumu-
late immature monocytic cells in blood and bone marrow.
We found the mRNA levels of PU.1, C/EBP, and Gfi in
ARKO bone marrow neutrophils are comparable to those
detected in WT neutrophils (unpublished data), indicating
that C/EBP, PU.1, and Gfi might not account for the gran-
ulopoietic defect observed in ARKO mice. Notably, a few
mature neutrophils can still be observed in G-CSF/,
G-CSFR/, and G-CSF/GM-CSF/M-CSF/ mice (5,
65, 66), suggesting that a myeloid-CSF independent mecha-
nism exists in basal granulopoiesis. It might be interesting to
further study whether AR also modulates a myeloid–CSF-
independent pathway.
Androgens can stimulate erythropoiesis and have been used
clinically for treatment of aplastic anemia (26, 27). However, our
data (Table I A) indicate that red blood cell numbers and hemo-
globin levels in WT and ARKO mice are similar, suggesting
that AR is not required for steady-state erythrocyte production
under physiological conditions. These results, however, are at
odds with early reports showing that androgens could stimulate
erythropoiesis (67). The diverse effect on erythropoiesis by dif-
ferent androgen derivatives is indicative of the complexity of an-
drogen control in erythropoiesis. 5-DHT binds to the AR and
might stimulate erythropoiesis indirectly by increasing levels of
erythropoietin, whereas 5 epimers (5-DHT and etiocholan­
olone) do not bind to the AR, yet effectively increase the
number of erythropoietic progenitor cells, thereby also en-
hancing erythropoiesis (68–73). It will be interesting to study if
androgen stimulates erythropoiesis through an AR-indepen-
dent pathway.
In summary, the data presented here indicate AR is es-
sential for steady-state granulopoiesis. Further studies that ex-
plore potential cross talk between AR and other myeloid
regulators in granulopoiesis might help reveal a better under-
standing of how cell signaling networks tightly control neu-
trophil homeostasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice. Construction of targeting vectors and generation of the chimera
founder mice have been previously described (12). The original strain back-
ground of the mosaic founder mice was C57BL6/129sv. We have generated
floxed AR mice with a nearly pure C57BL/6 background by backcrossing
the original C57BL6/129sv background floxed AR mice with pure C57BL/6
background mice for more than eight generations. -Actin is constitutively
and ubiquitously expressed; thus, the -actin promoter-driven Cre (ACTB-
Cre, FVB background; The Jackson Laboratory) will express and delete
floxed AR fragments in all the tissues. WT and ARKO mice were genotyped
1196 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
creased neutrophil counts from smoking and infections were also prevented,
and the results are statistically analyzed. We requested coded data from chart
reviews that include only patient diagnosis, treatments, time of blood drawn,
and blood analysis data.
FACS detection of BrdU-labeled neutrophils, cell cycle analysis,
and apoptosis assays. The immunofluorescent staining of intracellular
BrdU incorporation has been previously described (74). To study cycling
status of granulocytes, we first stained bone marrow cells with FITC-Gr-1
antibody, fixed cells in 70% ethanol and removed residual RNA by RNase
A, and then further stained them with propidium iodide (final concentration
5 µg/ml) for analysis by a FACSCalibur flow cytometer. Data were further
analyzed using CellQuest Software (BD) for DNA histogram analysis of Gr-1+
cells. For neutrophil apoptosis assays, bone marrow cells were stained
with Annexin-V and 7-AAD. High-SSC cell population was then gated for
apoptosis analysis.
Hematopoietic progenitor cell assay. Single-cell suspensions of bone
marrow (2.5 × 104 cells) in methylcellulose medium (MethoCult M3234,
Stem Cell Technologies) were plated in 35-mm Petri dishes in triplicate and
incubated at 37°C. Purified recombinant murine (rm)G-CSF (10 ng/ml),
rmGM-CSF (10 ng/ml), rmM-CSF (10 ng/ml), rmIL-3 (10 ng/ml), and
rmIL-6 (400 ng/ml) (R&D Systems) were used.
RNA analysis. Neutrophils were isolated by EasySep selection kit (Stem Cell
Technologies) and total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen). We performed reverse transcription using Superscript II reverse
transcription and oligo-dT primers (Invitrogen) on 250 ng of total RNA. In
semiquantitative RT-PCR, cDNA was diluted 5, 25, 50, and 100 times, and
an aliquot (2 µl) of the reverse transcription reaction was subjected to PCR in
a thermocycler (MyCycler; BioRad Laboratories). -Actin was used as an in-
ternal control. Q-PCR was performed in a final volume of 25 µl containing
1 µg cDNA, 12.5 µl SYBR Green Mix (2X), 6 pmol of each primer set. The
primer sequences for Q-PCR are listed in Table S1. The reaction mixtures
were incubated on a iCycler (BioRad Laboratories) real-time PCR amplifier
(BioRad Laboratories) programmed at 50°C, 2 min; 95°C 10 min; then 40
cycles for three steps at 95°C, 15 s to 60°C, 30 s to 72°C, 30 s; and finally at
70°C for 10 min. HPRT mRNA was used as the internal control. Real-time
Q-PCR was performed by determining the cycle at which the abundance of
the accumulated PCR product crosses a specific threshold, the threshold cycle
(CT) in each reaction. The difference in average CT values between the in-
ternal control and a specific gene was calculated for each individual and termed
CT, which is comparable to the log-transformed, normalized mRNA abun-
dance. For each gene, at least three samples with triplicate amplifications were
performed and mean ± SD taken for data analysis.
Construction. The retroviral vectors pBabe-AR and pBabe-PIAS3 were
constructed by ligating digested PCR products of AR and PIAS3 cDNA into
a pBabe vector containing the SV40 promoter-driven GFP. To generate vec-
tors for siRNA expression, the pSuperior-GFP-neo vector (OligoEngine) was
digested and the annealed oligonucleotides were ligated into the vector. The
nucleotide sequences for targeting mouse AR, PIAS3, and Stat3 were de-
signed as 5-TCTAGCCTCAATGAGCTTG-3, 5-gccactgccct­
tctatgaa-3, and 5-agccgatctaggcagatg-3, respectively.
Scrambled control shRNA unrelated to AR, PIAS3, and Stat3 sequences were
used as negative controls. hAR-siRNA was described previously (13).
Isolation of GMP precursor cells. The myeloid-committed precursor
populations from murine bone marrow were isolated by first depleting lin-
eage marker–positive cells by means of immunomagnetic beads. The re-
maining cells were then stained with goat anti–rat immunoglobulin Texas
red and anti–c-kit–APC and then enrichment sorted for Lin c-kit+ cells.
The enrichment-sorted cells were then stained with anti-FcRII/III
(CD16/32)–FITC, anti–c-kit–APC, anti–IL-7R–Alexa Fluor 594, anti–
Sca-1–Alexa Fluor 594, and anti–CD34-biotin, followed by PE-avidin. The
by PCR, as described previously (12). Male Tfm and WT control mice
(C57BL/6J-A-Ta[6J]+/Y) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. All
animal experiments were approved by the University Committee on Animal
Resources of the University of Rochester.
Castration. Castration was performed under anesthesia using sterile instruments
and gloves. A transverse scrotal incision was made, the testicles were exposed, the
vas deferens and spermatic blood vessels were ligated, and the testicles were re-
moved. A sham operation was performed for noncastrated controls in which the
testis and epididymis were only pulled out and then returned to the scrotum.
The scrotal incision was closed using a single skin clip. Animals were placed in a
clean cage and monitored until fully recovered from anesthesia.
Androgen supplementation. Androgen supplementation in castrated WT
mice and ARKO littermates was achieved by subcutaneous implantation of
60-d time-release pellets (Innovative Research of America) containing DHT
(5 mg per pellet); mice were sacrificed 14 d after androgen supplementation.
The levels of plasma DHT were determined by a DHT ELISA Kit (Alpha
Diagnostic International) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Blood and bone marrow sampling. Between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m., we col-
lected peripheral blood through cardiac puncture using a heparinized 3-ml sy-
ringe with a 30-gauge needle on mice under anesthesia. We dissected the
femur free from the muscle, and then cut both at the knee and hip for removal.
We removed bone marrow from each femur by flushing with 1 ml RPMI
1640 (using a 26-gauge needle and a 1-ml syringe) into a single well of a 6-well
culture plate.
Cytology and automated hematology analysis. Bone marrow smears,
blood smears, and cytospin preparations were stained with Wright-Giemsa
for morphological assessment and manual differential counting. Hematologic
parameters from blood samples obtained from 8–12-wk-old mice were mea-
sured using an Abbot CELL-DYN 4000 system.
Cell isolation. We isolated neutrophils from bone marrow or peripheral
blood by using the EasySep selection kit (StemCell Technologies) according to
the manufacturer’s suggested procedures. Mature bone marrow neutrophils
were isolated by discontinuous Percoll density gradient centrifugation.
Cell staining and FACS analysis. 1–5 × 105 cells were incubated on ice for
30 min with saturating amounts of antibody. Cells were washed with ice-cold
PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum, and flow cytometric analyses were
performed using a dual-laser FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD). For analysis
of white blood cell populations, we set gates to include those cells that were
CD45+ and viable by FSC and SSC scan profiles. Neutrophils were stained by
fluorochrome-conjugated, neutrophil-specific monoclonal antibodies (clone
7/4; Invitrogen) or anti–Gr-1 antibodies (clone RB6-8C5; eBioscience). For
intracellular AR staining, after cells were incubated with fixative buffer (2%
paraformaldehyde) and permeabilized with permeabilization solution (0.1%
saponin in PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum), intracellular AR was
stained by anti-AR antibody (clone C-19; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.),
followed by fluorochrome-conjugated anti–rabbit IgG antibodies. Data were
collected and analyzed from at least 10,000 gated events using CellQuest soft-
ware (BD). To assess surface G-CSFR expression, G-CSF was biotinylated.
Bone marrow Gr-1+ cells were incubated at 48°C for 1 h with biotinylated
G-CSF (25 ng per 106 cells) in the presence or absence of a 100-fold molar ex-
cess of nonlabeled G-CSF, followed by incubation with FITC-conjugated
streptavidin. All cells were analyzed on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer.
Neutrophil differential counts in humans before and after androgen
ablation. We collaborated with the Department of Urology at the Sir Run
Run Shaw Hospital to collect blood analysis data from each patient before
and after surgical castration (0–2 wk before castration and 2–4 wk after castra-
tion). Appropriate data excluded any patients receiving radiation therapy
and/or chemotherapy. Diurnal rhythms of neutrophil counts and possible in-
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1197
[35S]methionine-labeled proteins (2 µl) generated with the TNT-coupled
reticulocyte lysate system (Promega) were mixed with the glutathione–Sep-
harose-bound GST proteins at 4°C for 3 h to perform the pull-down assay.
The bound proteins were separated on a 10% or 15% SDS-polyacrylamide
gel and visualized by PhosphorImager (GE Healthcare).
In vitro proliferative activity. In the presence or absence of G-CSF
(10 ng/ml), bone marrow mononuclear cells (106/ml) were incubated in RPMI
with or without U0126 (20 µM). After 3 d, 0.5 µCi 3H-thymidine was added
and the cells were cultured for an additional 8 h. Proliferative activity was then
determined by 3H-thymidine incorporation.
Assessment of phagocytosis and oxidative burst assays. Heparinized
blood was incubated with opsonized fluorescein-labeled E. coli (Invitrogen)
either at 37°C or at 0°C (control) for 10 min. After erythrocyte lysis, cells were
washed twice and then stained with CyChrome–anti-Gr-1 antibodies. Oxida-
tive burst in response to PMA was evaluated by detecting the intracellular con-
versionofdichlorofluoresceindiacetate(DCFH-DA)to2,7-dichlorofluorescein
by flow cytometry. Leukocytes were stained with CyChrome–anti-Gr-1 anti-
bodies and cells were mixed with 10 µM DCFH-DA and 10 nM PMA for
5 min at 37°C. We examined intracellular 2,7 dichlorofluorescein content in
WT and ARKO Gr-1+ cells. 10,000 gated Gr-1+ cells were analyzed using
CellQuest software. We isolated fresh mature bone marrow neutrophils by
discontinuous Percoll density gradient centrifugation to perform oxidative
burst assays in response to fMLP (1 µM) or C5a (1 µg/ml).
Neutrophil migration. Fresh WT and ARKO mature bone marrow neu-
trophils were obtained by discontinuous Percoll density gradient centrifuga-
tion. Neutrophils (5 × 105 cells) were then plated in 3 µm Transwells (Corning)
with the indicated chemoattractant (200 ng/ml MIP-2, 1 µg/ml KC, or
0.1 mM fMLP) in the lower chamber. The number of cells migrated through
the Transwell was determined by cell counting after incubation for 2 h at
37°C. Over 90% neutrophils remained viable at the end of the assay as judged
by trypan blue exclusion.
Neutrophil degranulation. Cells (106/ml) were preincubated with 5 µg/ml
cytochalasin B for 10 min and then stimulated with 1 µM fMLP, 0.5 µg/ml
C5a, or 200 nM PMA for 20 min at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by cool-
ing on ice and cell suspensions were centrifuged. -Glucuronidase activity in
supernatants of activated cells was measured spectrophotometrically using
4-methylumbelliferyl--d-glucuronide as substrate (75). -Glucuronidase
release is presented as the percentage of total cellular content. The secondary
granule marker lactoferrin was determined by ELISA using anti-lactoferrin
antibody (Sigma-Aldrich).
Survival after intraperitoneal infection. 10 WT and 10 ARKO mice
were administered 5 × 105 colony forming units of E. coli (Serotype O18ac:
K1:H7; American Type Culture Collection) by intraperitoneal injection and
were followed for survival over 60 h.
Statistical analysis. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from at least three
experiments, and statistical analysis was performed by either two-tailed Stu-
dent’s t test or one-way analysis of variance. The statistical significance of dif-
ferences was set at P < 0.05.
Online supplemental material. Fig.S1 showsAR activity is knockeddown by
AR siRNA and restored by AR cDNA using retroviral infection in CV-1 cells.
Fig.S2showsAR-targeteddisruptionincolonycellsderivedfromGMPsinfected
with retrovirus carrying AR-siRNA. Fig. S3 demonstrates that the oxidative
burst induced by fMLP or C5a in WT and ARKO neutrophils was comparable.
Table S1 shows primer sequences for Q-PCR analysis. Online supplemental ma-
terial is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20082521/DC1.
The authors are grateful to Karen Wolf and Leroy Hanchett for manuscript
preparation and thank Marshall Lichtman, James Palis, Stephen Welle, and
GMP precursor population was sorted as Lin CD16/32+ CD34+ c-kit+
Sca-1 IL-7R cells.
Retroviral infection. Phoenix ectrophic cells were grown in DME supple-
mented with 10% FCS. Cells were typically seeded in 60-mm-diam plates at a
density of 2.4 × 106 cells per plate and allowed to settle for 18 to 24 h. Cells were
transfected with 5–10 µg of plasmid DNA using calcium phosphate transfection.
The media containing the plasmid DNA precipitate were replaced with fresh
media 16 h after transfection. Retroviral supernatants were collected 48 h after
transfection from Phoenix cells transfected with the retroviral vector–based con-
structs and used to infect freshly sorted GMP precursor cells. Infections were
performed with 1 ml of undiluted supernatant in 2 ml of DME plus 400 µg of
Polybrene per ml at 37°C. After 4 h of incubation, 2 ml of DME with 10% FCS
were added and incubated for an additional 20 h.
Green fluorescent colony formation and differentiation counting.
After retroviral infection, single-cell suspensions of GMP precursor cells in
methylcellulose medium (MethoCult M3234; StemCell Technologies Inc.)
were plated in 35-mm culture dishes in triplicate and incubated at 37°C in the
presence of rm G-CSF (10 ng/ml) in a humidified incubator maintained at
5% CO2. After 7 d in culture, the numbers of green fluorescent colonies in
each dish were counted, and green fluorescent colony cells were collected in
suspension for cell counting. Cells were cytocentrifuged onto a microscope
slide and stained with Wright-Giemsa for morphological assessment and 200-
count manual differential counting.
In vivo administration of G-CSF. We injected three pairs of WT and
ARKO littermates subcutaneously with rmG-CSF at 40 ng/g mice from day
0–8, and then examined blood neutrophil counts 4 h after G-CSF injection
at the indicated days.
Reporter gene assays. CV-1 cells were transfected with 4 × IRF-LUC (1.5 µg)
together with CA-Stat3 (0.5 µg), flag-PIAS3 expression construct (0.5 or
1.0 µg), and increasing amounts of AR (0.5 or 1.0 µg) with plasmid amount
balance. The media was changed 2 h after transfection, and cells were cultured
in media containing 10% charcoal depleted-FBS for 24 h, followed by treat-
ment with or without 10 nM DHT for another 16–18 h. 5 ng phRL-TK per
well was used as internal control. Cells were harvested, and the Luc activity
was analyzed using Dual-Luc Reporter Assay System (Promega).
Immunoblot analysis of cells infected with retroviruses. We infected
WT and ARKO GMPs or bone marrow cells with retroviruses carrying
pBabe-AR, AR-siRNA, or controls. After retroviral infection, single-cell
suspensions of bone marrow cells in methylcellulose medium were plated in
culture dishes and incubated at 37°C in the presence of G-CSF (10 ng/ml).
After 7 to 10 d in culture, colony cells were collected and further incubated
with or without G-CSF (40 ng/ml) for 30 min, and cells were harvested for
immunoblot analysis.
Immunoprecipitation. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 7.4, 0.3 M NaCl containing 1% NP-40, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate,
1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 10 µg/ml each of aprotinin, pep-
statin, and leupeptin). Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-PIAS3
antibody as indicated. The immunoprecipitates from cell lysates were re-
solved on 5–20% SDS–PAGE and transferred to Immobilon membrane
(Millipore). The membranes were then probed with each antibody as indi-
cated. Immunoreactive proteins were visualized using an enhanced chemilu-
minescence detection system (GE Healthcare) and analyzed using Quantity
One software (BioRad Laboratories).
GST pull-down assay. GST-PIAS3 fusion protein and GST protein were
obtained by transforming expressing plasmids into BL21 (DE3) pLysS strain-
competent cells followed with 1 mM isopropyl-D-thiogalactoside induc-
tion. GST fusion proteins were then purified by glutathione–Sepharose 4B
as instructed by the manufacturer (GE Healthcare). In vitro translated
1198 NEUTROPENIA IN AR-DEFICIENT MICE | Chuang et al.
	16.	 Mantalaris, A., N. Panoskaltsis, Y. Sakai, P. Bourne, C. Chang, E.M.
Messing, and J.H. Wu. 2001. Localization of androgen receptor expres-
sion in human bone marrow. J. Pathol. 193:361–366.
	17.	 Byron, J.W. 1970. Effect of steroids on the cycling of haemopoietic stem
cells. Nature. 228:1204.
	18.	 Resegotti, L., C. Dolci, L. Bertero, A. Genovese, F. Podesta, and D.
Testa. 1981. Treatment of aplastic anaemia with methenolone, stanozolol
and nandrolone. A report of 130 cases. Panminerva Med. 23:243–248.
	19.	 Udupa, K.B., and K.R. Reissmann. 1974. Acceleration of granulopoietic
recovery by androgenic steroids in mice made neutropenic by cytotoxic
drugs. Cancer Res. 34:2517–2520.
	20.	 DiBenedetto, J. Jr., D.J. Higby, S.J. Chester, and M.M. Albala. 1980.
Reversal of cyclophosphamide induced neutropenia by hypertransfusion
and androgen therapy. J. Med. 11:385–392.
	21.	 Horn, Y., and D.C. Price. 1972. The effect of androgens on erythroid
and granulocytic marrow recovery in the irradiated rat. Acta Haematol.
48:300–306.
	22.	 Horn, Y. 1971. The effect of androgenic hormones on bone marrow of
rats receiving chemotherapy. Oncology. 25:512–519.
	23.	 Horn, Y. 1972. A comparison of two androgenic hormones as leuko-
poietic agents in irradiated rats. Oncology. 26:16–24.
	24.	 Horn, Y. 1971. Leucopoietic properties of four different androgenic
hormones in irradiated rats. Scand. J. Haematol. 8:470–475.
	25.	 D’Alessandro, N., N. Gebbia, F. Biondo, L. Campio, G. Leto, F.
Tumminello, and L. Rausa. 1979. Haemopoietic effects of 7 alpha, 17
beta dimethyltestosterone. Pharmacol. Res. Commun. 11:81–94.
	26.	 Sanchez-Medal, L., J. Pizzuto, E. Torre-Lopez, and R. Derbez. 1964. Effect
of Oxymetholone in Refractory Anemia. Arch. Intern. Med. 113:721–729.
	27.	 Sanchez-Medal, L. 1971. The hemopoietic action of androstanes. Prog.
Hematol. 7:111–136.
	28.	 Alter, B.P. 1992. Fanconi’s anemia. Current concepts. Am. J. Pediatr.
Hematol. Oncol. 14:170–176.
	29.	 Freedman, M.H., and J.J. Doyle. 1999. Chapter 1: Inherited Bone
Marrow Failure Syndromes. In Pediatric Hematology. Second edition.
J. Lilleyman, I. Hann, and V. Blanchette, editors. p. 23–49.
	30.	 Kennedy, B.J. 1965. Stimulation of hematopoiesis by androgenic hor-
mones. Geriatrics. 20:808–815.
	31.	 Rawbone,R.G.,andK.D.Bagshawe.1972.Anabolicsteroidsandbonemar-
row toxicity during therapy with methotrexate. Br. J. Cancer. 26:395–401.
	32.	 Ibanez, L., A.M. Jaramillo, A. Ferrer, and F. de Zegher. 2005. High
neutrophil count in girls and women with hyperinsulinaemic hyperan-
drogenism: normalization with metformin and flutamide overcomes the
aggravation by oral contraception. Hum. Reprod. 20:2457–2462.
	33.	 Gaspar, M.L., T. Meo, P. Bourgarel, J.L. Guenet, and M. Tosi. 1991. A
single base deletion in the Tfm androgen receptor gene creates a short-
lived messenger RNA that directs internal translation initiation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:8606–8610.
	34.	 de Koning, J.P., A.A. Soede-Bobok, A.C. Ward, A.M. Schelen, C.
Antonissen, D. van Leeuwen, B. Lowenberg, and I.P. Touw. 2000.
STAT3-mediated differentiation and survival and of myeloid cells in
response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: role for the cyclin-de-
pendent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1). Oncogene. 19:3290–3298.
	35.	 Shimozaki,K.,K.Nakajima,T.Hirano,andS.Nagata.1997.Involvement
of STAT3 in the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-induced differ-
entiation of myeloid cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272:25184–25189.
	36.	 Furutani, T., T. Watanabe, K. Tanimoto, T. Hashimoto, H. Koutoku, M.
Kudoh, Y. Shimizu, S. Kato, and H. Shikama. 2002. Stabilization of an-
drogen receptor protein is induced by agonist, not by antagonists. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 294:779–784.
	37.	 Zhou, Z.X., M.V. Lane, J.A. Kemppainen, F.S. French, and E.M.
Wilson. 1995. Specificity of ligand-dependent androgen receptor stabi-
lization: receptor domain interactions influence ligand dissociation and
receptor stability. Mol. Endocrinol. 9:208–218.
	38.	 Antonio, J., J.D. Wilson, and F.W. George. 1999. Effects of castra-
tion and androgen treatment on androgen-receptor levels in rat skeletal
muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 87:2016–2019.
	39.	 Chung, C.D., J. Liao, B. Liu, X. Rao, P. Jay, P. Berta, and K. Shuai.
1997. Specific inhibition of Stat3 signal transduction by PIAS3. Science.
278:1803–1805.
Alexandra Livingstone for critical review. We thank Ke Shuai and Daniel Link for
sharing PIAS3, 4 × IRF-Luc, pMSCV-Stat3C (CA-Stat3), and pMSCV-Stat3D (DN-
Stat3) plasmids. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant
DK073414 and the George Whipple Professorship Endorsement.
The authors have no conflicting financial interests.
Submitted: 6 November 2008
Accepted: 13 April 2009
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Demetri, G.D., and J.D. Griffin. 1991. Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor and its receptor. Blood. 78:2791–2808.
	 2.	 Souza, L.M., T.C. Boone, J. Gabrilove, P.H. Lai, K.M. Zsebo, D.C.
Murdock, V.R. Chazin, J. Bruszewski, H. Lu, K.K. Chen, et al. 1986.
Recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: effects on
normal and leukemic myeloid cells. Science. 232:61–65.
	 3.	 Rex, J.H., S.C. Bhalla, D.M. Cohen, J.P. Hester, S.E. Vartivarian, and
E.J. Anaissie. 1995. Protection of human polymorphonuclear leukocyte
function from the deleterious effects of isolation, irradiation, and storage by
interferon-gamma and granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor. Transfusion.
35:605–611.
	 4.	 Lord, B.I., M.H. Bronchud, S. Owens, J. Chang, A. Howell, L. Souza, and
T.M. Dexter. 1989. The kinetics of human granulopoiesis following treat-
ment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 86:9499–9503.
	 5.	 Lieschke, G.J., D. Grail, G. Hodgson, D. Metcalf, E. Stanley, C. Cheers,
K.J. Fowler, S. Basu, Y.F. Zhan, and A.R. Dunn. 1994. Mice lacking
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor have chronic neutropenia, granulo-
cyte and macrophage progenitor cell deficiency, and impaired neutrophil
mobilization. Blood. 84:1737–1746.
	 6.	 Nazareth, L.V., and N.L. Weigel. 1996. Activation of the human andro-
gen receptor through a protein kinase A signaling pathway. J. Biol. Chem.
271:19900–19907.
	 7.	 Culig, Z., A. Hobisch, M.V. Cronauer, C. Radmayr, J. Trapman, A.
Hittmair, G. Bartsch, and H. Klocker. 1994. Androgen receptor activation
in prostatic tumor cell lines by insulin-like growth factor-I, keratinocyte
growth factor, and epidermal growth factor. Cancer Res. 54:5474–5478.
	 8.	 Yeh, S., H.K. Lin, H.Y. Kang, T.H. Thin, M.F. Lin, and C. Chang. 1999.
From HER2/Neu signal cascade to androgen receptor and its coactivators:
a novel pathway by induction of androgen target genes through MAP
kinase in prostate cancer cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 96:5458–5463.
	 9.	 Xie, Y., D.W. Wolff, M.F. Lin, and Y. Tu. 2007. Vasoactive intesti-
nal peptide transactivates the androgen receptor through a protein kinase
A-dependent extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway in prostate
cancer LNCaP cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 72:73–85.
	10.	 Kasbohm, E.A., R. Guo, C.W. Yowell, G. Bagchi, P. Kelly, P. Arora,
P.J. Casey, and Y. Daaka. 2005. Androgen receptor activation by G(s)
signaling in prostate cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 280:11583–11589.
	11.	 Migliaccio, A., G. Castoria, M. Di Domenico, A. de Falco, A. Bilancio, M.
Lombardi, M.V. Barone, D. Ametrano, M.S. Zannini, C. Abbondanza, and
F. Auricchio. 2000. Steroid-induced androgen receptor-oestradiol recep-
tor beta-Src complex triggers prostate cancer cell proliferation. EMBO J.
19:5406–5417.
	12.	 Yeh, S., M.Y. Tsai, Q. Xu, X.M. Mu, H. Lardy, K.E. Huang, H. Lin, S.D.
Yeh, S. Altuwaijri, X. Zhou, et al. 2002. Generation and characterization
of androgen receptor knockout (ARKO) mice: an in vivo model for the
study of androgen functions in selective tissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
99:13498–13503.
	13.	 Yeh, S., Y.C. Hu, P.H. Wang, C. Xie, Q. Xu, M.Y. Tsai, Z. Dong, R.S.
Wang, T.H. Lee, and C. Chang. 2003. Abnormal mammary gland devel-
opment and growth retardation in female mice and MCF7 breast cancer
cells lacking androgen receptor. J. Exp. Med. 198:1899–1908.
	14.	 Hu, Y.C., P.H. Wang, S. Yeh, R.S. Wang, C. Xie, Q. Xu, X. Zhou,
H.T. Chao, M.Y. Tsai, and C. Chang. 2004. Subfertility and defective
folliculogenesis in female mice lacking androgen receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 101:11209–11214.
	15.	 Matsumoto, T., H. Shiina, H. Kawano, T. Sato, and S. Kato. 2008.
Androgen receptor functions in male and female physiology. J. Steroid
Biochem. Mol. Biol. 109:236–241.
JEM VOL. 206, May 11, 2009
ARTICLE
1199
results in neutrophil expansion and induces a distinct, antiapoptotic and
pro-oncogenic gene expression pattern. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82:975–985.
	57.	 Croker, B.A., D. Metcalf, L. Robb, W. Wei, S. Mifsud, L. DiRago,
L.A. Cluse, K.D. Sutherland, L. Hartley, E. Williams, et al. 2004.
SOCS3 is a critical physiological negative regulator of G-CSF signaling
and emergency granulopoiesis. Immunity. 20:153–165.
	58.	 Kimura, A., I. Kinjyo, Y. Matsumura, H. Mori, R. Mashima, M. Harada,
K.R. Chien, H. Yasukawa, and A. Yoshimura. 2004. SOCS3 is a physi-
ological negative regulator for granulopoiesis and granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor receptor signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 279:6905–6910.
	59.	 Jenkins, B.J., A.W. Roberts, M. Najdovska, D. Grail, and M. Ernst.
2005. The threshold of gp130-dependent STAT3 signaling is critical for
normal regulation of hematopoiesis. Blood. 105:3512–3520.
	60.	 Takeda, K., B.E. Clausen, T. Kaisho, T. Tsujimura, N. Terada, I. Forster,
and S. Akira. 1999. Enhanced Th1 activity and development of chronic
enterocolitis in mice devoid of Stat3 in macrophages and neutrophils.
Immunity. 10:39–49.
	61.	 Lee, C.K., R. Raz, R. Gimeno, R. Gertner, B. Wistinghausen, K.
Takeshita, R.A. DePinho, and D.E. Levy. 2002. STAT3 is a negative
regulator of granulopoiesis but is not required for G-CSF-dependent
differentiation. Immunity. 17:63–72.
	62.	 Welte, T., S.S. Zhang, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, D.G. Hesslein, Z. Yin, A.
Kano, Y. Iwamoto, E. Li, J.E. Craft, et al. 2003. STAT3 deletion dur-
ing hematopoiesis causes Crohn’s disease-like pathogenesis and lethality:
a critical role of STAT3 in innate immunity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
100:1879–1884.
	63.	 Kamezaki, K., K. Shimoda, A. Numata, T. Haro, H. Kakumitsu, M.
Yoshie, M. Yamamoto, K. Takeda, T. Matsuda, S. Akira, et al. 2005.
Roles of Stat3 and ERK in G-CSF signaling. Stem Cells. 23:252–263.
	64.	 de Koning, J.P., A.A. Soede-Bobok, A.M. Schelen, L. Smith, D. van
Leeuwen, V. Santini, B.M. Burgering, J.L. Bos, B. Lowenberg, and I.P.
Touw. 1998. Proliferation signaling and activation of Shc, p21Ras, and
Myc via tyrosine 764 of human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor re-
ceptor. Blood. 91:1924–1933.
	65.	 Liu, F., H.Y. Wu, R. Wesselschmidt, T. Kornaga, and D.C. Link. 1996.
Impaired production and increased apoptosis of neutrophils in granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor receptor-deficient mice. Immunity. 5:491–501.
	66.	 Hibbs, M.L., C. Quilici, N. Kountouri, J.F. Seymour, J.E. Armes, A.W.
Burgess, and A.R. Dunn. 2007. Mice lacking three myeloid colony-stimu-
lating factors (G-CSF, GM-CSF, and M-CSF) still produce macrophages
and granulocytes and mount an inflammatory response in a sterile model of
peritonitis. J. Immunol. 178:6435–6443.
	67.	 Fried, W., and C. Morley. 1985. Effects of androgenic steroids on eryth-
ropoiesis. Steroids. 46:799–826.
	68.	 Gardner, F.H., and E.C. Besa. 1983. Physiologic mechanisms and the
hematopoietic effects of the androstanes and their derivatives. Curr. Top.
Hematol. 4:123–195.
	69.	 Beckman, B., B. Maddux, A. Segaloff, and J.W. Fisher. 1981. Effects of
testosterone and 5 beta-androstanes on in vitro erythroid colony formation
in mouse bone marrow. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 167:51–54.
	70.	 Besa, E.C., and L.P. Bullock. 1981. The role of the androgen receptor
in erythropoiesis. Endocrinology. 109:1983–1989.
	71.	 Mooradian, A.D., J.E. Morley, and S.G. Korenman. 1987. Biological
actions of androgens. Endocr. Rev. 8:1–28.
	72.	 Claustres, M., and C. Sultan. 1988. Androgen and erythropoiesis: evi-
dence for an androgen receptor in erythroblasts from human bone mar-
row cultures. Horm. Res. 29:17–22.
	73.	 Besa, E.C. 1994. Hematologic effects of androgens revisited: an alternative
therapy in various hematologic conditions. Semin. Hematol. 31:134–145.
	74.	 Basu, S., G. Hodgson, M. Katz, and A.R. Dunn. 2002. Evaluation of role
of G-CSF in the production, survival, and release of neutrophils from bone
marrow into circulation. Blood. 100:854–861.
	75.	 Dewald, B., and M. Baggiolini. 1986. Methods for assessing exocytosis
by neutrophil leukocytes. Methods Enzymol. 132:267–277.
	40.	 Minami, M., M. Inoue, S. Wei, K. Takeda, M. Matsumoto, T.
Kishimoto, and S. Akira. 1996. STAT3 activation is a critical step in
gp130-mediated terminal differentiation and growth arrest of a myeloid
cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 93:3963–3966.
	41.	 Ward, A.C., L. Smith, J.P. de Koning, Y. van Aesch, and I.P. Touw.
1999. Multiple signals mediate proliferation, differentiation, and survival
from the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor in myeloid 32D
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274:14956–14962.
	42.	 Wang, L., M.O. Arcasoy, S.S. Watowich, and B.G. Forget. 2005.
Cytokine signals through STAT3 promote expression of granulocyte sec-
ondary granule proteins in 32D cells. Exp. Hematol. 33:308–317.
	43.	 Numata, A., K. Shimoda, K. Kamezaki, T. Haro, H. Kakumitsu, K. Shide,
K. Kato, T. Miyamoto, Y. Yamashita, Y. Oshima, et al. 2005. Signal trans-
ducers and activators of transcription 3 augments the transcriptional activity
of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha in granulocyte colony-stimu-
lating factor signaling pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 280:12621–12629.
	44.	 Corey, S.J., A.L. Burkhardt, J.B. Bolen, R.L. Geahlen, L.S. Tkatch, and
D.J. Tweardy. 1994. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor sig-
naling involves the formation of a three-component complex with Lyn and
Syk protein-tyrosine kinases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:4683–4687.
	45.	 Matsuda, T., and T. Hirano. 1994. Association of p72 tyrosine kinase
with Stat factors and its activation by interleukin-3, interleukin-6, and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Blood. 83:3457–3461.
	46.	 Del Rio, L., S. Bennouna, J. Salinas, and E.Y. Denkers. 2001. CXCR2
deficiency confers impaired neutrophil recruitment and increased suscep-
tibility during Toxoplasma gondii infection. J. Immunol. 167:6503–6509.
	47.	 Boulay, F., M. Tardif, L. Brouchon, and P. Vignais. 1990. The human
N-formylpeptide receptor. Characterization of two cDNA isolates and
evidence for a new subfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors. Biochemistry.
29:11123–11133.
	48.	 Bozic, C.R., N.P. Gerard, C. von Uexkull-Guldenband, L.F. Kolakowski
Jr., M.J. Conklyn, R. Breslow, H.J. Showell, and C. Gerard. 1994. The
murineinterleukin8typeBreceptorhomologueanditsligands.Expression
and biological characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 269:29355–29358.
	49.	 Lee, J., G. Cacalano, T. Camerato, K. Toy, M.W. Moore, and W.I.
Wood. 1995. Chemokine binding and activities mediated by the mouse
IL-8 receptor. J. Immunol. 155:2158–2164.
	50.	 Gao, J.L., E.J. Lee, and P.M. Murphy. 1999. Impaired antibacterial host
defense in mice lacking the N-formylpeptide receptor. J. Exp. Med.
189:657–662.
	51.	 Panopoulos, A.D., L. Zhang, J.W. Snow, D.M. Jones, A.M. Smith,
K.C. El Kasmi, F. Liu, M.A. Goldsmith, D.C. Link, P.J. Murray, and
S.S. Watowich. 2006. STAT3 governs distinct pathways in emergency
granulopoiesis and mature neutrophils. Blood. 108:3682–3690.
	52.	 Shim, G.J., L. Wang, S. Andersson, N. Nagy, L.L. Kis, Q. Zhang, S.
Makela, M. Warner, and J.A. Gustafsson. 2003. Disruption of the estro-
gen receptor beta gene in mice causes myeloproliferative disease resem-
bling chronic myeloid leukemia with lymphoid blast crisis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 100:6694–6699.
	53.	 McLemore, M.L., S. Grewal, F. Liu, A. Archambault, J. Poursine-
Laurent, J. Haug, and D.C. Link. 2001. STAT-3 activation is required
for normal G-CSF-dependent proliferation and granulocytic differentia-
tion. Immunity. 14:193–204.
	54.	 Panopoulos, A.D., D. Bartos, L. Zhang, and S.S. Watowich. 2002.
Control of myeloid-specific integrin alpha Mbeta 2 (CD11b/CD18) ex-
pression by cytokines is regulated by Stat3-dependent activation of PU.1.
J. Biol. Chem. 277:19001–19007.
	55.	 Hermans,M.H.,C.Antonissen,A.C.Ward,A.E.Mayen,R.E.Ploemacher,
and I.P. Touw. 1999. Sustained receptor activation and hyperproliferation
in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in mice with
a severe congenital neutropenia/acute myeloid leukemia-derived mutation
in the G-CSF receptor gene. J. Exp. Med. 189:683–692.
	56.	 Redell, M.S., A. Tsimelzon, S.G. Hilsenbeck, and D.J. Tweardy. 2007.
Conditional overexpression of Stat3alpha in differentiating myeloid cells
