PEOPLE & IDEAS
1836 JEM Vol. 206, No. 9, 2009
In India, Varki was a physician–scientist at
the Christian Medical College in Vellore.
After a few years he moved to the United
States where he specialized in hematology,
later became a leading glycobiologist, and
most recently caught the evolution bug.
He now codirects the Glycobiology
Center at the University of California in
San Diego and the Center for Academic
Research and Training in Anthropogeny
(the study of human origins).
Varki’s interest in evolution began a
decade ago while he was studying sialic
acids—sugars that coat cell surfaces and
modulate a variety of physiological and
pathological process. He discov-
ered that humans can’t synthesize
one kind of sialic acid (Neu5Gc)
that other mammals can. How-
ever, in experiments conducted
partly on himself, Varki found
thathumansincorporateNeu5Gc
into their bodies when they eat
red meat (1) and that this incor-
poration has implications for dis-
ease. For example, it may explain why
diets rich in steaks and burgers might
predispose some people to toxins (2) or
lead to chronic inflammation (3). Mean-
while, sialic acid changes that are unique
to humans help explain why we are
susceptible to certain diseases, like P.
falciparum malaria (4). With each new
finding, Varki drills deeper into the ques-
tion of what makes us human.
How did you transition from glycobiology
into chimp biology?
After I found a sialic acid difference
between chimps and humans,I wanted to
know more about what makes humans
different. I went to the Yerkes National
Primate Research Center to educate my-
self about chimpanzees.I had assumed that
because they’re genetically so similar to us,
their diseases were going to be similar to
ours. But that wasn’t the case! I learned
that most of the common cancers of hu-
mans had never been reported in the great
apes. Their heart attacks were completely
different than ours. And things like
bronchial asth-
ma and rheuma-
toid arthritis,
which are com-
mon in humans,
were uncommon
in apes. Instead
they tended to
get strange types
of renal failure, a
different kind of
cardiac disease,
and so on.Then
I thought, well, if we’re genetically so
similar, but our diseases are so different, at
least this should be a tractable problem.
And you approach this problem by
comparing chimp and human genomes?
Yes, but not just the genomes.There’s a
complex interaction between our ge-
nomes, our phenomes [the set of possi-
ble phenotypes], and our environment.
If you don’t take a holistic view, you’ll
come up short. One of the things I’ve
been involved in is trying to develop
networks of people that range from
linguists to philosophers to biochemists to
neuroscientists to geneticists. They all
talk different languages, but they have
things to say to each other.
How might a philosopher or linguist
influence a biologist’s research?
Take the FOXP2 story. A physician
noticed that there was something un-
usual about a family who supposedly had
dyslexia—but in fact it wasn’t dyslexia
because they had problems with articula-
tion and grammar. Plus, it was a familial
problem. The physician’s finding was
picked up by linguists and psychologists
who showed that it was a global problem
with aspects of articulation and the speech
apparatus and not a problem of cognition.
Eventually geneticists narrowed down
the disorder to a point mutation in the
gene FOXP2. Researchers later cloned
FOXP2 from human cDNA samples and
revealed that this gene was uniquely
changed in humans—two amino acids
distinguished the human FOXP2 pro-
tein from the one in chimpanzees. And
recently there was a study in which
researchers put the human FOXP2 gene
in a mouse and showed that there were
slight changes in its vocalizations. None
of this would have happened if people
hadn’t been talking across disciplines.
Understanding what makes us human
is not a problem that will be solved by any
one specialty. The worst thing you can do
is to throw away clues that might seem
irrelevant initially because they may turn
out to be very important in the end.
TOXIC BURGERS
When did the nonhuman sialic acid
Neu5Gc first cross your radar?
I started out as a physician–scientist,
and one of my patients with a bone
marrow disease, aplastic anemia, had an
immune response to the horse serum
that we were using to treat her. I read
that this type of response was a reaction
to sialic acid.At first I thought it didn’t
make sense because sialic acids are
present throughout mammalian cells.A
decade later,we discovered that humans
were missing one kind of sialic acid that
is present in other mammals due to a
specific genetic event that occurred
during human evolution.
Since then we’ve found more than
10 sialic acid–related differences between
humans and chimpanzees. Sialic acids
represent a “hotspot” [of mutation] in
human evolution, and this seems to have
implications for diseases.
Some say language makes us human, others say it’s art or free will. Ajit Varki
points out how our diseases set us apart from the apes.
Ajit Varki: On the origin of maladies
“If you
don’t take
a holistic
view, you’ll
come up
short.”
Ajit and his wife and colleague, Nissi Varki, discuss their findings.
PEOPLE & IDEAS | The Journal of Experimental Medicine 1837
Text and Interview by Amy Maxmen
amaxmen@rockefeller.edu
How so?
Certain pathogens recognize sialic acid
on the surface of host cells and use it to
invade. For example, human flu binds
to one acid and the bird flu binds to
another, so this may explain why the
bird flu has a hard time jumping into
humans.What is newer is the suggestion
of molecular mimicry, in which the
pathogen puts the sialic acid on itself.We
think that by doing this, the pathogen
gains protection from complement path-
ways and avoids antibody production.
Does having a unique sialic acid profile
make humans more or less susceptible
to infection?
It goes in both directions. Because
humans are missing one kind of sialic
acid, we are apparently resistant to some
infections that animals get.One example
is the malaria that afflicts the great apes
in Africa. We found that this malaria
parasite prefers to bind to a sialic acid
that’s missing in humans. And the human
malaria parasite prefers to bind to the
human sialic acid. So although we had a
free ride from the original ape malaria
because we lost one sialic acid, the para-
sites eventually won.
Neu5Gc is present in small amounts in
some people. I’ve found that it originates
from our diet—primarily from red meat.
It turns out that it is present in mammalian
foods, and as we eat them, the acid gets
incorporated into our bodies even as we
make an immune response against it. So
this is the first example of what I call a
“xeno-autoantigen.” It’s a xenoantigen
because it comes from an animal and not
from humans, but it’s also an autoantigen
because it gets incorporated into us. Now
we have a whole program focused on
trying to understand the significance of
anti-Neu5Gc antibodies, the presence of
this nonhuman molecule in human
tissues, and how that relates to the fact
that there are various diseases associated
with the consumption of red meat. So far
we have evidence showing that it may
increase inflammation in carcinomas, and
we are looking into other diseases.
We also published a paper in 2008
showing that accumulating Neu5Gc
from red meat can make you susceptible
to an E. coli toxin that prefers
to bind to this nonhuman
sialic acid (2).
Do you still eat meat?
I haven’t eaten red meat for
five or six years since we first
discovered this. I mean, I at
least have to believe my
own theory, right? Neu5Gc
is not present in poultry, and
there are very low amounts
in fish, so I still eat these foods.
EARTHSHAKING SCIENCE
What else have you found by comparing
humans with chimps?
Humans have a lot of unusual changes
in Siglecs [inhibitory receptors on
white blood cells that dampen the im-
mune response when they bind to sialic
acid]. We’ve found that the level of ex-
pression of Siglecs in human leukocytes
is significantly lower than that in chim-
panzees, especially on T cells. We’ve
published evidence that human T cells
tend to be relatively overreactive, and
we think that this may be because of
loss of Siglec expression (5).When we
first published this article, a science
writer wrote an article about our work
saying something about human T cells
losing their brakes. I wouldn’t say we’ve
lost the brakes, but maybe we’ve lost
the power of our brakes. In fact, humans
have a relative preponderance of T cell–
mediated disorders: rheumatoid arthritis,
bronchial asthma, HIV with progres-
sion to AIDS, chronic hepatitis. It may
be that our lymphocyte reactivity is set
in a different state than that of our
evolutionary ancestors.
Another thing about human Siglecs
is that they turn up in unexpected places.
Normally they’re on circulating leuko-
cytes. But we’ve found that in humans—
but not in chimps—they show up on
microglia in the brain. This is due to a
gene conversion event that upregulates
Siglec-11 and -16. We don’t know
exactly what this means, but microglia
are not only involved in reacting to
infectious agents but also in human
inflammatory problems like Alzheimer’s
and HIV dementia.
Do you encounter resistance when you
jump from one scientific field into another?
We run into it a lot. Even though I’m
a hematologist, I rarely publish in he-
matology journals. I’m into infectious
diseases, immunology, neuroscience,
reproductive biology, and so, yes, I en-
counter resistance to
many of my findings. But
the great thing about sci-
ence is that it all comes
out in the wash in the
end.You just have to hope
that it comes about in
your lifetime. You don’t
want to be like Alfred
Wegener,who died on an
expedition trying to get
more proof for plate tec-
tonics because everybody
was castigating him for
how bad his theory was. Or Copernicus,
who wrote his final treatise on the fact
that the Earth went around the Sun on
his deathbed.
I’m not saying that my work is
nearly as important as theirs, but that
all unexpected findings are met with
skepticism. Of course, the nice thing
about working on something totally
different is that there isn’t much com-
petition, so you can take your time
and do things right.
1.Tangvoranuntakul, P., et al. 2003. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 100:12045–12050.
2. Byres, E., et al. 2008. Nature. 456:648–653.
3. Hedlund, M., et al. 2008. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci.
USA. 105:18936–18941.
4. Martin, M.J., et al. 2005. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci.
USA. 102:12819–12824.
5. Nguyen, D.H., et al. 2006. Proc. Natl.Acad.
Sci. USA. 103:7765–7770.
An E. coli toxin (red) preferentially binds Neu5Gc, a sialic
acid that humans can’t synthesize but can incorporate
from red meat.
“It may be
that our
lymphocyte
reactivity is set
in a different
state than
that of our
evolutionary
ancestors.”
MACMILLAN PUBLISHERS LTD: 2008. NATURE. 456: 651.
