INTRODUCTION
Emphysematous gastritis, which was first described by
Fraenkel in 1889 (1), is a rare disease characterized by the
presence of air within the wall of the stomach and diffuse
gastric wall inflammation by gas-forming bacteria, which may
be also life-threatening due to systemic toxicity. Predisposing
factors include the ingestion of corrosives, alcohol abuse,
recent abdominal surgery, diabetes, and immunocompromis-
ed conditions (1-3). Since 1889, only 51 cases have been re-
ported worldwide (1-8).
Mucormycosis is a rare fungal infection that usually involves
the nasopharynx (9). Among the several forms, gastrointesti-
nal mucormycosis is very rare, and the manifestations range
from colonization of peptic ulcers to infiltrative disease with
vascular invasion and dissemination (9). Commonly associated
conditions include diabetes mellitus, lymphoma, leukemia,
renal disease, septicemia, malnutrition, and long-term treat-
ment with steroids and antibiotics (10). Among the reported
cases of emphysematous gastritis, fungal organisms such as
Candida species have been isolated rarely (4, 11-15). How-
ever, emphysematous gastritis associated with mucormycotic
infection is extremely rare, and only one case has been report-
ed in the English literature (15).
Here we report a case of emphysematous gastritis, diag-
nosed by computed tomography (CT) and confirmed by
histopathologic findings associated with invasive gastric mu-
cormycosis that showed angioinvasion, necrosis, ultimately
disseminated to the colon and liver, and was fatal despite
medical and surgical treatment. To our knowledge, this is
the first report of a patient with emphysematous gastritis
associated with invasive gastric mucormycosis in Korea.
CASE REPORT
A 43-yr old man was admitted to the emergency room
because of diffuse abdominal pain, indigestion, and poor oral
intake for 4 days. He had had a 1-yr history of hypertension,
diabetes mellitus without strict control, and chronic pancre-
atitis with stone. He had undergone endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography to remove a pancreaticolith 8
months previously. There was also a history of excessive inges-
tion of alcohol and heavy smoking for 20 yr, but there was
no history of peptic ulcer disease. His family history was not
contributory. Upon admission, he looked acutely ill, but his
mental status was alert. His blood pressure was 160/100
mmHg, with a body temperature of 36.2℃, pulse rate of
98/min, and respiration rate of 26/min. His breathing sound
was decreased in both lung fields. Abdominal examination
revealed decreased bowel sounds and severe tenderness in
the epigastrium, with rigidity and rebound tenderness. How-
Ji Han Jung, Hyun Joo Choi,
Jinyoung Yoo, Seok Jin Kang,
Kyo Young Lee
Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea
Address for correspondence
Jinyoung Yoo, M.D.
Department of Pathology, The Catholic University of
Korea, College of Medine, St. Vincent’s Hospital, 93
Ji-dong, Paldal-gu, Suwon 442-723, Korea
Tel : +82.31-249-7593, Fax : +82.31-244-6786
E-mail : jinyyoo@vincent.cuk.ac.kr
923
J Korean Med Sci 2007; 22: 923-7
ISSN 1011-8934
Copyright � The Korean Academy
of Medical Sciences
Emphysematous Gastritis Associated with Invasive Gastric
Mucormycosis: A Case Report
Emphysematous gastritis is a rare form of phlegmonous gastritis, characterized by
air in the wall of the stomach due to invasion by gas-forming microorganisms. The
most commonly involved microorganisms are streptococci, Escherichia coli, Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa, Clostrodium perfrigens and Staphylococcus aureus. Gas-
trointestinal mucormycosis is another rare condition, which is most frequently occurs
in the stomach. Because emphysematous gastritis associated with invasive gastric
mucormycosis is an extremely rare clinical condition and both are life-threatening
diseases, early precise diagnosis and early treatment should be done to avoid mor-
tality. Herein we present an extremely rare case of emphysematous gastritis asso-
ciated with invasive gastric mucormycosis. A 43-yr-old man, suffering from alco-
holism and diabetes, has experienced diffuse abdominal pain for 4 days. Abdomi-
nal computed tomography scan demonstrated gas within the stomach wall. A his-
tologic examination of the total gastrectomy specimen showed several gas-filled
bubbles in the wall, along with numerous fungal hyphae throughout the necrotic
stomach wall. He died of multiorgan failure secondary to disseminated mucormy-
cosis, despite the intensive medical therapy.
Key Words : Gastritis; Stomach; Mucormycosis
Received : 13 June 2006
Accepted : 6 July 2006
ever, there was no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly or mass-
like lesion. Hematological and biochemical examinations
on admission showed hemoglobin 13.9 g/dL (normal: 13-
18), white blood cell 11.77×109
/L (3.6-11), platelet 210×
109
/L (150-450), blood sugar 816 mg/dL (70-110), aspar-
tate aminotransferase 148 IU/L (5-38), alanine aminotrans-
ferase 76 IU/L (4-43), lactate dehydrogenase 1,320 IU/L
(180-460), amylase 6 U/L (45-108), blood urea nitrogen
37.7 mg/dL (8-23), and creatinine 1.6 mg/dL (0.5-1.2), and
blood acetone-positive. Urinalysis showed sugar (++++)
and acetone (+). Blood and urine cultures were negative.
Chest radiography revealed collapse and consolidation in
the basal part of the left lower lobe, suggesting pneumonia.
Abdominal CT scan revealed gastric wall thickening with a
collection of dirty air bubbles and a small amount of pneu-
moperitoneum (Fig. 1). A diagnosis of emphysematous gas-
tritis with combined perforation was made. Antibiotic ther-
apy with sulferazone and metronidazole was initiated. Sub-
sequently, he underwent emergency surgery. Operation find-
ings showed nearly total necrosis of stomach wall with dark
924 J.H. Jung, H.J. Choi, J. Yoo, et al.
Fig. 1. (A) Computed tomography of the abdomen shows gastric wall thickening with a collection of dirty air bubbles (arrow), suggesting
emphysematous gastritis. (B) The gross surgical specimen from the gastrectomy shows nearly total necrosis of the stomach. (C) Histo-
logic findings of the gastrectomy specimen show some air spaces in the muscle layer of the stomach, consistent with emphysematous
gastritis (H&E ×200). (D) There are numerous broad-based, nonseptate, right angular branched fungal hyphae, morphologically consis-
tent with mucormycosis (H&E ×400).
A B
C D
green colored pus collection around the stomach. A total
gastrectomy was performed.
Grossly, the stomach had a large area of necrosis with black
discoloration of the mucosa (Fig. 1). Microscopic examination
revealed extensive, full-thickness necrosis. The remaining
viable stomach wall showed large numbers of neutrophilis in
the edematous submucosa and muscle layer. There were sev-
eral gas-filled bubbles in the submucosa and muscle layer
associated with numerous scattered or colonies of gram-neg-
ative bacilli, consistent with emphysematous gastritis (Fig. 1).
At the same time, there were numerous broad-based, non-
septate, right angular branched fungal hyphae, morphologi-
cally consistent with mucormycosis, detected on hematoxy-
line and eosin stain as well as silver stains throughout both
necrotic and viable stomach wall (Fig. 1). Widespread inva-
sion to blood vessels was found. Culture of pus in the peri-
toneum revealed Klebsiella pneumonia, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. There was no evidence of involvement
of the sinuses or lungs. Amphotericin B infusion was added
after operation.
On the fifth hospital day, there was pus discharge from the
wound site. However, the patient remained to have non-toxic
appearance with stable vital signs.
On the seventh hospital day, he complained of diarrhea and
vague abdominal discomfort. Over the following 2 days, the
pus discharge aggravated. Clinically, wound dehiscence was
suspected. Follow-up CT revealed an approximately 14.0×
12.0×12.0 cm-sized, irregularly shaped air-containing fluid
collection at the gastrectomy site, suggesting air-forming
postoperative abscess and anastomotic site leakage. Reoperation
was performed, and the operative findings showed multiple
perforations with necrosis in the transverse colon, necrotic
change in the liver, hematoma with fluid collection in the
peritoneal cavity, and leakage in the anastomotic site. Roux-
en-Y esophagojejunostomy with cecocolostomy and segmen-
tal resection of the large intestine were performed. The sub-
mitted pathological specimen consisted of segments of colon,
small intestine, and a portion of liver. The gross examination
of the segment of colon showed multiple perforations, dirty
serosa, and necrotic mucosa with greenish black exudates. The
portion of liver was totally necrotic. Microscopic examination
of the colon and small intestine showed ischemic necrosis of
mucosa with acute and chronic inflammation, and foreign
body reaction. Mucormycotic fungal hyphae scattered in the
muscle layer and serosa were noted. Microscopic examination
of the liver also showed totally necrotic parenchyma with many
angioinvasive mucormycotic fungal hyphae. After reoperation,
the patient deteriorated rapidly. He developed dyspnea and
remained in a sedated state. Auscultation of the lungs revealed
decreased breathing sounds with rale on both lung fields, and
saturation of arterial blood gas analysis was decreased. He
underwent intubation and ventilation. On the 21st-hospital
day, the patient expired. Autopsy was not performed.
DISCUSSION
Gas within the stomach wall is an alarming finding. Clin-
ically this condition is divided into gastric emphysema and
emphysematous gastritis (3, 5, 12). These two conditions
should be differentiated because they are characterized by
different clinical symptoms, possible etiology, radiologic
findings, treatment, and prognosis (3, 5, 12). In gastric em-
physema, air enters the stomach wall from the lumen, from
the peritoneal surface, or from its connections with the eso-
phagus and duodenum, resulting from barotraumas in the
absence of bacterial infection (12). Radiologically, in contrast
to emphysematous gastritis, a more linear distribution of gas
in the gastric wall is characteristic of gastric emphysema (3).
The symptom of acute abdomen as seen in patients with em-
physematous gastritis is usually absent in patients with gas-
tric emphysema (5). In general, gastric emphysema is asymp-
tomatic; its course is usually benign and resolves spontane-
ously without treatment (3, 5, 12).
On the other hand, emphysematous gastritis, the gas formed
in situ by gas-forming bacteria invading the gastric wall,
results in a necrotizing inflammation of the gastric wall. In
1889, Fraenkel first reported a young man who died after
several attacks of severe abdominal pain, blood vomitus, and
diarrhea (1). At autopsy, rod-like organisms and multiple gas
vesicles were found in the stomach wall. Originally, the stom-
ach wall is well protected from bacterial infection by the close
connection between cells, acidic pH, and good blood supply
(3, 12). The predisposing factors, leading to the breakdown of
these defenses, are ingestion of corrosives, alcohol abuse, dia-
betes, recent abdominal surgery, gastroenteritis, immunocom-
promised conditions, and treatment with non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (1-3). In the present case, the patient
had a history of alcohol abuse, which might have altered the
unstirred mucous layer, and diabetes due to chronic pancre-
atitis, which might have led to a systemic predisposition to
infection. Patients with emphysematous gastritis typically
develop acute abdominal pain, as was the case in our patient,
usually developing 1 week after initiation, accompanied by
diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and occasionally hematemesis and
melena (1, 4, 12). Physical examination of the abdomen reveals
epigastric tenderness, distension, and decreased bowel sounds
(4, 12). Radiologically it has a characteristic appearance. Ab-
dominal computed tomography, the best imaging modality
to establish the diagnosis, reveals gastric wall thickening and
intramural gas (1, 3, 12). In contrast to gastric emphysema,
the gas in the wall is in the form of irregular mottled bubbles
or spots, especially around the fundus and the greater curva-
ture, and remains in place despite the position of the body
or absorption through the gastric tube (3, 4, 12). Organisms
that have been cultured from stomach aspirates, blood, and
peritoneal fluid include streptococci, E. coli, P. aeruginosa,
Clostridium. perfringens, and S. aureus (1, 4). Among the previ-
ously reported cases, those associated with fungal infection
Emphysematous Gastritis Associated with Invasive Gastric Mucormycosis 925
926 J.H. Jung, H.J. Choi, J. Yoo, et al.
were rare (4, 11-15). Of these, most cases were Candida species
(4, 11, 12, 15). Pathologically, the gas forming organisms in
emphysematous gastritis have been shown to infiltrate the
stomach wall diffusely and there are edematous stomach wall-
containing gas bubbles (1, 6). The therapeutic approach for
emphysematous gastritis included initial stabilization of the
septic condition through vigorous fluid resuscitation and early
empirical parenteral antibiotic therapy with a broad range of
antibiotics covering Gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria
(2, 3, 12, 14). Specific therapy should be modified according
to the results of the gastric fluid culture and sensitivity test-
ing of the isolated organism (12). The role of surgery in the
acute phase is not well defined. However, indication for emer-
gency surgery include deterioration despite optimal medical
management, involvement of a large portion of or the entire
stomach, presence of gastric infarction, or perforation (3, 4).
Despite meticulous treatment, the prognosis for emphysema-
tous gastritis patients is poor. The mortality rate of emphy-
sematous gastritis is about 60%, and the morbidity near 21
% (2).
Mucormycosis is a rare, opportunistic fungal infection that
occurs almost exclusively in immunocompromised hosts such
as patients with diabetes, leukemia, lymphoma, renal disease,
septicemia, burns, malnutrition, and following long-term
treatment with steroids and antibiotics (10). Clinical mani-
festations of mucormycosis can be categorized as rhinocere-
bral, pulmonary, disseminated, gastrointestinal, and cuta-
neous (9). Among these, rhinocerebral and pulmonary dis-
ease are the most common forms, and gastrointestinal in-
volvement is very rare, accounting for only 7% of all cases
(16). One of the most commonly associated conditions is
diabetes mellitus (10). Other associated conditions are im-
munosuppressed conditions such as renal failure, hemato-
logical malignancies, cirrhosis, and solid organ transplanta-
tion (16). It is believed that infection of the alimentary tract
is acquired through direct ingestion of and invasion by fun-
gal spores. The gastrointestinal organ most frequently in-
volved is the stomach, followed by the colon, small intes-
tine, and esophagus (16). Widespread dissemination from a
primary gastrointestinal site may occur (9). The fungus may
colonize with or without invasion of surrounding tissue.
When they invade, the lesion extends and marked surround-
ing induration develops, with a shaggy, velvety discolored
surface or large plaqe-like areas of green and blacked eschar
(16). They also invade blood vessels and thus tend to cause
extensive thrombosis, necrosis, and, ultimately, dissemina-
tion (10). Clinically, the lesion mimic ulcer or carcinoma.
Diagnosis depends on the demonstration of tissue invasion
by biopsy. Stool and gastric cultures are of value (9).
Association with emphysematous gastritis is an extremely
rare, and only one such case has been reported (15). Mucormy-
cosis is not gas-forming, therefore this infection is not a direct
cause of emphysematous gastritis. Gastric wall necrosis caused
by bacterial infection may be predisposed to the invasion by
mucormycosis. Alternatively, it is possible that invasive mu-
cormycosis with subsequent gastric wall necrosis led to sec-
ondary bacterial invasion and intramural gas production (15).
Successful management of mucormycosis includes aggressive
metabolic support, amphotericin B, and surgical debridement
of all necrotic involved tissue (15, 16). As in emphysematous
gastritis, the prognosis of gastrointestinal mucormycosis is
poor. Forty-two cases of gastric mucormycosis have been de-
scribed in the literature thus for, with a mortality above 98
% (15).
We report an extremely rare case of emphysematous gas-
tritis associated with invasive gastric mucormycosis in a 43-
yr-old man. Heavy alcohol abuse and diabetes mellitus were
the predisposing factors. Clinicoradiological findings were
typical and pathologic findings were consistent with emphy-
sematous gastritis. CT is the diagnostic procedure of choice
of emphysematous gastritis and helps in differentiating with
gastric emphysema. Clinically, however, gastric mucormy-
cosis associated with emphysematous gastritis is an unexpect-
ed finding. Moreover, the gastric mucormycosis showed
angioinvasion, necrosis, and ultimately, disseminate to colon
and liver. In the case of mucormycosis, biopsy of involved
areas is often necessary to demonstrate the fungus histopatho-
logically. As in previously reported cases, this patient also
had a fatal outcome despite antibiotic and antifungal thera-
py and surgery. Increased awareness of these disease entities
may facilitate early diagnosis, prompt medical therapy, and
appropriate surgical intervention, and ultimately improve
survival rates.
REFERENCES
1. Shipman PJ, Drury P. Emphysematous gastritis: case report and lit-
erature review. Australas Radiol 2001; 45: 64-6.
2. Gutierrez O, Cantalapiedra A, Tabuyo MI, Del Villar R, Penarrubia
MJ, Sales R, Garcia-Frade LJ. Emphysematous gastritis and severe
aplastic anemia. Hematol J 2003; 4: 82-4.
3. Ocepek A, Skok P, Virag M, Kamenik B, Horvat M. Emphysema-
tous gastritis-case report and review of the literature. Z Gastroen-
terol 2004; 42: 735-8.
4. Yalamanchili M, Cady W. Emphysematous gastritis in a hemodial-
ysis patient. South Med J 2003; 96: 84-8.
5. van Mook WN, van der Geest S, Goessens ML, Schoon EJ, Ramsay
G. Gas within the wall of the stomach due to emphysematous gastri-
tis: case report and review. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2002; 14:
1155-60.
6. Eisenhut M, Hughes D, Ashworth M. Fatal emphysematous gastritis
in a 2-year-old child with chronic renal failure. Pediatr Dev Pathol
2004; 7: 414-6.
7. Cheong JY, Lee DH, Park WI, Park JH, Kim HW, Heo J, Kim GH,
Kang DH, Song GA, Cho M, Yang US. Emphysematous gastritis
developed in a patient with Klatskin’s tumor. Korean J Gastrointest
Endosc 2004; 28: 34-8.
Emphysematous Gastritis Associated with Invasive Gastric Mucormycosis 927
8. Yoh KG, Lee DK, Baek SG, Lee SW, Bae SW, Kwon SO. A case
of emphysematous gastritis caused by acetic acid. Korean J Gas-
troenterol 1993; 25: 1322-5.
9. Lehrer RI, Howard DH, Sypherd PS, Edwards JE, Segal GP, Win-
ston DJ. Mucormycosis. Ann Intern Med 1980; 93: 93-108.
10. Dannheimer IP, Fouche W, Nel C. Gastric mucormycosis in a dia-
betic patient. S Afr Med J 1974; 48: 838-9.
11. Williamson MR, Shah HR, Harper RR, Angtuaco TL. CT of emphy-
sematous gastritis. Comput Med Imaging Graph 1989; 13: 175-7.
12. Moosvi AR, Saravolatz LD, Wong DH, Simms SM. Emphysema-
tous gastritis: case report and review. Rev Infect Dis 1990; 12: 848-
58.
13. Van Allan RJ, Krebs TL, Henzie GM, Fermelia DE, Fichman MP.
Emphysematous gastritis in an immunocompromised host. Clin Imag-
ing 1995; 19: 129-30.
14. Bashour CA, Popovich MJ, Irefin SA, Esfandiari S, Ratliff NB, Hoff-
man WD, Averbook AW. Emphysematous gastritis. Surgery 1998;
123: 716-8.
15. Cherney CL, Chutuape A, Fikrig MK. Fatal invasive gastric mucor-
mycosis occurring with emphysematous gastritis: case report and
literature review. Am J Gastroenterol 1999; 94: 252-6.
16. Singh N, Gayowski T, Singh J, Yu VL. Invasive gastrointestinal
zygomycosis in a liver transplant recipient: case report and review
of zygomycosis in solid-organ transplant. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 20:
617-20.
