Review J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155
ressElmer
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
Dubowitz Syndrome: A Review and Implications for Cognitive,
Behavioral, and Psychological Features
Rebekah S. Hubera
, Daniel Houlihanb, c
, Kevin Filterb
Abstract
Dubowitz syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder charac-
terized by micorcephaly, short stature, abnormal faces, and mild to
severe mental retardation. Growth retardation occurs both intrauter-
ine and postnatal. Behavioral characteristics include hyperactivity,
short attention span, and aggressiveness. Behavior problems in-
clude difﬁculty feeding, sleep disturbance, and bedwetting. Individ-
uals with the disorder have displayed shyness, fear of crowds, and
dislike of loud noises. A high-pitched or hoarse voice is common.
Deﬁcits have been found in speech and language skills, reasoning
and memory skills, self-help skills, and psychomotor functioning.
Ocular, dental, cutaneous, skeletal, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal,
neurological, immunological, and hematological medical difﬁcul-
ties have been noted. Approximately 148 cases have been described
in the literature. The cause of the disorder remains unknown, how-
ever, research suggests genetic origin. Past research emphasizes
physical characteristics and medical complications. There is a lack
of cognitive, behavioral, and psychological information avail-
able regarding the disorder. This article presents a review of the
literature and provides assessment and treatment implications for
the cognitive, behavioral, and psychological aspects of Dubowitz
syndrome.
Keywords: Dubowitz; Syndrome; Autosomal; Recessive
Introduction
Dubowitz syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
that was ﬁrst identiﬁed in children over 40 years ago. Less
than 200 cases have been documented in the literature. It
is marked by growth retardation, microcephaly, short stat-
ure, characteristic facial features, skin eruptions, and mild
to severe mental retardation [1]. Children with the disorder
also display similar behavioral characteristics. Hyperactivity
and short attention span [2], impulsivity and aggressiveness
[3, 4], shyness and a dislike of crowds [5], refusal of food
and bedwetting [3] have all been reported. Certain medical
problems are associated with the condition [6-10]. Dubowitz
syndrome commonly leads to decreased motor and language
functioning [5], developmental delay [3], and an increased
risk for a shorter life span [4, 6, 13].
The disorder was ﬁrst discovered in a female child in
1965 by Victor Dubowitz. He described the disorder and
proposed it was a phenotype of Boone’s syndrome [1]. The
syndrome was later identiﬁed and named by Grosse [2] and
Opitz [11]. The cause of Dubowitz syndrome remains un-
known, however, literature points to genetics and chromo-
somal instability [3, 12, 13]. Sporadic cases suggest growth
hormone deﬁciency [14] or defects in the cholesterol biosyn-
thetic pathway [15] as the source of the disorder. Due to its
rarity, most reports discussed in the literature are case studies
that emphasize speciﬁc physical anomalies and new medical
ﬁndings.
Emphasis has been given to physical and medical phe-
nomenology of the disorder, but there is a lack of thorough
examination of cognitive, behavioral, and psychological as-
pects. To date, only one publication has focused speciﬁcally
on the psychological status of individuals with Dubowitz
syndrome [3]. The study reported on intellectual function-
ing, language and ﬁne motor developmental delays in ten
cases. Parent report addressed adaptive functioning and be-
havioral deﬁcits [3]. However, this research was conducted
more than two decades ago and failed to objectively evalu-
ate individuals’ behavioral characteristics and adaptability.
There is a need in the literature to measure these features
to provide a complete illustration of the disorder and how it
affects children. The literature also fails to discuss manage-
ment of these attributes. This paper thoroughly reviews 148
cases of Dubowitz syndrome and provides assessment and
treatment implications for cognitive, behavioral, and psy-
chological functioning.
Manuscript accepted for publication May 6, 2011
a
University of Utah, SLC, USA
b
Minnesota State University, Mankato, USA
c
Corresponding author: Daniel Houlihan.
Email: daniel.houlihan@mnsu.edu
doi:10.4021/jocmr581w
147
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Huber et al
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
Description of Disorder
Phenomenology
Facial characteristics
Individuals with Dubowitz syndrome have distinct facial
characteristics which distinguish it from other disorders with
similar symptomology. Distinctive abnormalities with the
shape of the face, eyes, ears, nose, and mouth are common.
The face is narrow or triangular shaped [5, 18] with a sloping
forehead [5, 16, 17]. The supraorbital ridge is shallow and
even with the face [5, 17, 18]. Micrognathia, a receding chin
that results in an underbite, was present in 85 of the cases
[5,16-19]. The hair and the eyebrows are thin and sparse
[5, 10, 16, 18, 19]. Facial asymmetry or abnormal neck has
been reported, but occurs in less than ten percent of cases
[5]. The ears vary in size, but are usually more prominently
positioned. Ears are low set [5, 19] and can be posteriorly
angulated [5]. In 41 cases, dysplastic (poorly-formed) ears
exist [10]. Otis media (inﬂammation of the middle ear) is
often severe and can require the insertion of tubes [24]. A
broad or ﬂat nasal bridge is common [5, 10, 16], and some
cases document a prominent round tip of the nose [5].
Several malformations are associated with the eyes.
Drooping of the upper eyelid was observed in the major-
ity of cases [5, 10, 16, 18]. Epicanthal folds are excessive
and cover the inner corner of the eye [5, 18]. Twenty ﬁve
percent of the cases report abnormal palperbral ﬁssures [5,
17, 19] (narrow longitudinal opening above the eyelids). Fif-
teen percent noted telecanthus [5, 17, 18] (increased distance
between the inside corner of the eye to the nose) or hyper-
telorism [5, 16]. Investigation of the size and functioning of
the eyes has also revealed irregularities. Unnatural small-
ness of the eyes has been mentioned [5, 18]. Microphthalmia
(large eyes in comparison to the face) were noted in one case
[18]. Megalocornea (enlarged rear segment of the eye) is rare
[20]. Strabismis and estropia exist but have been less men-
tioned [5]. Visual problems such as farsightedness (hypero-
pia), cataracts, and primary pigmentary degeneration of the
retina (tapetoretinal degeneration) have also been found [5,
20]. Iris coloboma, (some structure of the eye is absent) iris
hypoplasia, (underdevelopment of the iris), nystagmus, an-
isocoria, paresis, and astigmatism were noted in less than 5
cases [5, 20]. Strabismus is an anomaly in which the eyes are
not aligned with each other under normal conditions [20].
Children who experience strabismus can also experience
diplopia (double vision) and problems with depth perception
due to the misalignment of the eyes. Often, one of the images
is suppressed by the brain in order to compensate [20].
A large mouth is rare, but was observed in some cases
[5]. Studies have shown multiple abnormalities with the
palate [25, 27]. The palate has been found to be unusually
narrow and high arched [5, 18]. Other oral abnormalities in-
clude cleft palate, submucous cleft palate, and cleft uvula
[5, 10]. Velopharngeal insufﬁciency results in failure of the
soft palate to reach the rear pharyngeal wall which can cause
high pitched or hoarse speech [5]. Dental manifestations in-
clude crowded, missing, irregular, or rotated teeth. In chil-
dren with Dubowitz syndrome, delayed eruption of teeth has
been more commonly documented [5, 18].
Growth retardation
Growth retardation occurs both pre and post birth. In 14 cas-
es, it was found only after birth [5]. One of the most distinct
features is the small size of the body and the head. Micro-
cephaly, short stature, and low weight is common [5, 10, 16-
19]. In 141 cases, the average circumference of the head at
birth was 31.0 cm and the weight ranged from 900 to 3,600 g
[5]. Short stature is not as common as low weight. In 56 per-
cent of cases, intrauterine growth retardation (birth weight
less than 2,500 g at full term) was noted [5]. Physical devel-
opment is often months to years behind the actual age of the
child [3]. Growth charts of 5 cases presented by Orrison and
colleagues illustrate growth retardation in all cases [21]. At
birth, only one child was 3 standard deviations below normal
birth weight. When measured months later, 4 children were
below the 3rd standard deviation and one was below the sec-
ond standard deviation of weight for their age [21].
Retarded bone maturation can result in decreased tone
of the skeletal muscle, characterized by weakness and ﬂoppi-
ness [10] (hypotonia). Retarded bone maturation was found
in over 25% of cases [5, 10]. In a few individuals, the joints
were hyper extensible [5, 10]. Other anomalies include scoli-
osis [22], missing or underdeveloped ribs [10, 16], and fused
vertebra [5, 10]. One patient presented skeletal abnormali-
ties similar to his brother who was diagnosed with Klippel
Feil syndrome [16]. The hands and feet are not apart from
physical deformities. Problems with the feet include ﬂat
footedness, club foot, dorsiﬂexion, plantar ﬂexion, abducted
and inverted foot, or various combinations in which the foot
is twisted out of shape or position [5, 10]. More common
anomalies include ﬁfth ﬁnger clinodactyly, which is perma-
nent bending of the “baby” ﬁnger, and syndactyly, which the
2nd or 3rd ﬁngers or toes have fusion or webbing together
with skin [5, 21]. Two cases found children with abducted
thumbs [5, 23].
Dubowitz syndrome has been associated with genital
and rectal abnormalities [5, 24, 25]. Cryptorchidism, the
condition when one or both testes fails to descend, was found
in 27 cases [5, 10]. Hypospadias, abnormal development of
the urethra, was found in 10 cases [5]. In males, the urethra
opens on the bottom surface of the penis or in the perine-
um. In females, the urethra opens into the vagina. Genital
anomalies in females were found in 23 cases, which included
hypospadias or hypoplastic genitalia. This includes an un-
derdeveloped clitoris, labia, or vagina [5]. Chronic diarrhea
148
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Dubowitz Syndrome
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
and constipation have been found in 16% of cases [5]. Illynia
and Lurie ﬁrst noted rectal malformations in patients with
Dubowitz syndrome in 1990. Anal stenosis and constipation
were discovered in children from 3 different families [25].
Less common anal and rectal difﬁculties consist of rectal
prolapse, anal stenosis, congenital constipation, inguinal and
hatial hernia [5, 10, 25].
Cognition
Dubowitz syndrome has shown a deﬁciency in cognition [1].
Mild to moderate mental retardation is common [3, 5]. Se-
vere mental retardation is rare, but has been found in 7%
of the cases [5, 25]. Some cases reported that children with
cognitive deﬁcits attended special education classes or spe-
cial schools [3, 5, 6, 22]. Normal intelligence also exists in
children with the syndrome [3, 5, 10, 18]. Children with
Dubowitz syndrome have also shown a short attention span
[3, 7, 18, 24, 25] and preference for concrete thinking [5]. In
the evaluation of ten cases, Parrish and Wilroy indentiﬁed
deﬁcits in reasoning and memory, and severe delays with ex-
pressive and receptive vocabulary [3]. Difﬁculties speciﬁc to
individual cases included problems with spatial perception,
numerical abilities, spelling, abstract reasoning, visual motor
coordination, and ﬁne motor development [3]. In the study,
many parents also reported that their children were months
to years behind other children with regard to self-help skills
[3]. A few children required assistance with dressing, eating,
and toileting [3].
Behavioral characteristics
There are many behavioral characteristics associated with
Dubowitz syndrome that have been reported throughout the
literature. These are known to affect speech, temperament,
and overall behavior. In the majority of patients, there are
problems related to language development and speech [3, 5,
10, 15, 20, 24, 26]. A high pitched voice, which is common
to the disorder was found in 39 cases [5-7, 19, 26, 27]. High
pitched or hoarse voice [22] can be characterized as a voice
disorder. Voice disorders are often accompanied by prob-
lems with articulation or speech delay which form a com-
plex communication disorder. Development of speech was
delayed in 20% of cases [3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 26]. It is important
to correctly identify any communication difﬁculties and get
treatment started as soon as possible to prevent other learn-
ing or developmental problems [19, 27].
In 53 cases, children exhibited behavior problems [5,
19, 21, 24]. Hyperactivity was found in the 34% of the to-
tal cases [5, 7, 19, 24, 25]. Tsukahara and colleagues men-
tioned that hyperactivity was “very difﬁcult to manage and
in some cases interferes with sleep” [5]. Hyperactivity can
exacerbate impulsiveness, problem behaviors, and learning
deﬁcits. Frequent outbursts are not uncommon in these chil-
dren [5]. Less reported behavior problems include irritabil-
ity, agitation, moodiness, carelessness, poor compliance, and
frequent tempertantrums [3, 5, 10, 19].
Another behavioral factor that appears to be affected
by Dubowitz syndrome is temperament [3, 5, 7, 20, 28]. Al-
though it is somewhat uncommon, children have shown a
tendency to withdrawal from others or experience shyness
[5, 20, 28]. Other individuals dislike large crowds or have a
fear of public places [5]. Individuals with a range of mental
abilities prefer to avoid crowds and public places [5, 20].
It has not been distinguished if individuals simply have an
aversion to these places or if they are uncomfortable with
their physical appearance and consequently avoid public.
Children with hyperactivity and impulsivity may also expe-
rience anxious [4, 5] or aggressive temperament [5, 7, 10,
25]. Irritable, whiny, and attention seeking has been found
[3, 5, 10]. Understanding the temperament of the individual
can also help direct treatment and set up an educational pro-
gram that is appropriate for the child [19, 27].
Difﬁculty feeding has been found in 31 cases of chil-
dren with Dubowitz syndrome [4, 5, 9, 12, 21]. These dif-
ﬁculties are sometimes discovered immediately after birth
and include food refusal, vomiting, and regurgitation [4, 5,
9, 21]. Some cases with difﬁculty feeding have found to be
associated with medical concerns of the gastrointestinal sys-
tem or the esophagus [5, 9]. On the other hand, lack of eating
has been associated with failure to thrive or anorexic-like
tendencies [12, 21, 29].
Failure to thrive is associated with a child’s inability
to gain weight, grow or feed normally [29]. Several causes
have been hypothesized for the disorder of failure to thrive.
One relates low birth weight with the mother’s nourishment
during intrauterine development [29]. Another theory pro-
poses that children do not receive effective reinforcement
from parents when the feeding behavior occurs [29]. Study
of the feeding behaviors of a child diagnosed exclusively
with failure to thrive were assessed by Casey and colleagues
[29]. Via descriptive analysis, researchers identiﬁed sched-
ules of reinforcement by the child’s parents. When the child
refused food and the parents removed the food, it resulted in
negative reinforcement. The study implemented a behavioral
intervention to address feeding behaviors with the child and
schedules of reinforcement with the parents. When refusal of
food became extinct in the study, normal feeding behaviors
that resulted in weight gain and growth persisted [29].
Less common behavior characteristics include a prefer-
ence for vibrations and musical beat [5]. Children sit close to
speakers to enjoy vibrations from playing music [5]. Other
fascinations include watching ceiling fans or rolling credits
on television, and engaging in repetitious phrases and behav-
iors [5]. Bouncing, dancing, twirling of the hair, and giggling
have all been found to be repetitious, excessive, and often
inappropriate [5]. When parents reported on their children’s
behavior, a few children displayed sensitivity to criticism,
149
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Huber et al
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
were “picky eaters”, or wet the bed [3].
Medical difﬁculties
Case studies of patients with Dubowitz syndrome have
shown various medical phenomena. Medical problems with
the skin, esophagus, gastrointestinal system, cardiovascular
system, immune system, and neurological problems have all
been established [4-9, 23, 26, 27]. Although they don’t ap-
pear regularly, they still have shown to exist in cases and are
associated with the disorder.
Complications with the integumentary system are com-
mon in individuals with this disorder. Fifty-nine patients
reported a cutaneous abnormality [5, 7, 26, 27]. Since the
disorder was ﬁrst discovered, eczema has been considered to
be a characteristic feature, however, it has been vaguely de-
scribed in the literature [1, 2, 11]. Eczema is a type of derma-
titis that causes acute or chronic noncontiguous inﬂammation
of the skin. It is characterized chieﬂy by redness, itching,
and the outbreak of lesions that may discharge serous matter
and become encrusted and scaly [26, 27]. A small amount of
cases examined various skin problems in depth [7, 26, 27].
One case study found scaly skin dermatitis in a young boy
and made a diagnosis of ichthyosiform eruption [26]. He re-
sponded well to a treatment with daily topical application of
10% urea-containing ointment. Fifty percent of individuals
reported to have eczematous lesions did not respond to the
typical treatment of topical corticosteroids with success [26].
Kato and colleges suggested an incorrect diagnosis of ec-
zema in many of these cases. They implied that some lesions
may a result of ichthyosiform eruption [26]. Although rare,
keliodal lesions have also been reported in a few cases [5, 7].
Problems with the esophagus and gastrointestinal system
are often related to feeding problems. Irregularities found in
the literature include gastroesophageal reﬂux [5, 21] (return
of the stomach contents back up into the esophagus), and
achalasia [9] (narrowing of the esophagus). Vomiting and
regurgitation result with both. Vomiting occurred with 24 of
the cases in which 5 of the cases involved gastroesophageal
reﬂux [5]. There is still much information needed to under-
stand the cause of feeding problems and the association to
the esophagus and gastrointestinal system.
Medical concerns with the hematology, immunology,
and malignancies include aplastic anemia, actute lymphatic
leukemia, malignant lymphoma, germinal blastic sarcoma,
neuroblastoma, pancytopenia, embryonal rhabdomyosarco-
ma, hypogammaglobulinmia, hypoplastic anemia, and bone
marrow hypoplasia [4-6, 12, 13, 25]. These have occurred
very rarely in cases with Dubowitz syndrome. However,
with the majority of the anomalies, there is great risk for a
fatal outcome [4, 5]. Aplastic anemia results when bone mar-
row causes sufﬁcient red and white blood cell production [4,
6]. Acute lymphatic leukemia is a rapidly progressing cancer
of the blood that affects white blood cells [5]. Lymphoma is
malignant tumor of the lymph glands [5]. Neuroblastoma is
a malignant tumor derived from primitive ganglion cells that
most commonly appear on the adrenal glands [5]. Hypogam-
maglobulinmia is a condition where the immunoglobulin
level is depressed below the normal range. In many of these
cases, chromosomal instability and breakage was described
[5, 12, 13]. Frequent infections, allergies, and asthma are as-
sociated with Dubowitz syndrome. Infections appear in the
ears, sinuses, gastrointestinal system, respiratory system,
and urinary tract [5, 7, 13, 24].
Other reported medical complications consist of cardio-
vascular abnormalities, neurological problems, and migraine
headaches [5, 8, 10, 17, 23, 28]. Congenital heart defects
have been found in 13 cases [5, 23]. The defects included
ventricular septal defect, heat murmurs, atrial septal defect,
mitral valve prolapse, and coarctation of the aorta [5, 23].
Many of these abnormalities required surgical attention.
Neurological difﬁculties were found in 17% of the cases.
Seizures with abnormal and normal EEG ﬁndings, migraine
headaches, and paralysis of the limbs, anus and bladder have
been reported [5, 8, 17, 28]. Abnormalities in the brain have
also been discovered [5, 10, 17]. These included decreased
density in the frontal region of the brain and abnormal ven-
tricles [5, 10, 17].
Diagnosis
Diagnosis for Dubowitz syndrome is based primarily on in-
spection of facial appearance, growth records, and previous
medical history [19]. It is difﬁcult to diagnosis, as some of
the characteristic facial features are not always prominent or
similar in each case [19]. A medical doctor can make a diag-
nosis of the disorder, however, there are a few doctors that
are considered to be experts at diagnosing Dubowitz syn-
drome [1, 5, 11]. Diagnosis by these experts is not required,
however, these doctors have familiarity with the features and
have often made more than one diagnosis. Consulting a phy-
sician that has had previous experience with the disorder is
recommended if symptoms are variable and do not ﬁt the
common features of the disorder. At this time, the karotype
is normal, so diagnosis is done primarily through observa-
tion methods [5, 19]. Patients with Dubowitz syndrome are
often evaluated by several different specialists for associated
medical problems and abnormalities with eyes, ears, teeth,
skin, and skeletal system [19].
Age
Diagnosis can occur at any age [11, 19, 22]. Diagnosis is
more common during early childhood due to the associated
features and medical problems [5, 19]. It has also been diag-
nosed in adolescence and adulthood [11, 22]. Some infants
have been diagnosed with the disorder due to low birth size
and weight, microcephaly, and recurrent need of medical as-
150
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Dubowitz Syndrome
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
sistance following birth due to medical difﬁculties [4, 5, 19].
It is common that undiagnosed patients present with other
medical problems and upon examination, Dubowitz syn-
drome is diagnosed.
Differential diagnosis
Dubowitz syndrome can easily be confused with other disor-
ders. It has frequently been mistaken for Bloom syndrome,
Fanconi anemia, and fetal alcohol syndrome [1, 2, 5, 8, 11,
12, 19]. Dubowitz syndrome shares similar symptoms of
mental retardation, skin lesions, and growth retardation. Fan-
coni anemia and Dubowitz syndrome share problems with
chromosomal instability and the hematological and immune
systems [5, 12, 19]. However, Bloom syndrome and Fanconi
anemia do not share the facial characteristics of Dubowitz
syndrome and therefore can be easily distinguished [1, 2, 5,
8, 11, 12, 19]. On the other hand, fetal alcohol syndrome has
similar facial abnormalities, hyperactivity, growth retarda-
tion, varying degrees of mental retardation, and microceph-
aly [5, 8, 19]. Fetal alcohol syndrome requires intrauterine
exposure to alcohol which separates it from Dubowitz syn-
drome [5, 8, 19]. Dubowitz syndrome and fetal alcohol can
also be differentiated by evaluating clinical manifestations,
as they are different in each disorder [5, 8, 19].
Prevalence
Gender
Dubowitz syndrome is present equally in males and females.
Of the 148 cases reported, 66 were female and 73 were male
[5, 10, 16-19]. The literature failed to report the gender of
nine cases [5].
Race and location of origin
The disorder has been found in diverse groups worldwide.
Sixty-nine percent of the cases have been reported in the
United States, Russia, and Germany [5]. Cases have also
been found in Japan [16], Spain [19], Turkey [17], Hong
Kong [18], France, Italy, Mexico, Canada, England, Poland,
Venezuela, Israel, Hungary, Croatia, Netherlands, Brazil,
and Poland [5]. The disorder does not appear to be speciﬁc
to any particular race or region.
Family
Dubowitz syndrome has shown to exist within other mem-
bers of the family. Nine cases of family occurrence are re-
ported in the literature. The disorder has occurred in siblings
and twins [1, 2, 5, 11, 24, 25] Dubowitz’s original ﬁndings
describe the disorder in three sisters [1]. Tsukahara and Opitz
discovered Dubowitz syndrome in only one of two twins [5].
One case reported of the diagnosis within an aunt [10] and
another case described a mother with similar features of the
disorder [5].
Etiology
The cause of Dubowitz syndrome remains unknown. Due
to familial occurrence, it is believed to have genetic origins.
Direct consanguinity was found in three cases involving
parents [1, 5, 13] and one case involving ﬁrst cousins [27].
Hormone deﬁciency has been found sporadically throughout
the literature [5, 14, 23]. Three cases showed success with
growth hormone treatment [5, 14, 23]. Other cases have re-
ported hyperthirodism, iron deﬁciency, and cholesterol de-
ﬁciency [5, 15]. Chromosomal instability and breakage has
been examined in detail in a few cases [5, 12, 13]. How-
ever, Tsukahara and Opitz assert that metabolic and DNA
repair defects must be ruled out as the cause [5]. Instead,
they suggest that mosaic pleiotropy, which is intrcellular ac-
tion of the muntant genotype during various periods of pre
and post natal development. Their reasoning is based on
the broad variability of phenotype that there must be action
of many modifying genetic or epigenetic factors [5]. This
however, fails to account for the fact that the phenotype is
similar among siblings with Dubowitz syndrome [5]. Recent
research declares that Dubowitz syndrome is a microdeletion
and a microduplication syndrome rather than an autosomal
disorder [23].
Behavioral Assessment/Conceptualization
Cognitive functioning
Due to the severe physical and medical effects the disorder
has on an individual, it is necessary to assess all physical
aspects and medical concerns during examination. Past re-
search has shown the beneﬁts of examining different char-
acteristics such as the skin, immune system, brain structure,
lymphatic functioning and hormones, skeletal, ocular, den-
tal, and ears. It is equally important to assess the cognitive
functioning of individuals. Assessment and diagnosis of cog-
nitive deﬁcits can guide treatment and individualized educa-
tion plans [19, 27]. Much of the literatures discusse the cog-
nitive and behavioral aspects of each case, however, there is
not a great deal of information regarding assessment in the
majority of individuals described with cognitive problems.
Few studies have used cognitive and developmental
assessments to tap into the functioning of children with
Dubowitz syndrome [3, 8, 21, 22]. The Thermann-Merrill
was used to asses IQ in one case [22]. Five cases assessed
personal, social, ﬁne motor, adaptive, language, and gross
motor development with the Denver Developmental Screen-
ing [21]. In Parrish and Wilroy’s psychological analysis of
151
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Huber et al
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
ten children, the measures used included the Cattell Infant In-
telligence Test, Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised, Vineland Social
Maturity Scale, Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Form A,
Bender Gestalt Test, Goodenough Draw-A-Man Test, and
Wide Range Achievement Test [3]. Sunku and colleagues re-
ported results of one of child’s performance on the Wechsler
Intelligence Scale [8].
Information is missing from the literature about how
cognitive functioning was assessed in many individuals di-
agnosed with mental retardation. Lack of proper cognitive
assessment may be inferred in some of the cases that present
mental retardation in Dubowitz syndrome. In the majority
of the existing cases with a diagnosis of severely mentally
retarded, the literature described developmental and speech
delays. However, no assessment was mentioned. This sug-
gests that the child was not tested, but rather assumed to have
severe mental retardation based on the inability to talk, walk,
or perform speciﬁc tasks.
When assessing cognitive abilities, it is essential to use
a valid measure that generates an IQ score and level of per-
formance. Suggested assessments that can achieve this task
include the Wechsler Intelligence Scales [30-32], Stanford-
Binet Intelligence Scale: 4th Edition [33], Bayley Scales of In-
fant Development [34], and the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence
[35]. Individual functioning and academic achievement can be
measured on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children 4th
Edition (WISC-IV) [30] and the Wechsler IndividualAchieve-
ment Test 2nd Edition (WIAT-II) [31]. For youth ages 6 to16,
the WISC-IV is used [30]. The Wechsler Preschool and Prima-
ry Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI-III) [32] is used for children
ages 2 ½ – 7 years, 3 moths. The Stanford-Binet Intelligence
Scale: 4th Edition [33] has also been used to properly assess
intelligence and provide an IQ score for individuals ages 2 ½
up. For some children, it may not be practical to administer
the Wechsler or Stanford-Binet [31, 33]. There is no single
assessment that is appropriate for all individuals. The Bayley
Scales of Infant Development [34] and the Test of Nonverbal
Intelligence [35] can be utilized instead.
A measure of development and performance in various
areas would also be essential. This could be accomplished
with the Denver Developmental Screening: Revised [36].
Additionally, many individuals diagnosed with mental retar-
dation were in their early years of childhood [5]. It would be
important to have an initial measurement of cognitive ability
and continue to reassess the IQ, development, and perfor-
mance of each child. This longitudinal measurement could
show change over time and help identify needs for treatment
and special educational programs.
Maladaptive behavior
Behavior of children with Dubowitz syndrome also needs
to be assessed. Children have displayed hyperactivity, ag-
gressiveness, difﬁculty concentrating, behavior problems,
sleep disturbance, and feeding problems. The literature fails
to discuss an assessment strategy for these individuals. Sug-
gestions for assessment include behavioral observation,
functional assessment, behavioral checklists, the Differen-
tial Ability Scales [37], and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior
Scales [38].
Many of the associated behavioral characteristics such
as behavior problems, hyperactivity, aggressiveness, sleep-
ing and feeding difﬁculties can all be examined through
the use of behavioral observation or functional assessment.
Functional assessment would provide more information
about the antecedents and consequences of the behavior
and can guide treatment. Behavioral observation can assess
psychomotor retardation. Behavioral checklists such as the
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales could be given to a par-
ent to complete. It is not suggested that behavioral checklists
are administered alone. They need to be supplemented with
an objective measure. Functional assessment and observa-
tion is one way that this can be accomplished and can be
applied to a variety of settings and behaviors. A multifaceted
approach to behavioral assessment is recommended, and can
be accomplished by incorporating different methods of mea-
surement.
Dubowitz syndrome and attention deﬁcit-hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) have common symptoms of hyperactivity,
aggressiveness, irritability, and the inability to concentrate.
Due to the overlap of the symptomology, it is important to
consider ADHD as a possible diagnosis and to use the proper
tools for assessment. The Differential Ability Scales [37]
have shown validity in assessment for ADHD. Accurate di-
agnosis of ADHD would be essential to developing a treat-
ment and educational plan for the individual.
Speech and language
It is necessary to assess speech functioning to check for so-
cial skills deﬁcits in children with Dubowitz syndrome. One
case showed that a patient was very outgoing, friendly, at-
tentive, and talkative [18]. Other cases have shown patients
to be withdrawn and shy [5, 28]. The range of cognitive
abilities, temperament and social skills illustrate the need for
further assessment. Speech and language assessment can be
measured by the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-3rd edi-
tion (PPVT-III) [39], Assessment of Child Language Com-
prehension (ACLC) [40], and Clinical Evaluation of Lan-
guage Fundamentals-Revised (CELF-R) [41].
Treatment
Medical
Various treatments have been used with different medication
152
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Dubowitz Syndrome
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
conditions associated with Dubowitz syndrome. The major-
ity of treatments consist of surgery or medication. Surgery
has been done on the face, hands, and feet to correct abnor-
mal features. The skeletal, gastrointestinal, ocular, dental,
and cardiovascular systems have also been treated with sur-
gery.
Aphakic extended-wear contact lenses were used to treat
a boy with nuclear cataracts and strabismus [20]. In other
cases, surgical removal of cataracts and cosmetic strabismus
surgery can help restore comfortable, normal, clear vision
that also provides an aesthetically pleasing result. Despite
the beneﬁts of cosmetic strabismus surgery, common side
effects include persistent diplopia.
Other interventions consist of medications, blood trans-
fusions, growth hormones treatments, and transplants. Treat-
ment for aplastic anemia has shown to be most effective with
a bone marrow transplant. However, a donor is not always
available, so although it has been found to be extremely ef-
fective, it is not the most common form of treatment. A blood
transfusion might also be beneﬁcial, especially if there are
no other treatment options. One case of a young girl was fa-
tal due to aplastic anemia. Her parents denied treatment due
to religious convictions and she died three months later as a
result of the medical condition [4].
Cognitive and language treatment
Children with cognitive difﬁculties can attend special educa-
tion classes or specialized schools to assist with their learning
disabilities. An individual education plan can be developed
for each child which emphasizes areas of deﬁcits and needs.
By following this educational plan, parents and teachers can
help advance a child’s abilities while accentuating strengths.
Speech therapy can be utilized to develop language deﬁcits.
It can also help children learn how to annunciate and articu-
late words. Due to the abnormities experienced orally with
the palate, instruction of tongue placement and voice projec-
tion would be beneﬁcial. It will also be necessary to treat so-
cial skill deﬁcits and expand self-help skills for individuals
with Dubowitz syndrome. Social skills and self-help skills
can be taught through roll play, social play, or reinforcement
schedules.
Behavioral interventions and management
There are many behavioral treatments that can be applied to
the associated features of the disorder.After thorough assess-
ment, treatment can be implemented for behavior problems,
hyperactivity, feeding difﬁculties, sleep disturbance, and dis-
like/fear of public places. Differential reinforcement is can
be used as an effective treatment with many of the associated
behaviors. It is deﬁned by contingent and appropriate rein-
forcement based of the desired response and ignoring or not
acknowledging the target behavior.
Although medication has proven to be successful with
ADHD, behavioral treatments have also shown to be efﬁca-
cious. Behavioral treatment recommended for hyperactivity,
short attention span and behavior problems includes dif-
ferential reinforcement. Feeding problems associated with
Failure to Thrive can also employ differential reinforcement
after a thorough functional assessment [29]. Differential re-
inforcement can increase parental reinforcement and feeding
abilities such as bite-acceptance.
Sleep disturbance is often due to physical anomalies and
medical conditions, however sleeping difﬁculties have also
been attributed to hyperactivity and behavior problems. It
is necessary to carry out a functional assessment in order to
determine the underlying cause of sleep disruption. If sleep
disturbance is not due to physical or medical manifestations,
then a behavioral treatment can be implemented. A behavior-
al treatment can decrease sleep disturbance and help a child
sleep thru the night. Use of differential reinforcement or a
token system can encourage more sleep and decrease restful-
ness. Keeping a sleep log and recording sleep latency, dura-
tion, waking episodes and behaviors that accompany them.
Empirical Status/Outcome Research
There is a lack of information on the long-term outcome of
the disorder, associated medical problems, and adult level
of functioning. Few cases have been studied longitudinally,
and the outcomes of the disorder vary for each individual [5,
28]. Individual outcomes appear to be related to the primary
physical, medical, cognitive, and psychological manifesta-
tions of the disorder, how they progressed over time, treat-
ment, and the individual’s adaptability.
A longitudinal study of the ﬁrst child diagnosed with
Dubowitz syndrome describes childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood [28]. The female in the study had mild mental
retardation and completed high school in special education
classes. She had undergone multiple surgeries, including
plastic surgery to her face. She had experienced abnormal
menstruation at age 13. At age 22, she endured two seizures
for which she was prescribed phenobarbital for two years
with no later recurrence. As a child, she had severe eczema
that caused sleep disturbance. By adulthood, her eczema had
subsided and she was able to sleep through the night. She
appeared young for her age and had high tolerance to pain.
At the time of evaluation, she was living independently and
working full-time in a sheltered workshop [28].
Implications for Future Research
Future study of children with Dubowitz syndrome should
include cognitive, behavioral, and psychological evaluation.
Focus should be given to assessment of these features,
153
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Huber et al
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
which can provide speciﬁc information to direct treatment,
as well build on the current knowledge-base of the
disorder. Behavioral interventions that address associated
characteristics should be prominent in future research. More
research is needed concerning the long-term functioning
and adaptability of these individuals. Children with the
disorder appear and function differently from peers. It would
be essential to evaluate the affects of the disorder on an
individual’s self-esteem, social, and relational aspects. Much
research is needed in regard to the cognitive, behavioral, and
psychological status of children with Dubowitz syndrome.
Summary/Conclusion
Dubowitz Syndrome is a rare childhood disorder. It has
shown to affect individuals physically, medically, cognitive-
ly, behaviorally, and psychologically. The serious medical
and physical manifestations of the disorder highlight a need
for further evaluation of cognitive, behavioral, and psycho-
logical aspects of children with Dubowitz syndrome. Review
of the literature revealed a lack of thorough evaluation re-
garding these features. Previous reports provide a record of
associated characteristics, but fail to mention assessment and
treatment options for behavioral and psychological ﬁndings.
This paper suggests various assessment and treatment impli-
cations concerning cognitive, behavioral, and psychological
symptomology. Much research is needed to advance the cur-
rent knowledge of the disorder and to improve the quality of
care for individuals with Dubowitz syndrome.
References
1. Dubowitz V. Familial Low Birthweight Dwarﬁsm with
an Unusual Facies and a Skin Eruption. J Med Genet.
1965;42(12-17).
2. Grosse R, Gorlin J, Opitz JM. The Dubowitz syndrome.
Z Kinderheilkd. 1971;110(3):175-187.
3. Parrish JM, Wilroy RS, Jr. The Dubowitz syndrome: the
psychological status of ten cases at follow-up.Am J Med
Genet. 1980;6(1):3-8.
4. Berthold F, Fuhrmann W, Lampert F. Fatal aplastic
anaemia in a child with features of Dubowitz syndrome.
Eur J Pediatr. 1987;146(6):605-607.
5. Tsukahara M, Opitz JM. Dubowitz syndrome: review of
141 cases including 36 previously unreported patients.
Am J Med Genet. 1996;63(1):277-289.
6. Walters TR, Desposito F. Aplastic anemia in Dubowitz
syndrome. J Pediatr. 1985;106(4):622-623.
7. Paradisi M,Angelo C, Conti G, Mostaccioli S, Cianchini
G, Atzori F, Puddu P. Dubowitz syndrome with keloidal
lesions. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1994;19(5):425-427.
8. Sunku AJ, Gomez MR, Klass DW. Epileptic seizures,
EEG abnormalities, and neuronal heterotopia in the
Dubowitz syndrome. Am J. 1998;38:156-163.
9. Nowicki MJ, Peterson RB. Dubowitz syndrome and
achalasia: two rare conditions in a child. Clin Pediatr.
1998;37(3):197-200.
10. Swartz KR, Resnick DK, Iskandar BJ, Wargowski D,
Brockmeyer D, Opitz JM. Craniocervical anomalies in
Dubowitz syndrome. Three cases and a literature review.
Pediatr Neurosurg. 2003;38(5):238-243.
11. Opitz JM, Pferffer RA, Hermann JPR, Kushnick T.
Studies of malformation syndromes of man XXIVB:
The Dubowitz syndrome. Further observations. Z
Kinderheilk. 1973;120:283-292.
12. Thuret I, Michel G, Philip N, Hairion D, Capodano
AM, Perrimond H. Chromosomal instability in two
siblings with Dubowitz syndrome. Br J Haematol.
1991;78(1):124-125.
13. Al-Nemri AR, Kilani RA, Salih MA, Al-Ajlan AA.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and chromosomal
breakage in a newborn infant with possible Dubowitz
syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 2000;92(2):107-110.
14. Hirano T, Izumi I, Tamura K. Growth hormone
deﬁciency in Dubowitz syndrome. Acta Paediatr Jpn;
Overseas edition. 1996;38(3):267-269.
15. Ahmad A, Amalﬁtano A, Chen YT, Kishnani PS, Miller
C, Kelley R. Dubowitz syndrome: a defect in the
cholesterol biosynthetic pathway? Am J Med Genet.
1999;86(5):503-504.
16. Takahira S, Kondoh T, Sumi M, Tagawa M, Obatake M,
Kinoshita E, Shimokawa O, et al. Klippel-Feil anomaly
in a boy and Dubowitz syndrome with vertebral fusion
in his brother: a new variant of Dubowitz syndrome?
Am J Med Genet. Part A. 2005;138A(3):297-299.
17. Oguz KK, Ozgen B, Erdem Z. Cranial midline
abnormalities in Dubowitz syndrome: MR imaging
ﬁndings. Eur Radiol. 2003;13(5):1056-1057.
18. Chan KM, King NM. Dubowitz syndrome: report of a
case with emphasis on the oral features. J Dent Child.
2005;72(3):100-103.
19. Pascual JC, Betlloch I, Banuls J, Vergara G. What
syndrome is this? Dubowitz syndrome. Pediatr
Dermatol. 2005;22(5):480-481.
20. Rodden WS, Crouch ER, Jr., Leichtman LG, Becker HC.
Ophthalmologic ﬁndings in the Dubowitz syndrome. J
Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 1999;36(1):37-39.
21. Orrison WW, Schnitzler ER, Chun RW. The Dubowitz
syndrome: further observations. Am J Med Genet.
1980;7(2):155-170.
22. Fryns JP, Fabry G, Willemyns F, Van Den Berghe
H. Brief clinical report: the Dubowitz syndrome in a
teenager. Am J Med Genet. 1979;4(4):345-347.
23. Maas N, Thienpont B, Vermeesch JR, Fryns JP. Facial
asymmetry, cardiovascular anomalies and adducted
154
J Clin Med Res • 2011;3(4):147-155Dubowitz Syndrome
Articles © The authors | Journal compilation © J Clin Med Res and Elmer Press™ | www.jocmr.org
thumbs as unusual symptoms in Dubowitz syndrome:
a microdeletion/duplication in 13q. Genet Couns.
2006;17(4):477-479.
24. Mohrenschlager M, Beham A, Abeck D, Ring J. Atopic
eczema in monozygotic twins with Dubowitz syndrome.
Br J Dermatol. 1998;138(6):1091-1092.
25. Ilyina HG, Lurie IW. Dubowitz syndrome: possible
evidence for a clinical subtype. Am J Med Genet.
1990;35(4):561-565.
26. Kato T, Komatsu H, Sakakibara A, Tagami H.
Ichthyosiform eruption in a patient with Dubowitz
syndrome. Pediatr Dermatol. 1995;12(2):130-133.
27. Vieluf D, Korting HC, Braun-Falco O, Walther JU.
Dubowitz syndrome: atopic dermatitis, low birth weight
dwarﬁsm and facial dysmorphism. Dermatologica.
1990;180(4):247-249.
28. Hansen KE, Kirkpatrick SJ, Laxova R. Dubowitz
syndrome: long-term follow-up of an original patient.
Am J Med Genet. 1995;55(2):161-164.
29. Casey SD, Cooper-Brown LJ, Wacker, DP, Rankin BE.
The use of descriptive analysis to identify and manipulate
schedules of reinforcement in the treatment of food
refusal. Journal of Behavioral Education. 2006;15:41-
52.
30. Wechsler D. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children.
4th ed. SanAntonio,TX:The Psychological Corporation;
2003.
31. Wechsler D. Wechsler Individual Achievement Test. 2nd
ed. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation;
2001.
32. Wechsler D. Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence. 3rd ed. SanAntonio;TX:The Psychological
Corporation; 2002.
33. Thorndike R, Hagen E, Sattler J. Stanford-Binet
Intelligence Scale. 4th ed. Chicago: Riverside; 1986.
34. Bayley N. Bayley Scales of Infant Development. 2nd ed.
San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation: Harcourt
Brace & Company; 1993.
35. Brown L, Sherbenou RJ, Johnsen SK. Test of Nonverbal
Intelligence. Austin, TX: PRO-ED; 1982.
36. Frankenburg WK, Dodds J, Archer P, et al. The
DENVER II Technical Manual. Denver CO:Denver
Developmental Materials Inc;1996.
37. Elliott CD. Differential Ability Scales: Administration
and Scoring Manual. San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation; 1990.
38. Sparrow SS, Balla DA, Cicchetti DV. Vineland Adaptive
Behavior Scales. Ciricle Pines, MN: AmericanGuidance
Service; 1984.
39. Dunn LM, Dunn LM, Dunn, DM. Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-3rd Edition. Circle Pines, MN: ACS;
1997.
40. Foster R, Giddan, JJ, Stark J. Assessment of Child
Language Comprehension. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologist Press. 1973.
41. Semel E, Wiig E, Secord W. Clinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals-Revised. Examiner’s Manual.
New York: The Psychological Corporation; 1987.
155
