Infectious Mononucleosis Hepatitis in Young Adults:
Two Case Reports
Min-Jung Kang1
, Tae-Hun Kim1
, Ki-Nam Shim1
, Sung-Ae Jung1
, Min-Sun Cho2
, Kwon Yoo1
, and Kyu Won Chung1
Departments of 1
Internal Medicine and 2
Pathology, Clinical Research Institute, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea
DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2009.24.4.381
CASE REPORT
Infectious mononucleosis due to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection sometimes causes acute hepatitis, which is
usually self-limiting with mildly elevated transaminases, but rarely with jaundice. Primary EBV infection in
children is usually asymptomatic, but in a small number of healthy individuals, typically young adults, EBV
infection results in a clinical syndrome of infectious mononucleosis with hepatitis, with typical symptoms of fever,
pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. EBV is rather uncommonly confirmed as an etiologic
agent of acute hepatitis in adults. Here, we report two cases: the first case with acute hepatitis secondary to
infectious mononucleosis and a second case, with acute hepatitis secondary to infectious mononucleosis
concomitantly infected with hepatitis A. Both cases involved young adults presenting with fever, pharyngitis,
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and atypical lymphocytosis confirmed by serologic tests, liver biopsy
and electron microscopic study. (Korean J Intern Med 2009;24:381-387)
Keywords: Infectious mononucleosis; Epstein-Barr virus
Received: March 19, 2008
Accepted: April 30, 2008
Correspondence to Kyu Won Chung, M.D.
Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Mokdong Hospital, Mok 6-dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Korea
Tel: 82-2-2650-5825, Fax: 82-2-2655-2076, E-mail: kwchung@ewha.ac.kr
INTRODUCTION
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a herpes virus that is usually
transmitted by oropharyngeal secretions and is the
causative agent of infectious mononucleosis. More than
90% of the world’s population carries EBV as a life-
long, latent infection of B lymphocytes [1]. Infectious
mononucleosis is caused by an intense cytotoxic T
lymphocyte response to eliminate EBV-infected B cells
[2]. Usually, primary EBV infection in children is asymp-
tomatic with seroconversion. If primary infection occurs
in adolescents or in adulthood, the most common mani-
festation is infectious mononucleosis with the classic
presentation of fever, oropharyngitis, and bilateral
lymphadenitis. In the acute phase of infectious mononu-
cleosis, elevated transaminases are found in 80% of
patients, while jaundice is noted in only 5.0-6.6% [3].
Hepatitis owing to primary EBV infection is usually mild
and self-limited, although the mechanism is unclear.
Rarely, it results in hepatic failure with severe jaundice in
fatal infectious mononucleosis [4].
Here, we report two cases: the first case with acute
hepatitis secondary to infectious mononucleosis, and a
second case with acute hepatitis secondary to infectious
mononucleosis concomitantly infected with hepatitis A,
in young adults presenting with fever, pharyngitis,
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and atypical
lymphocytosis confirmed by serologic test, liver biopsy
and electron microscopic study.
CASE REPORT
Case 1
A 20-year-old male was admitted due to nausea,
vomiting, fever, myalgia, and sore throat for the past 7
days. He had no history of smoking or alcohol, and no
family history of liver disease.
On admission to the hospital, his body temperature was
38.3˚C, blood pressure 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate 100
beats per minute, and respiratory rate 20 breaths per
minute. Upon physical examination, he appeared acutely
ill-looking with bilateral cervical lymph node enlargement.
His tonsils were enlarged with white exudates and injection.
He was not apparently jaundiced, but was dehydrated.
The abdomen was remarkable for splenomegaly.
Laboratory findings revealed hemoglobin, 14 g/dL;
platelet count, 85,000/mm3
; white blood cell count,
13,500/mm3
with 13% granulocytes, 34% atypical
lymphocytes. The liver function tests reported aspartate
aminotransferase, 532 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase,
412 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 583 IU/L; gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase, 235 IU/L, and albumin, 3.6
g/dL. Total bilirubin was 2.1 mg/dL and direct bilirubin
was 1.2 mg/dL. The prothrombin time was 12.3 seconds
and the activated partial thromboplastin time was 30.3
seconds. Chest radiography showed no active lung lesion.
Treatment with amoxicillin for persistent fever was
administered empirically.
Abdominal sonography showed no change in liver
echogenicity and no focal lesion in liver with marked
splenomegaly, sized about 18.8 cm. On hospital day 3, a
liver biopsy was conducted and the patient was then
transferred to the intensive care unit temporarily, due to
iatrogenic subcapsular hematoma and hemoperitonium
confirmed by CT scan of the abdomen, which resolved
spontaneously 10 days later. Serological tests for hepatitis
A, B, C, cytomegalovirus (CMV), leptospirosis were
negative. Serology for both serum IgM and IgG antibodies
against EBV capsid antigen (EBV VCA IgM, IgG) showed
positive. Heterophil antibody was negative. The liver
biopsy showed infiltration of atypical lymphocytes within
sinusoid, and some hepatocytes revealed acidophilic
degeneration with frequent mitosis due to regeneration.
The lymphocytes were mostly positive for CD3, CD8
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and negative for CD20, CD4
cytotoxic T lymphocytes by immunohistochemistry (Fig.
1). Electron microscopy findings showed degenerated
hepatocytes with markedly dilated bile canaliculi and
increased collagen fiber bundles in the periportal area
382 The Korean Journal of Internal Medicine Vol. 24, No. 4, December 2009
Figure 1. Liver biopsy findings of case 1. (A) Multiple atypical
lymphocytes are observed in the sinusoid (H&E, ×400). (B, C)
Immunochemical staining shows CD 3 and CD 8 positive T
lymphocytes (×400).
A B
C
(Fig. 2). Large and pale looking atypical lymphocytes with
abundant cytoplasm and irregular nucleus could be seen
in the sinusoid and portal area. In the portal area, extensive
fibrosis and impaired bile ductules were observed with
infiltrations of mononuclear cells and macrophages.
Ductular lumen contained bleb formation. These findings
were consistent with hepatic involvement of infectious
mononucleosis. After 2 weeks of conservative treatment,
his condition was well and he was discharged without any
complications.
Case 2
A 24-year-old woman presented with a one-week
history of fever, sore throat and palpable neck mass. She
had lived in Canada for 10 years and was visiting Seoul for
summer vacation. She had a recent upper respiratory
infection with dry cough and nasal congestion. Recently,
she noticed progressive fatigue, malaise, nausea, and
vomiting with mildly swollen glands bilaterally. She had
no history of dental treatment, blood transfusion or sexual
activity in the previous 6 months. She had no family
history of liver disease and took no medications. She had a
travel history to the countryside for swimming about 10
days previously.
On admission to the hospital, her body temperature was
38˚C, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, pulse rate 104 beats
per minute and respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute.
Upon physical examination, she appeared acutely ill-
looking. She had bilateral posterior cervical adenopathy,
which was mobile and nontender. Her tonsils were enlarged
with white exudates. Sclera jaundice was prominent.
The auscultation of heart and lung were normal. The
abdomen was remarkable for moderate hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly. Laboratory findings revealed hemoglobin,
Kang MJ, et al. Infectious mononucleosis hepatitis in adults 383
Figure 2. Electron microscopic andiysis of liver biopsy samples from case 1. (A) Electron micrograph displaying degenerated
hepatocyte with dilated bile canaliculi (arrow) in the periportal area. The sinusoid contained thick collagen fiber bundles and fibrosis
(arrow) (×5,000). (B) Electron micrograph showing a large lymphocyte (arrow) with abundant pale cytoplasm and large nucleus in the
sinusoid (×5,000). (C) Electron micrograph showing two atypical lymphocytes (arrows) with abundant cytoplasm and irregular shaped
nucleus in the sinusoid. (×8,000). (D) Electron micrograph showing atypical lymphocyte (arrow) and interlobar bile ducts undergoing
degenerative injury. Picnotic nuclei (arrow) of bile ductular epithelial cells and bile ductular lumen (BD) containing blebs and scanty
microvilli were observed in the portal area with increased collagen fiber bundles (×4,000).
A B
C D
BDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBD
NNNNNNNNNNNN
12 g/dL; platelet count, 69,000/mm3
; white blood cell
count, 8,400/mm3
with 10% atypical lymphocytes. Liver
function tests reported aspartate aminotransferase, 368
IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 319 IU/L; alkaline
phosphatase, 544 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase,
69 IU/L, and albumin, 3.3 g/dL. Total bilirubin was 4.0
384 The Korean Journal of Internal Medicine Vol. 24, No. 4, December 2009
Figure 4. Electron microscopic analysis of liver biopsy samples from case 2. (A) Bile pigments (arrows) and lipofusin pigments
(arrowhead) were in the cytoplasm near bile canaliculus of hepatocytes. Mitochondria (M) contained long inclusion bodies (×8,000).
(B) Apoptotic body in the sinusoid (×15,000). (C) In sinusoid, mononuclear cells occupied the sinusoid lumen in which atypical
lymphocytes (arrow) with pale looking and large cytoplasm could be seen (×4,000). (D) Electron micrograph showing atypical
lymphocyte (arrow) and portal area with injured bile ductules (BD) with increased collagen fiber bundles. Ductular lumen has a bleb.
Hepatocytes contained a lot of lipofusin pigments (×2,500).
A B
C D
Figure 3. Liver biopsy findings of case 2. The lobule exhibits sinusoidal lymphocytic infiltration, individual hepatocyte degeneration,
and few spotty necroses. Some of the portal tract shows dense mononuclear cell infiltration, indicating activated lymphocytes (A: H&E,
×100, B: H&E, ×200).
A B
BDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBDBD
HHHHHHHHHHHH
MMMMMMMMMMMM
mg/dL and direct bilirubin was 2.4 mg/dL. Chest
radiography showed no active lung lesion. Treatment with
ceftriaxone was administered for persistent fever and she
was treated symptomatically for dehydration.
Abdominal sonography showed the liver to be enlarged
with a secondary change of gallbladder wall thickening.
The spleen was homogeneously enlarged to 13.5 cm.
There was no biliary tree dilatation or pathology. A CT
scan of chest and neck revealed several enlarged lymph
nodes of suspicious necrotic change at the supraclavicular
area, mediastinal area and axillary area. On hospital day 3,
neck node and liver biopsy were conducted.
On hospital day 7, her course was complicated by several
episodes of fever with negative blood cultures. Serologic
and virologic studies revealed the absence of hepatitis B
surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody IgM, hepatitis C
antibody, and negative CMV, but positive for hepatitis A
virus antibody IgM and EBV VCA IgM, EBV VCA IgG was
positive and Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) IgG
was negative. The neck node biopsy revealed reactive
hyperplasia with inflammation. The liver biopsy revealed
dense mononuclear cell infiltration, indicating activated
lymphocytes in the portal tract. The hepatic lobular
architecture was generally preserved and the lobule
showed sinusoidal lymphocytic infiltration, individual
hepatocyte degeneration and few spotty necrosis. Porto-
portal extension due to inflammatory activity and fibrosis
was also observed (Fig. 3). Electron microscopic findings
showed acute hepatitis, with hepatocytes containing
several bile pigments and lipofusin pigments near bile
canaliculi in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4). The mitochondria had
long paralleled inclusion bodies. An apoptotic body was
observed occasionally in the sinusoid. In the sinusoid,
mononuclear cells and atypical lymphocytes with a large
and pale looking cytoplasm occupied the lumen. In the
portal area, bile ducts were also injured with infiltration
of atypical lymphocytes and increased collagen fiber
bundles. These findings were suggestive of cholestatic
hepatitis. Her laboratory test results and physical
examination soon improved after two weeks of
hospitalization.
DISCUSSION
EBV is part of the herpes virus family and infects up to
90% of the population [1]. Initial infection is often
subclinical in children, but will generally result in
symptomatic infectious mononucleosis in adults who
were not exposed during childhood. Transmission occurs
through close personal contact among young children and
via intimate oral contact among adults. Transmission by
blood transfusion [5] and from a transplanted organ in
a previously seronegative recipient [6] have been docu-
mented. The most common presentation in infectious
mononucleosis is fever, sore throat and adenopathy.
Hepatosplenomegaly may be seen in more than 10% of
patients [7]. More rare manifestations of infectious
mononucleosis include hemolytic anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, aplastic anemia, myocarditis and neurological
complications [8].
Hepatic involvement with infectious mononucleosis
varies in severity and its frequency varies with age, which
is estimated to be 10% in young adults and 30% in the
elderly [9]. EBV infections are often associated with mild
hepatocellular hepatitis and can go undetected and resolve
spontaneously.
The elevated aminotransferases are usually less than
five-fold normal levels, and bilirubin may be elevated in
up to 5%, which may be due to intrahepatic cholestasis
or hemolytic anemia [10]. In our cases, both immuno-
competent adult patients had mild hepatitis with moderate
elevation of aminotransferases. In the second case, the
patient initially presented with icteric feature, as compared
to the first patient, and was later found to be infected
concomitantly with infectious mononucleosis and hepatitis
A. The incubation period of hepatitis A is 15-45 days, and
30-50 days for EBV infection [11]. Though their trans-
mission routes are different, hepatitis A spreads via the
fecal-oral route and infectious mononucleosis spreads via
nasopharyngeal secretion, their incubation periods may
overlap and these viruses may be acquired at nearly the
same time.
Only a few cases of cholestatic hepatitis by EBV infection
have been reported [9]. The mechanism for the obstructive
component is not well known, but it is assumed to be
related to a mildly swollen bile duct [12] rather than an
infection of the epithelial cells of the bile duct [13]. EBV
infections are rarely associated with acute fulminant
hepatic failure. It is characterized by the lymphocytic
infiltration of organs, hemophagocytosis and pancytopenia
[4]. It may occur, in particular, in immunodeficient states
such as X-linked lymphoproliferative disease, human
immunodeficiency virus co-infection and complement
deficiency [14].
The histological findings of infectious mononucleosis
Kang MJ, et al. Infectious mononucleosis hepatitis in adults 385
hepatitis include minimal swelling and vacuolization of
hepatocytes, as well as infiltration with lymphocytes and
monocytes in the periportal area [7]. The sinusoidal
invasion by monocytes in an ‘Indian Bead’ pattern, areas
of scattered focal necrosis and proliferation of Kupffer
cells, has also been observed [15]. An evaluation of infec-
tious mononucleosis hepatitis has demonstrated that the
virus did not infect hepatocytes, biliary epithelium, or
vascular endothelium but, rather, the infiltration of CD8 T
cells led to indirect hepatic damage [14].
The pathogenesis of infectious mononucleosis hepatitis
is not well understood. Traditionally, it has been thought
that hepatotropic viruses are not directly cytotoxic but,
instead, that the immune responses to viral antigens on
hepatocytes result in hepatocyte death. CD3 positive T
lymphocytes present as the main lymphocytic population
in EBV hepatitis, which are mainly cytotoxic CD8 positive
T-lymphocytes [14,16]. A recent animal model [17] showed
that activated CD8+ T cells were trapped in the liver
selectively, primarily by intracellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1), which is expressed constitutively on sinusoidal
endothelial cells and Kupffer cells. In infectious mononu-
cleosis hepatitis, EBV infected CD8+ T cells, presumably
activated T cells, may accumulate in the liver. A series of
experiments have shown that certain soluble products of
the immune response, especially interferon γ, tumor
necrosis factor α and Fas ligand, induced hepatitis [18-20].
These products, which are produced by either EBV-
infectedCD8+TcellsorinfiltratingcytotoxicTlymphocytes,
may, therefore, induce hepatocyte injury [16].
The diagnosis of EBV infection is made by appropriate
clinical symptoms, laboratory findings, and positive EBV
IgM antibody and heterophil antibody tests [21]. The EBV-
specific serology is a confirmative diagnostic tool, but can
be negative initially in patients who have been ill for only a
few days at the time of their first visit. However, within 1
to 2 weeks, antibodies to EBV-specific antigens appear
at the expected titers [22]. The serology of Anti-VCA IgM
generally persists for about 1-2 months. The original
serologic test for infectious mononucleosis, the Paul-Bunnell
test for detecting heterophil antibodies by agglutination of
sheep or horse red blood cells, is now available as a
convenient latex agglutination or solid phase immunoas-
say form [21]. The test is specific, but insensitive during
the first weeks of illness. The false negative rate is as high
as 25% in the first week, 5-10% in the second week and 5%
in the third week [21]. The primary acute EBV infection is
associated with VCA-IgM, VCA-IgG, and absent EBNA
antibodies [9]. Recent infection in 3 to 12 months includes
positive VCA-IgG and EBNA antibodies, negative VCA-
IgM antibodies, and usually positive EA antibodies [9].
Infectious mononucleosis hepatitis should be differentiated
from other viral hepatitis A, B, C, HIV, CMV, varicella
zoster virus and herpes simplex virus [7]. In the present
two cases, the patients were in acute phase of EBV infection
and the diagnosis was based on typical symptoms, including
atypical lymphocytosis, elevated liver enzymes, serologic
marker of positive anti-EBV IgM and, subsequently, IgG
with mononuclear cell infiltration of the portal tract and
sinusoids in liver biopsy.
Treatment for infectious mononucleosis hepatitis is
usually supportive as it is generally self-limiting. Steroids
and antiviral medications have been utilized to treat cases
of severe infectious mononucleosis hepatitis. Acyclovir has
not been shown to be efficacious for the treatment of severe
EBV hepatitis [23]. There is a case report of the successful
use of ganciclovir in two immunocompetent patients with
severe infectious mononucleosis hepatitis [10]. However,
randomized studies have not been performed for all of
these treatments of infectious mononucleosis hepatitis. In
our cases, both patients soon recovered with only conser-
vative treatment.
EBV is a rare causative agent of acute hepatitis, during
the course of infectious mononucleosis. Usually, it is mild,
undetected clinically and resolves spontaneously. Jaundice
is distinctly uncommon; cholestatic hepatitis due to EBV
infection is rarely reported. We should consider infectious
mononucleosis hepatitis in differentiating patients
presenting with liver abnormality, fever, pharyngitis, and
lymphadenopathy.
REFERENCES
1.Macsween KF, Crawford DH. Epstein-Barr virus-recent advances.
Lancet Infect Dis 2003;3:131-140.
2. Rickinson AB, Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus. In: Knipe DM, Howly
PM, eds. Virology. vol. 2. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
and Wilkins, 2001:2575-2627.
3. Markin RS. Manifestations of Epstein-Barr virus-associated
disorders in liver. Liver 1994;14:1-13.
4. Markin RS, Linder J, Zuerlein K, et al. Hepatitis in fatal infectious
mononucleosis. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1210-1217.
5. Paloheimo JA, Halonen PI. A case on mononucleosis-like
syndrome after blood transfusion from a donor with symptomatic
mononucleosis. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 1965;6:558-561.
6. Cen H, Breinig MC, Atchison RW, Ho M, McKnight JL. Epstein-
Bar virus transmission the donor organs in solid organ trans-
386 The Korean Journal of Internal Medicine Vol. 24, No. 4, December 2009
plantation: polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment
length polymorphism analysis of IR2, IR3 and IR4. J Virol
1991;65:976-980.
7. Curm NF. Epstein Barr virus hepatitis: cases series and review.
South Med J 2006;99:544-547.
8.Cohen JI. Epstein-Barr virus infection. N Engl J Med 2000;343:
481-492.
9. Lawee D. Mild infectious mononucleosis presenting with
transient mixed liver disease. Can Fam Physician 2007;53:1314-
1316.
10. Adams LA, Deboer B, Jeffrey G, Marley R, Garas G. Ganciclovir
and the treatment of Epstein-Barr virus hepatitis. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2006;21:1758-1760.
11. Karagoz G, Ak O, Ozer S. The coexistence of hepatitis A and
infectious mononucleosis. Turk J Gastroenterol 2005;16:102-104.
12. Nelson RS, Darragh JH. Infectious mononucleosis hepatitis: a
clinicopathologic study. Am J Med 1956;21:26-33.
13. Feranchak AP, Tyson RW, Narkewicz MR, Karrer FM, Sokol RJ.
Fulminant Epstein-Barr viral hepatitis: orthotopic liver
transplantation and review of the literature. Liver Transpl Surg
1998;4:469-476.
14. Kimura H, Nagasaka T, Hoshino Y, et al. Severe hepatitis caused
by Epstein-Barr virus without infection of hepatocytes. Hum
Pathol 2001;32:757-762.
15. Hinedi TB, Koff RS. Cholestatic Hepatitis Induced by Epstein-
Barr virus infection in an adult. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:539-541.
16. Hara S, Hoshino Y, Naitou T, et al. Association of virus infected-T
cell in severe hepatitis caused by primary Epstein-Barr virus
infection. J Clin Virol 2006;35:250-256.
17. Mehal WZ, Juedes AE, Crispe IN. Selective retention of activated
CD8+ T cells by the normal liver. J Immunol 1999;163:3202-
3210.
18. Kusters S, Gantner F, Kunstle G, Tiegs G. Interferon gamma plays
critical role in T cell-dependent liver injury in mice initiated by
concanavalin A. Gastroenterology 1996;111:462-471.
19. Bradham CA, Plumpe J, Manns MP, Brenner DA, Trautwein C.
Mechanisms of hepatic toxicity. I. TNF-induced liver injury. Am J
Physiol 1998;275:G387-G392.
20.Kondo T, Suda T, Fukuyama H, Adachi M, Nagata S. Essential
roles of the Fas ligand in the development of hepatitis. Nat Med
1997;3:409-413.
21. Ebell MH. Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis. Am Fam
Physician 2004;70:1279-1290.
22.Fleisher GR, Collins M, Fager S. Limitations of available tests for
diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis. J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:
619-624.
23.Hart GK, Thompson WR, Schneider J, Davis NJ, Oh TE. Fulminant
hepatic failure and fatal encephalopathy associated with Epstein-
Barr virus infection. Med J Aust 1984;141:112-113.
Kang MJ, et al. Infectious mononucleosis hepatitis in adults 387
