Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008 449
Gastrointestinal Complications Following
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
in Children
Gastrointestinal system involvement is one of the principal complications seen
in the recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), and it is also
a major cause of morbidity and death in these patients. The major gastrointestinal
complications include typhlitis (neutropenic enterocolitis), pseudomembranous
enterocolitis, viral enteritis, graft-versus-host disease, benign pneumatosis intesti-
nalis, intestinal thrombotic microangiopathy, and post-transplantation lymphopro-
liferative disease. As these patients present with nonspecific abdominal symp-
toms, evaluation with using such imaging modalities as ultrasonography and CT
is essential in order to assess the extent of gastrointestinal involvement and to
diagnose these complications. We present here a pictorial review of the imaging
features and other factors involved in the diagnosis of these gastrointestinal com-
plications in pediatric HSCT recipients.
ematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is increasingly being used
to treat many disorders ranging from hematologic malignancies to solid
organ malignancies (1). However, all the recipients are at risk for a
variety of post-transplant complications. Gastrointestinal tract involvement is a
frequent complication that causes nonspecific symptoms (2, 3). The timing of complica-
tions that occur following transplantation is divided into three phases (4). The pre-
engraftment phase lasts 15-30 days and it is characterized by marrow aplasia. The
host defense barriers may be weakened during this pancytopenic period. The broad-
spectrum antimicrobial agents that are administered during this period are also a
contributing factor for infection (3). The early post-engraftment period, i.e., from 30 to
100 days after transplantation, is characterized by the restoration of hematopoiesis.
However, as lymphocyte recovery occurs more slowly, there is a continued deficiency
of both cellular and humoral immunity during this period. The late, post-engraftment
period begins only months or years after transplantation (4).
The complications that arise shortly after transplantation often result from the
mucosal damage that’s secondary to the pre-transplantation chemotherapy and
radiation therapy regimens, together with the immunosuppression of the pre-engraft-
ment period and the infection that’s secondary to neutropenia. (4). The complications
that occur later during the post-transplantation phase include chronic graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD) and proliferative diseases such as post-transplantation lymphoprolif-
erative disease (PTLD) or secondary malignant neoplasm (1, 4).
Despite the fact that gastrointestinal complications remain a major cause of morbid-
ity and mortality in pediatric HSCT recipients, there is only limited data regarding the
imaging features of the gastrointestinal complications experienced by these patients
(3). Careful evaluation of the imaging findings of these gastrointestinal complications,
Ji-Hye Lee, MD1
Gye-Yeon Lim, MD1
Soo Ah Im, MD1
Nak-Gyun Chung, MD2
Seung-Tae Hahn, MD1
Index terms:
Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
Pediatric
Complications
Gastrointestinal tract
DOI:10.3348/kjr.2008.9.5.449
Korean J Radiol 2008;9:449-457
Received November 12, 2007; accepted
after revision March 6, 2008.
Departments of 1
Radiology and
2
Pediatrics, St. Mary’s Hospital, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 150-
713, Korea
Address reprint requests to:
Gye-Yeon Lim, MD, Department of
Radiology, St. Mary’s Hospital, The
Catholic University of Korea, 62, St.
Mary’s Hospital, Youido-dong,
Yongdungpo-gu, Seoul 150-713, Korea.
Tel. (822) 3779-2168
Fax. (822) 783-5188
e-mail: shlgy@catholic.ac.kr
Abbreviations:
CMV = cytomegalovirus
CsA = cyclosporine A
GI = gastrointestinal
GVHD = graft-versus-host disease
HSCT = hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
LDH = lactate dehydrogenase
PMC = pseudomembranous colitis
PTLD = post-transplantation
lymphoproliferative disease
TMA = thrombotic microangiopathy
H
together with the patient’s clinical history, allows radiolo-
gists to arrive at a more probable differential diagnosis.
Complications arising during the Pre-Engraftment
Period (Days 0-30)
Typhlitis (Neutropenic Colitis)
Neutropenic colitis is also termed typhlitis (greek:
typhlon = cecum), and this is a complication of severe
neutropenia in patients who have undergone chemother-
apy. Bacterial infection of the chemotherapy-related,
damaged mucosa, and often this is superinfection, e.g.,
Clostridia, may lead to necrotizing inflammatory disease of
the ileocecal region (1). The clinical manifestations are a
triad of abdominal pain or tenderness, fever and neutrope-
nia, and this all usually improves after neutrophil recovery.
The imaging feature of typhlitis on plain radiography is a
paucity of gas in the right side of the abdomen. Dilatation
of a small bowel loop suggests mechanical ileus caused by
marked ileocecal wall thickening and hypervascularity of
the thickened wall that’s caused by a transmural inflamma-
tory reaction (4) (Figs. 1A, B). The CT images may
demonstrate marked hypodense ileocecal wall thickening,
increased mucosal enhancement and inflammatory strand-
ing in the pericecal fat (Fig. 1C). These abnormalities are
localized in the cecum and ascending colon, appendix and
terminal ileum. Free abdominal gas and fluid collections
may occur in those patients with perforations and severe
typhlitis (1, 4).
Acute or chronic inflammatory disease of the ileocecal
area and the right colon, including cytomegalovirus
infection, bacterial ileocecitis, pseudomenbranous entero-
colitis and appendicitis, should be considered when making
the differential diagnosis. The appropriate microbiological
tests for bacteria and viruses include cytomegalovirus
(CMV) polymerase chain reaction and the CMV early
antigen tests. The endoscopic approach during pancytope-
nia is usually contraindicated. The finding of a thickened
bowel wall involving the ileocecal region, which is associ-
ated with the clinical triad of neutropenic patients who
have undergone intensive chemotherapy, suggests this
diagnosis.
Lee et al.
450 Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008
A B
Fig. 1. Neutropenic colitis in 10-year-old boy, and this developed on 23rd day
after bench mark test for treating his leukemia.
A, B. US of right lower guadrant abdomen shows marked asymmetric
echogenic wall thickening and abundant vascular flow of cecum (A) and
terminal ileum (B).
C. CT scan shows thickening of cecal wall with associated luminal narrowing
and stranding in pericecal fat (arrow).
C
Pseudomembranous Colitis (PMC)
Bacterial pathogens are the predominant cause of
infection during the first month following HSCT. The use
of antimicrobial agents during this period provides
effective preventative treatment, but these drugs can alter
the microflora of the colon and cause overgrowth of
Gastrointestinal Complications Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Children
Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008 451
Fig. 3. Cytomegalovirus enteritis in 15-year-old boy, and this developed during second month after bench mark test for treating his
aplastic anemia.
A, B. US of abdomen shows multiple sites of segmental hypoechoic bowel wall thickening that involves terminal ileum (A), and there are
abundant Doppler signals with ascites (B).
A B
A
B
Fig. 2. Pseudomembranous colitis in 9-year-old boy, and this developed on
23rd day after bench mark test for treating his leukemia.
A. Longitudinal US of ascending colon shows rather striking diffuse thicken-
ing of colonic wall (arrows). Exaggerated haustral markings and inhomoge-
nously thickened submucosa with apposition of muscosal surfaces of
thickened wall are noted.
B, C. Axial contrast enhanced CT shows pancolitis involving ascending,
transverse, descending (B) and rectosigmoid colon (C). Note the hyperemic
enhancing mucosa surrounded by thickened hypodense submucosa edema,
which forms accordion pattern (arrows).
C
Clostridium difficile. PMC almost always occurs in children
with neutropenia and antibiotic-related diarrhea (4).
The US features of PMC include exaggerated and
inhomogenously thickened submucosa with apposition of
the mucosal surfaces of the thickened wall (Fig. 2A). The
characteristic CT feature of PMC is diffuse colonic wall
Lee et al.
452 Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008
Fig. 4. Acute graft-versus-host disease in 12-year-old boy, and this developed on 32nd day after bench mark test for treating his leukemia.
A, B. US of abdomen shows slightly thickened echogenic wall (arrows) (A) and fluid (*) distended small bowel loops with ascites (B).
A B
Fig. 5. Acute graft-versus-host disease in 11-year-old-boy, and this
developed on 40th day after bench mark test for treating his
leukemia.
A, B. Axial contrast-enhanced CT scans show ascites and diffuse
wall thickening with mucosal enhancement involving small bowel
(long arrows) and large bowel (short arrows).
C. Coronal MPR contrast-enhanced CT demonstrates more
pronounced engorgement of vasa recta (arrow) adjacent to thickened
bowel wall segment, as well as multiple, fluid-filled, dilated loops of
colon without wall thickening in sigmoid colon (*). Abnormal enhance-
ment of gall bladder and urinary bladder is also present, and this is
similar to that seen within bowel wall.
A
B
C
thickening with low attenuation and trapped contrast
media between the thickened haustral folds, and this is
referred to as the “accordion sign” (Figs. 2B, C).
Pancolonic involvement is common in patients with PMC,
but this involvement may be focal or restricted to the right
or rectosigmoid colon.
Pseudomembranous colitis can be confirmed by either
endoscopic demonstration of the characteristic yellow
plaque (pseudomembrane) on the rectal or colonic mucosa
or by serologic documentation of Clostridium difficile in
the feces (5).
Complications arising during the Early Post-
Engraftment Period (days 31-100)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Gastroenteritis
Viruses such as rotavirus, adenovirus and CMV are well
recognized causes of the diarrhea in HSCT recipients
during the early post-transplantation period, and CMV is
the leading cause of intra-abdominal infectious complica-
tions. CMV gastroenteritis and hepatitis are major causes
of infection-associated mortality following transplantation
(4). The imaging findings include non-specific bowel wall
thickening, ascites and adjacent inflammatory change,
especially in the ileocecal region (Fig. 3).
Graft-versus-Host Disease (GVHD)
Graft-versus-host disease results from the damage that
donor lymphocytes do to the recipient’s target organs. The
most commonly affected organs are the skin, liver and
gastrointestinal tract. GVHD develops in 55% of the
allogenic marrow recipients. The degree of histocompati-
bility between the stem cell donor and the recipients
affects the risk for developing GVHD.
Graft-versus-host disease is not only a primary complica-
tion, but it also acts as a predisposing factor for other
complications. Because the GVHD-involved gut mucosa
impairs the mucosal lymphoid intestinal immunity, patients
with GVHD are also susceptible to concomitant gastroin-
testinal infections.
Acute GVHD usually develops 3-5 weeks after
transplantation and it is most commonly diagnosed in
conjunction with or it is usually heralded by such skin
manifestations as maculopapular rash and pruritis. Chronic
GVHD can develop following acute GVHD and it can arise
several months after allogenic transplantation (6, 7). It is
rare to diagnose GVHD when there is only a single site of
involvement such as isolated intestinal tract involvement.
Symptoms of intestinal GVHD can also occur, including
secretory diarrhea, fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain and intestinal hemorrhage (8).
The plain radiographic findings of intestinal GVHD
include air fluid levels, bowel wall thickening, a gasless
abdomen, bowel dilatation and ascites. US shows multiple,
fluid-filled, dilated bowel loops (Fig. 4). The CT findings
that suggest acute GVHD include abnormal bowel wall
enhancement, and this correlates histopathologically with
mucosal destruction and its replacement by a thin layer of
Gastrointestinal Complications Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Children
Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008 453
Fig. 6. Benign pneumatosis intestinalis in 15-year-old asymptomatic boy, and this developed on 75th day after BMT for treating his
leukemia.
A. Plain film of abdomen shows diffuse linear and bubbly intramural air along entire colon, as well as presence of subhepatic gas.
B. CT scan shows diffuse intramural air densities in entire colon with involvement of retroperitoneal (arrows) and intraperitoneal cavities.
BA
granulation tissue (Figs. 5A, B) (7, 8). As oral contrast
material, the use of a negative contrast agent, such as
water, may be advantageous for identifying mucosal
enhancement. Bowel wall thickening may involve any part
of the small or large bowel, but this is less severe than that
found in patients with typhlitis or pseudomembranous
colitis (4). The common extraintestinal findings of intestinal
GVHD include ascites and engorgement of the mesenteric
vessels; these findings are more pronounced adjacent to
the thickened bowel loops (Figs. 5A, B). The abnormal
findings that represent periportal edema and abnormal
enhancement of the gall bladder and urinary bladder wall
may also occur (Fig. 5C).
Because differentiation of intestinal GVHD from
infective enteritis is critical for proper patient treatment,
tissue sampling via biopsy is often required for confirma-
tion. Microbiological tests for bacteria and viruses, such as
those performed on rectal biopsies, are useful for making
the diagnosis of intestinal GVHD. A diagnostic biopsy from
skin, liver or rectum is required.
To diagnose the symptoms of intestinal GVHD, as well
as the other typical clinical findings of GVHD.
Pneumatosis Intestinalis
The factors contributing to the development of
pneumatosis intestinalis include pre-transplantation
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, steroid therapy,
infectious colitis, GVHD and septic shock (9). Steroid
therapy appears to be a significant factor for the develop-
ment of pneumatosis in patients who suffer with HSCT. It
has been postulated that steroid administration induces
atropy of the lymphoid aggregates (Peyer patches) in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract and that the resultant mucosal
defects allow dissection of intraluminal air into the
submucosal or subserosal regions (2). If this is detected in
an asymptomatic patient after steroid therapy, it is usually
not associated with bowel necrosis and it can be resolved
with conservative management. In these benign cases,
even the subsequent development of retroperitoneal air or
pneumoperitoneum does not necessitate surgery or
Lee et al.
454 Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008
Fig. 7. Intestinal thrombotic microangiopathy followed by graft-versus-
host disease in 13-year-old girl, and this developed on 28th day after
peripheral blood stem cell transplantation for treating her leukemia.
A, B. US shows multiple distended small bowel loops with wall thicken-
ing. Medium echogenic debris with floating echogenicities that fill
distended lumen are noted in some of these loops (*).
C. Unenhanced coronal multiplanar reconstruction CT image shows
increased intraluminal attenuation, which is consistent with intraluminal
bleeding (*), and submucosal zone of decreased attenuation parallel to
lumen (arrowhead). Ascites and mesenteric thickening are also noted.
A
B
C
*
*
indicate a grave prognosis (Fig. 6). However, pneumatosis
intestinalis associated with neutropenic colitis is very
worrisome as it implies imminent bowel perforation.
The imaging features of pneumatosis intestinalis include
bubbly and linear intraluminal lucencies that represent
submucosal and subserosal gas, respectively (Fig. 6).
Usually, the right side of the colon is predominantly
involved.
Thrombotic Microangiopathy (TMA) after
Transplantation
Thrombotic microangiopathy represents intimal injury of
the microvasculature followed by pathophysiologic
formation of microthrombi. As intestinal TMA after HSCT
is a rare, but fatal complication that occurs in patients who
undergo allogenic or autologous BMT (bench mark test), its
early diagnosis is very important. The risk factors such as
acute GVHD, cyclosporine A (CsA), tacrolimus (FK 506)
and total body irradiation may contribute to its occurrence,
but the pre-transplant conditioning regimen and the
presence of infection may also have a role in the pathogen-
esis of TMA (10). The intestinal tract is a prevalent site for
post-HSCT TMA, and ischemic enterocolitis caused by
microangiopathy is another mimic of gut GVHD. Although
the clinical symptoms and imaging features of intestinal
TMA are similar to those of intestinal GVHD, differentiat-
ing TMA from acute GVHD is important for patients
suffering from severe and refractory diarrhea after HSCT
(10). Because of the difficulty in making a definitive
diagnosis of TMA in HSCT recipients, this condition is
usually diagnosed based on the clinical and laboratory
findings such as the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
levels and the percentage of fragmented erythrocytes.
However, as these findings are frequently non-specific,
pathologic examination of the gastrointestinal tract may be
essential in order to make a definite diagnosis of TMA in
HSCT recipients with refractory diarrhea (11). In our
series, a 13-year-old girl developed intestinal TMA
followed by GVHD. Despite that her skin-GVHD
improved with intensive treatment, her intestinal symptom
of severe bloody refractory diarrhea progressed. This
patient also experienced subsequent hyperammonemic
encephalopathy and an elevated level of LDH with
fragmented erythrocytes. On the basis of the clinical and
laboratory data, this patient was diagnosed with CsA-
associated neurotoxicity with microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia. To the best of our knowledge, little attention has
been given to the imaging features of intestinal TMA after
Gastrointestinal Complications Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Children
Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008 455
Fig. 8. Megacolon in 14-year-old boy with neutropenic colitis, and this developed on 39th day after peripheral blood stem cell transplanta-
tion for treating his leukemia.
A. Initial CT shows diffuse concentric thickening with increased vascularity involving cecum and ascending colon (arrows). Lumen is
distended and partially fluid-filled.
B. Follow-up CT one month later shows resolution of previous wall thickening, but there is also marked fluid/gas-distended right side of
colon, which appears as megacolon (arrows).
BA
transplantation and although they do not differ from those
of GVHD, intraluminal or intramucosal hemorrhage is
frequently present in the TMA patients who present with
severe bloody diarrhea (Fig. 7).
Megacolon
Megacolon may be caused by motility problems that are
related to the complications of systemic chemotherapy and
intestinal or intrabdominal infection or a combination of
these factors (1) (Fig. 8).
Complications arising during the Late Post-
Engraftment Period
Post-Transplantation Lymphoproliferative Disease
(PTLD)
Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease is
caused by Epstein-Barr virus, which induces uncontrolled
proliferation of engrafted B lymphocytes in organ
transplant recipients. The histologic subtypes of PTLD
range from polyclonal lymphoid hyperplasia to malignant
monoclonal lymphoma (12). GI tract involvement by
PTLD frequently occurs, but this is rare following HSCT,
with a prevalence of 0.34% and 1.4% in patients with
matched allogenic grafts and unmatched grafts, respec-
tively (13).
The imaging features of PTLD are similar those of non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. PTLD involving the GI tract may
be infiltrative, and so it causes circumferential mural
infiltration with luminal excavation or there is a discrete
eccentric mass that causes luminal narrowing with intussus-
ception (12) (Fig. 9).
Reduced immunosuppression in the case of polyclonal
hyperplasia leads to regression of the PTLD, whereas
aggressive chemotherapy is required for monoclonal
lymphoma. Unlike the PTLD in solid organ recipients, the
PTLD seen in HSCT recipients has a poor prognosis
because decreasing these patients’ immunosuppression is
not a feasible therapeutic option.
CONCLUSION
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has resulted in
the prolonged survival of children with hematologic
malignancy. However, gastrointestinal complications
following transplantation are now seen as a major cause of
morbidity and mortality in pediatric HSCT recipients.
Therefore, it is important to recognize the imaging findings
of these complications in those patients who undergo
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in order to identify
and properly treat them.
References
1. Benya EC, Sivit CJ, Quinones RR. Abdominal complications
after bone marrow transplantation in children: sonographic and
CT findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;161:1023-1027
2. Jones B, Fishman EK, Kramer SS, Siegelman SS, Saral R,
Beschorner WE, et al. Computed tomography of gastrointestinal
inflammation after bone marrow transplantation. AJR Am J
Lee et al.
456 Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008
Fig. 9. Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease involving small bowel in
five-year-old boy, and this developed during third year following bench mark test for
treating his leukemia.
A. Longitudinal US of left mild abdomen shows short area of segmental severe
concentric hypoechoic mural thickening (*), and this causes luminal narrowing in
jejunum.
B. CT scan shows short area of segmental concentric wall thickening with homoge-
nous enhancement of small bowel loop in left side of abdomen (arrow).
A
B
Roentgenol 1986;146:691-695
3. Barker CC, Anderson RA, Sauve RS, Butzner JD. GI complica-
tions in pediatric patients post-BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant
2005;36:51-58
4. Coy DL, Ormazabal A, Godwin JD, Lalani T. Imaging evalua-
tion of pulmonary and abdominal complications following
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Radiographics
2005;25:305-317
5. Bolton RP, Thomas DF. Pseudomembranous colitis in children
and adults. Br J Hosp Med 1086;35:37-42
6. Donnelly LF, Morris CL. Acute graft-versus-host disease in
children: abdominal CT findings. Radiology 1996;199:265-268
7. Mentzel HJ, Kentouche K, Kosmehl H, Gruhn B, Vogt S,
Sauerbrey A, et al. US and MRI of gastrointestinal graft-versus-
host disease. Pediatr Radiol 2002;32:195-198
8. Fisk JD, Shulman HM, Greening RR, McDonald GB, Sale GE,
Thomas ED. Gastrointestinal radiographic features of human
graft-vs.-host disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1981;136:329-336
9. Day DL, Ramsay NK, Letourneau JG. Pneumatosis intestinalis
after bone marrow transplantation. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1988;151:85-87
10. Nishida T, Hamaguchi M, Hirabayashi N, Haneda M, Terakura
S, Atsuta Y, et al. Intestinal thrombotic microangiopathy after
allogeneic bone marrow trasplanatation: a clinical imitator of
acute enteric graft-versus-host disease. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2004;33:1143-1150
11. Narimatsu H, Kami M, Hara S, Matsumura T, Miyakoshi S,
Kusumi E, et al. Intestinal thrombotic microangiopathy follow-
ing reduced-intensity umbilical cord blood transplantation. Bone
Marrow Transplant 2005;36:517-523
12. Lim GY, Newman B, Kurland G, Webber SA. Post transplanta-
tion lymphoproliferative disorder: manifestations in pediatric
thoracic organ recipients. Radiology 2002;222:699-708
13. Lones MA, Kirov I, Said JW, Shintaku IP, Neudorf S. Post-
transplant lymphoproliferative disorder after autologous periph-
eral stem cell transplantation in a pediatric patient. Bone
Marrow Transplant 2000;26:1021-1024
Gastrointestinal Complications Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Children
Korean J Radiol 9(5), October 2008 457
