Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004 107
Bronchiolitis Obliterans after Allogenic
Bone Marrow Transplantation:
HRCT Findings
Objective: To evaluate the high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) find-
ings of bronchiolitis obliterans (BO) after bone marrow transplantation (BMT).
Materials and Methods: During the past three years, 11 patients were diag-
nosed as having BO after BMT when they developed irreversible air flow obstruc-
tion, with an FEV1 value of less than 80% of the baseline value, without any clini-
cal evidence of infection. All 11 patients underwent HRCT, of whom eight also
underwent follow-up HRCT. The HRCT images were assessed retrospectively for
the presence of decreased lung attenuation, segmental or subsegmental
bronchial dilatation, diminution of peripheral vascularity, centrilobular nodules,
and branching linear structure on the inspiratory images. The lobar distribution of
the decreased lung attenuation and bronchial dilatation was also examined. The
presence of air trapping was investigated on the expiratory images. The interval
changes of the HRCT findings were evaluated in those patients who had follow-
up images.
Results: Abnormal HRCT findings were present in all cases; the most common
abnormalities were decreased lung attenuation (n=11), subsegmental bronchial
dilatation (n=6), diminution of peripheral vascularity (n=6), centrilobular nodules
or branching linear structure (n=3), and segmental bronchial dilatation (n=3).
Expiratory air trapping was noted in all patients. The decreased lung attenuation
and bronchial dilatations were more frequent or extensive in the lower lobes.
Interval changes were found in all patients with follow-up HRCT: increased extent
of decreased lung attenuation (n=7); newly developed or progressed bronchial
dilatation (n=4); and increased lung volume (n=3).
Conclusion: HRCT scans are abnormal in patients with BO, with the most
commonly observed finding being areas of decreased lung attenuation. While the
HRCT findings are not specific, it is believed that their common features can
assist in the diagnosis of BO in BMT recipients.
ronchiolitis obliterans (BO), a relatively infrequent disease, is character-
ized clinically by persistent progressive airflow obstruction unresponsive
to bronchodilator therapy. The pathologic findings of BO are constrictive
bronchiolitis and submucosal and peribronchiolar fibrosis, which result in extrinsic
narrowing and obliteration of the lumen of the small bronchi and bronchioles. The
diverse contributing etiologies include toxic-fume exposure, viral and mycoplasma
infection, collagen vascular disease, drug reaction and organ transplantation (1, 2). BO
has received considerable attention as a major cause of obstructive lung disease along
with active chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) after bone marrow transplanta-
tion (BMT) (3 5). The incidence of BO after BMT in adults has been evaluated as
being less than 3% (6, 7), although Schultz et al. (8) reported a relatively high (19.4%)
Jung Im Jung, MD1
Won Sang Jung, MD1
Seong Tai Hahn, MD1
Chang Ki Min, MD2
Chun Choo Kim, MD2
Seog Hee Park, MD1
Index terms:
Bone marrow, transplantation
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Computed tomography (CT),
high-resolution
Korean J Radiol 2004;5:107-113
Received October 1, 2003; accepted
after revision March 6, 2004.
1
Department of Radiology, St. Mary’s
Hospital, 2
Catholic Hemopoietic Stem
Cell Transplantation Center, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea
Address reprint requests to:
Jung Im Jung, MD, Department of
Radiology, St. Mary’s Hospital, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, 62 Yeouido-dong, Youngdungpo-
gu, Seoul 150-713, Korea.
Tel. (822) 3779-1277
Fax. (822) 783-5288
e-mail: jijung@catholic.ac.kr
B
frequency in children. The disease can often be diagnosed
on the basis of the patient’s medical history, physical
examination, plain chest radiography, arterial blood gas
analysis, lung function test, and ventilation/perfusion lung
scan, although in severely ill patients any uncertainty
should be resolved by conducting a histological examina-
tion of an open-lung biopsy specimen. Owing to the
difficulties involved in obtaining a histologic specimen and
the limitations associated with the functional diagnosis of
BO, high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) has
emerged as a useful adjunct to lung function tests for
diagnosing BO after organ transplantation (9). There have
been many reports about the HRCT features of BO in
patients after lung transplantation (10 17). However,
reports about the HRCT findings of BO in patients after
BMT are rare (9, 18). Also, there are few reports about the
interval changes on HRCT of BO after BMT (9). We
evaluated the HRCT findings in patients who developed
BO after allogenic BMT, as well as the interval changes of
HRCT in those patients who had follow-up images.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
During the past three years, 362 patients underwent
allogenic BMT at our institution. Of these, 11 patients were
diagnosed as having BO after BMT (five men and six
women). Their ages ranged from 19 to 42 years (mean: 30
years). BMT was performed in cases of chronic myelocytic
leukemia (n=7), acute lymphocytic leukemia (n=2), acute
myelocytic leukemia (n=1), and severe aplastic anemia
(n=1).
Ten of the 11 patients with BO experienced chronic graft
versus host disease (GVHD) before the diagnosis of BO.
The remaining patient experienced chronic GVHD concur-
rent with the onset of BO. The most commonly affected
sites were the skin (n=11) and liver (n=8). BO was
diagnosed 4 42 months (mean, 15 months) after BMT.
During the follow-up period, two patients died of respira-
tory failure (4 and 15 months after the diagnosis of BO).
Fungal pneumonia was present in one of these two
patients.
Assessment of BO
All patients routinely had lung function tests performed
the month preceding BMT and at 3 12 months after BMT.
Additional pulmonary function testing was done if the
patients had symptoms suspicious for BO. BO was
diagnosed according to the criteria of BO established by
the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation (19), namely irreversible airflow obstruc-
tion, with an FEV1 value of less than 80% of the baseline
value, without clinical evidence of infection. Three patients
underwent bronchoalveolar lavage and one patient
underwent transbronchial lung biopsy. For these three
patients, no organisms were found in the bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid. Transbronchial biopsy showed the presence of
chronic bronchitis and bronchiolitis obliterans. One patient
underwent open lung biopsy and the diagnosis of BO was
obtained histologically.
HRCT
HRCT scans were performed on all patients at the time
of their initial diagnosis (Somatom Plus, Siemens,
Erlangen, Germany). HRCT scans during deep inspiration
were obtained throughout the entire thorax with 1.5-2 mm
thick axial sections at 1cm intervals; they were
reconstructed using a high spatial frequency algorithm. The
tube current was 240 mA at a voltage of 120 kV.
Expiratory scans were obtained at the levels of the aortic
arch, midway between the aortic arch and the trachea
carina, in the tracheal carina, midway between the tracheal
carina and the right hemidiaphragm, and 1 cm above the
right hemidiaphragm. Five patients underwent HRCT
twice, with the time interval ranging from 1 to 10 months
after the initial CT scan. Two patients underwent HRCT
three times, at 1 and 9 months and at 9 and 15 months
after the initial CT scan, respectively. One patient
underwent HRCT four times due to deteriorating
pulmonary function, with the follow-up scans being
performed at 6, 12 and 14 months after the initial CT scan.
Two radiologists evaluated all of the CT scans indepen-
dently and then jointly. The final interpretation was made
by consensus.
Jung et al.
108 Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004
Fig. 1. A 24-year-old woman with bronchiolitis obliterans. She
underwent allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic
myelocytic leukemia approximately 11 months previously.
Inspiratory high resolution computed tomography at the time of
diagnosis of bronchiolitis obliterans shows diffuse hypoattenua-
tion and thin-walled dilated bronchi (white arrows) in both lower
During the analysis of each CT examination, the inspira-
tory images were reviewed before the expiratory images.
The inspiratory HRCT images were assessed for the
presence and lobar distribution of decreased lung attenua-
tion. Each lobe of the lung was scored on a scale of 0 5
for the low-attenuating regions, depending on the percent-
age of each lobe involved: 0 (not affected); 1 (< 10% of
lung affected); 2 (10 to 25%); 3 (> 25 to 50%); 4 (> 50%
to 75%); and 5 (> 75%). The score of each lobe was
summed and averaged for the purpose of comparison. The
lobe with the highest score of decreased attenuation was
also evaluated. The images were also assessed for segmen-
tal or subsegmental bronchial dilatation, diminution of
peripheral vascular markings, centrilobular nodules, and
branching linear structure (tree-in-bud pattern). Bronchial
dilatation was diagnosed on the basis of a bronchial
internal diameter greater than that of the adjacent
pulmonary artery. Diminution of vascular markings was
defined as a reduction in vessel caliber and/or numbers.
The prominent lobar distribution of bronchial dilatation
was also assessed. The presence of subpleural linear or
patchy opacities was also evaluated. The expiratory images
were assessed for the presence of air trapping. Air trapping
was diagnosable if the lung parenchyma remained lucent
on the expiratory CT scans, demonstrating a less than
normal increase in attenuation after expiration, or showing
little change in cross-sectional area (20). We also evaluated
the interval changes of the HRCT findings in those patients
who had follow-up images. Contraction or expansion was
determined to be present if in the repeated follow-up CT
examination there was more than a 10% change in the
diameters on at least two scan levels.
RESULTS
Abnormal HRCT findings were present in all cases; the
most common HRCT abnormalities consisted of decreased
lung attenuation (n=11) (Figs. 1, 2), subsegmental
bronchial dilatation (n=6), diminution of peripheral
vascularity (n=6), and centrilobular nodules or branching
opacities (n=3). Three of the six patients with subsegmen-
tal bronchial dilatation showed segmental bronchial dilata-
HRCT Findings of Bronchiolitis Obliterans after Allogenic Bone Marrow Transplantation
Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004 109
A B
Fig. 2. A 29-year-old man with bronchiolitis obliterans. He
underwent allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic
myelocytic leukemia approximately one year previously.
A. Inspiratory high resolution computed tomography shows diffuse
decreased lung attenuation. The pulmonary vessels are sparse
and attenuated in the region of decreased density (arrows).
B. Expiratory scan shows air trapping within the diseased region
(arrows).
C. Photomicrograph (elastic van Gieson stain, 200) shows
narrowing of bronchial lumen due to fibrosis of the lamina propria,
surrounded by an elastic bundle (arrows) (from Journal of Thoracic
Imaging 2001;16:130 37 “notes from 2000 annual meeting of
Korean Society of Thoracic Radiology” with permission).
C
tion (Fig. 1). Subpleural linear or focal patchy opacity was
found in three patients. The averaged score of low attenua-
tion was 1 2 in two patients, 2 3 in five, 3 4 in three,
and 4 5 in one. In six patients, the lower lobes obtained
the highest score (wide involvement of low attenuation).
Four patients showed even lobar distribution of the low
attenuating region on the inspiratory images. In the
remaining one patient, there was upper lobe predominance
of decreased attenuation of the lung parenchyma. In four
patients, segmental or subsegmental bronchial dilatations
were noted only in the lower lobes (Fig. 1), while in two
patients they were noted in all of the lung lobes.
Expiratory air trapping was noted in all patients (Fig. 2).
Centrilobular nodules were noted in three patients. They
were seen in two lobes in two patients (both lower lobes)
and three lobes in the remaining one patient (right middle
lobe and both lower lobes). Tree-in-buds were also noted
in all three patients with centrilobular nodules; two lobes
in two patients (both lower lobes) and one lobe in one
patient (left lower lobe) (Fig. 3)
Interval changes were found in all eight patients who
underwent follow-up HRCT scans. These changes consisted
of an increased extent of decreased lung attenuation
(n=7), newly developed or progressive bronchial dilatation
(n=4), increased lung volume (n=2), bronchial wall
thickening and centrilobular nodules (n=1), and
diminished vascularity (n=1) (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
Obstructive lung disease complicating bone marrow
transplantation was first described in 1982 (3). A similar
complication is well known in lung and heart-lung
transplant recipients (10, 11). BO appears later than other
pulmonary complications, occurring between three and 12
months after BMT. Obstructive lung disease following
bone marrow transplantation is more common in patients
Jung et al.
110 Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004
Fig. 3. Tree-in-buds of bronchiolitis obliterans in a 28-year-old
woman. Bronchiolitis obliterans was diagnosed on spirometry and
transbronchial lung biopsy 16 months after bone marrow
transplantation for chronic myelocytic leukemia.
Inspiratory high resolution computed tomography scan shows
decreased lung attenuation and subsegmental bronchial dilata-
tions in left lower lobe. Tree-in-bud pattern is noted in subpleural
portion of posterior basal segment of left lower lobe (arrow).
Fig. 4. Progression of bronchiolitis obliterans on high resolution computed tomography in a 28-year-old woman. Bronchiolitis obliterans
was diagnosed on spirometry and transbronchial lung biopsy 16 months after bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelocytic
leukemia.
A. Inspiratory high resolution computed tomography scan at the time of diagnosis of bronchiolitis obliterans shows small areas of
decreased lung attenuation in both upper lobes (arrows).
B. Inspiratory high resolution computed tomography scan taken nine months later at a similar anatomic level to A, shows markedly
increased extent of pulmonary hypoattenuation and new development of subsegmental bronchial dilatations. The lung volume is much
increased.
A B
with chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) (6, 7),
occurring in 6 10% of long-term survivors with chronic
GVHD and with a mortality rate of more than 50% (7,
21). In our study, ten of the eleven patients with BO had
an episode of GVHD, and two of them died of respiratory
failure.
The pathogenesis of post BMT BO is unclear. Several
theories have been postulated, including immunologic
injury caused by GVHD (22), viral infection (21, 23),
decreased IgA levels, and chronic aspiration secondary to
esophageal abnormalities (12). GVHD is most likely to be
responsible for the initial mucosal injury, with further
damage being inflicted as a result of repeated aspiration,
opportunistic infections and chemotherapy (22).
Although histology provides the most definitive means
of diagnosis, the patchy nature of this disease may result in
a negative transbronchial biopsy being obtained (21, 24).
Many large series use the term post-BMT chronic airflow
obstruction, with the diagnosis relying on clinical criteria
with pulmonary function tests rather than histology for
diagnosis (6, 25, 26).
Obstructive lung disease following bone marrow
transplantation has been ascribed to bronchiolitis obliter-
ans (27, 28). Owing to the difficulties in obtaining a
histologic specimen and the limitation of the functional
diagnosis of BO, HRCT has emerged as a useful tool and as
an adjunct to lung function tests in diagnosing BO follow-
ing organ transplantation. A number of abnormalities have
been identified on HRCT in patients with BO, especially in
lung transplant recipients (12 14).
Morrish et al. (12) first reported the HRCT findings of
four lung transplant patients with BO, who showed
bronchial dilatation and decreased peripheral vascular
marking. Ikonen et al. (15) reported HRCT findings in
patients with long-term follow up after lung transplanta-
tion; among the first identifiable chronic changes were
volume contraction, decreased peripheral vascular and
bronchial markings, and thickening of the septal lines.
Later, bronchial dilatation, hyperlucency and mosaic
phenomenon were also identified. Recently, expiratory air-
trapping on HRCT, a non-specific sign of small-airway
disease, has also been demonstrated in patients with BO
and is reported to be the most sensitive and accurate
radiologic indicator of BO in the lung transplant population
(16, 17).
Reports on the HRCT features of BO after BMT are rare.
Sargent et al. (9) reported on the HRCT findings of seven
child patients with obstructive lung disease following
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. All of these
patients showed abnormal findings on the HRCT scan.
Areas of parenchymal hypoattenuation affected all 35
lobes of the lung. Expiratory air-trapping was found in all
four patients who underwent expiratory cine CT.
Subsegmental or segmental bronchial dilatations were
noted in five of seven patients.
Ooi et al. (18) reported the HRCT findings of nine adult
patients with BO after BMT. They reported normal
findings in two patients and abnormal findings in seven
patients, with non-specific findings of bronchial dilatation
(n=1), hypoattenuated areas (n=4), vascular attenuation
(n=4), and consolidation (n=2).
Contrary to Ooi’s report, our patients showed abnormal-
ities in all cases, with the findings being parenchymal
decreased attenuation, subsegmental bronchial dilatation,
diminution of peripheral vascularity, segmental bronchial
dilatation, centrilobular nodules, and centrilobular branch-
ing structures (tree-in-buds pattern) in order of frequency.
Our results are similar to those of Sargent et al. (9).
There are some discrepancies between the results of Ooi
et al. (18) and the results of our own and Sargent et al’s
study (9). There are several possible explanations for these
discrepancies. First, the discrepancy could be due to the
small numbers of patients in these studies (Sargent et al. =
7 patients, Ooi et al. = 9 patients, and our study = 11
patients). Second, Ooi et al. studied a group of patients
with BO after BMT, possibly at the early stage of the
disease, since they diagnosed BO through short term
follow up using the pulmonary function test (2, 3, 6, 9, 12,
18 and 24 months after BMT), whereas our patients
underwent the pulmonary function test at 3 12 months
after BMT. Sargent et al. performed the pulmonary
function test after the onset of the clinical symptoms.
Third, Ooi et al. did not routinely perform the expiratory
scan. Sometimes the diagnosis of decreased lung attenua-
tion is difficult on the inspiratory image when the lesion
involves the entire lung. The expiratory scan is very
helpful in such cases, since a normal increase in lung
attenuation is not observed after expiration. Expiratory
air-trapping on HRCT is reported to be the most sensitive
and accurate radiologic indicator of BO in the lung
transplant population (16, 17).
The HRCT findings of BO in BMT patients are very
similar to those of BO in lung transplant recipients, except
for the volume contraction of the thorax and thickening of
the septal lines noted among the chronic changes of BO in
lung transplantation patients (12 17).
Centrilobular nodules and tree-in-buds pattern were
found somewhat frequently in our study; and they are
likely to be caused by inspissated secretions occurring
within distal airways or plugging of the terminal airways
with granulation tissue, as reported by Padley et al. (29).
We also found expiratory air trapping in all of our patients.
HRCT Findings of Bronchiolitis Obliterans after Allogenic Bone Marrow Transplantation
Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004 111
Subpleural linear or focal patchy opacities were noted in
three patients; these findings are not characteristic of BO,
but may in fact represent small areas of linear fibrosis,
post-obstructive lobular consolidation or alveolar injury or
infarction, due to previous recurrent infection or
chemotherapy, as reported by Morrish et al. (12).
In particular, the low attenuation was found to be more
prominent in the lower lobes than in the upper or middle
lobes, which has not been described in other reports.
Similar to the results of our study, Lentz et al. (11)
emphasized the diagnostic value of a lower lobe predomi-
nance of bronchial dilatation in adult heart-lung transplant
recipients who develop BO. Hruban et al. (30) explained
the cause of lower lobe predominance of bronchiectasis in
lung transplant recipients. They suggested that chronic
rejection might preferentially involve the lower lobes of
the lungs. Patients with chronic rejection, because of a
rejection-associated depletion in the bronchus-associated
lymphoid tissue, are more susceptible to the development
of pulmonary infection. It is possible, therefore, that the
change in the lower lobes may, in part, also be due to the
presence of a superimposed infection. These suggestions
would also explain the lower lobe predominance of
bronchiectasis and low attenuation in patients with BO
after BMT. In our study, subsegmental bronchial dilatation
was more frequent than segmental bronchial dilatation,
which concurs with the report by Padley et al. (29).
Information regarding the interval changes on HRCT of
BO after BMT is sparse. Sargent et al. (9) reported interval
changes in three cases of BO after BMT. On the 3 9
month follow-up scans, they reported an increased extent
of bronchiectasis in one patient and an increased extent of
hypoattenuation area in two patients. In our study, interval
changes were found in all eight patients in whom follow-up
scans were available. Increased extent of pulmonary
hypoattenuation was the most frequent interval change in
our study. The areas of normal lung attenuation on the
earlier study became abnormal on the follow up scans.
Progression or new development of bronchial dilatation,
increased lung volume, bronchial wall thickening with
nodules, and diminished vascularity, were also found in the
follow-up scans. After integrating these findings, we were
able to speculate on the serial HRCT changes of bronchioli-
tis obliterans after the onset of functional decrease and
clinical symptoms. Initially, HRCT would show a hypoat-
tenuating region, mainly in the lower lobes. Diminished
vascularity and subsegmental bronchial dilatations would
frequently be associated with this hypoattenuating region.
Occasionally, segmental bronchial dilatation would also be
noted. Subsequently, the hypoattenuating regions might
increase in extent and, later on, hypoattenuated regions
would be noted in the entire lobes. In addition, the subseg-
mental and segmental bronchial dilatations could develop
or progress. We speculate that the early change of BO,
before the onset of the symptoms, would result in small
hypoattenuating areas on HRCT. A prospective study will
be required to determine if HRCT can facilitate the diagno-
sis of obstructive lung disease before the onset of
symptoms.
There are some limitations to our study, namely that it
was a retrospective study with a small numbers of patients,
for which there was an absence of histologic diagnosis of
BO except for two patients. Although histologic proof of
BO is desirable, transbronchial biopsies are unfortunately
known to have a low sensitivity for the diagnosis of BO,
and it is clinically not acceptable to submit a large percent-
age of BMT patients to surgical lung biopsy.
In conclusion, we found that HRCT scans are abnormal
in patients with BO after BMT, with the most commonly
observed finding being areas of decreased lung attenua-
tion. While the HRCT changes are not specific, it is
believed that their characteristic features can assist in the
diagnosis of BO in BMT recipients.
References
1. Epler GR, Colby TV. The spectrum of bronchiolitis obliterans.
Chest 1983;83:161-162
2. Ezri T, Kunichezky S, Eliraz A, Soroker D, Halperin D,
Schattner A. Bronchiolitis obliterans-current concepts. Q J Med
1994;87:1-10
3. Roca J, Granena A, Rodriguez-Rosin R, Alvarez P, Agusti-Vidal
A, Rozman C. Fatal airways disease in an adult with chronic
graft-versus-host disease. Thorax 1982;37:77-78
4. Holland HK, Wingard JR, Beschorner WE, Saral R, Santos GW.
Bronchiolitis obliterans in bone marrow transplantation and its
relationship to chronic graft-v-host disease and low serum IgG.
Blood 1998;72:621-627
5. Epler GR. Bronchiolitis obliterans and airways obstruction
associated with graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow
transplantation. Thorax 1984;39:887-894
6. Clark JG, Crawford SW, Madtes DK, Sullivan KM. Obstruction
lung disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
Clinical presentation and course. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:
368-376
7. Ralph DD, Springmeyer SC, Sullivan KM, Hackman RC, Storb
R, Thomas ED. Rapidly progressive air-flow obstruction in
marrow transplant recipients. Possible association between
obliterative bronchiolitis and chronic graft-versus-host disease.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:641-644
8. Schultz KR, Green GJ, Wensley D, et al. Obstructive lung
disease in children after allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion. Blood 1994;84:3212-3220
9. Sargent MA, Cairns RA, Murdoch MJ, Nadel HR, Wensley D,
Schultz KR. Obstructive lung disease in children after allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation: evaluation with high-resolution
CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:693-696
10. Paradis I, Yousem S, Griffith B. Airway obstruction and
Jung et al.
112 Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004
HRCT Findings of Bronchiolitis Obliterans after Allogenic Bone Marrow Transplantation
Korean J Radiol 5(2), June 2004 113
bronchiolitis obliterans after lung transplantation. Clin Chest
Med 1993;14:751-763
11. Lentz D, Bergin CJ, Berry GJ, Stoehr C, Theodore J. Diagnosis
of bronchiolitis obliterans in heart-lung transplant patients:
importance of bronchial dilatation on CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1992;159:463-467
12. Morrish WF, Herman SJ, Weisbrod GL, Chamberlain DW.
Bronchiolitis obliterans after lung transplantation: findings at
chest radiography and high-resolution CT. Toronto Lung
Transplant Group. Radiology 1991;179:487-490
13. Herman SJ. Radiologic assessment after lung transplantation.
Clin Chest Med 1990;11:333-346
14. Skeens JL, Fuhrman CR, Yousem SA. Bronchiolitis obliterans in
heart-lung transplantation patients: radiologic findings in 11
patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989;153:253-256
15. Ikonen T, Kivisaari L, Taskinen E, Piilonen A, Harjula AL.
High-resolution CT in long-term follow-up after lung transplan-
tation. Chest 1997;111:370-376
16. Leung AN, Fisher K, Valentine V, et al. Bronchiolitis obliterans
after lung transplantation: detection using expiratory HRCT.
Chest 1998;113:365-370
17. Bankier AA, Van Muylem AV, Knoop C, Estenne M, Gevenois
PA. Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome in heart-lung transplant
recipients: diagnosis with expiratory CT. Radiology 2001;218:
533-539
18. Ooi GC, Peh WCG, Ip M. High-resolution computed tomogra-
phy of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after bone marrow
transplantation. Respiration 1998;65:187-191
19. Cooper JD, Billingham M, Egan T, et al. A working formulation
for the standardization of nomenclature and for clinical staging
of chronic dysfunction in lung allograft. International Society for
Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 1993;
12:713-716
20. Webb WR, Muller NL, Naidich DP. High-resolution CT of the
lung, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Williams & Wilkins, 2001:599-618
21. Chan CK, Hyland RH, Hutcheon MA, et al. Small-airways
disease in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow transplants. An
analysis of 11 cases and a review of the literature. Medicine
1987;66:327-340
22. Krowka MJ, Rosenow EC III, Hoagland HC. Pulmonary compli-
cations of bone marrow transplantation. Chest 1985;87:237-246
23. Paz HL, Crilley P, Topolsky DC, Coll WX, Patchefsky A,
Brodsky I. Bronchiolitis obliterans after bone marrow transplan-
tation: the effect of preconditioning. Respiration 1993;60:109-
114
24. Theodore J, Starnes VA, Lewiston NJ. Obliterative bronchioli-
tis. Clin Chest Med 1990;11:309-321
25. Philit F, Wiesendanger T, Archimbaud E, Mornex JF, Brune J,
Cordier JF. Post-transplant obstructive lung disease (“bronchi-
olitis obliterans”) a clinical comparative study of bone marrow
and lung transplant patients. Eur Respir J 1995;8:551-558
26. Curtis DJ, Smale A, Thien F, Schwarer AP, Szer J. Chronic
airflow obstruction in long-term survivors of allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;16:169-
173
27. King TE Jr. Bronchiolitis obliterans. Lung 1989;167:69-93
28. McLoud TC, Epler GR, Colby TV, Gaensler EA, Carrington CB.
Bronchiolitis obliterans. Radiology 1986;159:1-8
29. Padley SP, Adler BD, Hansell M, Muller NL. Bronchiolitis
obliterans: high-resolution CT findings and correlation with
pulmonary function tests. Clin Radiol 1993;47:236-240
30. Hruban RH, Ren H, Kuhlman JE, et al. Inflation-fixed lungs:
Pathologic-radiologic (CT) correlation of lung transplantation. J
Comput Assist Tomogr 1990;14:329-335
