Congenital isolated right radial club
hand
Sajad Ahmad Salati* and Sari M. Rabah
Department of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Congenital radial club hand (RCH) is an uncommon congenital anomaly characterized by various degrees of
deficiency along the preaxial or radial side of the extremity. We present one such case of Type 4 congenital
isolated RCH who presented to a tertiary care center in the Middle East.
Keywords: club hand; congenital anomaly; radial deﬁciency
Received: 18 February 2010; Accepted in revised form: 5 March 2010; Published: 1 April 2010
A
four-month-old male child was referred for
evaluation of right upper limb deformity. He
was born at term by normal delivery following
an uneventful pregnancy and there was no significant
past medical or surgical history. He was the first child of
non-consanguineous parents and there was no family
history of congenital anomalies. Physical examination of
the baby revealed deformity of right forearm which
appeared shorter than contra lateral side with radial
deviation at the wrist (Fig. 1). All the fingers of the
affected hand including the thumb were however normal.
Physical examination by our team and by the pediatri-
cians revealed no other abnormalities. Hemoglobin, total
and differential leucocytes count, platelet count, and
renal function tests were all within normal limits in more
than one occasion. Radiographs of both upper limbs
revealed complete aplasia of radius and shortening of the
ulna on the right side (Fig. 2). Skeletal survey, ultra-
sonogram of abdomen, and cardiac echocardiogram
ruled out any other associated congenital anomalies.
The diagnosis of isolated right congenital radial club
hand (RCH) Type IV was made and the parents were
counseled. The management of the child was started in
collaboration with physiotherapists and the family were
taught some simple and easily reproducible exercises to
passively stretch the radial structures. Custom-made
splints were also fabricated by the orthotics division
for nocturnal application to the affected limb with the
aim of stretching the radial wrist structures. In future,
when the level of deformity is deemed optimal for
operative intervention (expected by age of one year),
operative centralization of the wrist on ulna will be
undertaken.
Discussion
Congenital RCH, also called longitudinal radial defi-
ciency or radial dysplasia, is an uncommon congenital
anomaly characterized by various degrees of deficiency
along the preaxial or radial side of the extremity (1). The
ulna is typically 60% of normal length. The incidence of
RCH is estimated to be 1 in 30,000 to 1 in 100,000 live
births (2). It is bilateral in 38Á58% of cases. Bayne and
Klug classified radial deficiency into four types (3):
Type I: Mildest form with defective distal radial
epiphysis. Minor radial deviation of the
hand is apparent, although considerable
thumb hypoplasia may be evident.
Type II: Involves limited growth of the radius on both
its distal and proximal sides and character-
ized by a miniature radius and moderate
radial deviation of the wrist.
Type III: Absence of two-thirds of the radius, most
commonly the distal side and severe radial
deviation of the wrist.
Type IV: This type of RCH is the most common and
most severe and involves complete absence of
the radius. The hand tends to develop a
perpendicular relationship to the forearm.
Our patient belonged to this type.
RCH usually occurs sporadically with no known cause.
About 40% of patients with unilateral club hand and 27%
with bilateral club hand have associated congenital
anomalies involving cardiac, genitourinary, skeletal, and
hematopoietic system (4). The prominent syndromes
associated with RCH include: Holt-Oram syndrome;
thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome; ver-
tebral, anal, cardiac, tracheal, esophageal, renal, and
(page number not for citation purpose)
æABC ARTICLE
Libyan J Med 2010. # 2010 Sajad Ahmad Salati and Sari M. Rabah. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
1
Citation: Libyan J Med 2010, 5: 5090 - DOI: 10.3402/ljm.v5i0.5090
limb (VACTERL) syndrome; and Fanconi anemia. The
latter is a serious associated condition which usually
manifests as aplastic anemia between 3 and 12 years of
age.
Correction of RCH requires a combination of non-
operative and operative management that should start
immediately after diagnosis. Patients should be assessed
thoroughly to identify any possible associated anomalies.
The basic goals of correction include correction of radial
deviation of wrist, balancing the wrist on forearm,
maintenance of wrist and finger flexion, promotion of
growth of the forearm, and improving the cosmetic
appearance of the limb (5). The non-operative manage-
ment comprises of stretching of the taut radial structures
by physiotherapy and splintage (6). Some centers utilize
the appliances based on principles of distraction Á
osteogenesis (Ilazarov technique) to decrease the magni-
tude of contracture before definitive surgery (7). Opera-
tive management aims at centralization of the wrist on
the ulna (8). Centralization is indicated in RCH Types II,
III, and IV. The cases of RCH need to be kept under
follow-up upto adulthood to prevent the recurrence of
the deformity (5), and monitor the function of the
affected limb and undertake corrective operative and
non-operative interventions as warranted.
Conflict of interest and funding
The authors have not received any funding or benefits
from industry to conduct this study.
References
1. Goldberg MJ, Meyn M. The radial clubhand. Orthop Clin North
Am. 1976; 7: 341Á59.
2. Urban MA, Osterman LA. Management of radial dysplasia.
Hand Clin. 1990; 6: 589Á605.
3. Waters MP. The upper limb. In: Morrissy RT, Weinstein SL,
editors. Lovell and Winters pediatric orthopedics. 5th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins 2001.
p. 841Á903.
4. Kozin SH. Upper-extremity congenital anomalies. J Bone Joint
Surg Am. 2003; 85: 1564Á76.
5. Damore E, Kozin SH, Thoder JJ, Porter S. The recurrence of
deformity after surgical centralization for radial clubhand.
J Hand Surg [Am]. 2000; 25: 745Á51.
6. Thirkannad SM, Burgess RC. A technique for using the Ilizarov
ﬁxator for primary centralization in radial club hand. Tech Hand
Up Extrem Surg. 2008; 12: 71Á8.
7. Goldfarb CA, Murtha YM, Gordon JE, Manske PR. Soft-tissue
distraction with a ring external ﬁxator before centralization for
radial longitudinal deﬁciency. J Hand Surg [Am]. 2006; 31:952Á9.
8. Manske PR, McCarroll HR Jr, Swanson K. Centralization of the
radial club hand: an ulnar surgical approach. J Hand Surg [Am].
1981; 6: 423Á33.
*Sajad Ahmad Salati
Department of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery
King Fahad Medical City
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Tel: 00966530435652
Email: docsajad@yahoo.co.in
Fig. 1. Right congenital radial club hand.
Fig. 2. Type IV radial club hand with complete absence of
radius.
Sajad Ahmad Salati and Sari M. Rabah
2(page number not for citation purpose)
Citation: Libyan J Med 2010, 5: 5090 - DOI: 10.3402/ljm.v5i0.5090
