THE CELLULAR METABOLISM AND EFFECTS OF GOLD COMPLEXES
Garry G. Graham1, G David Champion2 and John B. Ziegler2
School of Physiology and Pharmacology
2 School of Paediatrics, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia
Summary Leads to the cellular effects of the anti-arthritic gold complexes may come from the
the determination of their metabolism by target cells and, possibly, cells in the immediate
environment of the target cells. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) and mononuclear cells
(monocytes and lymphocytes) are present in inflamed joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and
these cells have been widely used in pharmacological studies on the gold complexes. It is
suggested that the cellular effects of the gold complexes are mediated by the production of
aurocyanide. According to this hypothesis, PMN metabolize small quantities of thiocyanate to
cyanide which, in turn, converts gold complexes, such as aurothiomalate, to aurocyanide
(dicyanogold(I)) which inhibits the functions of PMN and other cells. There is now considerable
evidence for this hypothesis from in vitro studies but there is little in vivo work to back up the
hypothesis. One of the few in vivo studies which tested the hypothesis involved the examination
of the activity of aurothiomalate in the treatment of polyarthritis in Hooded Wistar rats. Activity of
aurothiomalate is only shown in animals which received thiocyanate. Hydrogen cyanide is a
constituent of cigarette smoke and the aurocyanide formed by the interaction with gold complexes
and inhaled hydrogen cyanide rapidly diffuses into red blood cells. Because of the metabolism of
hydrogen cyanide to thiocyanate in the liver, there are higher plasma levels of thiocyanate in
smokers than in non-smokers. Smokers may have a greater incidence of side effects than non-
smokers but there appears to be little difference in therapeutic response, possibly because there is
sufficient thiocyanate in extracellular fluid, even in non-smokers, to support the conversion of gold
complexes to aurocyanide. The relationship between the metabolism and effects of the orally
active gold complex, auranofin are less clear. Auranofin itself is taken up by cells with the loss of the
ligands bound to gold while its inhibitory activity against the oxidative burst of PMN decreases with
increasing cell density. For example, the lucigenin-dependent chemiluminescence of 106 PMN/ml
is 46 pement of control at 0.5 M auranofin but only 2.2 pement in 2.105 PMN/ml in the presence
of the same concentration of auranofin. A potentially active gold complex is a plasma component
which is taken up by red blood cells.
Gold complexes are one of the groups of drugs used in the long term treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis. They are problematic drugs because of their potentially serious side effects and limited
therapeutic efficacy. Curtailment of their use has been recommended recently [1] but, while the
clinical use of the gold complexes is probably decreasing, they are still used in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis, particularly when the disease is mild but progressive [2]. While the gold
complexes are thus minor drugs, determination of their mechanism of action is still worthwhile.
More detailed knowledge of their cellular effects could lead to the development of complexes with
improved therapeutic indices, to potential sites of action for new anti-rheumatic drugs and,
possibly, even to the pathophysiological basis of rheumatoid arthritis. Leads on the biological
interactions of complexes of other heavy metals may also be obtained in studies on the gold
complexes.
395
Vol. 1, Nos. 5-6, 1994 The CellularMetabolism and Effects ofGold Complexes
Clinical activity of the gold complexes
The clinical effects of the gold complexes are difficult to quantitate, because their slow actions
necessitate prolonged clinical trials. Such clinical trials are difficult to design, conduct and analyse.
Deficiencies in the design and analysis of clinical trials of the gold complexes include small numbers
of patients, lack of consideration of type II statistical errors and inadequate discussion of the
reasons for discontinuation of treatment. Such problems make it difficult to accept unequivocally
the results of many trials on gold complexes, as well as other slowly acting anti-rheumatic drugs.
Placebo treatment always presents both practical and ethical problems in prolonged clinical
trials. The often numerous discontinuations both in the gold and placebo treated groups present
marked difficulties in the statistical analysis. Comparison of the disease activity in patients
completing the clinical trials may not indicate the overall effect of the drugs or placebo. In particular,
numerous terminations due to lack of efficacy in patients given placebo may make a placebo-
treated group appear to improve when only the clinical state of the patients completing the trial is
measured at the end of the study [3].
Despite the problems of the clinical trials of gold complexes, the following conclusions about the
actions of the injectable gold compleXes can be made [4]:
1. In responsive patients, the beneficial effect increases slowly for at least six months. Side
effects, mainly rashes, are often delayed. Extremely serious side effects, such as aplastic anemia
are produced occasionally.
2. The mean response is small but an excellent response occurs in 20 to 35 pement of patients
and peaks at 6 to 12 months, but is sustained in only about half these patients. Many patients do
not improve significantly. Overall, interpatient differences in the therapeutic response are large,
but it does appear that the gold complexes are very effective in some patients. This is a major
reason for continued research on the gold complexes.
3. Although the gold complexes are often considered to provide long term treatment for
rheumatoid arthritis, their use is usually not continued for many years. For aumthiomalate, only
about 20 pement of patients continue treatment after 4 years [5]. Termination of treatment is due
largely either to side effects or to lack of efficacy. As discussed above, some patients respond
initially but subsequently terminate treatment because of decreased effect. Thus, the effect of the
gold complexes may be self-limiting.
4. No relationshirPS between the dosage of aurothiomalate and therapeutic response have
been established over the commonly used dose ranges of the injectable complexes although the
extremes (10 and 150 mg weekly) have not been compared. The higher doses may be more toxic.
5. Them is, on average, slight retardation of joint damage.
6. The injectable gold complexes have similar beneficial activity to other slowly active anti-
rheumatic agents, although sulfasalazine and methotrexate have a lower incidence of side effects,
while methotrexate has a faster onset of action and, at present, is used more widely than the gold
complexes.
7. The orally active complex, auranofin, is slightly less efficacious than the injectable complexes
but causes fewer serious side effects. The dosage of auranofin is restricted by its purgative activity
and this probably limits its efficacy and serious side effects.
8. Therapeutic activity is shown not only in rheumatoid arthritis but the gold complexes may also
have activity in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis, asthma and two less common inflammatory
diseases, discoid lupus erythematosus and pemphigus.
These phenomena should be considered in studies on the mechanism of action of the gold
complexes. For the actions of the gold complexes to be understood at a molecular and cellular
level, the spectrum of clinical effects must be explicable.
396
G.G. Graham, G.D. Champion and’J.B. Ziegler Metal BasedDrugs
Aurocyanide hypothesis
One hypothesis which has been put forward is that the cellular effect of the gold complexes is
mediated by aurocyanide [6,7]. This hypothesis arose from studies on the distribution of gold in
red blood cells. During treatment with aurothiomalate, gold is found in much higher concentrations
in the red blood cells of smokers than in the same cells in non-smokers [8-10]. The reason is that
hydrogen cyanide is inhaled by smokers and forms the very stable complex, aurocyanide (see
below) which allows the gold to be taken up and bound to red blood cells [11]. Following this
finding, we investigated the effect of aurocyanide on the function of white blood cells, reasoning
that, if aurocyanide is taken up by red blood cells, it may also be available to other cells and
consequently affect their functions.
There are several experimental findings which are consistent with the aurocyanide hypothesis:
1. Cyanide is formed by the activity of myeloperoxidase in PMN [12]. The major source is
probably thiocyanate which is oxidized by myeloperoxidase. This enzyme metabolizes at least
some of the hydrogen cyanide further to cyanogen chloride [12]. Myeloperoxidase is present in
PMN and monocytes, although it is lost as monocytes are transformed into tissue macrophages.
Other sources of cyanide, such as glycine, are possible [13] while very different products of the
reaction between thiocyanate and myeloperoxidase have also been recorded. Hypothiocyanite
(OSCN’) has been identified as a major product of the enzymatic activity of myeloperoxidase acting
on thiocyanate [14] and more work is required on the identification of the products of the reaction.
2. Cyanide reacts with aurothiomalate and related polymeric complexes to yield the very stable
complex, aurocyanide. There is good chemical evidence for this step in defined chemical systems
[15,16]. At ratios of cyanide to Autm of 2:1 or more, aurocyanide is clearly the major product. At
lower ratios, other products are formed, particularly the mixed complex, RS-Au-CN’, but some
aurocyanide is still present [15-18]. Thus, the major reactions are:
Au-SR + HCN --> RS-Au-CN" + H+ (1)
RS-Au-CN" + HCN --> Au(CN)2" + RSH (2)
The mixed complex may disproportionate to yield aurocyanide and the bis thiolate complex:
2 (RS-Au-CN’) ---> Au(CN)2" + Au(SR)2" (3)
The bis thiolate complex may be formed from the liberated thiol and the parent polymeric thiol:
AuSR + RSH ---> Au(SR)2" + H+ (4)
3. There are spectroscopic [7] and chromatographic data [19] demonstrating the formation of
aurocyanide by activated PMN when thiocyanate and aurothiomalate are present. Like PMN,
monocytes contain myeloperoxidase although the levels of the enzyme are lower than in PMN.
Thus, monocytes may also convert thiocyanate to hydrogen cyanide and, consequently, lead to
the production of aurocyanide. However, the synthesis of aurocyanide in suspensions of purified
monocytes has not been examined as yet.
4. Aurocyanide is a common metabolite of aumthiomalate, aumthioglucose and auranofin in
patients treated with these complexes [20]. The plasma concentrations are, however, very low,
being about 0.1 to 1 pement of the concentrations which inhibit the functions of PMN and
lymphocytes. However, the detection of aurocyanide indicates that this complex is available to
cells and has some stability under in vivo conditions.
397
Vol. 1, Nos. 5-6, 1994 The CellularMetabolism and Effects ofGold Complexes
5. Aumcyanide inhibits the oxidative burst of PMN which are usually present in very high
numbers in the synovial fluid of inflamed joints at all stages of rheumatoid arthritis. A feature of the
effect of aurocyanide on PMN is that its effect is delayed (Figure 1). Initially, the oxidative burst is
either not altered or slightly accelerated. Consistent with the delayed inhibition, the depolarisation
of PMN, a phenomenon associated with the initiation of the burst, is not inhibited [21].
Two hypotheses may be put forward to explain this delayed effect of aurocyanide on the
oxidative burst of PMN. The first is that aurocyanide does not inhibit the transduction pathways
involved in the initiation of the burst but inhibits processes required for the maintenance of the
burst. A second possibility is that aurocyanide is metabolized further by activated PMN to the active
AUROCYANIDE PMN
z
0
0
0 10 20 30
TIME (minutes)
,T, ROL
:- 0.1 IM
-- 1 IM
5 IM
-- 10 IM
50 IM
Figure 1. The effect of aurocyanide on the production of superoxide (measured as lucigenin-
dependent chemiluminescence) by PMN (2.105/ml). Aurocyanide is active in both the absence
and presence of thiocyanate but aurothiomalate is inhibitory only when thiocyanate is present.
Data of Rudkowski etal [6].
Table I. The effect of gold complexes (10 IM) on the production of superoxide (measured as
lucigenin-dependent chemiluminescence) by PMN (106/ml in 50 percent synovial fluid). The
concentration of thiocyanate was measured in synovial fluid and the final concentration of
thiocyanate was adjusted to 50 IM. The cells were stimulated twice; at time 0 by opsonized
zymosan (1 mg/ml), at 30 minutes by phorbol myristate acetate (100ng/ml). Mean values and 95
pement confidence ranges are shown.
Chemiluminescence (pement of control)
0 30 minutes 30 60 minutes
Aurocyanide 53 (41-66) 7 (0 16)
Aurothiomalate 71 (43- 98) 42 (0- 85)
Auranofin 93 (78 107) 50 (17 84)
398
G.G. Graham, G.D. Champion andJ.B. Ziegler Metal Based Drugs
species. As discussed below (point 7), aurocyanide still inhibits the oxidative burst of PMN in the
presence of an inhibitor of myeloperoxidase and any activation of aurocyanide probably does not
involve myeloperoxidase.
6. Aurothiomalate inhibits the oxidative burst of PMN but only in the presence of physiological
concentrations of thiocyanate [7]. Because of the formation of aumcyanide (point 3) and its
inhibition of the oxidative burst (point 5), this finding satisfies an important requirement of the
aurocyanide hypothesis. A problem in the interpretation of the experiments on the influence of
thiocyanate on the activity of aumthiomalate is that thiocyanate itself influences the oxidative burst
of PMN. It slightly stimulates the production of supemxide [7], making it difficult to compare the
effects of aurothiomalate in the absence and presence of thiocyanate. Could thiocyanate change
the response to aurothiomalate because of altered metabolism of PMN, independent of the
production of aurocyanide? This question has not been answered but the activity of Autm in the
presence of physiological concentrations of thiocyanate and the simultaneous production and
activity of aurocyanide provides good evidence for the aumcyanide hypothesis.
The activities of aumcyanide and aurothiomalate have been evaluated in an in vitro system
which mimics the PMN in inflamed joints in vivo. Both gold complexes inhibit the oxidative burst of
PMN in 50 pement synovial fluid, with the preformed aurocyanide having the greater effect (Table I).
In this system, aurothiomalate tends to be more active than the orally administered complex,
auranofin. The conditions of the experiment are critical in demonstrating the activity of
aurothiomalate in this in vitro system. Aumthiomalate inhibits the oxidative burst of PMN at a cell
density of 106/ml in synovial fluid (Table I) but is without activity at 2.105 PMN/ml, presumably
because insufficient amounts of hydrogen cyanide and, consequently, aurocyanide are produced
at the lower cell density.
7. Sodiur0 azide prevents the inhibitory effect of the thiocyanate/aurothiomalate combination on
the oxidative burst of PMN (Table II). Azide is an inhibitor of myelopemxidase and thus should
decrease the conversion of thiocyanate to hydrogen cyanide and, consequently, the formation of
aurocyanide and its effect on the oxidative burst of PMN. The effect of azide on
thiocyanate/aurothiomalate is therefore consistent with the aumcyanide hypothesis. These results
are again somewhat difficult to interpret since azide itself has a late inhibitory effect on lucigenin-
dependent chemiluminescence and this experiment requires confirmation using an inhibitor with less
influence on the baseline measurement of the oxidative burst. Furthermore, in order to conclude that
Table II. The influence of azide on the production of superoxide (measured as lucigenin-
dependent chemiluminescence) by PMN (2.105/ml) in the presence of the aurothiomalate (10 IM)
and (101M/thiocyanate (401M). Mean values and 95 pement confidence ranges are shown.
Control chemiluminescence was measured in the presence of thiocyanate (40 IM) or thiocyanate +
azide (10 IM). The cells were stimulated twice; at time 0 by opsonized zymosan (1 mg/ml), at 30
minutes by phorbol myristate acetate (100ng/ml).
Chemiluminescence (pement of control)
0 30 minutes 30 60 minutes
Aurothiomalate + 82 (66 99) 20 (0 41)
Thiocyanate
Aurothiomalate + 101 (81 122) 83 (58 108)
Thiocyanate +
Azide
399
Vol. 1, Nos. 5-6, 1994 The Cellular Metabolism and Effects ofGold Complexes
myeloperoxidase is responsible for the production of hydrogen cyanide and hence lead to the
production of aurocyanide, it must also be shown that azide does not influence the inhibitory effect of
pre-formed aurocyanide on the oxidative burst of PMN. As discussed above (point 5), an inhibitory
effect of aurocyanide is still seen in the presence of azide although, as yet, only limited experiments
have been conducted.
Interestingly, aurocyanide is oxidized by hypochlorite, the major product of myeloperoxidase (see
paper by Shaw et al in this volume). The observation that azide does not prevent the inhibitory
actions of aurocyanide on the oxidative burst of PMN indicates that the oxidation of aurocyanide is
not a prerequisite for its effects on the oxidative burst of PMN. However, such oxidation may limit the
net availability of aumcyanide when it is produced by PMN and its further metabolism by PMN is an
aspect of the biological interactions of aurocyanide which requires further examination.
8. Aurocyanide is an anti-arthritic agent in rats [23]. Aumcyanide (10 Imol/kg) inhibits the
development of experimental polyarthritis in two strains of rats (Dark Agouti and Hooded Wistar)
while potassium cyanide (10 Imol/kg) is inactive. In one of these strains (Dark Agouti),
aurothiomalate (30 Imol/kg) also suppresses the development of the arthritis while this gold
complex is inactive in the other strain (Hooded Wistar). In the latter strain, the aurothiomalate is
active when thiocyanate (25 mM) is included in the drinking water. This result may be interpreted as
indicating that aurothiomalate is activated in vivo when high levels of thiocyanate are available to
support the production of aurocyanide which has anti-arthritic activity. Thus, this result is consistent
with the aurocyanide hypothesis. However, the administration of thiocyanate exacerbates the
polyarthritis in rats and other explanations may be possible [23].
Interestingly, the anti-arthritic activity of silver thiomalate and potassium silver cyanide largely
parallels the activity of aurothiomalate and aurocyanide. Both silver thiomalate and potassium silver
cyanide are active the Dark Agouti rats but silver thiomalate is only active in the Hooded Wistar rats if
they also ingest thiocyanate [23].
9. Aurocyanide is an inhibitor of the proliferation of lymphocytes. Because of the potential
involvement of lymphocytes in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis, the effects of aumcyanide
on these cells are of particular interest. Aurocyanide is a potent inhibitor of the mitogen-induced
proliferation of lymphocytes, with an EC50 of about 1 IM in cultures of mixed mononuclear cells,
well below the plasma concentrations of total gold during therapy with aumthiomalate. Plasma
proteins bind aurocyanide and decrease its pharmacological activity but, while the cultures of mixed
mononuclear cells contain foetal calf serum, aurocyanide still potently suppresses the proliferation
of lymphocytes. The approximate EC50 (llM) is about 10 pement of the usual concentrations of
total gold in plasma during treatment with aumthiomalate.
A feature of the effect of aurocyanide on the proliferation of lymphocytes is that its effect
increases when added late in the incubations. This is shown particularly at 0.5 IM aurocyanide. At
this concentration, aurocyanide is without significant effect when added at the commencement of
the incubations but there is considerable effect when added at 1 and 2 days after the
commencement of the 3 day incubations (Table III). This result indicates that aurocyanide has a
direct effect on the lymphocytes arid not on the monocytes which are required for the activation of
lymphocytes. Interestingly, tolerance to aurocyanide appears to develop. Thus, when
aurocyanide is added twice; at the commencement of the incubations and at 2 days, the inhibitory
effect of aurocyanide is less than that seen when added only once at 2 days (Table III), even though
the total concentration of added aurocyanide is now I IM.
While aurocyanide inhibits the proliferation of lymphocytes, similar inhibition will only occur in
vivo if the lymphocytes are exposed to sufficient aumcyanide. Infiltrations of lymphocytes are
commonly found in the synovium of joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis while large numbers
of PMN are present in synovial fluid. It is probable that the PMN in synovial fluid are the major cells
leading to the production of aurocyanide and the question is whether the aurocyanide formed by
the PMN is available to the lymphocytes at some distance from the synovial fluid. The
concentration of the complex formed by 106 PMN/ml in vitro is is in the range 0.5 to 1 IM [19],
while the concentrations in plasma are about two to three orders of magnitude lower. It is probable
that the concentrations of aurocyanide in the synovium are higher than in plasma but the
concentrations of aurocyanide available to lymphocytes are unknown. An answer to this question
4O0
G.G. Graham, G.D. Champion andJ.B. Ziegler Metal BasedDrugs
may be critical to the acceptance of the aurocyanide hypothesis since it is generally considered that
these cells are a major target of anti-arthritic drugs.
Table III. The effect of 0.5 gM aumcyanide on the proliferation of lymphocytes when added at
various times to cultures of mixed mononuclear cells. The proliferation of the lymphocytes was
measured by the incorporation of 14C.thymidine added at 2 days after the commencement of the 3
day cultures. Mean values and 95 pement confidence ranges are shown.
Time of addition
of aurocyanide
Incorporation of thymidine
(pement of control)
0 95 (63- 27)
1 hour 92 (61 123)
4 hours 97 (65- 128)
1 day 58 (38- 78)
2 days 29 (11 47)
0 + 2 days 62 (46 78)
Like aurocyanide, aurothiomalate is an inhibitor of the proliferation of lymphocytes in
suspensions of mixed mononuclear cells. Aurothiomalate is, however, much less potent than
aumcyanide. When added from the commencement of incubations, the EC50 of aurothiomalate is
approximately 100 gM [22], making aurothiomalate about two orders of magnitude less potent than
aurocyanide.
The activity of aurothiomalate is not only much less potent than aurocyanide, but the effect of
the two complexes is markedly different when added late in the incubations. Thus, in contrast to
aurocyanide, the inhibitory effect of aumthiomalate decreases when added at later times after the
commencement of the incubation [22] as we have confirmed. This and related observations led
Lipsky and Ziff [22] to suggest that the effect of aurothiomalate was on monocytes which act as
accessory cells in the early stages in the activation of the proliferation of lymphocytes. However, we
have found recently that aumthiomalate does not inhibit the proliferation of lymphocytes if washed
off the mononuclear cells at times up to 24 hours after the commencement of the incubations.
Thus, aurothiomalate may require continued exposure to lymphocytes to inhibit their proliferation.
Clinical significance of the formation of aurocyanide
At this stage, it is only possible to speculate on the significance of the formation of aurocyanide in
vivo. However, if the effects of the gold complexes are indeed mediated by aurocyanide, then
reasons for some clinical responses to the anti-arthritic gold complexes may be suggested.
Apart from the slow clinical response to the gold complexes, the main feature of the clinical
response to their use is the interpatient variation in both the therapeutic response and the
development of side effects. The formation of aurocyanide may very well depend upon the
numbers and level of activation of PMN and monocytes in joints and the access of aumcyanide to
their target cells. As discussed above, PMN and monocytes may be responsible for the formation
of aumcyanide, but may not be the ultimate target cell. Interpatient variation in the synthesis and
delivery of aumcyanide to target cells could easily lead to the variable clinical response.
Clinical responses to the gold complexes indicate that their anti-rheumatic activity may decrease
with continued treatment. Factors associated with the production of aumcyanide may lead to
tolerance. According to the aurocyanide hypothesis, the formation of aurocyanide is dependent
upon the activity of PMN or monocytes. If the activity of these cells subsides to a low level, the
production of aurocyanide may be insufficient to produce a marked suppression of the
inflammation of rheumatoid arthritis. However, the disease may continue at a low level although still
sufficient to lead to joint damage. Our introductory work on the proliferation of lymphocytes
401
Vol. 1, Nos. 5-6, 1994 The Cellular Metabolism and Effects ofGold Complexes
indicates that resistance to aurocyanide may occur, also consistent with tolerance to gold
complexes.
One of the most significant side effects of the gold complexes is the development of ulceration
of mucous membranes of the mouth. Could this be related to the formation of aurocyanide? High
levels of both peroxidase and a substrate, thiocyanate, are present in saliva. The subsequent
production of hydrogen cyanide [25] and aurocyanide may lead to this production of mouth ulcers.
Interest in the medical activity of aumcyanide first arose just over 100 years ago when the great
German microbiologist, Robed Koch, found that aurocyanide inhibited the growth of
mycobacterium tuberculosis [26]. Aurocyanide was, however, poorly tolerated and was reported to
be ineffective in the treatment of tuberculosis. Possibly its lack of activity in vivo was due to uptake
by red blood cells and binding to plasma proteins. Other gold complexes were subsequently
introduced for the treatment of tuberculosis, also without marked benefit, but were eventually
found to be useful in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
Smoking and the clinical response to gold
One of the uncertainties about the aurocyanide hypothesis concerns the lack of any clear effect of
smoking on the clinical response to aurothiomalate. Smokers inhale hydrogen cyanide which is
metabolized to thiocyanate in the liver. Consequently, smokers have higher plasma concentrations
of thiocyanate than non-smokers and, since thiocyanate is metabolized back to hydrogen cyanide
in PMN, a higher availability of cyanide is anticipated in smokers, both because of its direct inhalation
and also its greater production by PMN. Thus, greater synthesis of aurocyanide is anticipated in
smokers. However, the therapeutic response to aurothiomalate is not altered by smoking [10].
Terminations to treatment with aurothiomalate were also not related to smoking [5], although a
greater [24] or earlier incidence [8] of side effects has been repoded in smokers. While smoking
may influence the side effects to the gold complexes, any effect is of degree only, since smokers
do have side effects to their dosage with the gold complexes.
The in vitro data on the effects of the aurothiomalate/thiocyanate on PMN (point 6 above)
indicate that levels of thiocyanate in non-smokers causes the activation of aurothiomalate in these
cells. Possibly, the levels of thiocyanate in non-smokers are high enough to allow the production of
sufficient aurocyanide to mediate the effects of aurothiomalate. Other factors, such as the degree
of activation and the numbers of PMN at sites of inflamation, may be responsible the marked
interpatient differences in therapeutic effects. The determination of the effect of a range of
concentrations of thiocyanate on the PMN-mediated production of aurocyanide from
aurothiomalate and the subsequent effect of the aurocyanide on the oxidative burst of PMN should
help to answer this question.
The interaction between smoking and the clinical effects of the gold complexes is confounded
by a possible relationship between smoking and the development of rheumatoid arthritis. While
smoking does not appear to be a major factor, it may increase the incidence of rheumatoid arthritis in
young males [27] who rarely suffer from the disease.
Auranofin
The active form of gold during treatment with auranofin has not been determined. Leads may again
come from studies on the distribution of gold in red blood cells. During treatment of rheumatoid
patients with auranofin, gold is present in red blood cells whether the patients are smokers or not
[10]. Smoking does, however, increase the levels of gold in red blood cells although not to nearly
the same extent as seen during aurothiomalate therapy [10]. Thus, them may be some interaction
with hydrogen cyanide and auranofin or its metabolites in vivo.
Following the administration of auranofin to man [10] and rats [28], plasma contains a gold
complex which is transported into red blood cells. This was demonstrated by administering
auranofin orally, sampling blood and then incubating the plasma with fresh red blood cells.
Interestingly, this mobile gold complex may exist only for a limited time after the oral administration of
auranofin. When plasma was collected 48 hours after dosage of auranofin to rats, some of the gold
present diffused into red blood cells but, by contrast, when plasma was collected 72 hours after
dosage with auranofin, gold was still present but none was transported into fresh red blood cells
[28]. This mobile form of gold has never been identified. If this complex can diffuse or be
transported into red blood cells, it could be taken up by target cells. This mobile form of gold is
402
G.G. Graham, G.D. Champion andJ.B. Ziegler Metal Based Drugs
probably not aumnofin since the parent complex readily binds to plasma albumin and probably does
not last as long as 48 hours in the cimulation.
Apart from these limited studies with blood, studies on the uptake as well as the cellular effects
of aumnofin have been conducted with aumnofin itself. The cellular uptake has been most clearly
studied with a macrophage-like cell line, RAW 264.7 cells. The cellular uptake was studied using
auranofin labelled in three positions: gold, the triethylphosphine ligand and the
tetraacetylthioglucose ligand. The amount of gold taken up was much greater than the amount of
triethylphosphine and very much greater than that of the thiol ligand, tetraacetylthioglucose [29].
This experiment indicated that, not only was the gold concentrated in the cells, but that the gold
was separated from its ligands.
The strong association between the gold and cells indicates that the cellular effects of auranofin
may be dependent upon the numbers of cells in a cellular system as well as the concentration of
the aumnofin. Thus, the amount of gold per cell should decrease with increasing cell densities,
with the result that the cellular effects of auranofin should decrease with increasing cell density.
This prediction has now been observed experimentally (Table IV). It is difficult to compare
quantitatively the degree of inhibition at the two densities of PMN tested, because the fractional
inhibition of the oxidative burst does not follow simple dose response relationships and the semi-
logarithmic plots of fractional inhibition versus concentration of auranofin are not parallel. The
inhibitory effect of aumnofin is, however, generally greater at the lower concentration of auranofin
(Table IV). No such relationship between cell density and the activity of aumcyanide has been
detected [6].
Table IV. Relationship between the concentration of aumnofin and the depression of the
production of superoxide (measured as lucigenin-dependent chemiluminescence) at two cell
densities of PMN. Mean values and 95 pement confidence ranges are shown.
Auranofin
concentration
(pi)
Chemiluminescence
(Percent of control)
2.105 PMN/ml 106 PMN/ml
0.01 89 (66- 113) 101 (93- 108)
0.02 95 (75- 115) 77 (66- 88)
0.05 55 (39- 70) 86 (76- 97)
0.1 54 (32- 75) 74 (64- 83)
0.2 18 (0- 36) 67 (49- 85)
0.5 2.2 (1.6- 2.8) 46 (29- 63)
1 2.3 (1.3- 3.3) 27 (18- 37)
2 1.6 (1.2- 2.0) 5 (0- 10)
The action of auranofin on the oxidative burst of PMN is quite complex with at least a dual
interaction. At low concentrations (2.105 PMN/ml + 0.5 M auranofin), the effect of this complex
resembles those of aurocyanide. Both show a late inhibition of the oxidative burst of PMN (Table
IV) without inhibiting the depolarisation of the cells. At higher concentrations, auranofin decreases
the burst from its initiation and, consistent with an early effect on the oxidative burst, also inhibits
the depolarisation of the PMN [21 ].
A notable activity of auranofin is its high potency in inhibiting the growth of cells from progenitor
cells in human bone marrow. Auranofin inhibits this in vitro myelopoiesis at concentrations ranging
from 10-9 to 10-7 M [30]. The potent effect of auranofin may be related to the low inoculum of cells
(5.104) and the consequent high uptake of gold per cell.
Overall, the cellular uptake and activity of auranofin has been studied in considerable detail but
the relevance of this work to its clinical efficacy is, however, not clear since the work requires
confirmation using metabolites which are present in plasma or at sites of rheumatoid disease.
403
Vol. 1, Nos. 5-6, 1994 The Cellular Metabolism and Effects ofGold Complexes
References
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
12.
13.
14.
15.
1.
17.
18.
19.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
Epstein WV. Journal of Rheumatology 1989; 16: 1291-1294.
Cash JM, Klipel JH. New England Journal of Medicine 1994; 330: 1368-1375.
Williams HJ, Ward JR, Dahl SL, et al. Arthritis and Rheumatism 1988; 31: 702-713.
Champion, GD, Graham GG, Ziegler JB. Bailliere’s Clinical Rheumatology 1990; 4: 491-534.
Sambrook PN, Browne CD, Champion GD, et al. Journal of Rheumatology 1982; 9: 932-934.
Rudkowski R, Graham GG, Champion GD, Ziegler JB. Biochemical Pharmacology 1990; 39:
1687-1695.
Graham GG, Dale MM. Biochemical Pharmacology 1990; 39: 1697-1702.
Graham GG, Haavisto TM, McNaught PJ,etal. Journal of Rheurnatology 1982; 9: 527-531.
James DW, Ludvigsen NW, Cleland LG, Milazzo SC. Journal of Rheumatology 1982; 9: 532-
535.
Lewis D, Capell HA, McNeil CJ, et al. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 1983; 42" 566-570.
Graham GG, Haavisto TM, Jones HM, Champion GD. Biochemical Pharmacology 1984; 33:
1257-1262.
Stelmaszynska T. International Journal of Biochemistry 1986; 18:1107-1114.
Stelmaszynska T. International Journal of Biochemistry 1985; 17: 373-379.
Thomas EL, Fishman M. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1986; 261: 9694-9702.
Graham GG, Bales JR, Grootveld MC, Sadler PJ. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry 1985; 25:
163-173.
Lewis G, Shaw CJ. Inorganic Chemistry 1986; 25: 58-62.
Isab AA. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry 1992; 46; 145-151.
Hormann-Arendt AL, Shaw CF. Inorganic Chemistry 1990, 29: 4683-4687.
Graham GG, Champion GD, Haddad PR, et al. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Medicine 20:505 (1990).
Elder RC, Zlao Z, Zhang Y, et al. Journal of Rheumatology 1993; 20: 268-272.
Rudkowski R, Ziegler, Graham GG, Joulianos G. Biochemical Pharmacology 1992; 44: 1091-
1098.
Lipsky PE, Ziff M. Journal of Clinical Investigation 1977; 59: 455-466.
Whitehouse MW, Vernon-Roberts B. Australian and NewZealand Journal of Medicine 1993;
23: 555.
Kay EA, Jayson MIV. Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology 1987; 16: 241-245.
Lundquist P, Rosling H, Sorbo B. Arch Toxico11988; 61: 270-274.
Koch R. Deutsche Medicinische Wochenschrift 16: 171-173.
Heliovaara M, Aho K, Aromaa A, et al. Journal of Rheumatology 1993; 20:1830-1835.
Walz DT, DiMartino MJ, Griswold DE. Rheumatology 1983; 8:99-117.
Snyder RM, Mirabelli CK, Crooke ST. Biochemical Pharmacology 1986; 35: 923-932.
Hamilton JA, Williams N. Journal of Rheumatology 1987; 14: 216-220.
404
