The World Marrow Donor Association: Twenty Years of
International Collaboration for the Support of Unrelated Donor
and Cord Blood Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation
Effie W. Petersdorf, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle USA
Abstract
The transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells from unrelated volunteer donors and cord blood
units is made possible through an international collaboration of registries and cord blood banks.
The World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA) is a non-profit association based in Leiden, The
Netherlands, whose mission it is to assure that high quality stem cell products are available for all
patients in need, while maintaining the health and safety of the volunteer donors, This goal is
accomplished through the work of six working groups and six board committees, in which issues
of global significance to the clinical hematopoietic cell transplantation community are identified
and guidelines are established. In this special issue of Bone Marrow Transplantation, the activities
of the WMDA and a vision for future directions in the field are presented.
Keywords
World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA); unrelated donor; cord blood; hematopoietic cell
transplantation
Hematopoietic cell transplantation was first performed in the animal model over 40 years
ago. 1 The first successful transplants in humans were performed with bone marrow from
sibling donors and this experience was instrumental in the development of the transplant
procedure using stem cells from donors outside the family. 2, 3 The widespread availability
of volunteer donors was made possible by the establishment of registries. Enthusiasm for the
recruitment of donors and the systematic collection of donor tissue typing was ignited by
Shirley Nolan in the 1970s in the United Kingdom. When her son Anthony was diagnosed
with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and transplantation was the only known cure, Shirley
directed her energy towards creating a system to record the tissue type of volunteers, and
catalogue the information in an accessible format in the event that the donor’s type might
match that of a patient in need of a transplant. This was the birth of The Anthony Nolan
Trust, established in London in 1975. 4 The Anthony Nolan Trust paved the way for donor
recruitment and was the first donor registry to promote access to HLA-matched donors
worldwide. The success of the Anthony Nolan Trust energized similar projects in the United
States5 and worldwide. Efforts to facilitate donor searches at the international level were
launched by Jon J. van Rood at the Europdonor Foundation in Leiden, The Netherlands.
This collection and global catalogue of HLA phenotype data became known as the Bone
Marrow Donors Worldwide (BMDW). 6 To this day, transplant centers from around the
world can perform preliminary searches by accessing BMDW through the internet for a
Correspondence: Prof E Petersdorf Division of Clinical Research Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 1100 Fairview Ave N
Seattle, WA 98109 USA Tel: 206-667-5244 Fax: 206-667-5255 epetersd@fhcrc.org .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2010 May ; 45(5): 807–810. doi:10.1038/bmt.2010.10.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
preliminary view of the availability of potential suitable donors in worldwide registries and
cord blood banks. 7
In 1988, three pioneers, John Goldman, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK; E Donnell
Thomas, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, USA and Jon J. van Rood,
organized the Cooperative Marrow Donor Program, an informal group whose primary
objective was to establish guidelines for the promotion of volunteer donors for clinical
transplantation involving patients and donors residing in different countries. This program
provided critical early impetus in the founding of the World Marrow Donor Association
(WMDA) in 1994 to formalize the international activities under an umbrella association to
promote the exchange of donors across international borders. 8, 9 It is in this spirit that the
mission of the WMDA - to work towards making high quality and secure hematopoietic
stem cell products available for all patient worldwide while maintaining the health and
welfare of the stem cell donors – has led to a global effort.
In 1982, a landmark paper by John Goldman and colleagues, described the successful
treatment of patients suffering from chronic myeloid leukemia through bone marrow
transplantation, and was the earliest demonstration of the role of allogeneic transplantation
as a curative modality for blood disorders. 10 Today, the practice of transplantation from
donors other than a relative, reaches far beyond the classical indication of leukemia to
encompass both benign and malignant blood disorders; matched and mismatched adult
donor and umbilical cord blood stem cells; bone marrow, peripheral blood stem cells
sources, and many different approaches for the conditioning of the patient, the prevention
and treatment of post-transplant complications, and post-transplant monitoring. Since it is
now estimated that only 20% of patients in the United States in need of a transplant have a
genotypically HLA-identical sibling to serve as a donor, largely as a result of the smaller
average family size the demand for unrelated donors has grown proportionately. The means
through which a patient can receive life-saving stem cells from an unrelated donor or
umbilical cord blood unit, is a well-orchestrated process coordinated by donor registries
which collaborate with a worldwide network of collection centers, donor centers, cord blood
banks, transplant centers and laboratories for tissue typing and other specialized testing,
necessary for the evaluation of the donor and unit. The mechanisms by which a stem cell
product from a donor or umbilical cord blood unit physically located in a different country
than the patient’s, can be identified, collected, transported for clinical use, is the primary
concern of the WMDA. In this special issue of Bone Marrow Transplantation, the activities
of the WMDA that make it possible to carry out unrelated and umbilical cord blood
transplants are highlighted, and the issues faced by the community to broaden the use of
stem cells for all patients in need of a transplant, are discussed.
How global is the coordination of activities for unrelated donor and umbilical cord blood
transplantation? As described in Monitoring the International Use of Unrelated Donors for
Transplantation – the WMDA Annual Report, there are now over 14.6 million registered
adult volunteer donors and 450 000 cord blood units banked worldwide (Figure 1). These
figures describe activity in all regions of the world: Africa, the Americas, Europe, the
Western Pacific, Southeast Asia, and the Eastern Mediterranean region. These statistics are
important not only for measuring growth of transplantation in general, but to identify ways
to improve the availability of transplantation to every patient in need. If 1.7 million new
donors were recruited and almost 78,000 umbilical cord blood units added to the worldwide
inventory in 2008, how might future recruitment be directed to assure that every patient has
one suitable stem cell source? The Annual Report of the WMDA is a product of the Donor
Registries Working Group whose mission is to develop guidelines for donor recruitment and
maintenance of donor confidentiality, track the efficiency of donor searches and develop
consensus standards for the logistics of transporting stem cell products across international
Petersdorf Page 2
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
borders. The Report highlights regional differences in the export and import of stem cell
products, emphasizing the need for continued research on how the genetics of the volunteer
donor pool may influence the extent of worldwide sharing of donors and to identify potential
barriers to the exchange of stem cell products. These data are of importance in the
recruitment of new donors and umbilical cord blood units, and aid in determining the
optimal size and composition of registries and banks.
With almost half of all transplants involving a product originating outside of the patient’s
country of residence, the need for standardized practice in the collection of the product is of
critical importance. To ensure the quality of international donations, standards have been
developed to assure that the highest quality product is delivered with safety of both the
donor and patient of paramount importance. As described in Standards, Regulations, and
Accreditation for Registries Involved in the Worldwide Exchange of Hematopoietic Stem
Cell Donors and Products, the standards by which stem cell products are collected and
transported result from the collaborative efforts of several organizations represented within
the Worldwide Network for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (WBMT). 11 The WMDA’s
Accreditation program remains one of the most important mechanisms by which registries
and banks maintain the highest standards in the field for stem cell collection with donor
safety of paramount importance. Its broad goals are to promote harmonisation between
worldwide stem cell donor registries and cord blood banks and encourage uniformity of
practice based on internationally accepted standards. These goals are accomplished through
a set of standards that include donor recruitment; donor characterization; information
technology; facilitation of search requests; second/subsequent donations; the collection,
processing and transplant of the product; follow-up of the recipient and the donor and issues
pertaining to financial and legal responsibilities. The continued sharing of stem cell products
brings new challenges in meeting regulatory standards both nationally and internationally;
future directions include the need for coordinated efforts among organizations with expertise
in this area.
Since 1999 cord blood banks worldwide have provided the platform for the systematic data
collection of umbilical cord blood units for altruistic public donation. Their efforts ignited
international efforts in support of umbilical cord blood transplantation, and today, over
450,000 units are currently stored in banks worldwide for any patient in need of a cord blood
transplant. The geography of sharing umbilical cord blood units increasingly mirrors that of
the adult volunteer donor pool: over 40% of units are used for patients who reside in a
country that is different to where the umbilical cord blood unit was banked. This level of
activity necessarily requires international collaboration in the establishment of standards for
collection, processing, typing, and storage. In International Exchange of Cord Blood Units –
The Registry Aspects.
The activities of the Cord Blood Working Group of the WMDA highlight the complex
nature and the requirements for good practice in the collection of maternal medical history
and confirmatory testing of the umbilical cord blood unit. The WMDA’s focus is on the
development of best practice and standards to support and promote the safe and effective
international exchange of unrelated cord blood units. To meet these goals, the newly formed
Cord Blood Working Group gathers and shares information concerning cord blood registry
activities, through various instruments including comprehensive questionnaires, and by
establishing relationships with organizations active in umbilical cord blood transplantation.
As with the donation of bone marrow and peripheral blood stem cells from adult volunteer
donors, the sharing of umbilical cord blood units internationally requires regulatory
oversight, and is a high priority activity for the WMDA. Another critical area is the
emerging data on the immunobiology of umbilical cord blood transplantation and the role of
many genetic and non-genetic factors that influence transplant outcome after single and
Petersdorf Page 3
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
double cord blood unit transplantation. These factors include the definition of confirmatory
testing and extended tissue typing, standardized forms to facilitate communication,
definition of ethnicity and conditions in the family medical history that are pertinent to the
transplantation of blood and cellular products.
Exemplified by the adult volunteer blood and marrow experience, tissue typing guidelines
for the selection of unrelated donors significantly impact the activities of registries vis-à-vis
their recruitment efforts and the loci and level of resolution for typing recruited donors. For
cord blood transplantation, current recommendations for the selection of the optimal unit to
meet individual patient needs are summarized from the Eurocord experience. The
longitudinal follow-up of outcomes by the WMDA will continue to be an important arena
for the refinement of criteria used by transplant centers for cord blood unit selection, as well
as for registries and banks to help them to meet clinical needs in the future. Guidelines for
the donation of adult unrelated blood and marrow stem cells are very well-developed but the
continued high level of international sharing of donors requires on-going oversight of
standards of practice including indications for the use of an unrelated donor graft and the
health and welfare of the donor. The activities of two WMDA working groups, Clinical
Working Group and Ethics Working Group, are highlighted in this issue and include
development of criteria for donor activation and formulation of guidelines for subsequent
donations including the standardization of stem cell and donor lymphocyte infusions. As
described in Donor Safety: The Role of the WMDA in Ensuring the Safety of Volunteer
Unrelated Donors – Clinical and Ethical Considerations, the welfare of the volunteer donor
in the donation process is one of the most important missions of the WMDA. These needs
include indications for use of growth factors for mobilization of stem cells, of harvest
procedures and monitoring immediate, short-term and long-term donor outcomes. A
comprehensive data collection system permits the formal tracking of events in the donor and
product: the serious events and adverse effects registry (SEAR) for events experienced by
donors, and the serious product events and adverse effects registry (SPEAR) related to the
product that is infused into the patient. The tracking of SEAR and SPEAR events is an
important mechanism for alerting the transplant community to donor-related issues, and
serves as a platform to review, modify and apply standards for best practice. Although the
focus of the WMDA is on the health and welfare of the volunteer unrelated donor, the
information is also pertinent and beneficial to the related donor, and efforts to disseminate
information gleaned from the international unrelated experience will continue to be
important in the future to optimize donor care in the allogeneic transplant setting.
The initiation of a search for a volunteer donor and/or umbilical cord blood unit for
transplantation triggers a worldwide network of communications that depends on a common
language for HLA nomenclature and matching standards. In Information Technology and
the Role of the WMDA in Promoting Standards for International Exchange of
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Donors and Products, two fundamental needs for the electronic
exchange of HLA typing information are described: 1) a logical approach to catalogue
human variants which is also flexible to accommodate continued discovery of novel alleles
and their functional properties, and 2) search systems to accurately identify potential donors
for a given recipient. The former need is met through guidelines on the application of HLA
nomenclature for matching and selection of suitable stem cell sources based on the World
Health Organisation (WHO) Nomenclature Committee for Factors of the HLA System. 12
Use of a common language minimizes ambiguities and errors in the transmission of tissue
typing data. The latter feature requires technology that can be applied to datafiles containing
heterogeneous information with respect to the number of HLA genes with available typing
information, as well as the kind of information specified for the locus (methodology and
resolution of the HLA determinant). Beyond the communication of donor match grades,
tools for prioritizing the donors and units that are most likely to be matched to the recipient,
Petersdorf Page 4
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
require constant development and remain a high priority area of research and development
for the WMDA’s Information Technology Working Group. Additional projects include the
development of encrypted e-mail security standards and biostatistical tools for analysis of
genetic variation encoded in registry donors and umbilical cord blood units.
The vision of the founding members of the WMDA in 1992 was that the search and
provision of stem cells from unrelated donors would eventually become an international
effort, and therefore would require standardized practice to ensure the high quality of stem
cells no matter where the donor or recipient reside. This vision has been realized not only for
adult volunteer donors, but also for umbilical cord blood units. Through these global efforts,
over 100,000 patients have received a stem cell transplant for the treatment of a benign or
malignant blood disorders worldwide. What does the future hold? As described by John
Goldman and Jon J. van Rood in Future Perspectives, continued research in several areas is
mandatory in order to fully meet the needs of our patients. From a genetic standpoint,
understanding the circumstances in which HLA disparity can and cannot be tolerated is a
key to broadened application of hematopoietic cell transplantation as a life-saving
procedure. With substantial progress in the elucidation of the genetic diversity, organization
and function of the natural killer (NK) receptors, particularly application of donor selection
based on killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) and KIR ligands, is on the horizon.
The powerful effect of the non-inherited maternal antigen (NIMA) on outcome after
haploidentical related transplantation and cord blood transplantation, provides a model for
extending selection to NIMA-matched umbilical cord blood units and maternal donors,
opening new options for patients who lack HLA identical siblings or HLA matched
unrelated donors. Continued collection of information concerning the properties of the stem
cell graft that most strongly associate with optimal clinical outcome, will provide the
community with the data needed to refine the requirements of an “optimal” stem cell graft.
New understanding will only be achieved through both comprehensive real-time data
collection and active participation in clinical studies. Finally, a successful transplant comes
about through expertise at each stage of the process; education and training serve as the
backbone to the continued growth of centers of excellence. To this end, the WMDA looks
forward to maintaining and extending high quality international standards for registries,
umbilical cord blood banks and their stem cell products; to participating in research trials
related to optimizing the stem cell product, and to integrating new findings from clinical
research into practice to fit the individual needs of patients worldwide.
Acknowledgments
This special issue of Bone Marrow Transplantation was made possible through the generosity of Dr. John
Goldman. The authors of the papers in this series thank Dr. Jeremy Chapman and the members of World Marrow
Donor Association board for their insightful comments and critical review of the papers. Dr. Petersdorf is supported
by grants AI069197, CA100019 and CA18029 from the National Institutes of Health, USA,
References
1. Epstein RB, Bryant J, Thomas ED. Cytogenetic demonstration of permanent tolerance in adult
outbred dogs. Transplantation. 1967; 5:267–272.
2. Speck B, Zwaan FE, van Rood JJ, Eernisse JG. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in a patient
with aplastic anemia using a phenotypically HLA-identical unrelated donor. Transplantation. 1973;
16:24–28. [PubMed: 4576852]
3. Bortin MM, Rimm AA. Bone marrow transplantation for acute myeloblastic leukemia. JAMA.
1978; 240(12):1245–1252. [PubMed: 28425]
4. Cleaver, S. The Anthony Nolan Research Centre and other matching registries. In: Treleaven;
Barret, J., editors. Bone Marrow Transplantation in Practice. Edinburgh; Churchill Livingston:
1992. p. 361-366.
Petersdorf Page 5
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
5. McCullough J. Bone marrow transplantation from unrelated voluntary donors: summary of a
conference on scientific, ethical, legal, financial and practical issues. Transfusion. 1982; 22:78–81.
[PubMed: 7039011]
6. Oudshoorn M, Leeuwen A, Zanden HGM, van Rood JJ. Bone marrow donors worldwide: a
successful exercise in international cooperation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1994; 14:3–8. [PubMed:
7951117]
7. http://www.bmdw.org
8. Goldman JM for the WMDA Executive Committee. A special report - bone marrow transplants
using volunteer donors - recommendations and requirements for a standardized practice throughout
the world. Blood. 1994; 84:2833–2839. [PubMed: 7949160]
9. www.worldmarrow.org
10. Goldman JM, Baughan ASJ, McCarthy DM, Worsley AM, Hows JM, Gordon-Smith EC, et al.
Marrow transplantation for patients in the chronic phase of Chronic Granulocytic Leukaemia.
Lancet. 1982; 2:623–625. [PubMed: 6125773]
11. http://www.wbmt.org
12. Marsh SGE, Albert ED, Bodmer WF, Bontrop RE, Dupont B, Erlich HA, et al. Nomenclature for
factors of the HLA system, 2004. Tissue Antigens. 2005; 65:301–369. [PubMed: 15787720]
Petersdorf Page 6
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
Figure 1.
Worldwide location of unrelated donor registries. Registries are indicated by a star. As of
January 1, 2010, there are a total of 9 donor registries in North America, 47 in Europe, 2 in
Africa, 11 in Asia and 2 in Australia.
Petersdorf Page 7
Bone Marrow Transplant. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 16.
NIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscriptNIH-PAAuthorManuscript
