© 2009 Zakka et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 567–579
Clinical Ophthalmology
567
r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Current trends in the management of ocular
symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease
Fouad R Zakka1
Peter Y Chang1
Gian P Giuliari1
C Stephen Foster1,2
1
Massachusetts Eye Research
and Surgery Institution (MERSI),
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA;
2
Department of Ophthalmology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA
Correspondence: C Stephen Foster
Massachusetts Eye Research and Surgery
Institution, 5 Cambridge Center, 8th Floor,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
Tel +1 (617) 621-6377
Fax +1 (617) 494-1430
Email sfoster@mersi.us
Abstract: Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease (ABD) is a multisystemic vasculitic disease.
It is most prevalent in the Eastern Mediterranean countries and the Eastern region of
Asia. Its effect on the eye can range from mild to debilitating, resulting in total blindness.
A necrotizing and obliterative vasculitis affects both arteries and veins of organs. Recurrent
attacks of uveitis, oral aphthous ulcers, skin lesions, and genital ulcers are common. Topical
and systemic corticosteroids have been the mainstay in the treatment of ocular inflamma-
tion for many years; however, due to the several known side effects of corticosteroids and
thanks to scientific advances, more novel approaches to ABD treatment have been emerging.
Antimetabolites such as methotrexate and azathioprine have been utilized with the latter
showing positive results. Chlorambucil has been utilized effectively for ocular manifestations
of ABD. Interferon alpha has shown encouraging results in the management of refractory
ocular inflammation associated with ABD, either alone or in combination with other immu-
nosuppressive agents. Surgical interventions to deal with complications from ABD can be
safely done if adequate control of inflammation is achieved peri-operatively. Early detection
and aggressive treatment, when needed, have proven to be essential in the management of
this relentlessly explosive disease.
Keywords: Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease, Behçet’s disease, ocular inflammation, uveitis,
immunomodulatory therapy, immunosuppressive therapy
Introduction
Historical context
Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease (ABD) is a chronic, relapsing systemic vasculitis
that afflicts organs encompassing the eye, skin, gastrointestinal tract, joints, genitalia,
and central nervous system. To date, a clear etiology of the disease has not been
identified. Described possibly by Hippocrates in the 5th century BC,1
it is named
after Benedictos Adamantiades, a Greek ophthalmologist, and Hulusi Behçet,
a Turkish dermatologist, who in the 1930s separately published on their patients
with the findings of recurrent iritis as well as oral and genital ulcers. Although
Adamantiades had presented his case report2
seven years prior to Behçet, the
disease is widely referred to as Behçet’s disease primarily due to the popularity of
the German medical literature in which the latter presented his case series of three
patients.3
To properly reflect the importance of the contribution both of these physi-
cians made to the recognition of this devastating disease, this article will adopt the
name Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease (ABD).
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Ophthalmology
15 October 2009
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3568
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Epidemiology
ABD is most commonly found in countries of the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Eastern edge ofAsia. Its predominant
distribution between the 30° and 45° north latitudes roughly
correspond to the old Silk Road utilized for trades between
the East and Europe.4
While its prevalence is much higher in
countries such as Turkey, Iran, and Japan, ABD accounts for
only 0.2% to 0.4% of uveitis cases in the United States, with
a prevalence of 4 patients per 1 million population.5,6
Earlier reports from Asia and the Mediterranean basin
showed a male preponderance of ABD;5,7,8
however, more
recent reports suggest a more equal distribution between
sexes. It appears that the complete type ofABD (see Clinical
features below) is more common in males, while the incom-
plete type has a 1:1 male-to-female ratio. ABD has been
reported in all ages, but mostly between 25 and 35 years.
In general, younger age and male gender are associated with
more disease severity.
Genetics
Due to the increased prevalence in certain racial groups, it is
clear that genetics plays an important role in the pathogenesis
of ABD. HLA-B5 (and its subtype HLA-B51), HLA-B12,
HLA-B27, and HLA-A26 have all been implicated in
ABD;9–11
of these, HLA-B5 appears to be associated with the
worst ocular prognosis.12
On the other hand, HLA-DR1 and
HLA-DQw1 seem to confer resistance to the disease.13
Pathology and immunology
The pathology of ABD varies depending on the location of
the lesions, but its principal features include perivascular infil-
trates of lymphocytes and mononuclear cells, and swelling,
proliferation and subsequent fibrinoid necrosis of small
blood vessels, especially venules. Excessive number of mast
cells may be found in the recurrent mucocutaneous ulcers.14
Demyelination is the most common finding in the brain.15
Ocularly, acute uveitis is characterized by diffuse
infiltration of neutrophils, followed by lymphocytes,
monocytes and mast cells in the iris, ciliary body and
choroid. When the disease becomes chronic and recurrent,
the presence of increased collagen can lead to iris atrophy,
posterior synechiae, cyclitic membrane formation, and
choroidal thickening. Retinal vasculitis, which involves
veins more than arteries, is typified by significant infiltration
of leukocytes and plasma cells in and around blood vessels
and deeper into the retinal tissue. Although retinal pigment
epithelium destruction is minimal, the photoreceptor layers
are often damaged. In more advanced vasculitis, fibrosis
of the vessels can lead to the obliteration of the vascular
structures. In addition, the vasculitic process may result in
optic neuritis, ischemia, and even atrophy.
TheTlymphocyteisthepredominantcelltypeintheimmu-
nopathogenesis of ABD. The early lesions in ABD resemble
a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction (type IV), while the
late lesions correspond to an immune-complex type reaction
(type III). Whether vessel inflammation is driven by immune
complexes is debatable, however, as immunoglobulins are not
typically found in the vessel walls of ABD patients.
Clinical features
The diagnosis of ABD is based on clinical findings. Two
separate diagnostic systems currently exist: one by Behçet’s
ResearchCommitteeofJapanin1974(Table1),16
andtheother
by the International Study Group for Behçet’s Disease in 1990
(Table 2).17
The major difference between the two systems
is that the former emphasizes ocular symptoms, while the
latter stresses the importance of oral aphthae (thus, we prefer
the Japanese system in our care of ophthalmic patients).
Systemic manifestations
OralaphthousulceristhemostcommonfindinginABD.These
lesions of 3 to 15mm diameter are recurrent and very painful.
The lesions can be found anywhere in the oral cavity, including
the lips, gums, tongue, palate, uvula, and posterior pharynx.
Table 1 Diagnostic criteria of Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease
(ABD) suggested by Behçet’s Research Committee of Japan
Major criteria
 Recurrent oral aphthous ulcers
 Recurrent genital ulcers
  Skin lesions
  Ocular inflammation
Minor criteria
  Arthritis
  Gastrointestinal tract ulceration
 Epididymitis
 Vasculitis/vasculopathy
  Neuropsychiatric symptoms and signs
ABD types
  Complete (4 major)
  Incomplete (3 major, or ocular inflammation with 1 other major)
  Suspect (2 major, no ocular inflammation)
  Possible (1 major)
Modified from Newman NM, Hoyt WF, Spencer WH. Macula-sparing monocular
blackouts: Clinical and pathologic investigation of intermittent choroidal
vascular insufficiency in a case of periarteritis nodosa. Arch Ophthalmol. 1974;
91(5):367–370.134
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 569
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
They typically last 7 to 10 days and resolve spontaneously,
though some patients never fully recover before the next bout
of ulcers appears. Skin eruptions resembling acne vulgaris
or folliculitis are common cutaneous findings, especially
above the neck. Erythema nodosum can be found not only on
the tibia (as classically seen in sarcoidosis), but also on the
face, neck, and buttock. Genital ulcers are another common
mucocutaneous finding of ABD. They can occur on the penis,
scrotum, vulva, and vaginal mucosa; at times, they are located
in the perianal areas. Although epididymitis is common in
ABD, urethritis is not a known feature, which may be helpful
in differentiating the condition from reactive arthritis. Further-
more,superficialthrombophlebitiscanoccuronbothupperand
lower extremities, and these lesions should be evaluated very
carefully as they may indicate a more widespread disease.
Neurologic involvement (neuro-ABD) is one of the most
serious complications of ABD. The reported frequency of
CNS involvement in ABD ranges from 3% to 10%.8
Its
manifestations are wide-ranging and nonspecific: migraine-
like headaches, stiff neck, cranial nerve palsies, hemiparesis,
cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs,
seizures, peripheral neuropathies, mental status change, audio-
vestibular deficits, and many more have all been reported.
Arthritis occurs at some point in approximately half
of  ABD patients, with lower extremity joints most commonly
affected. It can be monoarticular, oligoarticular, or polyarticu-
lar, but it is typically not chronic or destructive. Other systemic
features ofABD have been documented in the cardiovascular,
pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and renal systems.
Ocular manifestations
Ocular symptoms occur in 43%18
to 72%19
of ABD patients
and affect males more commonly than females. They are
not usually the first presenting manifestations of ABD
(only in about 10 to 13% of the cases).20,21
The time between
oral and genital lesions and eye involvement is estimated to
be 3 to 4 years.22
Although the ocular disease may initially
be unilateral, it almost always progresses to both eyes.
Anterior uveitis of ABD is nongranulomatous. It is
explosive in nature but may resolve in 2 to 3 weeks without
any therapy. The presenting symptoms and signs include
periorbital pain, blurry vision, conjunctival injection, ciliary
flush, anterior chamber cells and flare, and fine keratic
precipitates. Mobile hypopyon, which moves as a patient
changes head positions, is a classic finding, although it is
exceedingly rare today likely due to earlier diagnosis and
treatment; Tugal-Tutkun et al found hypopyon in only 12%
of 1567 eyes.27
At times, the hypopyon is not immediately
visible but may be discovered in the angle via gonioscopy
(termed angle hypopyon). Of note, hypopyon is also found in
HLA-B27-associated anterior uveitis; however, it is usually
less mobile than that found in ABD. Repeated attacks in the
anterior chamber result in structural damages such as anterior
and posterior synechiae and iris atrophy. Furthermore, in the
case of chronic posterior segment inflammation, rubeosis may
become apparent and signify a poor ocular prognosis.
In the posterior segment, vitreal inflammatory cells are
always present during acute attacks. Chronic inflammation of
the vitreous frequently leads to posterior vitreous detachment.
The most prominent retinal change is obliterative, necrotizing
vasculitis that afflicts both arteries and veins; evident on the
fundoscopic exam are engorged veins, perivascular sheath-
ing (veins usually before arteries), intraretinal and vitreous
hemorrhage, macular edema, retinal ischemia and infarct,
disc swelling, and chorioretinal scarring. Repeat vasculitic
attacks ultimately result in permanent vascular occlusion
(central or branch retinal vein or artery occlusion) and
tissue hypoxia, which induces neovascularization of the
optic nerve (neovascularization of the disc, or NVD) or else-
where (NVE). When only posterior segment inflammation
is present, the patient typically relates painless decrease in
vision with a sudden increase in floaters.
As with most chronic intraocular inflammation, ABD
uveitis is complicated by cataracts and glaucoma, both of
which result from the inflammation itself and the chronic
corticosteroid therapy that is all too often employed in the
patients. Clearly, the ocular involvements in ABD have
extremely dire consequences, as each recurrence damages
the eye. Therefore, it is essential for a clinician to diagnose
the disease early and begin aggressive treatments, which
usually comprise systemic immunomodulatory medications.
Even as a patient’s disease enters remission, one must not be
Table 2 Diagnostic criteria of Adamantiades-Behçet’s disease
suggested by the International Study Group for Behçet’s disease
Recurrent oral aphthous ulcers (at least 3 times a year) and 2 of the
following:
 Recurrent genital ulcers
  Skin lesions
  Ocular inflammation
  Positive pathergy test (Behçetine test)a
a
Pathergy test is performed by inserting a 20-guage or smaller needle (no injection)
5 mm obliquely into the skin of the flexor aspect of the forearm.  The test is positive
if there is an indurated erythematous papule or pustule with 2 mm diameter after
24 to 48 hours.
Modified from Gold DH. Ocular manifestations of connective tissue (collagen)
diseases.In: Tasman W, Jaeger AE,editors.Duane’s Clinical Ophthalmology.Philadelphia:
J.B. Lippincott. 1989;5:17–19.135
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3570
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
complacent because recurrence is the rule inABD. Regardless
of the disease activity, patients should always have regular
slit-lamp exams. Angiographic and electrophysiological
studies are also useful in monitoring posterior segment
changes and prognosticating visual outcomes.
Treatment
Corticosteroids
For many years, topical and systemic corticosteroids
have been the gold standard in the treatment of ocular
inflammation, contributing immensely to the treatment
of these often difficult patients. Prolonged corticosteroid
therapy, however, is associated with a broad spectrum of
local and systemic side effects, such as cataracts, glaucoma,
systemic hypertension, hyperglycemia, weight gain, peptic
ulcers, Cushingoid syndrome, psychosis, and many, many
others. Furthermore, it is not uncommon forABD to become
refractory to corticosteroids, with progressive loss of vision
and the eventual need for additional therapeutic options.23
Systemic corticosteroids
The use of systemic corticosteroids inABD is controversial.
If they are to be used, they are preferred in cases of posterior
inflammation, panuveitis, retinitis and/or severe anterior
chamber and intermediate inflammation with multiple exac-
erbations that are poorly responsive to topical and/or peri-
ocular corticosteroids. In these cases, they should be given
in high doses such as oral prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/kg daily)
given in a single morning dose after breakfast and/or as an
intravenous dose as a pulse methylprednisolone (1 g daily
for 3 consecutive days). After disease control is attained,
corticosteroids should be tapered gradually to a maintenance
dosage of 15 to 20 mg daily.
Even though systemic corticosteroids have proven
effective in the treatment of acute ocular attacks in patients
with ABD, one should try to avoid the chronic use of these
agents in an attempt to reduce the associated side effects.
Furthermore, steroid-resistance can occur in patients with
posterior segment involvement,24,25
and corticosteroids may
be associated with retinal thrombosis.26,27
Regardless of the fact that some ophthalmologists never
give systemic corticosteroids due to the belief of a worse
long-term prognosis, we believe that it is appropriate to
employ a short course of high-dose systemic corticoste-
roids to an existing regimen of immunosuppressive drugs
in cases of acute posterior segment involvement, in an
effort to eradicate all inflammation while waiting for other
medications to take full effects.
Topical corticosteroids
The use of topical corticosteroids is usually applied to mild
episodes of anterior and intermediate inflammation. These
agents may be given as drops during the day and ointment at
bedtime.The use of the so-called stronger corticosteroids such
as prednisolone 1% and/or dexamethasone is preferred over
weaker ones such as fluorometholone. Regardless of the route
of administration, topical corticosteroids should be given at a
large dose initially and then tapered as soon as the inflamma-
tion is brought under control, possibly over a period of several
weeks once the inflammation is controlled. It is not uncommon
that after the corticosteroids are withdrawn the inflammation
may recur. At the Massachusetts Eye Research and Surgery
Institution, if the inflammation is mild, we usually start therapy
with one drop 4 times a day.We increase the frequency in more
severe cases. These drops are then gradually tapered 1 drop
every week once the inflammation is controlled.
Once the inflammation is suppressed and the therapy has
been discontinued, it is prudent to follow the patient to ensure
the absence of recurrence. It is not uncommon that the inflam-
mation recurs upon tapering of corticosteroids. To monitor
the anterior chamber inflammatory status, one should use
the classification put forth by the Standardization of Uveitis
Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group.28
In our practice we
do not chase every single cell; we treat inflammatory cell
reaction equal or greater than 1+.
Periocular corticosteroids
This route of administration is offered to patients with more
severe inflammation, especially with posterior uveitis, vitritis
and macular edema. Several studies have demonstrated the
benefit of periocular corticosteroid injections in the treatment
of uveitic macular edema.29–32
We believe that periocular
corticosteroids may be especially beneficial in patients with
unilateral disease, to whom they could be administered alone
orincombinationwithsystemiccorticosteroidand/orasteroid-
sparing agent. Periocular corticosteroids may also be offered
to severe anterior chamber inflammation with poor response
to topical corticosteroids. Depot agents such as triamcinolone
acetonide are preferred over other types of corticosteroids such
as prednisolone and dexamethasone, as they are able to achieve
a longer lasting anti-inflammatory effect.
Azathioprine
Azathioprine (AZA) is an imidazolyl derivative of
6-mercaptopurine. It is metabolized to 6-mercaptopurine, and
then to thioinosine-5-phosphate, which is a purine analogue.
The latter interferes with DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 571
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
by acting as a false precursor for adenine and guanine
synthesis. Azathioprine also acts by suppressing circulating
T-cells, selectively decreasing monocyte precursors, sup-
pressing delayed hypersensitivity reactions, and inhibiting
T-lymphocyte function.33
Kötter and associates evaluated the efficacy of different
treatment strategies in controlling the several organ manifes-
tations of ABD.34
The results revealed that in patients with
uveitis (posterior or panuveitis),AZA was successfully used
to achieve complete remission in 8 of 10 cases when combined
with CSA and corticosteroids. Hamuryudan and colleagues
conducted a two-year randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind trial studying the effect of AZA therapy
on long-term prognosis in ABD.35
The authors followed
73 ABD patients, 48 of whom had ocular involvement and
25 who did not. It was found that AZA was superior to
placebo in preventing eye diseases in patients without ocular
involvement. In addition, a decrease in hypopyon uveitis
episodes was observed in patients with ocular involvement.
Other studies have also found that early AZA treatment was
effective in improving the long-term visual prognosis ofABD
patients and preventing new ocular involvement.36–38
A study
by our group showed more equivocal results.38
We found that
only 3 of 8 patients achieved control of ocular inflammation
in combination with cyclosporine or systemic corticosteroids.
As such, we do not consider azathioprine to be the most
effective drug for the treatment of ABD.
The most common side effect of AZA is gastrointestinal
upset. Myelosuppression is a serious side effect, and is
reversible and dose-related. Liver enzyme abnormalities are
observed in less than 2% of patients.33
Methotrexate
Methotrexate was first used in 1958 to treat leukemia. It is a
folic acid analogue that competitively binds and inactivates
the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) which plays a
key role in converting dietary folic acid to reduced, meta-
bolically active folates (dihydrofolate and tetrahydrofolate).
Folate plays a role in the metabolism of histidine, thymidylate
and purine synthesis, and in the conversion of homocysteine
to methionine.This along with its antiangiogenic properties,
cellular and humoral immunosuppression, and inhibition of
cytokine production may account for the therapeutic effect
of low-dose methotrexate.33,39
The bioavailability of methotrexate is 100% when
given intravenously. It also exhibits a high bioavailability
when given in low doses orally, intramuscularly, and sub-
cutaneously. Metabolism takes place in the liver and all
the metabolites are cleared renally.33
Folinic acid is used to
protect or shield normal cells from the toxic effect of metho-
trexate when used in high doses. Folinic acid remains active
without the need for reduction by DHFR. It functions by
restoring thymidylate, methionine, and purine biosynthesis.
The activity of folinic acid is impervious to the presence of
methotrexate in the system.39
Methotrexate has been used in treating a large number
of ocular inflammatory diseases. The evidence regarding
methotrexate use in ABD uveitis is scant. It has been shown
that methotrexate is not entirely effective for posterior uveitis,
but it is more potent for anterior uveitis when used at a low
dose of 7.5 to 25 mg weekly.40–42
Methotrexate is mostly well-tolerated and side effects
improve with reducing dosage.The most common side effects
are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and weight loss.
Cutaneous vasculitis, urticaria, alopecia, photosensitivity,
and cutaneous nodules are also side effects of low-dose
methotrexate.43
Hepatotoxicity is a likely side effect and
alcohol consumption should be avoided by patients in treat-
ment with methotrexate. Duration of therapy and age are
risk factors for hepatotoxicity, and abnormal liver enzymes
are seen in 15% of patients.44,45
A study by our group on the
long-term risk of malignancy among patients treated with
immunosuppressive agents for ocular inflammation showed
that methotrexate has virtually no long-term carcinogenic
effects.46
Pregnant women are not eligible for methotrexate
treatment as it is a definite teratogen.33
Colchicine
Colchicine is an anti-inflammatory plant alkaloid and is
well-known in the treatment of gout.47
It acts by inhibiting
neutrophil chemotaxis by binding to microtubular proteins
and interfering with the function of the mitotic spindle.48–50
Consequently, the migration of granulocytes, which are
responsible for the release of lactic acid and inflammatory
enzymes to inflammation sites, is inhibited. Through the
prevention of spindle formation, it appears that colchicine
can also act as an antimitotic agent, stopping cell division
in metaphase.
Colchicine is effective in the treatment of ocular
manifestations of ABD, both alone or in combination
with other drugs.51–55
One earlier study showed that
104 of 131 patients withABD were responsive to colchicine
therapy.54
Colchicine has been successful in the treatment of
anterior uveitis at a dosage of 1 mg daily; however its effi-
cacy in severe posterior uveitis is yet to be determined.56,57
Masuda and associates reported that colchicine was inferior
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3572
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
to cyclosporine in treating the ocular manifestations ofABD,
in addition to oral skin lesions, aphthous ulcer, and genital
lesions.58
Nonetheless, colchicine and cyclosporine may
be used in combination.59
Colchicine is usually well tolerated in moderate doses,
gastrointestinal side effects being the most common. Nephro-
toxicity, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, ascending paralysis of
the central nervous system, vascular damage, and muscular
depression may be caused by acute toxicity, while azosper-
mia, myopathy, aplastic anemia, and agranulocytosis may
occur in chronic use.60
Chlorambucil
Chlorambucil, a nitrogen mustard derivative, is widely used
in the treatment of lymphomas. It acts by alkylating purine
bases. This causes DNA strands to undergo intrastrand
crosslinking as well as DNA-to-protein crosslinking, which
disrupts DNA replication, transcription, and nucleic acid
function, ultimately leading to apoptosis.33
Chlorambucil
has a high absorption in the gut, reaching peak concentration
within one to two hours.61
Phenylacetic acid mustard, the
active metabolite, is produced in the liver, and is hydrolyzed
into an inactive compound, along with chlorambucil, and
excreted renally. The half-life of phenyl acetic mustard is
145 minutes and that of chlorambucil is 92 minutes.
Two approaches exist for the use of chlorambucil in
uveitic patients.The first, described as the traditional method,
consists of administering 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg body weight of the
medication daily. Treatment would continue for 1 year after
the disease has been controlled so as to achieve “long-term,
drug-free remission.”62
The second approach consists of
administering short-term, high dose therapy. One would begin
at 2 mg daily for 1 week and increase the dosage by 2 mg daily
each week thereafter. The increase in dosage would continue
either until inflammation is controlled or a white blood count
of below 2,400 cells per microliter or a platelet count below
100,000 cells per microliter is achieved.This treatment would
typically be carried out for 3 to 6 months but discontinued
immediately in case of bone marrow toxicity.63
A study by Mudun and coworkers evaluated the
responsiveness of patients with ABD uveitis to short-term
chlorambucil therapy.64
The study population consisted of
44 patients and efficacy of chlorambucil was evaluated by
measuring the frequency of disease flare-ups per year and
the longest time period between flare-ups while in treatment.
The results revealed that the mean frequency of attacks had
decreased from 4.9 ± 2.3 to 0.9 ± 1.4 (P  0.0001) and the
mean longest period between the attacks was prolonged
from 4.4 ± 2.3 months to 25.7 ± 23.1 months (P  0.0001).
Goldstein and associates studied 53 patients with uveitis
treated with short-term high-dose chlorambucil.65
The
treatment period ranged from 2 to 9 months. Seventeen
patients out of the total population had ABD-associated
uveitis. Thirteen of those patients (76%) achieved sustained
remission after initial treatment. Our group conducted a
noncomparartive case series on 28 patients with chronic
noninfectious uveitis treated with chlorambucil.66
Of those
patients, 7 were diagnosed withABD. Results showed that all
7 patients responded to treatment; however, only 2 of 7 had
an ocular and systemic response.Two of 7 patients responded
both ocularly and systemically but later relapsed. Three of
7 patients showed an ocular response but failed to respond
systemically. The study demonstrated that chlorambucil is a
safe treatment when administered and monitored expertly.
Bone marrow depression is a serious side effect of
chlorambucil therapy. However, this can be reversed by
reducing the dosage or discontinuing the treatment. Sterility
is another major concern related to chlorambucil therapy.
Men are seemingly more susceptible to sterility than women.
A relationship has been described between cumulative
dose of therapy and gonadal effect of chlorambucil.66
It has
been shown that doses less than 8.2 mg/kg in children and
6.1 mg/kg in adults do not affect fertility.67–70
With the option
of sperm cryopreservation now readily available, we believe
that sterility is a risk worth taking in the quest to prevent
blindness in ABD patients.
Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide is a nitrogen mustard derivative similar
to chlorambucil. It is designed to target neoplastic cells more
selectively than healthy cells. Phosphoramide mustard is the
active compound which inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis
and results in apoptosis. Cyclophosphamide acts on both
primary and established cellular and humoral immune
responses, suppressing delayed-type hypersensitivity, mixed
lymphocyte reactions, mitogen-induced and antigen-induced
blastogenesis, and production of cytokines.39
The drug is
primarily excreted renally with less than 25% remaining
chemically unaltered in the urine.71,72
The drug can be admin-
istered both orally and intravenously and is well tolerated in the
gut. Nonetheless, we prefer the intravenous method for ease
of saline flushing and shorter time of exposure in the body.
Not much evidence exists regarding the effectiveness of
cyclophosphamide in ABD-associated ocular inflammatory
disease, especially as a monotherapy. We usually select chlo-
rambucil over cyclophosphamide for the treatment of ABD
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 573
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
ocular disease, unless urgent care is required, in which case
we employ intravenous cyclophosphamide. As with chlo-
rambucil, cyclophosphamide can result in serious adverse
effects if not dosed and monitored expertly.
Thalidomide
Thalidomide is a derivative of glutamic acid and was synthe-
sizedinthe1950s.Itwasoriginallyusedasanantihistamineand
anticonvulsant, and subsequently a sedative and anti-emetic.
Tragically, it was later discovered that thalidomide was highly
teratogenic and was linked to thousands of birth defects world-
wide. This resulted in the drug being pulled off the market,
and it did not gain FDA approval until nearly 40 years later.73
Thalidomide is reported to have an immunomodulatory,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-angiogenic effect.The proposed
mechanism of its immunomodulatory/anti-inflammatory
action is that thalidomide selectively inhibits the production
of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) in monocytes by the
accelerated degradation of TNF-α mRNA and the reduction
of its half-life. In addition, the drug also results in the decrease
of neutrophil migration to the site of inflammation and the
reduction of polymorphonuclear phagocytosis.Thalidomide
also co-stimulates the production of T-lymphocytes and,
as such, proves useful in lowering TNF-α levels while
maintaining normal immunity.59,74
Thalidomide’s anti-angiogenic activity has been
demonstrated in solid tumors, in the control of gastric bleed-
ing and rabbit-model corneal neovascularization. When
thalidomide was studied in a mouse-model retinopathy of
prematurity-associated neovascularization and retinopathy,
it was not effective.74–79
In treating ABD, thalidomide appears to have favorable
results in orogenital lesions, arthritis, and erythema nodosum.
The results in uveitis are not as encouraging.80–82
In 1986,
Hamza studied the use of thalidomide in 30 male patients
with ABD.83
Twenty-six of 27 patients with oral ulcerations
showed improvement with therapy. Four patients with
erythema nodosum had resolution of the lesions within 7 to
10 days after thalidomide was initiated; once the medication
was purposely withdrawn, all 4 patients flared up within a
week. Sixteen patients had uveitis, and the disease was active
in 11 patients at the time the treatment was initiated. Three
patients with uveitis had total regression of inflammation
within 1 to 3 months. In 4 patients inflammation was stable;
it did not improve or worsen. Four patients experienced a dete-
rioration of their uveitis requiring the use of corticosteroids.
The most notorious side effect of thalidomide is
teratogenecity, with phacomelia being the best recognized
congenital abnormality. There have also been reports of
neural tube abnormalities, micro-ophthalmia, duodenal
stenosis, and mid-line hemangiomas.84
Peripheral neu-
ropathy is another serious side effect resulting in painful,
symmetrical paresthesias of upper and lower extremities as
well as sensory loss.85
Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus, also known as FK506, is a macrolide analogous
to cyclosporin A. It is a calcineurin inhibitor isolated from
the fungus Streptomyces tsukubaensis and is frequently used
in organ transplantation. Like cyclosporine, it binds to the
intracellular FK-binding protein and then associates with
calcineurin. This ultimately leads to the inhibition of TNF-α
and GM-CSF production.33,59,86
Tacrolimus is poorly absorbed orally. Its absorption
form the gastrointestinal tract is incomplete, variable, and
limited when taken with food. It is metabolized hepatically
via the cytochrome P450 system, and fecal elimination
accounts for over 90% of elimination.33,39
The drug may also
be given intravenously, but most uveitis patients receive it
orally. The initial dosage for uveitis recommended by an
expert panel is 0.05 mg/kg daily with a maximum dosage
of 0.3 mg/kg daily.
Tacrolimus has been used to treatABD-associated uveitis
in patients who have failed cyclosporine.87–89
Sloper and
colleagues have studied the efficacy of tacrolimus in patients
who did not respond to cyclosporine treatment.90
Six patients
with posterior uveitis – 3 associated with ABD – refractory
to cyclosporine were treated with tacrolimus. The 3 patients
with ABD as well as 2 other patients (1 with microscopic
polyangiitis and 1 with pars planitis) showed improvement
in uveitis with the therapy. Hogan and associates recently
studied tacrolimus treatment in 62 patients with noninfectious
uveitis.91
It was found that the drug’s efficacy was sustained on
a long-term basis with an excellent cardiovascular risk profile.
The side effects of tacrolimus are similar to those of
CSA in terms of gastrointestinal disturbance, hypertension,
neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity. It differs from CSA in that
it is diabetogenic. In addition, the degrees of hypertrichosis,
hyperlipidemia, gingival hypertrophy and coarsening of the
features are less with tacrolimus.59
Interferon-alpha
Interferon-alpha (IFN-α) is a cytokine initially produced for its
antiviral properties. It was the first cytokine to be produced in
the recombinant form. Since its production, it has been studied
for multiple sclerosis andABD due to its immunomodulatory
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3574
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
capabilities. IFN-α and IFN-β are both type I interferons.
IFN-α is produced by leukocytes and IFN-β is produced
by fibroblasts, and they are both functionally similar. They
modulate the production of antibodies and inhibit lymphocyte
proliferation as well as delayed-type hypersensitivity, all the
while enhancing T-cell and NK-cell cytotoxicity. The drug
undergoes complete filtration in the kidneys.33,92
IFN-α2a
and
IFN-α2b
are commercially available as injections.
StudiesonIFN-αhaveshownencouragingresults,especially
in the treatment of refractory ocular inflammation associ-
ated with ABD. In addition, IFN-α has also proven effective
when combined with other immunomodulatory agents and
corticosteroids.59,93
Tugal-Tutkun and associates studied 44
Turkish patients who were treated with IFN-α2a
.94
The initial
doses were 6 MU daily in 37 patients and 3 MU daily in 7
patients, which were subsequently tapered upon suppression
of ocular inflammation. Oral corticosteroids were either dis-
continued or kept below 10 mg daily. The authors reported
that 16 patients (36.4%) remained free of inflammation during
treatment, while 28 patients (63.6%) had recurrent flare ups.
Overall, 91% of patients experienced a partial or complete
response.Gueudryandcoworkersstudied32patientswithsight-
threatening uveitis associated with ABD who failed previous
immunosuppressive and corticosteroid therapy.95
The patients
weretreatedwith3MU3timesperweek.Inflammationwascon-
trolled in 28 patients (88%) over a mean observation period of
70.6months.Theauthorsconcludedthatwhilethetreatmentwas
efficient and safe in the treatment of ABD uveitis, it appeared
to be a suspensive therapeutic strategy as relapse occurrence
increased following discontinuation of IFN-α; nevertheless,
weaning of the drug was possible in some patients.
Infliximab
It has been found that TNF-α, a proinflammatory cytokine,
is present in the sera of patients with active ABD due to
overproduction by elevated numbers of T lymphocytes and
monocytes.96–98
In addition, TNF receptors were also found to
beelevatedintheperipheralbloodofABDpatients.97
Infliximab
(Remicade®
;CentocorOrthoBiotechInc.)isahuman– murine
chimeric TNF-α inhibitor. An IgG monoclonal antibody,
it binds to and deactivatesTNF-α molecules.An expert panel
has put forth the following criteria for the selection of patients
eligible for anti-TNF-α therapy: (i) a definite diagnosis
of ABD; (ii) presence of active disease, including objective
signs of inflammation; (iii) previous failure of drugs that have
a documented efficacy in controlling ABD manifestations,
combined or not, with low dose corticosteroids (7.5 mg
daily); (iv) presence of contraindications or intolerance to
conventional immunomodulatory regimens; (v) absence of
contraindications to anti-TNF treatment.99
Several studies
have demonstrated the efficacy of infliximab therapy in the
control of ocular and systemic manifestations of ABD.100–102
In a prospective open study, Sfikakis and associates demon-
strated an effective remission of acute ocular inflammation
following a single infusion of 5 mg/kg intravenous infliximab
in 96% of patients with ocular ABD.103
The authors also
found that cystoid macular edema resolved after 28 days
of therapy in 90% of patients. More recently, Niccoli and
associates conducted a prospective 24-month follow-up study
on 12 consecutive patients with ABD-associated posterior
uveitis refractory to other immunomodulatory therapies.104
Patients were treated with prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily with
rapid tapering and 9 infliximab infusions (5 mg/kg) for
12 months. At the 12-month visit, 75% of patients achieved
complete steroid-free disease remission with no relapses by
week 22. At the 24-month visit, 78% of patients were still
in remission. Tognon and coworkers studied 7 patients with
sight-threatening relapsing uveitis refractory to previous
therapy.105
The patients received intravenous infliximab at a
dose of 3 to 5 mg/kg, on weeks 0, 2, 4 and then every 6 to
8 weeks thereafter, in combination with low-dose prednisone
and azathioprine or methotrexate.The mean follow-up period
was 23 months, after which the total number of relapses
dropped to 6, compared to the 21 observed in an equivalent
period of time before treatment. Visual acuity improved
in 4 eyes and remained stable in 9. The authors concluded
that infliximab is safe and effective in controlling both the
number and intensity of cases of posterior uveitis in ABD
patients, allowing the reduction of corticosteroids and other
immunosuppressive drugs. However, the authors remarked
that ocular and systemic manifestations tended to recur after
the treatment was discontinued or when the interval between
infliximab infusions was longer than 8 weeks.
Etanercept
Etanercept(Enbrel®
; Amgen/Wyeth)isadimericfusionprotein
consisting of the extracellular ligand-binding portion of the
human 75 kDa (p75) TNF receptor (TNFR) linked to the Fc
portion of human IgG1.33
Etanercept is produced by recom-
binant DNA technology. It consists of 934 amino acids and
has an apparent molecular weight of approximately 150 kDa
with a good tolerability when administered by subcutaneous
injection.106
Etanercept is indicated either alone or in combination with
other agents in the treatment of the symptoms of rheumatoid
arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 575
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis among others. In our
experience, however, its effectiveness in controlling ocular
inflammation associated with these diseases is limited. On
the other hand, studies have shown that etanercept may be
beneficial, at least in the short term, in maintaining visual
acuity in patients with refractory uveitis secondary toABD.107
A greater response has been noted over other ABD com-
plications such as oral ulcers, nodular and papulopustular
skin lesions as well as the arthritis symptoms, though these
observations have been inconsistent.108,109
Other anti-TNF-α agents, such as infliximab, have shown
better ocular results than those seen with etanercept.A recent
study at the University of Padova, evaluated the efficacy of
anti-TNF-α therapy, in this case infliximab, in 7 patients with
severe ocular involvement resistant to previous treatment.110
This therapy proved to be safe and effective in controlling
both the number and intensity of posterior uveitis flares
and the extraocular manifestations of ABD, but ocular and
systemic manifestations recurred after drug withdrawal, as
was seen in patients treated with etanercept.111
Pentoxifylline
Pentoxifylline is a methylxanthine derivative hemorheological
agent widely known for its role in vascular disorders.
Yasui and coworkers reported on the use of this drug on
three male patients with ABD uveitis.112
They found that
pentoxifylline successfully improved the patients’ clinical
symptoms by its ability to alter cell membrane fluidity and
membrane-receptor function, leading to decreased release
of superoxide radicals by neutrophils. A recent study
suggested that pentoxifylline inhibits Vgamma9/Vdelta2
T cell function in ABD in vitro, which raises the possibility
that this drug may be of use in dysregulated cell-mediated
immunity immunological disorders.113
Granulocytapheresis
Still considered a novel approach to ABD, granulocytapher-
esis shows promise with its ability to reduce the neutrophil
load from the peripheral blood through selective adsorption
phereses. The number of studies pertaining to this treatment
method remains scarce.There has been a report regarding the
successful control of ABD-associated uveitis.114
Surgical interventions
Due to the nature ofABD, the use of systemic immunomodu-
latory agents alone or in combination with corticosteroids
has become the gold standard of treatment. Nonetheless,
ophthalmic complications such as glaucoma, macular edema,
cataracts, neovascularization and vitreous hemorrhage are
not uncommon in ABD patients. It is in dealing with these
complications that surgery may play an important role in
preventing further visual loss and even restoring useful
vision.
Recurrent inflammation as well as prolonged use of
corticosteroids may lead to cataract formation. Most of
the complications observed following cataract extraction
in ABD patients are related to poorly controlled disease
prior to surgery. Therefore, it is advised that a patient
receives immunosuppressive medication and prophylactic
systemic, topical and/or periocular corticosteroids prior to the
procedure.115
Once at least 3 months control of inflammation
has been achieved, cataract extraction and intraocular lens
implantation can then be safely performed. The visual out-
come depend mainly on the preoperative posterior segment
involvement.116–118
Glaucoma, either secondary or neovascular, may be a
significant cause of visual loss in patients withABD.As with
glaucoma not associated with ocular inflammatory diseases,
initial topical hypotensive regimen should be supplemented
with systemic therapy if better control of intraocular pres-
sure is called for. In case of poor pressure control despite
aggressive medical treatment, surgical intervention must be
considered. In this case, either a drainage device (we prefer
Ahmed glaucoma valve,119
though a Molteno tube shunt is a
reasonable option)120
or trabeculectomy with antimetabolites
is employed.121–126
Another common complication seen in ABD patients is
vitreous hemorrhage. ABD vasculopathy results in retinal
hypoxia and subsequent production of vascular endothe-
lial growth factors, leading to ocular neovascularization.
Patients with repeated episodes of hemorrhages and neo-
vascularization may have severe underlying retinal disease.
Vitreous hemorrhage may spontaneously resolve without
any intervention. In patients with retinal tractional diseases
and repeated vitreous hemorrhages, however, pars plana
vitrectomy (PPV) should be considered to try to avoid
further damage. One earlier report suggested that PPV
had extremely poor outcomes in ABD patients and thus
should be avoided.127
However, as more advanced vitreo-
retinal surgical techniques and technologies as well as better
medical therapies become available, recent reports have all
demonstrated that vitrectomy has a beneficial effect on vision
in ABD.128–131
In cases of retinal neovascularization, early
diagnosis and treatment with retinal photocoagulation may be
beneficial,132
but some investigators believe that this will lead
to production of retinal antigens which may lead to systemic
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3576
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
sensitization and thus exacerbation ofABD. In addition, laser
may not be as effective as certain immunosuppressive agents
in treating neovascularization. For instance, Tugal-Tutkun’s
group found that optic disc neovascularization associated
with ABD was more successfully treated with IFN-α than
photocoagulation.133
Conclusion
ABD-associated ocular disease remains one of the most
difficult diseases an ophthalmologist will encounter in his or
her career. Its relentlessly explosive nature and progressive
course frequently cause blindness without much warning.
Therefore, it is imperative for a clinician to diagnose the
disease early and institute aggressive therapy if necessary.
While there are a number of treatment options available, none
is definitively effective or safe. Care and expertise are needed
in the selection and administration of immunomodulatory
regimens, and this will likely require a coordinated effort
between the ophthalmologist and a chemotherapist.When one
faces an especially difficult case, timely referral to a specialist
in ocular inflammatory disease and immunology is essential.
Disclosures
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
	 1.	 Hippocrates. In: Dilsen N, Kaktos, Editor.Third book on epidemiology.
Case 7. 1993; p. 209.
	 2.	 Adamantiades B. A case of recurrent hypopyon iritis. Medical Society
of Athens. 1930;586–593.
	 3.	 Behçet H. Uber rezidivierende aphthose, durch ein Virus verursachte
Geschwure am Mud, amAuge und an den Genitalien. DermWochenschr.
1937;36:1152–1157.
	 4.	 Ohno S. Behçet’s disease in the World. In: Lehner T, Barnes CG,
editors. Recent Advances in Behçet’s Disease. London: Royal Society
of Medicine Service; 1986.
	 5.	 ChajekT, Fainaru M. Behçet’s disease: Report of 41 cases and a review
of the literature. Medicine. 1975;54(3):179–196.
	 6.	 O’Duffy JD: Behçet’s disease. In: Kelly WN, Harris ED, Ruddy S,
Sledge CB, editors. Textbook of Rheumatology. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders; 1985;1174–1178.
	 7.	 Mamo JG, Baghdassarian A. Behçet’s disease: A report of 28 cases.
Arch Ophthalmol. 1964;71:4–14.
	 8.	 Shimizu T. Clinical and immunological studies on Behçet’s syndrome.
Folia Ophthalmol Jpn. 1971;22(10):801–810.
	 9.	 Mizuki N, Ohno S, Ando H, et al. A strong association between
HLA-B*5101 and Behçet’s disease in Greek patients. Tissue Antigen.
1997:50(1):57–60.
10.	 Ohno S, Ohguchi M, Hirose S, et al. Close association of HLA-Bw51
with Behçet’s disease. Arch Ophthalmol. 1982;100(9):1455–1458.
11.	 Mishima S, Masuda K, Izawa Y, et al. Behçet’s disease in Japan:
Ophthalmologic aspects. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1979;76:225–279.
12.	 Lehner T, Barnes CG. Criteria for diagnosis and classification of
Behçet’s syndrome. In: Lehner T, Barnes CG, editors. Behçet’s
Syndrome: Clinical and Immunological Features. Proceedings of a
Conference Sponsored by Royal Society of Medicine, February 1979.
London: Academic Press. 1979;1–9.
13.	 Numaga J, Matsuki M, Mochizuki M, et al.An HLA-D region restriction
fragment associated with refractory Behçet’s disease. Am J Ophthalmol.
1988;105(5):528–533.
14.	 Shikano S. Ocular pathology of Behçet’s syndrome. In: Monacelli M,
Nazzaro P, editors. International Symposium on Behçet’s Disease.
New York: Karger, Basel. 1966;111–136.
15.	 Lakhanpal SH, Tani K, Lie JT, et al. Pathologic features of Behçet’s
syndrome: A review of Japanese autopsy registry data. Hum Pathol.
1985;16(8):790–795.
16.	 Behçet’sDiseaseResearchCommitteeofJapan.Behçet’sdisease:Guideto
diagnosis of Behçet’s disease. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 1974;18:291–294.
17.	 International Study Group for Behçet’s Disease. Criteria for diagnosis
of Behçet’s disease. Lancet. 1990;335(8697):1078–1080.
18.	 Pande I, Uppal S, Kailash S, et al. Behçet’s disease in India: A clinical,
immunological, immunogenetic and outcome study. Br J Rheumatol.
1995;34(9):825–830.
19.	 Benamour S, Zeroual B, Bennis R, et al. Maladie de Behçet. 316 cas.
La Presse Med. 1990;19(32):1485–1489.
20.	 Dilsen N, Konice K, Aral O, et al. Risk factors for vital organ
involvement in Behçet’s disease. In: Godeau P, Wechsler B, editors.
Behçet’s Disease. New York: Elsevier Science. 1993;165–169.
21.	 Gharibdoost F, Davatchi F, Shahram F, et al. Clinical manifestations
of Behçet’s disease in Iran: Analysis of 2176 casese. In: Godeau P,
Wechsler B, editors. Behçet’s Disease. New York: Elsevier Science,
1993;153–158.
22.	 Imai Y. Studies on prognosis and symptoms of Behçet’s disease in
long-term observation. Jpn J Clin Ophthalmol. 1971;25:665–694.
23.	 Benezra D, Cohen E. Treatment and visual prognosis in Behçet’s
disease. Br J Opthalmol. 1986 Aug;70(8):589–592.
24.	 Kaklamai VG, Kaklamanis PG. Treatment of Behçet’s disease: an
update. Semi Arthritis Rheum. 2001;30:299–312.
25.	 Toker E, Kazokoglu H, Acar N. High dose intravenous steroid
therapy for severe posterior segment uveitis in Behçet’s disease. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2002 May;86(5):521–523.
26.	 Evereklioglu C. Managing the symptoms of Behçet’s disease. Expert
Opin Pharmacother. 2004;5(2):317–328.
27.	 Tugal-Tutkun I, Önal S, Altan Yaycioglu R, et al. Uveitis in
Behçet’s disease: an analysis of 880 patients. Am J Ophthalmol.
2004;138(3):373–380.
28.	 Standarization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group.
Standarization of uveitis nomenclature for reporting clinical data:
results of the First International Workshop. Am J Ophthalmol. 2005
Sep;140(3):509–516.
29.	 Yoshikawa K, Ichiishi A, Kotabe S, et al. Posterior sub-Tenon’s
space injection of repository corticosteroids in uveitis patients
with cystoid macular edema. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi.
1993;97(9):1070–1074.
30.	 RothovaA. Medical treatment of cystoid macular edema. Ocul Immunol
Inflamm. 2002;10(4):239–246.
31.	 Fine H, Baffi J, Reed GF, et al. Aqueous humor and plasma vascular
endothelial growth factor in uveitis associated cystoid macular edema.
Am J Ophthalmol. 2001;132(5):794–796.
32.	 Cordero-Coma M, Sobrin L, Onal S, et al. Intravitreal bevacizumab
for treatment of uveitic macular edema. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(8):
1574–1579.
33.	 Okada AA. Immunomodulatory therapy for ocular inflammatory
disease: a basic manual and review of the literature. Ocul Immunol
Inflamm. 2005;13(5):335–351.
34.	 Kötter I, Dürk H, Saal J, Fierlbeck G, Pleyer U, Ziehut M. Therapy of
Behçet’s disease. Ger J Ophthalmol. 1996;5(2):92–97.
35.	 Hamuryudan V, Ozyazgan Y, Hizli N, et al. Azathioprine in Behçet’s
syndrome: effects on long-term prognosis. Arthritis Rheum.
1997;40(4):769–774.
36.	 Greenwood AJ, Stanford MR, Graham EM. The role of azathioprine
in the management of retinal vasculitis. Eye. 1998;12(5):783–788.
37.	 SakaneT,Takeno M, Suzuki N, Inaba G, et al. Behçet’s disease. N Engl
J Med. 1999;341(17):1284–1291.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3 577
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
38.	 Foster CS, Baeyer JC, Raizman MB. Therapeutic response to systemic
immunosuppressive chemotherapy agents in patients with Behçet’s
syndrome affecting the eyes. In: O’Duffy KE, editor. Behçet’s
Disease: Basic and Clinical Aspects. New York: Marcel Dekker.
1991;581–588.
39.	 Jabs DA, Rosenbaum JT, Foster CS, et al. Guidelines for the use
of immunosuppressive drugs in patients with ocular inflammatory
disorders: recommendations of an expert panel. Am J Ophthalmol.
2000;130(4):492–513.
40.	 Davatchi F, Shahram F, Chams H, et al. High dose methotrexate for
ocular lesions of Behçet’s disease. Preliminary short-term results. Adv
Exp Med Biol. 2003;528:579–584.
41.	 Ghate JV, Jorizzo JL. Behçet’s disease and complex aphthosis. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 1999;40(1):1–18; quiz 19–20.
42.	 Hirohata S, Suda H, Hashimoto T. Low-dose weekly methotrexate
for progressive neuropsychiatric manifestations in Behçet’s disease.
J Neurol Sci. 1998;159(2):181–185.
43.	 Weinblatt ME. Toxicity of low dose methotrexate in rheumatoid
arthritis. J Rheumatol Suppl. 1985;12 Suppl 12:35–39.
44.	 Kremer JM, Alarcón GS, Lightfoot RW Jr, et al. Methotrexate for
rheumatoid arthritis. Suggested guidelines for monitoring liver toxicity.
American College of Rheumatology. Arthritis Rheum. 1994;37(3):
316–328.
45.	 Walker AM, Funch D, Dreyer NA, et al. Determinants of serious liver
disease among patients receiving low-dose methotrexate for rheumatoid
arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1993;36(3):329–335.
46.	 Kempen JH, Gangaputra S, Daniel E, et al. Long-term risk of
malignancy among patients treated with immunosuppressive agents
for ocular inflammation: a critical assessment of the evidence. Am J
Ophthalmol. 2008;146(6):802–812 e1.
47.	 Yu T, Yu TF. Milestones in the treatment of gout. Am J Med. 1974;
56(5):676–685.
48.	 Ehrenfeld M, Levy M, Bar Eli M, Gallily R, Eliakim M. Effect of
colchicine on polymorphonuclear leucocyte chemotaxis in human
volunteers. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1980;10(3):297–300.
49.	 Malawista SE.The action of colchicine in acute gouty arthritis. Arthritis
Rheum, 1975;18(6 Suppl):835–846.
50.	 Pesanti EL, SGAxline. Colchicine effects on lysosomal enzyme induc-
tion and intracellular degradation in the cultivated macrophage. J Exp
Med. 1975;141(5):1030–1046.
51.	 Frayha RA.Arthropathy of Behçet’s disease with marked synovial pleocy-
tosis responsive to colchicine. Arthritis Rheum. 1982;25(2):235–236.
52.	 Ando K, Fujino Y, Hijikata K, Izawa Y, Masuda K. Epidemiological
features and visual prognosis of Behçet’s disease. Jpn J Ophthalmol.
1999;43(4):312–317.
53.	 Matsumura N, Mizushima Y. Leucocyte movement and colchicine
treatment in Behçet’s disease. Lancet. 1975;2(7939):813.
54.	 Mizushima Y, Matsumura N, Mori M, et al. Colchicine in Behçet’s
disease. Lancet. 1977;2(8046):1037.
55.	 Raynor A, Askari AD. Behçet’s disease and treatment with colchicine.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 1980;2(5):396–400.
56.	 Fontes V, Machet L, Huttenberger B, Lorette G, Vaillant L. [Recurrent
aphthous stomatitis: treatment with colchicine. An open trial of
54 cases]. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2002;129(12):1365–1369.
57.	 Mizushima Y. Behçet’s disease. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 1991;
3(1):32–35.
58.	 Masuda K, Nakajima A, Urayama A, Nakae K, Kogure M, Inaba G.
Double-masked trial of cyclosporin versus colchicine and long-
term open study of cyclosporin in Behçet’s disease. Lancet. 1989;
1(8647):1093–1096.
59.	 Evereklioglu C. Current concepts in the etiology and treatment of
Behçet disease. Surv Ophthalmol. 2005;50(4):297–350.
60.	 Gilman AG GL, Rall TW, Murad F. The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 1985;709.
61.	 Newell DR, Calvert AH, Harrap KR, McElwain TJ. Studies on the
pharmacokinetics of chlorambucil and prednimustine in man. Br J Clin
Pharmacol. 1983;15(2):253–258.
62.	 Mamo JG,Azzam SA.Treatment of Behçet’s disease with chlorambucil.
Arch Ophthalmol. 1970;84(4):446–450.
63.	 Tessler HH, Jennings T. High-dose short-term chlorambucil for
intractable sympathetic ophthalmia and Behçet’s disease. Br J
Ophthalmol. 1990;74(6):353–357.
64.	 Mudun BA, ErgenA, Ipcioglu SU, Burumcek EY, DurluY,Arslan MO.
Short-term chlorambucil for refractory uveitis in Behçet’s disease.
Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2001;9(4):219–229.
65.	 Goldstein DA, Fontanilla FA, Kaul S, Sahin O, Tessler HH.
Long-term follow-up of patients treated with short-term high-dose
chlorambucil for sight-threatening ocular inflammation.Ophthalmology.
2002;109(2):370–377.
66.	 Miserocchi E, Baltatzis S, Ekong A, Roque M, Foster CS. Efficacy
and safety of chlorambucil in intractable noninfectious uveitis: the
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary experience. Ophthalmology.
2002;109(1):137–142.
67.	 Grupe WE. Chlorambucil in steroid-dependent nephrotic syndrome.
J Pediatr. 1973;82(4):598–606.
68.	 Guesry P, Lenoir G, Broyer M. Gonadal effects of chlorambucil given
to prepubertal and pubertal boys for nephrotic syndrome. J Pediatr.
1978;92(2):299–303.
69.	 Richter P, Calamera JC, Morgenfeld MC, KierszenbaumAL, Lavieri JC,
Mancini RE. Effect of chlorambucil on spermatogenesis in the human
with malignant lymphoma. Cancer. 1970;25(5):1026–1030.
70.	 Callis L, Nieto J, Vila A, Rende J. Chlorambucil treatment in minimal
lesion nephrotic syndrome: a reappraisal of its gonadal toxicity.
J Pediatr. 1980;97(4):653–656.
71.	 Moore MJ. Clinical pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 1991;20(3):194–208.
72.	 GrochowLB,ColvinM.Clinicalpharmacokineticsofcyclophosphamide.
Clin Pharmacokinet. 1979;4(5):380–394.
73.	 Shek LP, Lim DL. Thalidomide in Behçet’s disease. Biomed
Pharmacother. 2002;56(1):31–35.
74.	 Calabrese L, Fleischer AB. Thalidomide: current and potential clinical
applications. Am J Med. 2000;108(6):487–495.
75.	 Rabinowitz R, Katz G, Rosner M, Pri-Chen S, Spierer A. The effect
of thalidomide on neovascularization in a mouse model of retinopathy
of prematurity. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2008;246(6):
843–848.
76.	 Lambert K, Ward J. The use of thalidomide in the management of
bleeding from a gastric cancer. Palliat Med. 2009;23(5):473–475.
77.	 Alberto SF, Felix J, de Deus J. Thalidomide for the treatment of severe
intestinal bleeding. Endoscopy. 2008;40(9):788; author reply 789.
78.	 Bauditz J, Lochs H. Angiogenesis and vascular malformations:
antiangiogenic drugs for treatment of gastrointestinal bleeding. World
J Gastroenterol. 2007;13(45):5979–5984.
79.	 Dabak V, Kuriakose P, Kamboj G, Shurafa M. A pilot study of
thalidomide in recurrent GI bleeding due to angiodysplasias. Dig Dis
Sci. 2008;53(6):1632–1635.
80.	 Gardner-Medwin JM, Smith NJ, Powell RJ. Clinical experience with
thalidomide in the management of severe oral and genital ulceration in
conditions such as Behçet’s disease: use of neurophysiological studies to
detect thalidomide neuropathy. Ann Rheum Dis. 1994;53(12):828–832.
81.	 Eisenbud L, Horowitz I, Kay B. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis of the
Behçet’s type: successful treatment with thalidomide. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol. 1987;64(3):289–292.
82.	 Treves R,Arnaud M, Jacob P, et al. [Speculative ameloriation of arthritis
in Behçet disease with thalidomide. A case report]. Rev Rhum Mal
Osteoartic. 1984;51(10):585.
83.	 Hamza MH. Treatment of Behçet’s disease with thalidomide. Clin
Rheumatol. 1986;5(3):365–371.
84.	 Mellin GW, Katzenstein M. The saga of thalidomide. Neuropathy to
embryopathy, with case reports of congenital anomalies. N Engl J Med.
1962;267:1238–1244.
85.	 Ochonisky S, Verroust J, Bastuji-Garin S, Gherardi R, Revuz J.
Thalidomide neuropathy incidence and clinico-electrophysiologic
findings in 42 patients. Arch Dermatol. 1994;130(1):66–69.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3578
Zakka et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
	86.	 De Tran QH, Guay E, Chartier S, Tousignant J. Tacrolimus in
dermatology. J Cutan Med Surg. 2001;5(4):329–335.
	87.	 Dick AD. Experimental approaches to specific immunotherapies in
autoimmune disease: future treatment of endogenous posterior uveitis?
Br J Ophthalmol. 1995;79(1):81–88.
	88.	 Mochizuki M. Immunotherapy for Behçet’s disease. Int Rev Immunol.
1997;14(1):49–66.
	89.	 Figueroa MS, Ciancas E, Orte L. Long-term follow-up of tacro-
limus treatment in immune posterior uveitis. Eur J Ophthalmol.
2007;17(1):69–74.
	90.	 Sloper CM, Powell RJ, Dua HS. Tacrolimus (FK506) in the treat-
ment of posterior uveitis refractory to cyclosporine. Ophthalmology.
1999;106(4):723–728.
	91.	 Hogan AC, McAvoy CE, Dick AD, Lee RW. Long-term efficacy and
tolerance of tacrolimus for the treatment of uveitis. Ophthalmology.
2007;114(5):1000–1006.
	92.	 Belardelli F, Gresser I. The neglected role of type I interferon in the
T-cell response: implications for its clinical use. Immunol Today.
1996;17(8):369–372.
	93.	 Feron EJ, Rothova A, van Hagen PM, Baarsma GS, Suttorp-
Schulten MS. Interferon-alpha 2b for refractory ocular Behçet’s
disease. Lancet. 1994;343(8910):1428.
	94.	 Tugal-Tutkun I, Guney-Tefekli E, Urgancioglu M. Results of
interferon-alfa therapy in patients with Behçet uveitis. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2006;244(12):1692–1695.
	95.	 Gueudry J, Wechsler B, Terrada C, et al. Long-term efficacy and
safety of low-dose interferon alpha2a therapy in severe uveitis
associated with Behçet disease. Am J Ophthalmol. 2008;146(6):
837–844 e1.
	96.	 Freysdottir J, Lau S, Fortune F. GammadeltaT cells in Behçet’s disease
(BD) and recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS). Clin Exp Immunol.
1999;118(3):451–457.
	97.	 Turan B, Gallati H, Erdi H, GurlerA, Michel BA,Villiger PM. Systemic
levels of the T cell regulatory cytokines IL-10 and IL-12 in Bechcet’s
disease; soluble TNFR-75 as a biological marker of disease activity.
J Rheumatol. 1997;24(1):128–132.
	98.	 Haznedaroglu E, Karaaslan Y, Buyukasik Y, et al. Selectin adhesion
molecules in Behçet’s disease. Ann Rheum Dis. 2000;59(1):61–63.
	99.	 Sfikakis PP, Markomichelakis N, Alpsoy E, et al. Anti-TNF
therapy in the management of Behçet’s disease – review and
basis for recommendations. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007;46(5):
736–741.
100.	 Goossens PH, Verburg RJ, Breedveld FC. Remission of Behçet’s
syndrome with tumour necrosis factor alpha blocking therapy. Ann
Rheum Dis. 2001;60(6):637.
101.	 Sfikakis PP. Behçet’s disease: a new target for anti-tumour necrosis
factor treatment. Ann Rheum Dis. 2002;61 Suppl 2:ii51–ii53.
102.	 Sfikakis PP, Theodossiadis PG, Katsiari CG, Kaklamanis P,
Markomichelakis NN. Effect of infliximab on sight-threatening
panuveitis in Behçet’s disease. Lancet. 2001;358(9278):295–296.
103.	 Sfikakis PP, Kaklamanis PH, Elezoglou A, et al. Infliximab for
recurrent, sight-threatening ocular inflammation in Adamantiades-
Behçet disease. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(5):404–406.
104.	 Niccoli L, Nannini C, Benucci M, et al. Long-term efficacy of
infliximab in refractory posterior uveitis of Behçet’s disease:
a 24-month follow-up study. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007;46(7):
1161–1164.
105.	 Tognon S, Graziani G, Marcolongo R. Anti-TNF-alpha therapy in
seven patients with Behçet’s uveitis: advantages and controversial
aspects. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2007;1110:474–484.
106.	 Maini RN, Taylor PC. Anti-cytokine therapy for rheumatoid arthritis.
Ann Rev Med. 2000;51:207–229.
107.	 Thomas-Golbanov C, Sridharan S. Novel therapies in vasculitis.
Exp Opin Invest Drug. 2001;10:1279–1289.
108.	 Melikoglu M, Özyazgan Y, Fresko I, et al. The response of treatment
resistant uveitis in Behçet’s syndrome (BS) to a TNF-α blocker,
etanercept: an open study. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;46:181.
109.	 Evans CA, Jellis J, Hughes SP, et al. Tumor necrosis factor-α,
interleukin-6, and interleukin-8 secretion and the acute-phase
response in patients with bacterial and tuverculous osteomyelitis.
J Infect Dis. 1998;177:1582–1587.
110.	 Yücel AE, Kart-Köseoglu H, Akova YA, et al. Failure of infliximab
treatment and occurrence of erythema nodosum during therpy in two
patients with Behçet’s disease. Rheumatology. 2004;43:394–396.
111.	 Tognon S, Graziani G, Marcolongo R.Anti-TNF-alpha therapy in seven
patients with Behçet’s uveitis: advantages and controversial aspects.
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2007;1110:474–484.
112.	 Yasui K, Ohta K, Kobayashi M, Aizawa T, Komiyama A. Successful
treatment of Behçet disease with pentoxifylline. Ann Intern Med.
1996;124(10):891–893.
113.	 Accardo-Palumbo A, Ferrante A, Ciccia F, et al. Pentoxifylline
inhibits Vgamma9/Vdelta2 T lymphocyte activation of patients with
active Behçets disease in vitro. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol.
2007;20(3):601–606.
114.	 Namba K, Sonoda KH, Kitamei H, et al. Granulocytapheresis in
patients with refractory ocular Behçet’s disease. J Clin Apher.
2006;21(2):121–128.
115.	 Rojas B, Zafirakis P, Foster CS. Cataract surgery in patients with
uveitis. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 1997;8:6–12.
116.	 Sullu Y, Oge I, Erkan D. The results of cataract extraction and
intraocular lens implantation in patients with Behçet’s disease. Acta
Ophthalmol Scand. 2000;78(6):680–683.
117.	 Berker N, Soykan E, Elgin U, Ozkan SS. Phacoemulsification cataract
extraction and intraocular lens implantation in patients with Behçet’s
disease. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging. 2004;35(3):215–218.
118.	 Kadayifcilar S, Gedik S, Eldem B, Irkec M. Cataract surgery in patients
with Behçet’s disease. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2002;28(2):316–320.
119.	 Da Mata A, Burk SE, Netland PA, Baltatzis S, Christen W, Foster CS.
Management of uveitic glaucoma with Ahmed glaucoma valve
implantation. Ophthalmology. 1999;106(11):2168–2172.
120.	 Hill RA, Nguyen QH, Baerveldt G, et al.Trabeculectomy and Molteno
implantation for glaucomas associated with uveitis. Ophthalmology.
1993;100(6):903–908.
121.	 Jampel HD, Jabs DA, Quigley HA.Trabeculectomy with 5- fluorouracil
for adult inflammatory glaucoma. Am J Ophthalmol. 1990;109(2):
168–173.
122.	 Patitsas CJ, Rockwood EJ, Meisler DM, Lowder CY. Glaucoma filter-
ing surgery with postoperative 5-fluorouracil in patients with intra-
ocular inflammatory disease. Ophthalmology. 1992;99(4):594–599.
123.	 Prata JA Jr, Neves RA, Minckler DS, Mermoud A, Heuer DK. Trab-
eculectomy with mitomycin C in glaucoma associated with uveitis.
Ophthalmic Surg. 1994;25(9):616–660.
124.	 Towler HM, McCluskey P, Shaer P, Lightman S. Long-term follow-up
of trabeculectomy with intraoperative 5-fluorouracil for uveitis-related
glaucoma. Ophthalmology. 2000;107(10):1822–1828.
125.	 Ceballos EM, BeckAD, Lynn MJ.Trabeculectomy with antiprolifera-
tive agents in uveitic glaucoma. J Glaucoma. 2002;11(3):189–196.
126.	 Yalvac IS, Sungur G, Turhan E, Eksioglu U, Duman S. Trabeculec-
tomy with mitomycin-C in uveitic glaucoma associated with Behçet’s
disease. J Glaucoma. 2004;13(6):450–453.
127.	 Ozdemir O, Erkam N, BakkalogluA. Results of pars plana vitrectomy
in Behçet’s disease. Ann Ophthalmol. 1988;20(1):35–38.
128.	 Soylu M, Demircan N, PelitA. Pars plana vitrectomy in ocular Behçet’s
disease. Int Ophthalmol. 2001;24(4):219–223.
129.	 Ozerturk Y, Bardak Y, Durmus M. Vitreoretinal surgery in Behçet’s
disease with severe ocular complications. Acta Ophthalmol Scand.
2001;79(2):192–196.
130.	 Sullu Y, Alotaiby H, Beden U, Erkan D. Pars plana vitrectomy for
ocular complications of Behçet’s disease. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers
Imaging. 2005;36(4):292–297.
131.	 Krause L, Altenburg A, Bechrakis NE, Willerding G, Zouboulis CC,
Foerster MH. Intraocular surgery under systemic interferon-alpha
therapy in ocular Adamantiades-Behçet‘s disease. Graefes Arch Clin
Exp Ophthalmol. 2007;245(11):1617–1621.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2009:3
Clinical Ophthalmology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-ophthalmology-journal
Clinical Ophthalmology is an international, peer-reviewed journal
covering all subspecialties within ophthalmology. Key topics include:
Optometry; Visual science; Pharmacology and drug therapy in eye
diseases; Basic Sciences; Primary and Secondary eye care; Patient
Safety and Quality of Care Improvements. This journal is indexed on
PubMed Central and CAS, and is the official journal of The Society of
Clinical Ophthalmology (SCO). The manuscript management system
is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review
system, which is all easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
579
Ocular symptoms in Adamantiades-Behçet’s diseaseDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
132.	 Atmaca LS. Experience with photocoagulation in Behçet’s disease.
Ophthalmic Surg. 1990;21:571–576.
133.	 Tugal-Tutkun I, Onal S, Altan-Yaycioglu R, Kir N, Urgancioglu M.
Neovascularization of the optic disc in Behçet’s disease. Jpn J
Ophthalmol. 2006;50(3):256–265.
134.	 Newman NM, Hoyt WF, Spencer WH. Macula-sparing monocular
blackouts: Clinical and pathologic investigation of intermittent cho-
roidal vascular insufficiency in a case of periarteritis nodosa. Arch
Ophthalmol. 1974;91(5):367–370.
135.	 Gold DH. Ocular manifestations of connective tissue (collagen)
diseases. In: Tasman W, Jaeger AE, editors. Duane’s Clinical
Ophthalmology. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1989; 5:17–19.
