© 2010 Patil et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4 111–119
Clinical Ophthalmology
111
r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Valganciclovir in the treatment of cytomegalovirus
retinitis in HIV-infected patients
A Jayaprakash Patil1,2,3
Ashish Sharma1,4
M Cristina Kenney1
Baruch D Kuppermann1
1
Department of Ophthalmology,
Gavin S Herbert Eye Institute,
University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA, USA; 2
Department
of Ophthalmology, Summa
Health System,  Akron, OH, USA;
3
Northeastern Ohio Universities
Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Rootstown, OH, USA; 4
Department
of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer
Eye Institute, Miami, FL, USA
Correspondence: Baruch D Kuppermann
Department of Ophthalmology,
Gavin S Herbert Eye Institute,
University of California Irvine,
118 Med Surge I, Irvine,
CA 92697, USA
Tel +1 949 824 6256
Fax +1 949 824 4015
Email bdkupper@uci.edu
Abstract: Oral valganciclovir is a new and highly efficacious alternative to the chronic
administration of ganciclovir in the treatment of cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis in HIV-infected
patients. In addition to its excellent bioavailability and favorable pharmacokinetic profile, valgan-
ciclovir has also proved cost effective and is the most widely used drug in the armamentarium for
the treatment of CMV retinitis.Valganciclovir is a prodrug of ganciclovir, the erstwhile commonly
used therapy. In March 2001, the US Food and DrugAdministration approved valganciclovir for
the induction and maintenance treatment of CMV disease, including CMV retinitis.Valganciclvoir
has compared favorably with both oral and intravenous treatments for induction and maintenance
therapy with ganciclovir. The reduced pill burden and the ease of oral administration has helped
avoid the risks associated with intravenous therapy.The most serious adverse event is neutropenia,
which makes the patient susceptible to infections. In the current review, we have compiled all the
available evidence-based information on valganciclovir.
Keywords: CMV retinitis, ganciclovir, valganciclovir
Introduction
Cytomegalovirus(CMV)retinitisistheleadingcauseofvisualimpairmentinpatientswith
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and typically occurs in HIV-positive individuals
with CD4 count below 50 cells/mm3
.1–3
Historically, the most utilized antiviral agent has
been ganciclovir, which was initially licensed as an intravenous agent. In an attempt to
make an oral preparation with convenient dosing that has the safety profile, efficacy and
bioavailability comparable to ganciclovir, the prodrug was developed.4,5
Valganciclovir,
the valine ester of ganciclovir, was the first systemic agent found to be as effective as
intravenous ganciclovir, and is the oral prodrug of the popular anti-CMV drug ganciclovir.
Valganciclovir has answered the great need of patients with CMV retinitis for an injection
free medication in the induction and maintenance phases of therapy.5,6
In this review we
highlight the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of valganciclovir and address the
issues of clinical trials and related studies. We also discuss valganciclovir drug interac-
tions, drug economics and efficacy as a substitute to intravenous ganciclovir.
With the advent of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), the prevalence
of CMV retinitis has drastically decreased by 75%–90% from a pre-HAART era
prevalence of 30% or more in people with advanced AIDS.7
Of the patients having
access to HAART, the prevalence is now less than 5%.8
Nevertheless, CMV retinitis
still remains the chief vision threatening infection in HIV infected patients.9
Untreated
retinitis typically progresses and can lead to the development of atrophic retinal holes
and subsequent retinal detachment. Approximately 15% of patients develop retinal
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Ophthalmology
27 February 2010
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4112
Patil et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
detachment even before the treatment is initiated.10,11
Thus
CMV retinitis is thought to profoundly affect ocular morbid-
ity, and quality of life, unless timely treatment is instituted.
Valganciclovir hydrochloride (Valcyte®
; Hoffmann-La Roche
Inc., Nutley, NJ, USA) is an US Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA)-approved antiviral medication for the treatment of
CMV disease that has revolutionized the treatment of CMV
retinitis. Studies WV 15376 and WV 15705 were the two
pivotal studies that established the bioequivalence, efficacy,
and safety of oral valganciclovir in comparison with oral and
intravenous ganciclovir. These studies formed the basis for
clinical use of oral valganciclovir and have played an impor-
tant role in the drug development. In this review we have
compiled all the information on valganciclovir available from
PubMed and results from a Google search from December
1996 to June 2009. The information was also derived from
clinical trials, case reports, abstracts and previous reviews.
Additional references were obtained from the bibliographic
data of published review articles. The valganciclovir pack-
age insert also provided useful information. The two pivotal
studies are described in detail below.
Pharmacokinetics
Valganciclovir hydrochloride is a hydrochloride salt of the
L-valyl ester of ganciclovir. It is a prodrug of ganciclovir.
Upon absorption, it is extensively and rapidly hydrolyzed
into the active forms of ganciclovir, which is a mixture of two
diastereomers,byhepaticandgutesterases.Hencethepharma-
cokinetics of oral valganciclovir is essentially the same as that
of intravenous ganciclovir.12
Treatment with valganciclovir/
ganciclovir typically stabilizes retinal lesions in two to four
weeks, and frequently there is a complete response in one
month. Ganciclovir (intravenous) treatment of CMV retinitis
is associated with clearing of CMV viremia and CMV DNA
from the buffy coat of the infected blood in 7–8 days.13
Protein binding of valganciclovir has not been established
due to rapid and extensive conversion of oral valganciclovir
to ganciclovir. Kidneys excrete valganciclovir as ganciclovir,
both by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion.
Hence the plasma level of ganciclovir and thus terminal
half-life is increased in patients with renal impairment.14
Pharmacokinetic parameters are described in Table 1.
Bioavailability
Oral valganciclovir at the standard dose of 900 mg once a day
produces a daily systemic exposure which is 1.7-fold greater
than that attained with oral ganciclovir at the standard dose
of 1000 mg three times daily. In addition, the area under
curve at 24 hours/drug exposure (AUC24) of valganciclovir
increased from 24% to 56% when compared from fed state
to the fasting state.6
As a result, valganciclovir has greater
CMV-suppressing ability than ganciclovir.15
The absolute bioavailability of oral valganciclovir
is approximately 60%,16
which is 10 times higher than
ganciclovir bioavailability after oral administration.17
The
peptide-mediated active transport of valganciclovir due to
the presence of valine moiety explains its increased bioavail-
ability.17–19
A dose of 900 mg/day of valganciclovir produces
a daily exposure equivalent to the 5 mg/day daily intravenous
dose of ganciclovir.6,17
Oral ganciclovir was developed as an
initial attempt to provide a more convenient therapeutic regi-
men for ganciclovir (Cytovene®
; Roche Laboratories), but
was found to have low and variable bioavailability (6%–9%)
compared to oral valganciclovir (60%). In clinical trials oral
ganciclovir was found to be inferior to intravenous ganci-
clovir for the induction phase, as it reached a subtherapeutic
serum level.20,21
It was however approved by the FDA for
maintenance phase therapy of CMV retinitis.
Mechanism of action
Ganciclovir is the only metabolite of valganciclovir and it
undergoes no further metabolism. Intracellular phosphoryla-
tion of ganciclovir forms ganciclovir triphosphate, which is the
most active form. Ganciclovir triphosphate inhibits viral DNA
synthesis by competing with deoxyguanosine. This prevents
the incorporation of deoxyguanosine into elongating viral
DNA, thus terminating DNA synthesis, chiefly of the group of
herpes viruses. Ganciclovir monophosphate formed after the
release of pyrophosphate is also incorporated into the growing
viral DNA chain further slowing the process of replication.22
Clinical trials
Based on the equivalent pharmacokinetic profile andAUC24
of oral valganciclovir compared to the conventional intra-
venous ganciclovir, Hoffmann-La Roche applied for FDA
Table 1 Pharmacokinetics of valganciclovir22
Feature Valganciclovir Intravenous
ganciclovir
Ganciclovir
capsules
Dosage 900 mg qd
with food
5 mg/kg
once daily
1000 mg tid
with food
Plasma half-life
(hours)
4.08 2.9 4.420
AUC24
µg.h/mL 29.1 ± 9.7 26.5 ± 5.9 12–19.2
Oral
Bioavailability (%)
604
Not applicable 624
Abbreviations: qd, once a day; tid, three times daily;  AUC, area under curve.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4 113
Valganciclovir for CMV retinitisDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
approval in 1997.12
The initial FDA application was not
approved based on the pharmacokinetics alone. Roche was
asked to complete another randomized controlled trial dem-
onstrating the equivalence between the two drugs for the
induction therapy of CMV retinitis.5
Study WV 15376
Unlike a traditional head-to-head study, this pivotal trial,
Study WV 15376,5,22
was a noninferiority study designed
to prove that oral valganciclovir was not 10% worse than
intravenous ganciclovir. The study enrolled 160 patients
with newly diagnosed CMV retinitis; 80 of them received
induction therapy with intravenous ganciclovir 5 mg/kg
for three weeks and the remaining 80 received induction
therapy with oral valganciclovir 900 mg twice daily for three
weeks. The patients were followed with the same therapy
once daily for one week. All patients were then placed on
maintenance treatment with oral valganciclovir 900 mg once
daily. Retinal photographs were obtained at baseline visit
and then week two and week four and evaluated by masked
reviewers. Although most patients had zone-3 retinitis, 24%
in each arm had zone-1 retinitis. The mean CD4 cell count
at baseline was 54 cells/mm3
in the intravenous ganciclovir
arm, and 58 cells/mm3
in the oral valganciclovir arm. The
median HIV RNA at baseline was 4.9 log10 copies/mL in
the intravenous ganciclovir arm, and 4.8 log10 copies/mL
in the oral valganciclovir arm. This registrational study is
summarized in Table 2.
The primary efficacy end point of the study was the pro-
gression of retinitis during the first four weeks of the therapy.
Analysis of the primary endpoint revealed that seven patients
(10%) in each treatment arm had progression of retinitis
after four weeks as determined by the masked reviewer. The
secondary efficacy end point was the time to CMV retinitis
progression.This was not significantly different between the
two groups (219 days in the ganciclovir arm and 226 days
in the valganciclovir arm). Of importance, the mean time to
progression of CMV retinitis in this trial conducted during the
HAART era was substantially longer than the times observed
in studies before the introduction of HAART (approximately
70 days). No significant difference in serious adverse events
between the two drugs was noted in the study except for the
increased catheter related infectious complications in intra-
venous ganciclovir group.23
Study WV 15705
Study WV 1570524
enrolled 212 patients who received
maintenance treatment with oral valganciclovir for CMV
retinitis. Patients who were receiving intravenous ganciclovir
for maintenance treatment of CMV retinitis were eligible
for enrollment. The results of the study established the
safety profile of oral valganciclovir in AIDS patients with
Table 2 Summary of the valganciclovir registrational study WV 1537622
Total number of patients enrolled
and randomized to either arms
160
Number of patients
completing the study
146
Induction therapy Oral valganciclovir arm: 900 mg bid for three weeks followed by 900 mg once daily for one week.
Intravenous ganciclovir arm: 5 mg/kg bid for three weeks followed by 5 mg/kg once daily for one week.
Maintenance therapy All patients were given the maintenance therapy of valganciclovir of 900 mg once daily.
Primary endpoint of the study Progression of CMV retinitis within four weeks of initiation of treatment determined as growth of lesion 750
µm or a new retinitis lesion measuring 750 µm in diameter.
Secondary endpoint
of the study
Secondary outcome measures included the achievement of a satisfactory response to induction treatment during
the first four weeks, as determined by analysis of retinal photographs.   A satisfactory response was achieved when
all of the following criteria were met: no movement of a lesion border by 1500 µm or more and no development
of a new lesion 1500 µm or more in diameter between base line and week 4, no movement of a lesion border by
750 µm or more and no development of a new lesion 750 µm or more in diameter between week 2 and week 4,
no increase in retinitis activity between week 2 and week 4, and a decrease in retinitis activity between base line
and week 4 by at least two steps on the six-step activity scale.
Bioavailability of valganciclovir 60%, about 10-fold higher than the oral ganciclovir.
Outcomes of the study 10% of patients in each arm showed progression of retinitis after four weeks. 77% of patients in the intravenous
ganciclovir arm and 72% of patients in the oral valganciclovir showed no progression.
Adverse events Seven patients suffered retinal detachment during the first four weeks of the study.5
Twenty percent of participants
experienced grade 3–4 adverse events by week 4.
Abbreviation: bid, twice a day.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4114
Patil et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
CMV retinitis. Due to the low number of clinical events it
was not possible to calculate the mean time to CMV retinitis
progression. The mean treatment duration was 779 days.
No significant difference in adverse reactions particularly
hematological abnormalities were noted between the two
treatment arms as seen in Table 3.24
More than 30% of patients had diarrhea, nausea, and
fever.4–6
More than 20% of patients experienced candidia-
sis, headache, dermatitis, neutropenia, anemia, insomnia,
cough, vomiting and fatigue. 19% experienced progres-
sion of CMV retinitis during the study. Patients with CMV
retinitis progression needed multiple cycles of induction and
maintenance therapy. Of the 113 patients who entered the
study with unilateral retinitis, 10 (8.8%) developed CMV
retinitis in the previously unaffected eye. Adverse reactions
are summarized in Table 3.
Administration and dosage
Valganciclovir is available as 496.3 mg film-coated tablets
of valganciclovir hydrochloride corresponding to 450 mg of
valganciclovir. It is stored between 15–30 °C.Valganciclovir
administration with food maximizes its bioavailability. Fatty
foods significantly increase the bioavailability. The tablets
are not to be broken or crushed because of its potential tera-
togenic and carcinogenic property in humans.Valganciclovir
tablet is not a one-to-one substitute for ganciclovir capsules.
As the bioavailability of oral valganciclovir is significantly
higher than the ganciclovir capsules, patients turning from
ganciclovir capsules to oral valganciclovir should be warned
of possible over dosage if they take more than the prescribed
valganciclovir.22
The treatment regimen is summarized in
Table 4.
Patients on oral valganciclovir therapy must undergo com-
plete ophthalmic evaluations periodically. This serves as the
basis to judge the recovery of retinitis with treatment. Com-
plete blood count with total and differential counts, serum
creatinine levels 2–3 times a week during the induction phase,
and once a week during maintenance therapy is recommended
to identify any hematological adverse events.22
Treatment of CMV retinitis with oral valganciclovir is
suppressive but not curative.8
Valganciclovir profoundly
suppresses viral replication, but does not eradicate the virus
itself. Cessation of oral Valganciclovir therapy in a pro-
foundly immunosuppressed person results in reactivation
of CMV viral replication. Therefore maintenance therapy is
essential in the successful management of CMV retinitis if
the patient’s immune function remains poor. Recent reports
from the US Public Health Service (USPHS) advises discon-
tinuation of maintenance oral valganciclovir in a patient on
HAART therapy with quiescent CMV retinitis having CD4
count persistently greater than 100–150 cells/mm3
for at least
six months, backed by cautious clinical, immunological and
ophthalmological monitoring.25,26
Maintenance therapy is
reconsidered if the CD4 count falls below 100–150 cells/mm3
or the patient develops other signs of HIV progression.27
On September 12, 2003, valganciclovir was also approved
for the prevention of CMV disease in kidney,28
heart, lung,29
liver,17
and pancreas transplant recipients.16
This was based
on the results of the clinical trial, PV 16000, in which oral
valganciclovir decreased the incidence of CMV disease,
including CMV syndrome and tissue-invasive disease in
the first six months after transplantation.22
Valganciclovir
is currently being investigated for its efficacy in prevention
and treatment of CMV end-organ disease in HIV infected
patients, congenital and neonatal CMV disease and in pre-
venting CMV disease in stem cell transplant recipients.
Alternative therapies
Approved alternative therapies for the treatment of CMV reti-
nitis in addition to intravenous ganciclovir and oral ganciclo-
vir include the ganciclovir intravitreal implant, intravenous
foscarnet (Foscavir®
; AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA)
and intravenous cidofovir (Vistide®
; Gilead, Foster City,
CA, USA).22
For CMV retinitis, resistant to ganciclovir, the
commonly used alternative drugs are foscarnet and cidofovir.
With the exception of the study comparing oral valganciclovir
to intravenous ganciclovir, there exists no head-to-head study
between valganciclovir and any other drugs used in patients
with CMV. Foscarnet and cidofovir act by directly inhibiting
CMV DNA polymerases. They are considered second-line
Table 3 Adverse reactions (%) noted in study WV 1570522
Adverse reaction Valganciclovir Intravenous
ganciclovir
Diarrhea 16 10
Nausea 8 14
Anemia 8 8
Neutropenia (Neutrophil
count 1000/mm3
)
11 13
Headache 9 5
Cathether-related
infections
3 11
Table 4 Treatment regimen
Induction therapy 900 mg (two 450 mg tablets) bid with food for 21 days.
Maintenance therapy 900 mg (two 450 mg tablets) qd with food.
Abbreviations: qd, once a day; bid, twice a day.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4 115
Valganciclovir for CMV retinitisDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
drugs in the management of CMV retinitis because of their
associated adverse effects discussed in Table 5.
Gancicloivir implant
Intraocular sustained-release ganciclovir implants (Vitrasert®
;
Chiron Vision, Irvine, CA, USA) with a release rate of
1 µg/hour of ganciclovir and intravitreal injections of ganci-
clovir have been very effective in treating CMV retinitis.5,30,31
In the pivotal trial, patients treated with the ganciclovir
implant had a mean time to CMV retinitis reactivation of
220 days compared to 70 days for patients treated with intra-
venous gancicloivir.30
The risk of CMV retinitis becoming
bilateral was 50% at six months with the sustained-release
implant alone. However biopsy confirmed the development
of visceral CMV disease in 31% of patients indicating lack of
protection from systemic CMV disease with the intraocular
implant alone. Given that CMV retinitis is the ocular manifes-
tation of a systemic infection, local therapy by itself must be
given with awareness of systemic risks. In general, when local
intraocular therapy is administered, it is done so in combina-
tion with systemic therapy typically oral valganciclovir.
Intravenous foscarnet
A direct comparison of ganciclovir and foscarnet was con-
ducted in an open-label, randomized, multicenter clinical
trial sponsored by Studies of Ocular Complications ofAIDS
Research Group (SOCA) in patients with AIDS and CMV.
In the ganciclovir group, induction therapy with intravenous
ganciclovir sodium at 5 mg/kg twice a day for two weeks
was followed by maintenance therapy of 5 mg/kg per day.
In the foscarnet group, induction therapy with intravenous
foscarnet sodium at 90 mg/kg twice a day for two weeks
was followed by maintenance therapy of 120 mg/kg per day.
Retinitis progression, visual acuity, visual fields, mortality
and morbidity were the outcome parameters. The mortality
rate was significantly different between the two groups.
Median survival times were 8.5 months for the ganciclovir
group and 12.6 months for the foscarnet group. The median
times to retinitis progression were similar between groups
(53 days for foscarnet and 47 days for ganciclovir), and no
significant difference was detected in visual acuity outcomes
and visual field loss (29° per month for foscarnet and 31°
per month for ganciclovir), and retinal area involvement on
fundus photographs.32
Intravenous cidofovir
The SOCA sponsored HPMPC (cidofovir) Peripheral
Cytomegalovirus Retinitis Trial suggested the effectiveness
of both high-dose and low-dose cidofovir in controlling CMV
retinitis when given as intravenous infusions intermittently.
This was a multicenter, randomized, and controlled trial
evaluating the role of intravenous cidofovir as a treatment
for CMV retinitis. Sixty-four AIDS patients with small,
peripheral, untreated CMV retinitis were enrolled for the
study.These patients were assigned to one of three groups as
described here: the deferral group, in which cidofovir treat-
ment was withheld until CMV retinitis was found progressive;
the low-dose cidofovir group received cidofovir, 5 mg/kg of
body weight once a week for two weeks, then maintenance
therapy with cidofovir, 3 mg/kg of body weight once every
two weeks; or the third treatment group of high-dose cidofo-
vir receiving 5 mg/kg of cidofovir once a week for two weeks
followed by maintenance therapy of cidofovir, 5 mg/kg once
every two weeks. Concomitant administration of cidofovir
with probenecid, adequate hydration, intermittent dosing and
monitoring for proteinuria was found to minimize associated
nephrotoxicity of cidofovir. In the low-dose cidofovir group,
the median time to retinitis progression was 64 days and it
Table 5 Alternative therapies for CMV disease15
Parameter Ganciclovir9
Valganciclovir22
Cidofovir Foscarnet44
Induction therapy IV 5 mg/kg for two weeks 900 mg bid
for three weeks
5 mg/kg weekly
for two weeks
IV 60 mg/kg tid
for two weeks
Maintenance therapy IV 5 mg/kg qd 900 mg qd IV 5 mg/kg every
two weeks
IV 30 mg/kg tid
Advantages Systemic therapy, oral
therapy, long acting
implants available
Systemic therapy,
oral therapy,
low pill burden,
convenient dosing
Systemic therapy,
least expensive,
suppresses
exacerbations
Systemic therapy
Adverse effects Myelosuppressant, large pill burden,
Intravenous regimen and infusion
related problems, if orally- poor
bioavailability
Myelosuppressant Nephrotoxic,
Co-administration
with probenicid
Nephrotoxic, electrolyte
imbalance, intravenous
regimen and infusion-
related problems
Abbreviations: IV, intravenous; qd, once a day; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4116
Patil et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
was 21 days in the deferral group. In the high-dose group,
the median time to progression was not reached at all. In
conclusion, both high- and low-dose intravenous cidofovir
delayed the progression of CMV retinitis effectively.33
Combination therapy of intravenous
ganciclovir and foscarnet
In the SOCA-CMV Retinitis Retreatment Trial, for the
relapsed retinitis, the combination of intravenous ganciclovir
and foscarnet was found to be more effective than either
drug alone. Combination of ganciclovir sodium at 5 mg/kg
per day and foscarnet sodium at 90 mg/kg per day was
the treatment regimen in the study. Combination therapy
was found to be the most effective regimen in controlling
retinitis progression, as evaluated by the centralized Fundus
Photograph Reading Center in a masked fashion.The median
times to retinitis progression were 1.3 months, 2.0 months,
and 4.3 months in the foscarnet group, ganciclovir group,
and combination therapy group, respectively. Quality-of-life
parameters were found to be best with the combination
therapy compared to the monotherapy groups of ganciclovir
and foscarnet.33
However, infusion times and systemic side
effects are significant, and in the HAART era, this treatment
approach is rarely utilized.
Combination of ganciclovir implant
and oral ganciclovir with intravenous
cidofovir
In vitro data suggest that combination therapies are syner-
gistic in inhibiting viral replication.Therefore, the combina-
tion of daily oral ganciclovir and intermittent intravenous
cidofovir was thought to be an attractive therapy for relapsed
disease as both these act in synergy to control the systemic
and ocular CMV disease.
The Ganciclovir-Cidofovir CMV Retinitis Trial
(GCCRT) was a randomized, multicenter clinical trial aimed
at comparing the regimen of the ganciclovir implant plus
oral ganciclovir to one of intravenous cidofovir for the treat-
ment of CMV retinitis. Sixty-one patients with AIDS and
CMV retinitis were randomized either to the regimen of the
ganciclovir implant plus oral ganciclovir, 1 gm three times
daily, or intravenous cidofovir, 5 mg/kg once a week for two
weeks, followed by 5 mg/kg every other week. The results
were as follows: Ocular outcomes were similar between
the two groups, with retinitis progression occurring at a
rate of 0.67 per person-year in the ganciclovir group, 0.71
per person-year in the cidofovir group, and a 15-letter loss
of visual acuity occurring at a rate of 0.78 per person-year
in the ganciclovir group and 0.47 per person-year in the
cidofovir group. Vitreous hemorrhage associated with the
surgical procedure of placing the implant was noted in
the ganciclovir implant group (0.13 per person-year) with
no cases in the cidofovir group. Conversely, uveitis occurred
more frequently in the cidofovir group (0.35 per person-
year) than in the ganciclovir group (0.09 per person-year).
Mortality rates were not different between groups (0.41 per
person-year for ganciclovir and 0.49 per person-year for
cidofovir). Nephrotoxicity, the main systemic side effect of
cidofovir was significantly more common in the cidofovir
group (0.48 per person-year) compared to the ganciclovir
group (0.18 per person-year).34
Advantages of systemic therapy
with valganciclovir
1.	 Systemic treatment with oral ganciclovir reduced the
incidence of systemic CMV disease.35
The effectiveness
of systemic ganciclovir is emphasized by the fact that
there is an increase of 22%–35% in the incidence of new
CMV retinitis in the untreated contralateral eye with
intraocular treatment alone.36
2.	 The convenient administration of valganciclovir has
resulted in better patient compliance as suggested in a
study by Claxton.37
3.	 In a study with oral ganciclovir, it has been found to
prevent CMV disease in patients with HIV infection
and CD4 count of lesser than 100 cells/mm3
. Hence, oral
valganciclovir/ganciclovir holds promise in preventing
CMV disease in patients with HIV infection.38
4.	 Systemic treatment reduces mortality.13
Resistance to valganciclovir
Viral resistance to ganciclovir has been noted with prolonged
treatment in patients with CMV retinitis and was first reported
in 1989. Ganciclovir resistance has been attributed to the
mutations in protein kinase gene UL97 and polymerase gene
UL54.22
The incidence of ganciclovir resistance in valgan-
ciclovir therapy is similar to that in intravenous ganciclovir
therapy. Patients showing poor clinical response but with
persistent viral excretion are considered to have developed
resistance to ganciclovir. In a study involving 72 immuno-
compromised patients with HIV and CMV retinitis, 20% of
patients who failed to respond to valganciclovir were found
to have nine different resistant strains of CMV.39
All these
patients failed to phosphorylate ganciclovir. Surprisingly in
some patients, valganciclovir resistance was noticed without
any prior exposure to ganciclovir. In another study, genotypic
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4 117
Valganciclovir for CMV retinitisDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
resistance to ganciclovir was found in 9.4% of patients after
182 days of therapy.40
Mutation in viral protein
kinase gene UL97
Deletion of four amino acids in a highly conserved region
of viral protein kinase results in a mutation of UL97, viral
protein kinase gene.These viral mutants fail to phosphorylate
ganciclovir efficiently and this is the main cause for CMV
resistance to ganciclovir.22
Mutation in viral polymerase gene UL54
Mutation in viral polymerase gene UL54 has resulted in
cross-resistance with other antiviral drugs acting on viral
DNA polymerase such as cidofovir and foscarnet.22
This
leads to reduced incorporation of the drug into the CMV
DNA strand.
Drug interactions
No drug–drug in vivo interaction has been studied with
valganciclovir. Valganciclovir is rapidly and extensively
converted to ganciclovir and hence the same drug interactions
with ganciclovir are seen with valganciclovir.22
The important
drug interactions are discussed in Table 6.
Adverse effects
General
The common adverse events reported during maintenance
therapy are diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain,
fever, headache, insomnia, tremors, peripheral neuropathy,
seizures, confusion, paresthesia, hallucinations, graft rejec-
tion, constipation, back pain, high blood pressure and retinal
detachment.22,23
Myelosuppressant
Less than 5% patients had serious adverse reactions such as
pancytopenia and aplastic anemia.22,41
Teratogenic
Valganciclovir is a FDA pregnancy category-C drug with
reproductive toxicity similar to ganciclovir. Common terato-
genic abnormalities reported in animal models include cleft
palate, hydrocephaly, microphthalmos and brachygnathia.
Adequate contraception is advised to women of reproductive
potential on valganciclovir.22
Carcinogenic
Although there is no human study to prove the carcinogenesis
of valganciclovir, patients are warned to consider it a poten-
tial carcinogenic.
Anti-fertility
It causes azoospermia in animals due to direct cessation
of spermatogenesis, without affecting testicular endocrine
functioning. Suppressed fertility is reported in females in a
different animal study.22
Special precautions
Pediatric and geriatric population
The effects of valganciclovir on pediatric and geriatric
population have not been studied. Caution is to be exercised
while using valganciclovir in the elderly keeping in mind the
increased frequency of impaired renal, hepatic and cardiac
function in them.
Nursing mothers
It is not known whether ganciclovir is secreted in human
milk. Nursing mothers are instructed not to breast-feed if
Table 6 Valganciclovir drug interactions22
Valganciclovir interactions with Drug interactions Comments
Zidovudine Myelosuppression This calls for reduction in valganciclovir dosage
or substitution with a different antiretroviral drug.
Didanosine Paradoxical decline in the CD4
cell counts, despite persistent
suppression of viral load
The probable explanation is the inhibition of
purine nucleoside phosphorylase by ganciclovir
and its prodrug valganciclovir.
Mycophenolate mofetil22
Myelosuppression Granulocytopenia reversed with
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
Probenecid22
Reduces renal clearance and
increases plasma concentration
Close monitoring advised
Imipenem/cilastatin Induces convulsions No human studies done
Stavudine/zalcitabine/trimethoprim22
No untoward effects reported
Nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides,
cisplatin, tacrolimus and amphotericin B12
Increased nephrotoxicity Avoidance or cautious administration is advised
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4118
Patil et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
they are on valganciclovir. The Centers for Disease Control
also recommend HIV-infected mothers not to breast feed
their infants to avoid postnatal transmission of HIV.
Contraindications
Valganciclovir is contraindicated in patients with ganci-
clovir hypersensitivity. It is contraindicated in patients
with absolute neutrophil count less than 500/mm3
, platelet
count less than 25,000/mm3
or the hemoglobin less than
8 g/dL.22,42
Valganciclovir is not advised in patients on hemodialysis
or in those with creatinine clearance below 10 ml/minute,
as the optimal daily dosage is less than 450 mg. There is
no study regarding the effects of peritoneal dialysis on the
excretion of valganciclovir.14
Drug economics
Oral valganciclovir is an efficient and advantageous sub-
stitute for ganciclovir in many ways. It is an effective
alternative to intravenous ganciclovir43
in induction and
maintenance therapy of CMV retinitis in HIV patients,
and is found to achieve significantly higher systemic levels
than oral ganciclovir. Based on the wholesale prices in the
United States, a two-week induction therapy with intrave-
nous ganciclovir costs US$1,583, while oral valganciclovir
costs US$2,136. For maintenance treatment, intravenous
ganciclovir costs US$57 each day, and oral valganciclovir
costs US$76 each day.
Valganciclovir is cost and time effective as it eliminates
the expenses involved in hospitalization, intravenous, or
indwelling catheterizations and nursing care associated with
the use of parenteral ganciclovir, foscarnet or cidofovir.15,38,44
Long-term intravenous therapy predisposes the patient to
the risk of catheter-related complications such as thrombo-
phlebitis, intravenous line infection and sepsis.45
Although
valganciclovir is more expensive per pill than ganciclovir, the
costs are comparable with intravenous ganciclovir taking
into account the cost of parenteral administration.42
Valganci-
clovir has overcome the large pill burden of oral ganciclovir
and has improved treatment adherence. Roche has agreed to
offer valganciclovir at a price of US$1800 for two weeks in
developing countries of Africa and Asia, after negotiations
with Médecins Sans Frontières’s (MSF) Access to Essential
Medicines Campaign.11
Conclusions
Valganciclovir is a relatively safe, highly bioavailable oral
form of ganciclovir that has greatly enhanced the efficacy
of preventive and maintenance treatment regimens for CMV
retinitis in AIDS patients. Valganciclovir is the only drug
with bioavailability equivalent to the intravenous ganci-
clovir and is indicated for the treatment of serious vision
and life-threatening CMV infections.5
Valganciclovir in
AIDS patients has been shown to be highly effective for
the induction and maintenance of CMV disease, and has
significantly improved quality of life for patients with this
disease as it has eliminated the need for chronic indwelling
catheterization and chronic intravenous therapy for people
with CMV retinitis.
Disclosures
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Gallant JE, Moore RD, Richman DD, Keruly J, Ghaisson RE, et al.
Incidence and natural history of cytomegalovirus disease in patients
with advanced human immunodeficiency virus disease treated with
zidovudine. The Zidovudine Epidemiology Study Group. J Infect Dis.
1992;1666:1223–1227.
	 2.	 Kuppermann BD, Petty JG, Richman DD, et al. Correlation between
CD4+ counts and prevalence of cytomegalovirus retinitis and human
immunodeficiency virus-related noninfectious retinal vasculopathy in
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol.
1993;1155:575–582.
	 3.	 Whitley RJ, Jacobson MA, Friedberg DN, et al. Guidelines for the
treatment of cytomegalovirus diseases in patients with AIDS in the era
of potent antiretroviral therapy: recommendations of an international
panel. International AIDS Society-USA. Arch Intern Med. 1998;1589:
957–969.
	 4.	 Jung D, Dorr A. Single-dose pharmacokinetics of valganciclovir in HIV-
and CMV-seropositive subjects. J Clin Pharmacol. 1999;398:800–804.
	 5.	 Martin DF, Sierra-Madero J, Walmsley S, et al. A controlled trial of
valganciclovir as induction therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis. N Engl
J Med. 2002;34615:1119–1126.
	 6.	 Brown F, Banken L, Saywell K, Arum I. Pharmacokinetics of valgan-
ciclovir and ganciclovir following multiple oral dosages of valganci-
clovir in HIV- and CMV-seropositive volunteers. Clin Pharmacokinet.
1999;372:167–176.
	 7.	 Karmel M. Get Drugs Straight to the Eye. Eye Net. 2006. Cited 2006
Jan. Available from: http://www.aao.org/publications/eyenet/200601/
feature.cfm. Accessed Nov 20, 2009.
	 8.	 Marco M.Valganciclovir: a new treatment for cytomegalovirus retinitis.
San Francisco AIDS Foundation Beta. 2002;151:19–21.
	 9.	 Skiest DJ. Cytomegalovirus retinitis in the era of highly active antiret-
roviral therapy (HAART). Am J Med Sci. 1999;3175:318–335.
10.	 Bowen EF, Wilson P, Atkins M, et al. Natural history of untreated
cytomegalovirus retinitis. Lancet. 1995;346:1671–1673.
11.	 Heiden D, Ford N, Wilson D, et al. Cytomegalovirus retinitis: the
neglected disease of the AIDS pandemic. PLoS Med. 2007;412:e334.
12.	 Segarra-Newnham M, Salazar MI. Valganciclovir: A new oral alterna-
tive for cytomegalovirus retinitis in human immunodeficiency virus-
seropositive individuals. Pharmacotherapy. 2002;229:1124–1128.
13.	 Kempen JH, Jabs DA, WIlson LA, Dunn JP, West SK, Tonascia J.
Mortality risk for patients with cytomegalovirus retinitis and acquired
immune deficiency syndrome. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;3710:1365–1373.
14.	 Czock D, Scholle C, Rasche FM, Schaarschmidt D, Keller F. Pharma-
cokinetics of valganciclovir and ganciclovir in renal impairment. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2002;72:142–150.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2010:4
Clinical Ophthalmology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-ophthalmology-journal
Clinical Ophthalmology is an international, peer-reviewed journal
covering all subspecialties within ophthalmology. Key topics include:
Optometry; Visual science; Pharmacology and drug therapy in eye
diseases; Basic Sciences; Primary and Secondary eye care; Patient
Safety and Quality of Care Improvements. This journal is indexed on
PubMed Central and CAS, and is the official journal of The Society of
Clinical Ophthalmology (SCO). The manuscript management system
is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review
system, which is all easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
119
Valganciclovir for CMV retinitisDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
15.	 Cvetkovic RS, Wellington K. Valganciclovir: a review of its use in the
management of CMV infection and disease in immunocompromised
patients. Drugs. 2005;656:859–878.
16.	 AIDSInfo.nih.gov. 2007. Updated 2007 Mar 16. Rockville, MD: US
Department of Health and Human Services Online. Available from:
http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/DrugsNew/DrugDetailNT.aspx?MenuIt
em=Drugs&Search=On&int_id = 271. Accessed on Nov 20, 2009.
17.	 Pescovitz MD, Rabkin J, Merion RM, et al. Valganciclovir results in
improved oral absorption of ganciclovir in liver transplant recipients.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000;4410:2811–2815.
18.	 Ganapathy ME, Huang W, Wang H, et al. Valacyclovir: a substrate
for the intestinal and renal peptide transporters PEPT1 and PEPT2.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;2462:470–475.
19.	 Sinko PJ, Balimane PV, Balimane. Carrier-mediated intestinal absorp-
tion of valacyclovir, the L-valyl ester prodrug of acyclovir: 1. Interac-
tions with peptides, organic anions and organic cations in rats. Biopharm
Drug Dispos. 1998;194:209–217.
20.	 Griffy KG. Pharmacokinetics of oral ganciclovir capsules in
HIV-infected persons. AIDS. 1996;10(Suppl 4):3–6.
21.	 Sagedal S, Nordal KP, Hartmann A, et al. Pre-emptive therapy of
CMVpp65 antigen positive renal transplant recipients with oral
ganciclovir: a randomized, comparative study. Nephrol DialTransplant.
2003;189:1899–1908
22.	 Drugs.com. Auckland. Drugsite Trust online. 2009. Updated on 2009
Oct 26. Available from: http://www.drugs.com/pro/valcyte.html.
Accessed on Nov 20, 2009.
23.	 Curran M, Noble S. Valganciclovir. Drugs. 2001;618:1145–1150.
24.	 Lalezari J, Lindley J,Walmsley S, et al. Intravenous cidofovir for periph-
eral cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS. A randomized,
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1997;1264:257–263.
25.	 Deayton JR, Griffiths PD. When can cytomegalovirus prophylaxis and
maintenance therapy be stopped in HIV disease? Curr Opin Infect Dis.
2000;136:637–641.
26.	 Sklar PA, Agyemang AF, Monastra R, et al. Five-year follow-up of a
cohort of profoundly immunosuppressed patients discontinuing therapy
for cytomegalovirus retinitis. AIDS. 2004;183:567–569.
27.	 2004 USPHS/IDSA Guidelines for the Treatment of Opportunistic
Infections in Adults and Adolescents Infected with Human Immuno-
deficiency Virus: U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) and Infectious
Diseases Society ofAmerica (IDSA). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004;53:53
(RR-15):1.
28.	 Babel N, Gabdrakhmanova L, Juergensen JS, et al. Treatment of cyto-
megalovirus disease with valganciclovir in renal transplant recipients:
a single center experience. Transplantation. 2004;782:283–285.
29.	 Fellay J, Venetz JP, Aubert JD, Seydoux C, Pascual M, Meylan PR.
Treatmentofcytomegalovirusinfectionordiseaseinsolidorgantransplant
recipients with valganciclovir. Transplant Proc. 2005;372:949–951.
30.	 Musch DC, Martin DF, Gordon JF, et al. Treatment of cytomegalovirus
retinitis with a sustained-release ganciclovir implant. The Ganciclovir
Implant Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1997;3372:83–90.
31.	 MartinDF,KuppermannBD,WolitzRA,PalestineAG,LiH,RobinsonCA,
et al. Oral ganciclovir for patients with cytomegalovirus retinitis treated
with a ganciclovir implant. Roche Ganciclovir Study Group. N Engl J Med.
1999;34014:1063–1070.
32.	 Studies of the Ocular Complications of AIDS Research Group, AIDS
ClinicalTrials Group. Foscarnet-Ganciclovir Cytomegalovirus Retinitis
Trial. 4. Visual outcomes. Ophthalmology. 1994;1017:1250–1261.
33.	 Studies of the Ocular Complications of AIDS Research Group, AIDS
Clinical Trials Group. Combination foscarnet and ganciclovir therapy
vs monotherapy for the treatment of relapsed cytomegalovirus retinitis
in patients with AIDS. The Cytomegalovirus Retreatment Trial. Arch
Ophthalmol. 1996;1141:23–33.
34.	 Studies of the Ocular Complications of AIDS Research Group, AIDS
ClinicalTrials Group. Parenteral cidofovir for cytomegalovirus retinitis
in patients withAIDS: the HPMPC peripheral cytomegalovirus retinitis
trial. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1997;1264:
264–274.
35.	 Morinelli EN, Dugel PU, Lee M, Klatt EC, Rao NA, et al. Opportunistic
intraocular infections in AIDS. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1992;90:
97–108; discussion 108–109.
36.	 Ausayakhun S,Watananikorn S, Ngamtiphakorn S, Prasitsilp J. Intravit-
real foscarnet for cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients withAIDS. J Med
Assoc Thai. 2005;881:103–107.
37.	 Claxton AJ, Cramer J, Pierce C, et al. A systematic review of the
associations between dose regimens and medication compliance. Clin
Ther. 2001;238:1296–1310.
38.	 Oppenheimer F, Gonzalex-Molina M, Rubio M. Cost of prophylaxis in
the management of cytomegalovirus infection in solid organ transplant
recipients. Clin Transplant. 2007;214:441–448.
39.	 Stanat SC, Reardon JE, Erice A, Jordan MC, Drew WL, Biron KK.
Ganciclovir-resistant cytomegalovirus clinical isolates: mode of
resistance to ganciclovir. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1991;35:
2191–2197.
40.	 Boivin G, Goyette N, Gilbert C, Covington E. Analysis of cytomega-
lovirus DNA polymerase (UL54) mutations in solid organ transplant
patients receiving valganciclovir or ganciclovir prophylaxis. J Med
Virol. 2005;773:425–429.
41.	 Walmsley S, Tseng A. Comparative tolerability of therapies for cyto-
megalovirus retinitis. Drug Saf. 1999;213:203–224.
42.	 Infectious-diseases.jwatch.org. Waltham, MA: Journal Watch Online;
2001. Updated 2001 July 27.Available from: http://infectious-diseases.
jwatch.org/cgi/content/full/2001/727/1. Accessed on Nov 20, 2009.
43.	 Wiltshire H, Hirankarn S, Farrell C, et al; Valganciclovir Solid Organ
Transplant Study Group. Pharmacokinetic profile of ganciclovir
after its oral administration and from its prodrug, valganciclovir,
in solid organ transplant recipients. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2005;445:
495–507.
44.	 Lee CH, Bright DC, Ferrucci S, et al. Economic evaluation of systemic
treatments for cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS.
Pharmacoeconomics. 2001;195(Pt 2):535–550.
45.	 Stanley HD, Charlebois E, Harb G, Jacobson MA. Central venous
catheter infections in AIDS patients receiving treatment for cytomega-
lovirus disease. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 1994;73: 272–278.
