© 2011 Syed and Loucks, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5 1291–1296
Clinical Ophthalmology
Update and optimal use of a brinzolamide-timolol
fixed combination in open-angle glaucoma
and ocular hypertension
Misha F Syed
Emma KR Loucks
Department of Ophthalmology
and Visual Sciences,The University
of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston,TX, USA
Correspondence: Misha F Syed
700 University Boulevard, Galveston,
TX 77555, USA
Tel +1 409 747 5801
Fax +1 409 747 5402
Email mfsyed@utmb.edu
Abstract: Glaucoma encompasses a wide clinical spectrum of disease, with the common
pathophysiology of progressive optic neuropathy leading to visual field loss. Elevated intraocular
pressure (IOP) is a key risk factor in disease progression. Treatment is aimed at reduction of
IOP to minimize continued optic nerve head damage. Pharmacologic treatment with various
classes of IOP-lowering medications is generally employed before more aggressive surgical
interventions. Monotherapy is generally accepted as initial therapy for glaucoma, but at least
half of patients may require more than one IOP-lowering medication. One option is the fixed
combination of brinzolamide 1% and timolol maleate 0.5%, which is commercially available in
some countries asAzarga®
for treatment of glaucoma not adequately responsive to monotherapy.
These agents may also be used in an unfixed fashion, but fixed combination therapy is gener-
ally more convenient for patients, which may result in improved compliance, a reduction of
the “washout effect” from instilling multiple drops, and a potential reduction in the side effects
related to multiple doses of preservatives.
Keywords: brinzolamide, timolol, glaucoma, fixed combination therapy, ocular hypertension
Introduction
Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness in the world. It is estimated that
approximately 60.5 million people suffer from glaucoma. In the United States, it is
estimated that almost three million people have open-angle glaucoma. By the year
2020, it is predicted that 11.1 million people will be bilaterally blind from glaucoma
worldwide.1
Glaucoma is a characteristic optic neuropathy for which the only known modifiable
risk factor is intraocular pressure (IOP). Other risk factors for progression of open-
angle glaucoma, cannot currently be altered. Therefore, therapeutic options focus on
controlling the pressure inside the eye.
As with the management of any chronic, asymptomatic disease, challenges exist for
both the patient and the physician.Treatment for glaucoma is generally chronic and may
last decades. Even after surgical intervention, further IOP-lowering may be required.
Patients most often do not notice small or moderate loss of peripheral vision as occurs
early in the course of the disease, so as with other asymptomatic diseases, convincing
patients that medications are crucial to preserving their vision can be difficult. Long-
term use of eye drops reduces patient quality of life, and the more drops required, the
greater the difficulty with and reported worsening of compliance.2
Balancing quality
of life with the need for medications can be difficult, and any decrease in the number
of drops may improve that balance.
Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
1291
R ev i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S13786
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Ophthalmology
7 September 2011
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5
Medications may be costly, troublesome to administer,
and can cause side effects which range from irritating to
dangerous. In choosing a drug regimen, the patient and
physician must decide which treatment is most acceptable
to both parties.
Major classes of medications include beta-blockers,
alpha-adrenergic agonists, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
and prostaglandin analogs. As more drug classes have
become available, fixed combinations of these classes
are being formulated. The fixed combination therapies
currently available in the United States include dorzolamide-
timolol (Cosopt®
, Merck Inc, Whitehouse Station, NJ) and
brimonidine-timolol (Combigan®
,Allergan Inc, Irvine, CA).
In Europe, fixed combinations of latanoprost-timolol
(Xalacom®
, Pharmacia Inc, New York, NY), travoprost-
timolol (Duotrav®
,Alcon Inc, Fort Worth,TX), bimatoprost-
timolol (Ganfort®
, Allergan Inc) and brinzolamide-timolol
(Azarga®
, Alcon Inc) are also available. Combination drugs
may provide benefits of improved patient adherence and
potential of reduced cost. This article will focus on the fixed
combination of brinzolamide-timolol.
Pharmacology
There are no published data on the pharmacokinetics
of the brinzolamide-timolol fixed-dose combination, but
the pharmacokinetics of each individual drug are known.
Brinzolamide is a highly specific and reversible carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor. It targets carbonic anhydrase II, the
predominant isoenzyme in the ciliary processes. Carbonic
anhydrase II is also found in many other tissues of the
body, including the corneal endothelium. The formation of
bicarbonate ions is blocked by brinzolamide. This prevents
sodium transport through the ciliary epithelium and results
in decrease of aqueous humor formation.3
Timolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic (beta-1 and
beta-2) receptor antagonist that blocks beta-adrenergic
receptors in the ciliary body, which leads to a reduction
of cyclic AMP-dependent aqueous humor formation. Beta
antagonists were traditionally first-line treatment for IOP,
but in recent years the prostaglandin analogs have generally
replaced them as first-line therapy.4
Following ocular administration, systemic absorption
of both medications does occur. The systemic effects of
brinzolamide and timolol are discussed in the Safety section
of this article.
With the issues surrounding patient compliance and
tolerability of treatment, new and more efficacious modes
of drug delivery are needed. Contact lenses have been
developed with high loading and controllable sustained
release of medication and are being tested for use in vitro.5
Hydrogels are insoluble, crosslinked polymer network
structures composed of hydrophilic polymers, which
have the ability to absorb water and retain their shape
without dissolving.5
Hydrogel contact lenses imprinted
with macromolecular memory could provide slow-release
drug diffusion of glaucoma medications. Success with this
type of treatment has not yet been demonstrated clinically,
primarily due to the issue of matching release duration
with the wear time of the contact lens and maintenance
of suitable levels of drug concentration.5
Various in vivo
rabbit studies done recently have demonstrated a prolonged
therapeutic effect of ophthalmic medications with use of
hydrogel contact lenses, resulting in a more stable pro-
longed drug level and longer retention time in tear fluid.6–8
The use of molecularly implanted therapeutic contact
lenses remains theoretical but holds promise as a future
treatment option.
Efficacy studies
Brinzolamide and timolol have documented efficacy in
lowering IOP, as separate medications and in combination.
Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors have been shown to
reduce IOP by up to 24% when used as monotherapy and
by an additional 15% when combined with timolol.9
Topical
beta antagonists have been shown to lower IOP by 19%–29%
when used as monotherapy.10
Twice or three times daily
dosing of brinzolamide 1% produces an equally significant
IOP reduction with no loss of efficacy for up to an 18-month
period.11,12
Both brinzolamide 1% and dorzolamide 2% added to
timolol0.5%reducedIOPsignificantlycomparedwithtimolol
alone, and both adjunctive treatments showed equivalent
mean IOP-lowering ability as single agents.13
Various studies
have evaluated the efficacy of fixed combination therapy.
In a double-masked, randomized, parallel group, multicenter
study with a six-month follow-up, a fixed combination of
brinzolamide 1%/timolol 0.5% was compared with either
brinzolamide 1% or timolol 0.5%. The fixed combination
of brinzolamide-timolol reduced IOP by approximately
8.0–8.7 mmHg from baseline (29.6%–33.5%). For timolol
0.5% twice daily and brinzolamide 1% twice daily, the
IOP reduction from baseline ranged from 5.7 to 6.9 mmHg
(22.8%–26.1%) and 5.1 to 5.6 mmHg (18.9%–20.8%),
respectively.The fixed combination of brinzolamide-timolol
0.5% was the most effective at lowering IOP at all visits and
time points.These results showed that the fixed combination
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
1292
Syed and Loucks
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5
was superior in IOP-lowering efficacy compared with each
of its individual components.14
A one-year, double-masked, prospective, randomized,
multicenter, active-controlled, parallel-group clinical trial
compared the fixed combinations of brinzolamide 1%/
timolol 0.5% and dorzolamide 2%/timolol 0.5%. Mean IOP
reductions from baseline in the brinzolamide-timolol group
varied from 7.2 to 9.1 mmHg (reduced 28%–35%) and in the
dorzolamide-timolol group from 7.4 to 8.9 mmHg (reduced
by 29%–34%). IOP was reduced to less than 18 mmHg in
up to 61% of eyes in the brinzolamide-timolol group and
in up to 59% of eyes in the dorzolamide-timolol group.
According to this study, the brinzolamide-timolol fixed
combination demonstrated a significant ability to lower IOP,
similar to the IOP-lowering ability of dorzolamide-timolol.15
This observation is logical, since in previous studies, the
ability of the two carbonic anhydrase inhibitors to lower IOP
when used alone is equivalent and the other ingredient in the
combination, ie, timolol 0.5%, is the same.16
Although it appears that no studies have evaluated the
fixed combination of brinzolamide-timolol when added
to a prostaglandin analog, three studies have examined
brinzolamide added to a prostaglandin analog and a
beta-blocker (two of which used the fixed combination
of travoprost and timolol). These studies suggest that
the addition of brinzolamide as a third medication to a
prostaglandin analog and beta-blocker further reduces IOP
significantly.17–19
Other factors besides IOP may be influential in the
pathogenesis of glaucoma and therefore are important to
consider when evaluating treatment options. Ocular perfusion
is increasingly recognized as potentially playing a role in the
disease. In a randomized, crossover, double-masked study
of 15 patients who underwent evaluation of ocular blood
flow, confocal scanning laser Doppler flowmetry suggested
an increase in retinal blood flow with both brinzolamide and
dorzolamide. Increased oxygen saturation in the retina was
also measured by photographic retinal oximetry in the supe-
rior and inferior retinal veins with both medications. Color
Doppler imaging found no significant change in retrobulbar
blood supply with either medication.20
In a literature review,
meta-analysis of ocular blood flow and topical carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors suggests that carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
increase ocular blood flow velocities and reduce vascular
resistance in the retinal circulation, specifically in the short
posterior ciliary and central retinal arteries. More studies are
needed to evaluate brinzolamide and its hemodynamic effects
as well as the clinical significance of this finding.21
Safety
Although applied topically, brinzolamide and timolol are
absorbed systemically.22
While not reported with topical
use,23
some rare serious reactions can occur with oral carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors including fulminant hepatic necrosis,
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, and aplastic anemia.9
Oral
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors have also caused significant
systemic side effects due to the renal effects on electrolyte
balance.9
Systemic adverse effects of the topical carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors most commonly include a bitter/sour
taste, headache, dermatitis, allergic reaction, dizziness, dry
mouth, dyspnea, nausea, chest pain, kidney stones, and
urticaria.9
Ocular adverse effects include blurred vision,
keratitis, burning/stinging/discomfort, allergic reaction, blep­
haritis, conjunctivitis, dryness, hyperemia, tearing, pruritus,
photophobia, conjunctival edema, and discharge.9,23
Carbonic anhydrase II inhibition may affect the main-
tenance of stromal dehydration. In corneas predisposed to
decompensation, this could cause further loss of corneal
function and impaired vision. Care should be used in using
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors in patients with compromised
corneas, including those with low endothelial cell counts,
corneal dystrophies, diabetes, or contact lens wearers.22
The beta-adrenergic component, timolol, may cause
adverse reactions similar to systemic beta-blockers.22
These
include bradycardia, arrhythmia, cardiac failure, heart
block, syncope, and bronchospasm. Worsening of mental
depression, impotence and/or loss of libido, and reduced
exercise tolerance can also occur.9,24
Additionally, beta-adrenergic blocking agents may mask
signs of acute hypoglycemia and hyperthyroidism and can
worsen systemic hypotension. Other contraindications to
beta-blocker use include a history of bronchial asthma,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or sinus bradycardia.22
Beta-adrenoreceptor antagonists may cause ocular side
effects, such as foreign body sensation, redness, ocular
burning/stinging, blurred vision, and decreased corneal
sensation.9,24
The efficacy of topical timolol may be decreased by
concomitant use of systemic beta-adrenoreceptor antago-
nists, and this may also increase systemic adverse effects.11
Punctal occlusion and avoiding blinking after placing
the drop may lessen systemic absorption. Unless neces-
sary, the brinzolamide-timolol fixed combination should
not be used during pregnancy. Although it is not known
whether brinzolamide appears in breast milk, timolol does.
At therapeutic doses, no effects on breastfed infants are
anticipated.22
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
1293
Update and optimal use of brinzolamide-timolol
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5
Side effects noted with the brinzolamide-timolol
fixed combination were similar to those of its individual
­components. In one study, the most common ocular side
effect was blurred vision at 3.4% in the brinzolamide-timolol
combination group compared with 2.9% in the brinzolamide
group and 0.6% in the timolol group. Other ocular side
effects in the fixed combination group included irritation/
burning (2.9%), punctate keratitis (1.7%), eye pain (1.1%),
eye pruritus (1.1%), conjunctival hyperemia (1.1%), foreign
body sensation (0.6%), corneal epithelium disorder (0.6%),
and ocular hyperemia (0.6%). The most common nonocular
adverse effect of the combination brinzolamide-timolol was
dysgeusia (1.1%), which had a lower occurrence than treat-
ment with brinzolamide alone (4.6%).Additionally, 1.1% had
a decrease in blood pressure, 0.6% experienced exacerbation
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and 0.6% had
pharyngolaryngeal pain.14,25
In another study, the most common adverse ocular
effects of the fixed combinations of brinzolamide-timolol
and dorzolamide-timolol were blurred vision, eye pain,
and irritation. Blurred vision occurred more commonly in
the brinzolamide-timolol group than in the dorzolamide-
timolol group (3.6% versus 0.5%), thought to be due to the
suspension formulation. Ocular pain (6.5% compared with
2.7%) and irritation (10.6% compared with 2.7%) occurred
more commonly in the dorzolamide-timolol group than in the
brinzolamide-timolol group. Other ocular reactions included
foreign body sensation and hyperemia. Dysgeusia was the
mostcommonnonocularsideeffect.Overall,thedorzolamide-
timolol group had a significantly greater number of reported
side effects (23% versus 14.1%),15,16
demonstrating that
the brinzolamide-timolol fixed combination may be better
tolerated overall.
Because patient health as well as compliance with
treatment can be directly affected by tolerability and/or
adverse effects of medication, it is clearly important to be
aware of the common reported effects of each medication,
both as a single agent and in combination.
Patient-focused perspectives
Glaucoma patients face a unique challenge in the management
of their disease. In contrast with many other ophthalmologic
diseases, early glaucoma is often asymptomatic and causes
little or no change in quality of life. In fact, it is often the
treatment of glaucoma (most commonly in the form of eye
drops) that negatively affects patient quality of life.
A major difficulty for many glaucoma patients is simply
getting the drop(s) into their eyes. Most glaucoma patients
are older and often suffer from debilitative joint disease
which affects their manual dexterity. Glaucoma patients can
also have varying degrees of visual disability, ranging from
decreased contrast sensitivity to low vision from advanced
loss of peripheral vision. These conditions can affect the
ability of a patient to administer medication accurately and
effectively from an eye drop bottle.
Financial issues may also adversely affect compliance.
However, in one study, the cost of medications was not found
to be a consistent factor in nonadherence to therapy among
glaucoma patients.6
Difficulty in affording medication as a
barrier to compliance may not be detected unless discussed
directly with the patient.2
In general, patients with more
advanced disease have higher treatment costs.26
Health literacy has been increasingly recognized as a
potential barrier to adherence. Health literacy relates to the
skills needed to read medicine labels and inserts, as well as
other written health care information. It also includes the
ability to understand information given by doctors, nurses,
pharmacists, and other health care staff.27
It has been shown
that those with poor health literacy are much more likely
to miss appointments, to miss eye drops, and to refill their
medications fewer times.27,28
Complicated dosing schedules may also contribute to non-
adherence. Several studies have found that taking multiple
types of medications and/or taking an increased number of
doses per day could result in decreased compliance.2
The use of a fixed combination medication could poten-
tially improve compliance with medical therapy and thereby
improve outcomes. Fixed combination drugs have several
advantages. They may be more efficacious in lowering IOP
when combined into one formulation. This also decreases
long-term preservative exposure and severity of side effects.
Washout effect from administering one drop after another
is also eliminated. Fixed combination medications simplify
dosing by just having one bottle to use (and to refill) and
they also decrease the frequency of applications.All of these
factors may have a positive impact on patient compliance
and IOP control.23,25
Compliance with topical medications is likely linked
to comfort issues. Multiple studies have demonstrated
brinzolamidetobemorecomfortableandpreferredbypatients
to dorzolamide, the other major topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor available for treatment of glaucoma.13,17,29–31
In a
prospective, double-masked, randomized, active-controlled,
crossover, multicenter study, patients were asked to evaluate
ocular discomfort associated with the brinzolamide-timolol
fixed combination versus the dorzolamide-timolol fixed
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
1294
Syed and Loucks
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5
combination. Over 80% in the study expressed a preference
in medication, and of those, approximately 80% chose
brinzolamide-timolol, which had significantly lower ocular
discomfort scores compared with dorzolamide-timolol.
Brinzolamide-timolol caused more transient blurred vision
and dorzolamide-timolol had more reported ocular irritation
and pain. However, it seems patients preferred transient
blurring of vision over ocular pain or discomfort.16,25,32
In a prospective, double-masked, parallel-group, random-
ized clinical trial, the brinzolamide-timolol group reported
significantly less ocular discomfort than the dorzolamide-
timolol group after one week. More than three times as many
patients in the brinzolamide-timolol group reported no ocular
discomfort after one week of therapy (49% versus 15%). Both
groups had a statistically significant mean increase in ocular
discomfortscoresfrombaseline;however,theincreasewasless
pronounced in the brinzolamide-timolol group.16,25,33
The more physiologic pH of brinzolamide may be the
reason for greater ocular comfort,32,33
and this may be true
of the fixed combination medications as well. Brinzolamide-
timolol has a more physiologic pH of 7.222
as compared
with 5.6, the more acidic pH of dorzolamide-timolol.34
Additionally, pH also affects solubility.At physiologic pH and
room temperature, brinzolamide has a limited solubility, so a
suspension form is used to maximize delivery.22,25
In contrast,
dorzolamide and dorzolamide-timolol were formulated as a
solution with a buffering system using sodium citrate. This
buffering system could be another explanation for difference
in comfort. It has also been suggested that the intrinsic
molecular differences between the fixed combinations may
account for the reported variation in comfort,33,34
although
both contain timolol and a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, so
the dissimilarity in comfort is not likely to be molecular.32
Therapy with an adjunctive third glaucoma ­medication,
specifically with a prostaglandin analog and a ­beta-
blocker (either a fixed combination or monotherapy) with
brinzolamide added does not appear to elicit any additional
serious side effects.17–19
Costs
The direct and indirect costs of being afflicted with glau-
coma are difficult to estimate. Studies in the literature have
focused on the direct costs of glaucoma, namely the cost
of medications. Indirect costs including lost income due to
visual disability have been less explored.2,26
Costs associated
with screening for glaucoma need to be considered as newer
screening modalities are developed, including possible
genetic testing for certain types of glaucoma.
Studies looking at the “cost-of-illness” from glaucoma
foundthatcostsforpatientswithprimaryopen-angleglaucoma
were higher than for those with ocular hypertension.26
Patients with mild and/or controlled primary open-angle
glaucoma had the lowest costs.26
One European study found
that medications accounted for about half of total direct
costs in primary open-angle glaucoma patients, and a French
study reported that combination therapies were almost twice
as expensive as monotherapy.26
It is clear that the costs
of glaucoma are lower when the disease is diagnosed and
treated early, which suggests that accurate diagnosis and
early intervention could decrease costs associated with the
disease.26
Conclusion
The fixed combination of brinzolamide and timolol has been
shown to be more efficacious than each of its components
individually and equivalent in efficacy as a fixed combination
when dosed against the simultaneous administration of
its two components. It also has a similar safety profile in
comparison with existing glaucoma medications.The added
utility of providing two medications in one formula may
improve patient compliance with the medication. Clinicians
will need to judge if a fixed combination medication such
as brinzolamide-timolol is the best choice for their patients,
because individuals may have varying degrees of tolerability
and response to the treatment. If an adverse effect is noted,
the combination drug may need to be discontinued and each
component individually evaluated. Glaucoma remains a
disease with extremely diverse manifestations and treatment
must be tailored to each patient in order to attain the best
clinical outcome and prevent significant visual loss.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by an unrestricted grant from
Research to Prevent Blindness.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
1.	 Quigley HA, Broman AT. The number of people with glaucoma world-
wide in 2010 and 2020. Br J Ophthalmol. 2006;90(3):262–267.
2.	 Tsai JC. A comprehensive perspective on patient adherence to topical
glaucoma therapy. Ophthalmology. 2009;116(11 Suppl):S30–S36.
3.	 Rhee DJ, Rapuano CJ, Papaliodis GN, Fraunfelder FW, editors.
Physicians’Desk Reference for Ophthalmic Medicines. 39th ed. ­Montvale,
NJ: PDR Network, LLC; 2010.
4.	 Allingham RR, Damji KF, Freedman S, Moroi SE, Shafranov G,
Shields MB, editors. Shields’Textbook of Glaucoma. 5th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2005.
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
1295
Update and optimal use of brinzolamide-timolol
Clinical Ophthalmology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-ophthalmology-journal
Clinical Ophthalmology is an international, peer-reviewed journal
covering all subspecialties within ophthalmology. Key topics include:
Optometry; Visual science; Pharmacology and drug therapy in eye
diseases; Basic Sciences; Primary and Secondary eye care; Patient
Safety and Quality of Care Improvements. This journal is indexed on
PubMed Central and CAS, and is the official journal of The Society of
Clinical Ophthalmology (SCO). The manuscript management system
is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review
system, which is all easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/
testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
Clinical Ophthalmology 2011:5
	 5.	 White CJ, Byrne ME. Molecularly imprinted therapeutic contact lenses.
Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2010;7(6):765–780.
	 6.	 Singh V, Bushetti SS, Appala R, Shareef A, Imam SS, Singh M.
­Stimuli-sensitive hydrogels: A novel ophthalmic drug delivery system.
Indian J Ophthalmol. 2010;58:477–481.
	 7.	 Hui-Hui A, Qiu-Hua L, Zhi-Jun Y, Wei-San P, Shu-Fang N. Novel
ophthalmic timolol maleate liposomal-hydrogel and its improved local
glaucomatous therapeutic effect in vivo. Drug Delivery. Epub 2011,
May 1. Available from informahealthcare.com. Accessed August 15,
2011.
	 8.	 Xu J, Xinsong L, Fuqian S. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of ketotifen
fumarate-loaded silicone hydrogel contact lenses for ocular drug
delivery. Drug Deliv. 2011;18(2):150–158.
	 9.	 Tsai JC, Forbes M. Medical Management of Glaucoma. 3rd ed. Caddo,
OK: Professional Communications Inc; 2009.
	10.	 Shaarawy T, Sherwood MB, Hitchings RA, Crowston JG. Glaucoma:
Medical Diagnosis and Therapy, Volume 1. Beijing, China: Elsevier
Limited; 2009.
	11.	 March WF, Ochsner KI. The long-term safety and efficacy of
­brinzolamide 1.0% (Azopt) in patients with primary open-angle
­glaucoma or ocular hypertension. The Brinzolamide Long-Term
Therapy Study Group. Am J Ophthalmol. 2000;129(2):136–143.
	12.	 Silver LH. Clinical efficacy and safety of brinzolamide (Azopt), a new
topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor for primary open-angle glaucoma
and ocular hypertension. Brinzolamide PrimaryTherapy Study Group.
Am J Ophthalmol. 1998;126(3):400–408.
	13.	 Michaud JE, Friren B. Comparison of topical brinzolamide 1% and
dorzolamide 2% eye drops given twice daily in addition to timolol 0.5%
in patients with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
Am J Ophthalmol. 2001;132(2):235–243.
	14.	 Kaback M, Scoper SV, Arzeno G, et al. Intraocular pressure-lowering
efficacy of brinzolamide 1%/timolol 0.5% fixed combination compared
with brinzolamide 1% and timolol 0.5%. Ophthalmology. 2008;115(10):
1728–1734.
	15.	 Manni G, Denis P, Chew P, et al.The safety and efficacy of brinzolamide
1%/timolol 0.5% fixed combination versus dorzolamide 2%/timolol
0.5% in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
J Glaucoma. 2009;18(4):293–300.
	16.	 Hollo G, Bozkurt B, Irkec M. Brinzolamide/timolol fixed combination:
A new ocular suspension for the treatment of open-angle glaucoma
and ocular hypertension. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009;10(12):
2015–2024.
	17.	 Tsukamoto H, Noma H, Matsuyama S, Ikeda H, Mishima HK. The
efficacy and safety of topical brinzolamide and dorzolamide when added
to the combination therapy of latanoprost and a beta-blocker in patients
with glaucoma. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2005;21(2):170–173.
	18.	 Goldberg I, Crowston JG, Jasek MC, Stewart JA, Stewart WC.
Intraocular pressure-lowering efficacy of brinzolamide when added to
travoprost/timolol fixed combination as adjunctive therapy. J Glaucoma.
November 2, 2010. [Epub ahead of print].
	19.	 Hollo G, Kothy P. Intraocular pressure reduction with travoprost/
timolol fixed combination, with and without adjunctive brinzolamide,
in glaucoma. Curr Med Res Opin. 2008;24(6):1755–1761.
	20.	 Siesky B, HarrisA, Cantor LB, et al.A comparative study of the effects
of brinzolamide and dorzolamide on retinal oxygen saturation and ocular
microcirculation in patients with primary open-angle glaucoma. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2008;92(4):500–504.
	21.	 Siesky B, Harris A, Brizendine E, et al. Literature review and meta-
analysis of topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and ocular blood flow.
Surv Ophthalmol. 2009;54(1):33–46.
	22.	 European Medicines Agency. European Public Assessment Report
(EPAR): Azarga. Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/
en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Summary_for_the_public/
human/000960/WC500029824.pdf. Accessed January 19, 2011.
	23.	 Kanner E,Tsai JC. Glaucoma medications: Use and safety in the elderly
population. Drugs Aging. 2006;23(4):321–332.
	24.	 Bartlett JD, editor. Ophthalmic Drug Facts. St Louis, MO: Facts and
Comparisons; 2003.
	25.	 Hollo G. Brinzolamide/timolol fixed combination for open-angle
glaucoma and ocular hypertension. Exp Rev Ophthalmol. 2009;4(2):
129–133.
	26.	 Schmier JK, Halpern MT, Jones ML. The economic implications
of glaucoma: A literature review. Pharmacoeconomics. 2007;25(4):
287–308.
	27.	 Juzych MS, Randhawa S, ShukairyA, Kaushal P, GuptaA, Shalauta N.
Functional health literacy in patients with glaucoma in urban settings.
Arch Ophthalmol. 2008;126(5):718–724.
	28.	 Muir KW, Santiago-Turla C, Stinnett SS, et al. Health literacy and
adherence to glaucoma therapy. Am J Ophthalmol. 2006;142(2):
223–226.
	29.	 Barnebey H, Kwok SY. Patients’ acceptance of a switch from
­dorzolamide to brinzolamide for the treatment of glaucoma in a clinical
practice setting. Clin Ther. 2000;22(10):1204–1212.
	30.	 Stewart WC, Day DG, Stewart JA, Holmes KT, Jenkins JN. Short-term
ocular tolerability of dorzolamide 2% and brinzolamide 1% vs placebo
in primary open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension subjects. Eye
(Lond). 2004;18(9):905–910.
	31.	 Silver LH. Ocular comfort of brinzolamide 1.0% ophthalmic suspension
compared with dorzolamide 2.0% ophthalmic solution: Results from
two multicenter comfort studies. Brinzolamide Comfort Study Group.
Surv Ophthalmol. 2000;44 Suppl 2:S141–S145.
	32.	 Mundorf TK, Rauchman SH, Williams RD, Notivol R. A patient
­preference comparison of Azarga (brinzolamide/timolol fixed
­combination) vs Cosopt (dorzolamide/timolol fixed combination)
in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension. Clin
­Ophthalmol. 2008;2(3):623–8.
	33.	 Vold SD, Evans RM, Stewart RH, Walters T, Mallick S. A one-week
comfort study of BID-dosed brinzolamide 1%/timolol 0.5% ophthalmic
suspension fixed combination compared to BID-dosed dorzolamide
2%/timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution in patients with open-angle
glaucoma or ocular hypertension. J Ocul PharmacolTher. 2008;24(6):
601–605.
	34.	 Merck Sharp and Dohme Corporation. Available from: http://www.
merck.com/product/usa/pi_circulars/c/cosopt/cosopt_pi.pdf.Accessed
February 7, 2011.
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
1296
Syed and Loucks
