Plasminogen Alleles Influence Susceptibility to Invasive
Aspergillosis
Aimee K. Zaas1
*, Guochun Liao2
, Jason W. Chien3
, Clarice Weinberg4
, David Shore4
, Steven S. Giles5
,
Kieren A. Marr3,6
, Jonathan Usuka2
, Lauranell H. Burch4
, Lalith Perera4
, John R. Perfect1
, Gary Peltz2
,
David A. Schwartz4¤
1 Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America, 2 Roche Palo Alto, Palo Alto, California, United States of America, 3 Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America, 4 National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina,
United States of America, 5 University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America, 6 Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, United
States of America
Abstract
Invasive aspergillosis (IA) is a common and life-threatening infection in immunocompromised individuals. A number of
environmental and epidemiologic risk factors for developing IA have been identified. However, genetic factors that affect
risk for developing IA have not been clearly identified. We report that host genetic differences influence outcome following
establishment of pulmonary aspergillosis in an exogenously immune suppressed mouse model. Computational haplotype-
based genetic analysis indicated that genetic variation within the biologically plausible positional candidate gene
plasminogen (Plg; Gene ID 18855) correlated with murine outcome. There was a single nonsynonymous coding change
(Gly110Ser) where the minor allele was found in all of the susceptible strains, but not in the resistant strains. A
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (Asp472Asn) was also identified in the human homolog (PLG; Gene ID
5340). An association study within a cohort of 236 allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients revealed
that alleles at this SNP significantly affected the risk of developing IA after HSCT. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
plasminogen directly binds to Aspergillus fumigatus. We propose that genetic variation within the plasminogen pathway
influences the pathogenesis of this invasive fungal infection.
Citation: Zaas AK, Liao G, Chien JW, Weinberg C, Shore D, et al. (2008) Plasminogen Alleles Influence Susceptibility to Invasive Aspergillosis. PLoS Genet 4(6):
e1000101. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101
Editor: Jonathan Flint, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Received February 27, 2008; Accepted May 20, 2008; Published June 20, 2008
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Public Domain declaration which stipulates that, once placed in the public
domain, this work may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose.
Funding: This work was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. This work was
supported in part by Grant # K08AI065837 (AKZ) from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily reflect the official views of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases or the National Institutes of Health. GL, JU and
GP are employees of Roche Biosciences.
Competing Interests: Aimee K. Zaas, MD serves on the speaker’s bureau for Pfizer, Inc. John R. Perfect is a consultant for the Robert Michael Educational
Institute. Guochun Liao, Jonathan Usuka and Gary Peltz are employees of Roche Biosciences. All other authors declare that no conflict of interest exists.
* E-mail: aimee.zaas@duke.edu
¤ Current address: National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado, United States of America
Introduction
Invasive infection with Aspergillus fumigatus (AF) is a common and
life-threatening infection among severely immunocompromised
individuals. Despite aggressive surveillance and prophylaxis, the
incidence of invasive aspergillosis (IA) in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant (HSCT) recipients remains approximately 10%, and the
three month mortality following infection approaches 30% [1,2].
AF infection leads to a potentially hemorrhagic bronchopneumo-
nia, with angio-invasion and tissue destruction. Several factors
have been shown to affect risk for developing IA in allogeneic
HSCT recipients. These include immunosuppresion required for
HSCT, graft-vs-host-disease, and corticosteroid use[2]. However,
despite having similar risk profiles, only a subset of at-risk
individuals will develop IA. Since most of the identified risk
factors for IA affect the immune system of the recipient, we
hypothesize that genetic variation within key innate or adaptive
immune response genes could influence susceptibility to or
outcome of this invasive fungal infection.
The susceptibility of different inbred murine strains for
developing IA after immunosuppression was analyzed to deter-
mine if genetic factors affect susceptibility to aspergillosis.
Haplotype-based computational genetic analysis of this survival
data identified PLG as a candidate susceptibility gene. A SNP that
caused a significant amino acid substitution in human PLG was
identified, and human PLG alleles were found to affect risk for
developing IA in HSCT recipients.
Results
Inbred Mouse Strains Have Distinct Survival Patterns after
Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis
Ten inbred mouse strains were transiently immunosuppressed
with cyclophosphamide and cortisone acetate prior to exposure to
AF conidia. The strain-specific survival patterns were then
evaluated over a 14 day period. This immunosuppressive regimen
disrupts macrophage and neutrophil-mediated defense against
inhaled conidia. In control experiments, no significant mortality
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 1 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
was observed in the nine different immunosuppressed strains of
mice that were not exposed to AF. However, the immunosup-
pressive regimen caused significant mortality in the DBA/2 strain.
Therefore, subsequent analyses were performed with and without
the data from this strain. Since the immunosuppressive regimen
was initiated 3 days prior, all strains were rendered neutropenic at
time of exposure to AF. The neutropenia extended through day 7
with neutrophil recovery by day 10 (Table S1). Quantitative PCR
(qPCR) measurements performed on lung tissue harvested
24 hours after AF exposure indicated that the inbred strains were
exposed to equivalent amounts of AF and had an equivalent
pulmonary burden of A. fumigatus (Table S1). Thus, the inbred
strains received the same immunosuppressive regimen, experi-
enced identical periods of neutropenia, and received the same
pulmonary fungal inoculum.
Despite this, the inbred strains exhibited significant and
reproducible differences in survival after exposure to AF
(Figure 1A). The ‘‘susceptible’’ inbred strains (A/J and C3H/
HeJ) exhibited 100% mortality by day 6. The DBA/2J strain also
experienced 100% mortality by day 6; however the survival curves
for immune suppressed unexposed DBA/2J mice were not
significantly different from the mice that were exposed to AF
(data not shown). The ‘‘intermediate’’ strains (MRL/MPJ and
NZW/LacJ) also experienced 100% mortality; however the
majority of deaths in these strains occurred between days 5 and
10. Five strains exhibited a ‘‘resistant’’ pattern of survival: (AKR/
J, C57/Bl6J, 129/SvJ, Balb/CJ, and Balb/CByJ); they had
between 30–60% survival at the end of the 14 day observation
period (Figure 1B). The survival patterns were reproducible on
repeated experimental trials. Histological evaluation of the lungs of
moribund mice revealed Aspergillus hyphae and foci of pneumonitis
(Figure 1C, D). Overt histologic differences between moribund
mice from each strain were not noted, however histologic sections
from surviving mice noted resolving pneumonia (data not shown).
The amount of AF in the lung 48 hours after infection was also
measured by qPCR. At 48 hours, the fungal burden in the
sensitive strains (median conidial equivalents 4.7 log cells/gram
lung tissue; range 3.8–5.0) was significantly greater (p = 0.02) than
in the resistant strains (median conidial equivalents 3.7 log cells/
gram lung tissue; range 2.7–5.3) (Table S1). Despite having the
same level of immunosuppression and initial exposure to AF, the
inbred strains exhibited significant differences in fungal burden
and survival after AF exposure. These findings suggest that genetic
factors affect the control of fungal burden, and survival in immune
suppressed mice after AF exposure. Notably, C3H/HeJ mice are
known to have defective TLR-4 signalling [3]. To evaluate the role
of TLR-4 hypofunction in outcome following inhalation of A.
fumigatus, both non-immune compromised and exogenously
immune compromised C57Bl6tlr42/2
mice were evaluated. These
mice exhibited a ‘‘resistant’’ phenotype upon exposure to A.
fumigatus in this model (data not shown). Thus, the survival pattern
exhibited by C3H/HeJ mice in our model was not felt to be solely
due to hypofunction of TLR4.
Computational Genetic Analysis Identifies Plasminogen
(PLG) as a Candidate Susceptibility Gene for Invasive
Aspergillosis
To identify genetic factors affecting survival after AF exposure, the
inbred strain survival data were analyzed using haplotype-based
computational genetic analysis [4,5,6]. This analysis identifies
genomic regions where the pattern of genetic variation among
inbred murine strains correlates with a pattern of phenotypic
responses. The area under the survival curve (AUC) after AF
exposure was analyzed; and 2 haplotype blocks were identified where
the pattern of genetic variation had a strong correlation with survival
(Figure 2, Figure S1A). The top two predicted loci contained the
genes UDP-glucose ceramide glucosyltransferase-like 1 (Ugcgl1) and
Plasminogen (PLG). While Ugcgl1, a glycoprotein glucosyltransferase,
may have some role in CD4/CD8 thymocyte function [7], recent
reports linking the fibrinolytic system with host response to infectious
pathogens made PLG an attractive candidate for influencing
susceptibility to IA [8–18]. Because the immunosuppressive regimen
induced mortality in the DBA/2 strain, the computational analysis
was also repeated using survival data that did not include this strain.
When this reduced dataset was analyzed, PLG was among the
genomic regions whose pattern of genetic variation correlated
survival (Figure S1B, Figure S2).
PLG was sequenced across 20 inbred strains, and 423 SNPs
were identified. Among the 10 inbred Mus musculus strains
characterized here, the pattern of genetic variation in PLG was
organized into 2 haplotype blocks. The 129, AKR, Balb/c, Balb/
cBy, C57, and NZW strains had one haplotype, while the AJ,
MRL, DBA and C3H strains had the other haplotype. There was
a single non-synonymous SNP that altered an amino acid (G110S).
This non-conservative amino acid substitution is within the first
kringle domain, which regulates the initial binding of plasminogen
to fibrin as well as plasmin-induced cell-detachment [19,20]. The
glycine at this position is conserved across all five kringle domains
of plasminogen in mice and humans, suggesting that this amino
acid change may have significant functional importance. Notably,
the susceptible strains had the minor allele (Ser) at this position,
which was not present in the resistant strains.
Human PLG Alleles also Affect Susceptibility to Invasive
Aspergillosis
Since an allelic difference in murine PLG was associated with
susceptibility in a mouse model, it was possible that polymor-
phisms in human plasminogen (PLG) could also affect susceptibility
to IA. If true, the best chance for detecting a genetic effect would
be through analysis of a cohort of immunosuppressed patients that
is at increased risk of developing invasive aspergillosis. The
incidence of invasive aspergillosis in allogeneic HSCT recipients,
Author Summary
Invasive aspergillosis (IA) is the most common invasive
mould infection among highly immune compromised
hosts. While exogenous immune suppression is the
greatest risk factor for infection acquisition, polymorphic
variation in key immune effector genes likely contributes
to disease susceptibility as well. We hypothesized that
susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis was, in part, due to
host genetic variation. By screening strains of inbred mice,
we demonstrated differential susceptibility to invasive
aspergillosis. Using the Roche Mouse single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) Database, we localized an area on
murine chromosome 17 as a putative ‘‘quantitative trait
locus’’ governing disease susceptibility. Within this interval,
the gene encoding plasminogen (Plg) was found to have a
coding change SNP in murine strains that were highly
susceptible to disease. Many micro-organisms are recog-
nized to hijack the plasminogen to be more prevalent in
human hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients who
developed IA as compared to those who did not. Thus, we
demonstrated a genetic basis for increased susceptibility
to IA in both a murine model and human cohort, and
implicated the fibrinolytic system in the pathogenesis of
this disease.
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 2 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
which undergo intensive immunosuppression is approximately
10% [1,2]. Therefore, HSCT recipients, followed for at least one
year after transplant, provide an ideal population for identifying
the genetic factors associated with IA susceptibility (Table 1).
To perform the human genetic study, we first had to
characterize the pattern of genetic variation in the human
plasminogen gene. To do this, all exons and the promoter region
of PLG were sequenced in 20 HSCT donor-recipient pairs (40
DNA samples from 20 stem cell donors and 20 stem cell
recipients). Although 4 SNPs causing an amino acid change were
identified, only one of these SNPs had a minor allele frequency
above 1%. Therefore, our analysis focused upon SNP rs4252125
(Asp472Asn), which had a minor allele frequency (Asn472) of
25%. This non-conservative (neutral to acidic amino acid)
substitution occurs in a loop region that connects the 4th and
5th
kringle domains of plasminogen. This loop region can form
highly variable structures based on the surrounding environment.
Similar to the murine polymorphism, this amino acid change
could have a significant functional impact through altering the
alignment of kringle domains or ligand binding.
Figure 1. Survival following immune suppression and inhalation of A. fumigatus differs among inbred strains of mice. (A) 14-day
survival phenotype for inbred murine strains following immunosuppression and inhalation of 3.06108
AF293 conidia. Susceptible strains had death of
all mice by day 6 following infection. Intermediate strains had death predominately during neutrophil recovery (days 8–11) and resistant strains had
surviving mice at day 14. N = 10 mice per strain. Repetitions of the inhalation in C57Bl/6, Balb/C, A/J and C3H/HeJ yielded similar results, indicating
reproducibility of phenotype and consistency of inhalational protocol. (B) Kaplan-Meier curve representing divergent outcomes of murine strains
following immune suppression and inhalation of A. fumigatus. Death occurred earlier in susceptible mice as compared to intermediate and resistant
mice, as well as in intermediate mice as compared to resistant mice (p,0.001, log rank). (C) Haematoxylin and eosin stain of A/J lung, taken from a
moribund mouse 4 days following immune suppression and inhalation of 3.0610e8 AF conidia, magnification 406. 1d. Gomori-methanamine silver
stain of A/J lung, showing a focus of AF hyphae, magnification 406.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.g001
Figure 2. Computational genetic analysis identifies plasminogen (PLG) as a candidate susceptibility gene for invasive aspergillosis.
Haplotype-based computational genetic analysis was used to analyze the area under the survival curve to identify genetic factors affecting survival
after AF exposure among the inbred strains. Colored blocks represent haplotype structure, with red blocks representing ‘‘resistant’’ murine strains
(C57, 129, Balb/C, Balb/CBy and AKR) and the ‘‘intermediate’’ strain NZW/LacJ and blue blocks representing ‘‘susceptible’’ murine strains (A/J, DBA/2J
and C3H/HeJ) and the ‘‘intermediate’’ strain MR/MpJ. The green block represents missing haplotype data.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.g002
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 3 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
The genotype at Asp472Asn for the remainder of the HSCT
cohort was then determined. Genotype was interpreted in a
blinded manner, such that the two independent persons analyzing
genotype data were unaware of each subject’s status as a case or
control. Analysis of these data indicated that HSCT recipients that
were homozygous or heterozygous for Asn472 (AA or AG
genotype) were at a significantly increased risk of developing IA
after transplant. The Asn472 allele was present with greater
frequency in HSCT recipients who developed IA (47/83; 56%) as
compared to those who did not (62/147; 42%). Importantly, the
genotype-specific risk for developing IA was not constant over time
after transplant. Risk for development of IA following HSCT is
bimodal, with peak risk periods occurring during the pre-
engraftment phase (,day 40) and a second peak during the
post-engraftment phase, during days 40–100 [2]. To allow for
possible violations of the proportional hazards assumption, the
Table 1. Demographics of HSCT Recipients.
IA + IA 2 P value
(n = 83) (n = 147)
Characteristic no % no %
Age (yr)
Gender
Male 48 58% 70 48% NS
Female 35 42% 77 52%
Transplant Type
MatchRelated 26 31% 11 7% 0.01
MatchUnrelated 53 64% 135 92%
Mismatch 4 5% 1 1%
Malignancy
CML 37 45% 68 46% NS
CLL 1 1% 0 0% NS
ALL 7 8% 23 16% 0.04
ANL 16 19% 26 18% NS
NHL 1 1% 0 0% NS
AA 2 2% 2 1% NS
MDS 10 12% 26 18% 0.01
MM 7 8% 1 1% NS
other 2 2% 1 1% NS
Stem Cell Source
Bone Marrow 79 95% 130 88% NS
PBSC 4 5% 17 12%
AGVHD
None 10 12% 14 10% NS (none vs any GVHD)
Mild 32 39% 90 61% 0.001 (none/mild vs severe)
Severe 41 49% 43 29%
CGVHD
None/Mild 3 7% 10 9% NS
Mild 12 27% 18 17%
Severe 30 67% 81 75%
Censored* 34 6
Missing 4 21
Allele Frequency
A 33% 23%
G 66% 76%
*
subjects were censored if follow-up ended prior to day 100% calculated based on total persons in each time period IA = invasive aspergillosis CLL = chronic lymphocytic
leukemia; CML = chronic myelocytic leukemia; ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia AML = acute myeloblastic leukemia; NHL = non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma;
PBSC = peripheral blood stem cells ANL = acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia; AA = aplastic anemia; MM = multiple myeloma; MDS = myelodysplastic syndrome;
AGVHD = acute graft-versus-host disease; CGVHD = chronic graft-versus-host disease.
Of 87 total Caucasian HSCT donor-recipient pairs with IA sequenced, two were excluded due to missing data and two were excluded due to IA occurring during a
second stem cell transplant. Only 2 of a total of 149 HSCT donor-recipient pairs that did not develop IA were excluded from this analysis. One pair was excluded due to
having a second stem cell transplant and one was excluded due to missing data.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.t001
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 4 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
genotypic hazard ratios were evaluated during 3 distinct time
periods post HSCT: days 0–40, days 40–100 and days 100–365.
There was a constant and substantial elevation in the genotype-
specific hazard ratio for IA among recipients who carried at least
one ‘‘Asn’’ allele (AA or AG genotype) between 40–365 days
following HSCT (Figure 3, Table 2). Perhaps due to a low number
of cases of IA occurring during days 0–40 or to the confounding
effects of known strong risk factors pre-engraftment (e.g.
neutropenia), an association between PLG genotype and IA was
not observed during the first 40 days after transplant. For follow-
up after day 40, the recipient plasminogen genotype remained a
significant risk factor for IA susceptibility (p,0.0005) when a
multivariate analysis was used to simultaneously account for effects
of other factors that were significant in univariate analysis (HLA
matching status, source of stem cells, and underlying malignancy).
In addition, there was an apparent gene-dosage effect: homozy-
gous AsnAsn individuals were at a 5.6-fold increased risk of
developing IA, while heterozygous individuals had a 3.0 fold
increased risk, relative to AspAsp individuals. A majority (96%) of
subjects received fluconazole prophylaxis (no anti-Aspergillus
activity), with the remainder receiving itraconazole, which does
possess anti-Aspergillus activity (4%). Type of prophylaxis did not
differ significantly between cases and controls. Inclusion of
prophylaxis in the risk model revealed that the type of prophylaxis
was not predictive of acquiring invasive aspergillosis, nor did the
results related to genotype change with adjustment for type of
prophylaxis. Notably, donor polymorphism status was not
associated with development of aspergillosis. This served as an
important negative control; plasminogen is synthesized hepatically,
and thus, the donor plasminogen genotype should not associate
with disease acquisition.
During the 40–365 days following transplant, 59 HSCT
recipients developed IA; and 135 HSCT recipients who survived
for more than 40 days following HSCT did not develop IA. The
analysis of survival following diagnosis of IA showed somewhat
reduced risk of death among IA patients with the same genotypes,
with the hazard ratio for AsnAsn = 0.32 95% CI = (0.11, 0.89) and
the hazard ratio for AspAsn = 0.79, 95% CI = (0.43, 1.44)
(Table 2). Thus, an allelic difference causing an amino acid
change in plasminogen is associated with increased risk for
developing IA in a high-risk human cohort, as well as in an
experimental murine model, and may also be associated with
survival in HSCT patients who develop IA (p = 0.07).
Plasminogen Interacts with AF
We next sought to identify possible mechanisms by which
plasminogen may influence susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis.
The lysine binding sites in the 1st
and 4th
kringle domains of
plasminogen mediate plasminogen binding to fibrinogen and other
Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier curve demonstrating elevated risk of developing IA in HSCT recipients with AA or AG genotype, using GG
as the reference genotype. The data represent 59 HSCT recipients who developed IA between days 40–365 following transplantation and 135
HSCT recipients who survived .40 days following HSCT and did not develop IA (HR genotype AA 5.56, 95% CI 1.88, 16.48; HR genotype AG 3.00 95%
CI 1.46, 6.14; p,0.0005). The genotypic results are reported for follow-up beyond 40 days, using a left-censored analysis.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.g003
Table 2. Recipient Plg genotype is a risk factor for development of invasive aspergillosis after day 40 following HSCT.
Genotype: Adjusted* Hazard Ratio 95% Confidence Interval
AA (Asn/Asn) 5.56 (1.88, 16.48)
AG (Asp/Asn) 3.00 (1.46, 6.14)
GG (Asp/Asp) is referent category *Adjusted for cell type, HLA matching, and malignancy category. p,0.0005
HSCT recipients with ‘‘AA’’ (Asn/Asn) or ‘‘AG’’ (Asp/Asn) genotype are at increased risk of developing invasive aspergillosis following transplant as compared to HSCT
recipients with ‘‘GG’’ (Asp/Asp) genotype. The data were adjusted for cell type, HLA match, and malignancy category. The ‘‘GG’’ (Asp/Asp) genotype is the referent
category.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.t002
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 5 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
targets [20]. Analysis of the theoretical crystal structure of the
murine kringle domain 1 revealed that substitution of serine for
glycine at this position increased the negativity of the electrostatic
potential around the principal lysine binding site. Such a change
could increase the affinity of lysine binding to the 1st
kringle
domain (Figure S3). Since plasminogen is more easily activated
after binding, this amino acid substitution could increase the rate
of plasminogen activation [12,21,22]. Analysis of the crystal
structure of human plasminogen (Figure 4) kringle 4 (K4) and
kringle 5 (K5) revealed that a substitution of asparagine for
aspartic acid at position 472, located in the loop connecting K4
and K5, could potentially influence K4–K5 interactions or
binding at the K4 lysine binding site (LBS). Although an
interaction between plasminogen and AF has not been previously
described, plasminogen does bind to other fungal pathogens
[14,23]. Therefore, immunofluorescence microscopy and flow
cytometric analysis were used to determine if plasminogen bound
to AF. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that FITC-
labeled murine (Figure 5C, D) bound to both swollen AF conidia
and hyphae in a dose dependent manner. Neither murine nor
human plasminogen bound resting conidia (data not shown). The
dose-dependent binding of plasminogen to AF was confirmed and
further quantified by flow cytometry (Figure 5A). Furthermore,
specificity of the interaction was tested using pre-incubation of
swollen conidia with unlabeled plasminogen. This pre-incubation
inhibited the binding of the labeled plasminogen (Figure 5A).
Human plasminogen bound to swollen conidia and hyphae
(Figure 5B), and demonstrated similar specificity as murine
plasminogen, with inhibition of binding by pre-incubation with
unlabeled human plasminogen (Figure 5B). FITC-labeled bovine
serum albumin (BSA) bound to AF conidia to a lesser degree than
labeled plasminogen, and pre-incubation of AF conidia with 0.1%
BSA did not inhibit binding of labeled plasminogen (data not
shown), highlighting the specificity of the plasminogen-AF
interaction. These observations indicate that both infectious forms
of AF can directly bind plasminogen, which supports the
possibility that the plasminogen system plays an important role
in the pathogenesis of IA. This also suggests a plausible mechanism
by which the polymorphisms could alter susceptibility to invasive
aspergillosis. A polymorphism that enhances plasminogen binding
to the pathogen will increase plasminogen activation on the
pathogen surface, which could facilitate pathogen entry and
pathogen-induced tissue damage [11].
Discussion
Our genetic analyses in mice and humans indicate that
plasminogen alleles affect risk for developing invasive aspergillosis
in the immunocompromised state. This association is also
supported by functional in vitro studies demonstrating that
plasminogen binds to AF. To our knowledge, this is the first
attempt to identify genetic polymorphisms affecting risk of IA
using a multi-species genetic mapping approach, with a murine
model system targeting a polymorphic susceptibility gene which is
then assessed in a well-defined human cohort. This approach,
unlike a pure candidate gene approach, allowed evaluation of a
gene that would be unlikely to be selected a priori for evaluation.
While clinical applications of this finding will require further
prospective evaluation, the finding can serve as a proof-of-
principle paradigm for this staged approach to identifying host
genetic polymorphisms that can affect outcome in immune
compromised patients. Identification of a genetic polymorphism
that influences infectious outcome after HSCT has important
implications for pre and post transplant care, and may also have
implications for the management of other immune-compromised
patients. For example, genetic testing could identify high risk
individuals who may benefit from use of broad-spectrum
antifungal agents or enhanced monitoring for infection. While
plasminogen polymorphisms are associated with development of
invasive aspergillosis in HSCT recipients, it remains to be
determined whether this allelic variant affects the risk of
developing invasive aspergillosis after chronic corticosteroid use,
semi-invasive aspergillosis or allergic bronchopulmonary aspergil-
losis.
Additionally, these findings implicate the fibrinolytic pathway as
an important mediator of fungal infection. The fibrinolytic
Figure 4. Ribbon diagrams of the combined kringle 4 (K4) and
kringle 5 (K5) domains of human plasminogen. (A) Ribbon
diagram showing Asp472 and the relationship to a major lysine binding
site (LBS) on kringle 4. (B) Asp472 in the native K4K5 structure mutated
to Asn.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.g004
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 6 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
pathway is increasingly recognized in infectious disease pathogen-
esis, and this is the first report to link plasminogen with a
filamentous fungus. Several mechanisms may explain how genetic
changes affecting the function of plasminogen and the fibrinolytic
system could influence host susceptibility to IA. IA is characterized
by hemorrhage and tissue destruction, which are mediated by the
plasminogen system. As previously demonstrated for streptococcal
infection [18], AF-induced plasminogen activation could trigger
plasminogen-mediated destruction of extracellular matrix compo-
nents, which in turn enhances tissue invasiveness of the pathogen.
Genetic differences that alter the coagulative function of
plasminogen may also influence disease pathogenesis by promot-
ing pulmonary hemorrhage and infarction. Immobilization of
plasminogen on the pathogen surface allows for easier activation of
this zymogen[10]. This brings the activated enzyme into close
contact with key substrates in the basement membrane, which
increases the virulence of bacteria [9,16,24] and other fungi
[13,14,23]. Since AF adheres to components in the extracellular
matrix and basement membrane [25,26], its ability to bind
plasminogen could be an important virulence mechanism. Since
plasminogen plays an important role is inflammation and host
defense, this provides another potential mechanism for the
plasminogen system to affect the pathogenesis of IA. Plasminogen
is a direct chemotaxin and is an activator of monocytes, and has
recently been shown to prevent monocyte apoptosis [27–30]. A
bidirectional relationship between coagulation and inflammation
has long been recognized [15,22]. Since monocytes/macrophages
are critical for host defense, genetic variation in plasminogen could
cause subtle differences in immune function that may also affect
outcome after exposure to AF in severely immune compromised
hosts.
Although death rates following infection tended to be reduced
among carriers of the same genotypes that conferred increased
risk, this finding may well be due to chance, as it was not
statistically significant (p = 0.07). However, puzzling the finding, if
this proves statistically significant in another population, it is of
profound importance since it dissociates risk from acquisition of
disease from survival. Clinical outcome following development of
IA hinges not only on immune recovery to limit fungal related
pulmonary hemorrhage and tissue infarction, but also on control
of an over-exuberant inflammatory response as the immune
system recovers. Thus, some of those who develop IA despite
carrying the protective AspAsp genotype may respond differently
to infection than those carrying the AsnAsn genotype. An
additional possibility is that carriers of the AsnAsn genotype who
develop IA tend to have a more evident phenotype and
consequently are either more readily diagnosed or are diagnosed
at an earlier stage of disease. Thus carriers would have elevated
Figure 5. Murine and human plasminogen bind swollen A. fumigatus conidia and hyphae. (A and B) A. fumigatus conidia (16106
) were
incubated with several concentrations of murine (A) or human (B) PLG-AF488 (FITC) for 30 minutes at 37uC. Binding was assessed by flow cytometry.
There was a strong correlation between the geometric mean of the FITC channel and PLG-AF488 concentration. Results are reported as the geometric
mean6the standard error of the mean of at least three experiments. Specificity of binding is demonstrated as pre-incubation with 4 ug/mL unlabeled
plasminogen for 30 minutes at 37uC inhibits binding of AF488-labeled plasminogen. Results are reported as the geometric mean6the standard error
of three replicates. (C.) A. fumigatus conidia (16106
) were stained with murine PLG-AF488 (0.2 mg/ml) and Calcoflour White for 30 minutes at 37uC.
Plasminogen binding is evident on the conidial surface. (D.) A. fumigatus hyphae were incubated with several concentrations of murine PLG-AF488 for
30 minutes at 37uC and calcofluor white and visualized with fluorescence microscopy. Preincubation (30 minutes at 37uC) of hyphae with unlabelled
plasminogen inhibits binding of AF488-labeled plasminogen.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.g005
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 7 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
risk of diagnosis but would present with a more clinically
manageable form of IA.
Human association studies in smaller independent HSCT
cohorts have implicated Toll-like receptor 1 and 6 [31] and IL-
10 receptor [32] polymorphisms as risk factors for development of
invasive aspergillosis, While the published human association
studies target viable candidate genes based on the prior literature,
they are hampered by small size (n = 22 [31] and n = 9, including 4
cases of ‘‘possible’’ IA [32]). Additionally, conflicting data exist on
the role of other common innate immune deficiencies (i.e. TLR2
and TLR4 hypofunction) in the pathogenesis of IA [33–38]. Our
work with C57Bl6tlr42/2
mice did not find TLR4 to be essential
for host defense against IA (data not shown), thus unlikely to be the
sole reason for enhanced susceptibility of C3H/HeJ mice who are
known to have TLR4 hypofunction. Similarly, where deficiency in
complement 5a (C5a) may influence outcome in invasive
aspergillosis [39], the varying phenotypes between A/J and
AKR/J (both C5a deficient) mice indicate that C5a deficiency
alone is unlikely to account for the poor survival of A/J mice.
A polymorphism in the gene for plasminogen may confer
increased risk of invasive aspergillosis following bone marrow
transplantation. The identification of murine and human genetic
polymorphisms associated with susceptibility to invasive fungal
infection in immunosuppressed hosts enables subsequent epide-
miologic and clinical studies that can produce improved methods
for management of transplant patients.
Methods
Immunosuppression
Inbred 6–8 week-old female mice (Jackson Laboratories; Bar
Harbour, ME) were housed and fed under aseptic conditions and
their sterile water was supplemented with tetracycline (1 mg/ml)
changed once daily. Ten inbred strains were utilized (BalbC/ByJ,
Balb/CJ, AKR/J, 129/SvJ, C57Bl/6J, MRL/MPJ, NZW/LACJ,
A/J, DBA/2J and C3H/HeJ). Mice weighed between 18–24
grams, with the exception of MRL/MPJ mice (28–32 grams).
The mice were immunosuppressed with an intraperitoneal
injection of cyclophosphamide (Sigma Biochemicals, St. Louis,
MO) (150 mg/kg) on day 23, and a subcutaneous injection of
cortisone acetate (Sigma Biochemicals, St. Louis, MO) (250 mg/
kg) on day 21 of infection. The immunosuppressive regimen also
included additional doses of cyclophosphamide (150 mg/kg) on
days +1, and +4 of infection. All animal work was approved by the
Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee at Duke University
Medical Center and followed the standard guidelines for ethical
treatment of animals.
Aspergillus fumigatus Strain
AF strain 293 was used in all experiments (provided by Dr.
William J. Steinbach, Duke University Medical Center). AF
conidia were grown on Sabouraud dextrose agar (Difco; Becton
Dickinson; Sparks, MD) for 7 days and harvested in 0.01% Tween
80 in sterile water on the day prior to inoculation. Conidia were
washed and resuspended in sterile water and counted on a
Neubauer hematocytometer to create a conidial suspension of
36108
conidia/ml.
Inoculation with Conidia
10 mice per strain were immunosuppressed. A total of 40 ml of
the 36108
conidia/ml suspension was aerosolized in four separate
nebulizers (Aerotech II, CIS-US, Inc., Beford, MA) in a Hinners-
style exposure chamber [40] for 25 minutes as previously
described [41]. Select strains (C3H/HeJ, A/J, C57Bl/6J and
Balb/CJ) were evaluated a total of 3 times each to ensure
reproducibility of findings, thus the total number of mice evaluated
was 160.
Computational Haplotype Mapping
Haplotype-based computational genetic analysis of the pheno-
typic data was performed as previously described [4,6,42,43,44].
In brief, allelic data from multiple inbred strains were analyzed
and a haplotype block map of the mouse genome was constructed.
SNPs were organized into haplotype blocks. Only a limited
number of haplotypes-typically 2, 3 or 4-are present within a
haplotype block. This analysis identifies haplotype blocks in which
the haplotypic strain grouping within a block correlates with the
distribution of phenotypic data among the inbred strains analyzed.
To do this, a p-value that assesses the likelihood that genetic
variation within each block could underlie the observed distribu-
tion of phenotypes among the inbred strains is calculated as
described using ANOVA [6,43,44]. The phenotypic data was
evaluated using the average value for each strain, obtained by
assessing 10–30 mice per strain. The haplotype blocks are then
ranked based upon the calculated p-value. The genomic regions
within haplotype blocks that strongly correlated with the
phenotypic data are then analyzed. When the computational
analysis was performed, there were 1745 haplotype blocks that
were generated from analysis of 160,000 SNPs with alleles
characterized across 18 inbred strains covering 2,171 genes. For
this analysis, the candidate haplotype blocks that were empirically
selected had p-value,0.005. This was the best p-value achieved by
blocks in which the 10 strains are grouped into two haplotypes
such that the phenotypes of strains in one haplotype are separated
from those of strains in another haplotype.
Mouse Genomic Sequencing
Genomic sequencing of PLG in inbred mouse strains was
performed as previously described [4]; and covered the 2 kb 59
upstream, 1 kb 39 downstream, intron-exon junctions and all
exonic regions.
Quantitative Aspergillus PCR
AF burden was quantified in murine lung at 24 and 48 hours
following inhalation of 3.06108
AF 293 conidia according to the
methods of Bowman, et al [45]. Briefly, organ samples were
mechanically disrupted using a roller-bottle method [46] and then
vigorous agitation in a FastPrep 120 (Qbiogene; Carlsbad, CA)
homogenizer. DNA was extracted from the homogenate using the
DNeasy 96 Tissue Kit (Qiagen; Valencia, CA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Oligonucleotide amplification primers
and a dual-labeled fluorogenic oligonucleotide hybridization probe
complementary to sequence from the 18S rRNA gene utilized by
Bowman, et al [45]; were designed using Primer Express version
1.5 (Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CA). The sequences of these
oligonucleotides are-
(i) sense amplification primer: 59- GGCCCTTAAATAGC-
CCGGT-39
(ii) antisense amplification primer: 59-TGAGCCGATAGTC-
CCCCTAA-3
(iii) probe: 59-6FAM-AGCCAGCGGCCCGCAAATG-TAM-
RA-39.
Modifications to the published protocol include the normaliza-
tion of DNA content by a spike addition of 26106
copies of the
non-murine, non-fungal plasmid Eimeria tenella PKG cDNA
(Accession Number AF411961), with normalization of results to
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 8 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
amount of E. tenella DNA extracted (Bowman, et al; unpublished
data). After homogenization and DNA isolation, samples are
analyzed by TaqMan with the following primers and probe
specific for the parasite gene sequence:
(i) sense amplification primer: 59-AGGGCTTTGCTGCAC-
GAC-39
(ii) antisense amplification primer: 59-TCCACCTCGG-
GACTGTTTG-39
(iii) hybridization probe: 59- FAM-TGCTACTGTTGCA-
GACCGCCGCT-TAMRA-39
TaqMan quantification of the PKG target sequence allows for
an estimate of the recovery of DNA in the experiment from the
crude homogenate through the TaqMan reaction. This assessment
of DNA recovery was made for each experimental sample. The
percent recovery of the PKG target sequence was used to estimate
the recovery of tissue DNA from the sample. Accordingly, each
TaqMan data point for the AF18S rRNA gene target was
normalized based on the recovery of DNA predicted by the PKG
standard. Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism version 4.0
for Windows, (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, www.
graphpad.com).
Fluorescent Labeling of Mouse and Human Plasminogen
Purified mouse plasminogen prepared from outbred mice
(Haematologic Technologies) was dialyzed against PBS and labeled
with AlexaFluor 488 per the manufacturers instructions (Invitro-
gen). The moles dye per mole protein binding ratio of labeled
plasminogen was 5. Free dye was removed by dialyzing labeled
protein for 24 hours against PBS at 4uC. Purified human glu-
plasminogen (Haematologic Technologies) was labeled in the same
manner, with a moles dye per mole protein binding ratio of 6.
Plasminogen Binding to A. fumigatus Conidia
Swollen A. fumigatus conidia were prepared by incubating freshly
harvested A. fumigatus 293 conidia in RPMI for 6 hours at 37uC.
Swollen conidia were washed with PBS prior to incubation with
AlexaFluor 488 labeled murine or human plasminogen. Resting
and swollen A. fumigatus conidia (16107
conidia/ml) were treated
with several concentrations (0.2 to 10 mg/ml) of AlexaFluor 488
labeled mouse or human plasminogen in PBS and incubated at
37uC for 30 minutes with shaking. As controls, swollen conidia
were incubated with increasing concentrations (0.2 to 4 mg/mL) of
FITC-bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Invitrogen). Plasminogen
binding was quantified by flow cytometric analysis (Duke Human
Vaccine Institute Flow Cytometry Core Facility and Flow
Cytometric Core Facility, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences). For competitive inhibition binding assays A.
fumigatus conidia (16107
) were first treated with unlabelled mouse
or human plasminogen (Haematologic Technologies) then Alexa-
Fluor 488 labeled mouse or human plasminogen. Controls
included swollen conidia pre-incubated in PBS-0.1% BSA
overnight prior to incubation with AlexaFluor 488 labeled human
plasminogen as described above. Conidia were incubated at 37uC
for 30 minutes with shaking for each treatment. Plasminogen
binding was quantified by flow cytometric analysis (Duke Human
Vaccine Institute Flow Cytometry Core Facility and Flow
Cytometric Core Facility, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences). For microscopy, conidia were treated with
Calcofluor white (Sigma Biochemicals) to visualize the cell wall.
Binding was visualized using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 Plus (Carl Zeiss
MicroImaging) fluorescent microscope with an AxioCam MRM
digital camera.
Plasminogen Binding to A. fumigatus Hyphae
10 ml of RPMI-1640 medium in a T-25 vented cap tissue
culture flask was inoculated with AF conidia (16107
) and
incubated overnight at 37uC with 5% CO2. Hyphae were
collected by gentle vortexing of the tissue culture flask and 10 ml
aliquots of hyphae were spotted onto glass slides and allowed to
dry. Hyphae were then treated with AlexaFluor 488 labeled mouse
or human plasminogen for 30 minutes at 37uC at varying
concentrations and with Calcofluor white to visualize the cell
wall. For competitive inhibition binding assays A. fumigatus hyphae
were first treated with unlabelled mouse or human plasminogen
(Haematologic Technologies) for 30 minutes at 37uC then Alexa
Fluor 488 labeled mouse or human plasminogen (0.2 mg/ml) for
30 minutes at 37uC. Binding was visualized using a Zeiss Axioskop
2 Plus fluorescent microscope with an AxioCam MRM digital
camera.
Human Genomic Sequencing
Genomic DNA was prepared from patients who received
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) after
myeloablative therapy at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center (Seattle, WA), and their donors. An immortalized
lymphocyte cell line was created from each subject using
peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained prior to transplan-
tation[47]. Genomic DNA was isolated using a Qia-Amp DNA
blood Kit (Qiagen). The cohort represented a sample of 83
patients who developed proven or probable invasive aspergillosis,
according to standardized criteria[48], and 147 patients who did
not. Cases of ‘‘possible’’ aspergillosis were not included in the
study. The plasminogen (PLG) gene extending from 2 kb 59
upstream to 1 kb 39 downstream of human PLG transcript was
sequenced in 20 IA affected donor/recipient pairs using Applied
Biosystems (AB) Version 3.1 Dye Terminators and an ABI 3730
Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Polymorphisms were
identified, and corresponding genotypes determined, by analysis
of the resulting DNA sequence data using PHRED and PHRAP.
Four coding change SNPs were identified and exons containing
these SNPs (exons 2, 3, 11, and 12, Ensembl Human V.36) were
further sequenced for all members of the cohort to determine their
genotypes using PolyPhred. To identify potentially important
sequence changes in hPLG, all exons and the 500 bp promoter
region of the hPLG gene were sequenced in 20 HSCT donor-
recipient pairs; nineteen SNPs were identified. Of the 19 SNPs, 11
SNPs were located in exons and 4 of them induced a change in an
amino acid.
Exons containing these nonsynonymous coding change SNPs
(exons 2, 3, 11, and 12) were sequenced in the remaining sample of
210 Caucasian donor/recipient pairs (63 with proven/probable
IA, 147 without IA) (Demographics; Table 1). SNP Asp472Asn
(rs4252125) at position 827 in exon 11 was the only one of the
nonsynonymous coding change SNPs considered to be of further
interest as it had a minor allele frequency of approximately 25%,
while the other 3 SNPs had minor allele frequencies of ,1%.
Statistical Methods: A Cox proportional hazards approach was
used to model the hazard of IA in relation to the recipient
genotype, over follow-up time after receipt of stem cells. Death
and relapse were treated as censoring mechanisms [49]. Although
the required proportional hazards assumption was not significantly
violated, in the final modeling the follow-up for analysis was begun
on day 40 following transplantation, though this left-truncation did
not materially affect the results. Because patients developing IA
were sampled with probability 0.25, while those who had
remained free of IA were sampled with probability 0.09, the
differential sampling had to be accounted for statistically. This was
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 9 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
accomplished by designating a random 9/25 of the IA cases (31 of
83), together with all noncases, as members of a synthetic random
subcohort, and applying software for case-cohort analysis [50]. In
this way, the variances for parameter estimation were increased
appropriately to account for the dependency induced by using the
same controls in successive risk sets in modeling the risk of IA. This
weighting was also accounted for in calculating Kaplan-Meier
cumulative incidence curves. For multi-category variables, the
improvement in fit provided by their inclusion in a model was
tested by means of chi-squared statistics based on scores. To assess
the proportionality assumption required by the Cox proportional
hazards model, the relative risks associated with the PLG genotype
were permitted to vary across two defined periods of time: days
40–100 and days more than 100 following receipt of stem cells, as
these time intervals represent known differential risk periods for
IA [2]. Additionally, we included models that allowed genotype
(and certain other factors, such as HLA matching status) to have
different effects during different epochs of follow-up. Division of
time into epochs was based on knowledge of how clinical
approaches to management are altered in the months following
HSCT. Analyses were performed both for the entire available
follow-up time, and with follow-up truncated at one year. Results
are shown for the analysis beginning at 40 days and truncated at
one year, but the inference is not materially different with
inclusion of longer follow-up. Covariates considered for adjust-
ment as possible confounders or effect modifiers included age, cell
type, malignancy category, antifungal prophylaxis, gender,
genotype of the donor, and HLA status of graft [matched related
(6/6 match from relative); matched unrelated (6/6 match from
non-relative) or mismatched]. Adjustment for development of
graft-versus-host disease was considered, but judged not to be
defensible as a legitimate potential confounder of recipient
genotype, based on any plausible causal directed acyclic
graph [51]. Possible effects of genotype on survival following IA
were explored through a Cox proportional hazards analysis, with
follow-up beginning the day after diagnosis of IA. The
contribution of each variable to the final model was tested by
means of score tests and all p values given are two-sided.
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for the recipient patients was
tested based on the members of the sub-cohort, while that for the
donors were tested based on all the donors. Work was approved by
the Institutional Review Boards of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Duke University Medical Center and the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Modeling of Murine and Human Plasminogen Amino
Acid Changes
A model for murine kringle-1 (K1) was created using the X-ray
crystal structure of the kringle-1 domain of human plasminogen
(pdb entry: 1CEA). All appropriate mutations required for this
homology modeling were carried out using Sybyl 7.1 (Tripos,
Inc.). The structure was then energy minimized in vacuum using
the Amber force field (FF03) [52]. Gly6 was then mutated to Ser
and the structure was re-minimized using the above force field.
Minimization was performed using the Sander module of the
molecular dynamics package Amber 9.0 [53]. All hydrogens were
added to the crystal structure of human plasminogen K1 (pdb
entry: 1CEA) and the sidechains were energy minimized (in
vacuum) using the Amber force field (FF03). The electrostatic
potential surfaces of the minimized structures were constructed
using the program Grasp [54]. For modeling the change in human
plasminogen, the combined K4K5 domains along with the
connecting region was modeled using the crystal structures of
the individual kringle domains (K4 from PDB entry 2PK4 and K5
from PDB entry 5HPG) and the X-ray crystal structure of K1-K2-
K3 domains of human angiostatin. The K1-K2 relative domain
arrangement in angiostatin was used as the initial template for K4
superimposed on K1 and K5 superimposed on K2 and the loop
building using homology modeling package Sybyl 7.1 (Tripos,
Inc.) yielded the initial structure of K4K5 domains. A subsequent
minimization followed by a nanosecond molecular dynamics
simulation using Generalized Born solvation model (Amber 9.0)
was used to obtain the final representative structure for K4K5 of
plasminogen. Asp472 in the native K4K5 structure was mutated to
Asn and the resultant structure was subjected to a minimization
followed by a nanosecond generalized Born salvation dynamics
trajectory calculation to obtained the representative structure of
the K4K5 (Asp472Asn) mutant structure.
Supporting Information
Figure S1 (A) Computational prediction of chromosomal
regions regulating outcome following immune suppression and
exposure to inhaled A. fumigatus. Segments are arranged from
centromeric to telomeric for all 19 autosomes. Each bar represents
a 30-cM interval, and neighboring bars are offset by 10 cM. The
dotted line represents a useful cutoff for analyzing this data; the
most highly correlated 10% of the loci are above this line. (B) After
exclusion of the DBA/2J strain, the interval containing Plg
remains among the top predicted loci.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.s001 (0.03 MB PDF)
Figure S2 Computational genetic analysis identifies plasmino-
gen (Plg) as a candidate susceptibility gene for invasive
aspergillosis. Haplotype-based computational genetic analysis
was used to analyze the area under the survival curve to identify
genetic factors affecting survival after AF exposure among the
inbred strains. The area under the survival curve (AUC) after AF
exposure was analyzed for 9 inbred strains. There were several
haplotype blocks that had a strong correlation with survival curve
AUC with P value less than 0.01, including the block containing
Plg. However, Plg remained a top biologically plausible candidate.
Red blocks indicate haplotypes for the ‘‘resistant’’ strains (Balb/
CJ, Balb/CbyJ, C57Bl/6J, AKR/J and 129/SvJ) and the
‘‘intermediate’’ strain NZW/LacJ, and the blue blocks indiciate
‘‘susceptible’’ strains (C3H/HeJ and A/J) and the ‘‘intermediate’’
strain MRL/MpJ.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.s002 (0.19 MB PDF)
Figure S3 Ribbon diagrams of (A) human (C) murine (E) murine
(Gly6Ser) plasminogen kringle-1 structures. Amino acid number-
ing for this model is used for kringle 1 only, thus Gly6 in this model
corresponds to Gly110 in the full plasminogen structure. Gly6 (and
Ser6 in the mutated structure) are shown as space filling models on
the ribbon diagram. Also shown are Asp55 and Asp57 (above
Gly6), the key lysine binding residues in kringle-1. Corresponding
electrostatic potential surfaces are shown in (B) for human K-1, (D)
for murine, and (F) for murine (Gly6Ser) structures. Notably, the
negativity of the electrostatic potential surface is enhanced in the
variant plasminogen, thus possibly increasing the affinity of lysine
binding. The area of the lysine binding site is circled.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.s003 (0.48 MB PDF)
Table S1 White blood cell (WBC) and absolute neutrophil
counts (ANC) were measured in each mouse strain at the indicated
times after administration of cyclophosphamide and cortisone
acetate (n = 5 mice/strain). Neutropenia/leukopenia are present at
time of inhalation (day 0) through day 7, and recover by day 10
following inhalation. The pulmonary Aspergillus burden was
measured by RT-PCR 24 and 48 hours after inhalation of
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 10 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
3.0610e8 AF conidia. Of note, all mice had equivalent fungal
burden 24 hours after AF exposure (P = NS, Wilcoxon rank sum).
However, 48 hours after AF exposure, mice from sensitive inbred
strains (A/J and C3H/HEJ, n = 4 mice/strain) had increased
fungal burden from initial values (median conidial equivalents 4.7
log cells/gram lung tissue; range 3.8–5.0) versus resistant inbred
strains (AKR/J, 129/SvJ, C57/Bl6, Balb/C and Balb/CByJ;
n = 4–5 mice/strain) did not increase their fungal burden (median
conidial equivalents 3.7 log cells/gram lung tissue; range 2.7–5.3;
p = 0.02, Mann-Whitney test).
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000101.s004 (0.10 MB
DOC)
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of W. Michael Foster,
PhD (Duke University Medical Center; NIEHS #ES-011961) and William
J. Steinbach, MD (Duke University Medical Center) in the development
and implementation of the inhalational chamber and the Duke University
Medical Center Flow Cytometry Core Facility and the Flow Cytometry
Center at the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences for
assistance with flow cytometry.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: AZ SG GP JP DAS. Performed
the experiments: AZ SG LP. Analyzed the data: AZ GL CW DS LB GP.
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: GL CW DS SG KM JU LB
LP GP. Wrote the paper: AZ GL JP GP DAS.
References
1. Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, Bennett JE, Greene RE, et al. (2002)
Voriconazole versus amphotericin B for primary therapy of invasive aspergil-
losis. N Engl J Med 347: 408–415.
2. Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L (2002) Invasive
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients: changes in epidemi-
ology and risk factors. Blood 100: 4358–4366.
3. Poltorak A, He X, Smirnova I, Liu MY, Van Huffel C, et al. (1998) Defective
LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene.
Science 282: 2085–2088.
4. Grupe A, Germer S, Usuka J, Aud D, Belknap JK, et al. (2001) In silico mapping
of complex disease-related traits in mice. Science 292: 1915–1918.
5. Guo Y, Weller P, Farrell E, Cheung P, Fitch B, et al. (2006) In silico
pharmacogenetics of warfarin metabolism. Nat Biotechnol 24: 531–536.
6. Liao G, Wang J, Guo J, Allard J, Cheng J, et al. (2004) In silico genetics:
identification of a functional element regulating H2-Ealpha gene expression.
Science 306: 690–695.
7. Bianchini R, Nocentini G, Krausz LT, Fettucciari K, Coaccioli S, et al. (2006)
Modulation of pro- and antiapoptotic molecules in double-positive (CD4+CD8+)
thymocytes following dexamethasone treatment. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 319:
887–897.
8. Berge A, Sjobring U (1993) PAM, a novel plasminogen-binding protein from
Streptococcus pyogenes. J Biol Chem 268: 25417–25424.
9. Bower K, Djordjevic SP, Andronicos NM, Ranson M (2003) Cell surface
antigens of Mycoplasma species bovine group 7 bind to and activate
plasminogen. Infect Immun 71: 4823–4827.
10. Boyle MD, Lottenberg R (2000) The interaction of pathogens with humans.
Methods 21: 99–102.
11. Coleman JL, Benach JL (1999) Use of the plasminogen activation system by
microorganisms. J Lab Clin Med 134: 567–576.
12. Collen D, Schlott B, Engelborghs Y, Van Hoef B, Hartmann M, et al. (1993) On
the mechanism of the activation of human plasminogen by recombinant
staphylokinase. J Biol Chem 268: 8284–8289.
13. Crowe JD, Sievwright IK, Auld GC, Moore NR, Gow NA, et al. (2003) Candida
albicans binds human plasminogen: identification of eight plasminogen-binding
proteins. Mol Microbiol 47: 1637–1651.
14. Fox D, Smulian AG (2001) Plasminogen-binding activity of enolase in the
opportunistic pathogen Pneumocystis carinii. Med Mycol 39: 495–507.
15. Levi M, van der Poll T (2005) Two-way interactions between inflammation and
coagulation. Trends Cardiovasc Med 15: 254–259.
16. Sanderson-Smith M, Batzloff M, Sriprakash KS, Dowton M, Ranson M, et al.
(2006) Divergence in the plasminogen-binding group a streptococcal M protein
family: functional conservation of binding site and potential role for immune
selection of variants. J Biol Chem 281: 3217–3226.
17. Sodeinde OA, Sample AK, Brubaker RR, Goguen JD (1988) Plasminogen
activator/coagulase gene of Yersinia pestis is responsible for degradation of
plasmid-encoded outer membrane proteins. Infect Immun 56: 2749–2752.
18. Sun H, Ringdahl U, Homeister JW, Fay WP, Engleberg NC, et al. (2004)
Plasminogen is a critical host pathogenicity factor for group A streptococcal
infection. Science 305: 1283–1286.
19. Suenson E, Thorsen S (1981) Secondary-site binding of Glu-plasmin, Lys-
plasmin and miniplasmin to fibrin. Biochem J 197: 619–628.
20. Ho-Tin-Noe B, Rojas G, Vranckx R, Lijnen HR, Angles-Cano E (2005)
Functional hierarchy of plasminogen kringles 1 and 4 in fibrinolysis and plasmin-
induced cell detachment and apoptosis. Febs J 272: 3387–3400.
21. Gong Y, Kim SO, Felez J, Grella DK, Castellino FJ, et al. (2001) Conversion of
Glu-plasminogen to Lys-plasminogen is necessary for optimal stimulation of
plasminogen activation on the endothelial cell surface. J Biol Chem 276:
19078–19083.
22. Lahteenmaki K, Kuusela P, Korhonen TK (2001) Bacterial plasminogen
activators and receptors. FEMS Microbiol Rev 25: 531–552.
23. Jong AY, Chen SH, Stins MF, Kim KS, Tuan TL, et al. (2003) Binding of
Candida albicans enolase to plasmin(ogen) results in enhanced invasion of
human brain microvascular endothelial cells. J Med Microbiol 52: 615–622.
24. Ge J, Catt DM, Gregory RL (2004) Streptococcus mutans surface alpha-enolase
binds salivary mucin MG2 and human plasminogen. Infect Immun 72:
6748–6752.
25. Bouchara JP, Sanchez M, Esnault K, Tronchin G (1999) Interactions between
Aspergillus fumigatus and host matrix proteins. Contrib Microbiol 2: 167–181.
26. Tronchin G, Esnault K, Renier G, Filmon R, Chabasse D, et al. (1997)
Expression and identification of a laminin-binding protein in Aspergillus
fumigatus conidia. Infect Immun 65: 9–15.
27. Mitchell JW, Baik N, Castellino FJ, Miles LA (2006) Plasminogen Inhibits
TNF{alpha}-induced Apoptosis in Monocytes. Blood.
28. Ploplis VA, French EL, Carmeliet P, Collen D, Plow EF (1998) Plasminogen
deficiency differentially affects recruitment of inflammatory cell populations in
mice. Blood 91: 2005–2009.
29. Syrovets T, Schule A, Jendrach M, Buchele B, Simmet T (2002) Ciglitazone
inhibits plasmin-induced proinflammatory monocyte activation via modulation
of p38 MAP kinase activity. Thromb Haemost 88: 274–281.
30. Weide I, Tippler B, Syrovets T, Simmet T (1996) Plasmin is a specific stimulus of
the 5-lipoxygenase pathway of human peripheral monocytes. Thromb Haemost
76: 561–568.
31. Kesh S, Mensah NY, Peterlongo P, Jaffe D, Hsu K, et al. (2005) TLR1 and
TLR6 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1062: 95–103.
32. Seo KW, Kim DH, Sohn SK, Lee NY, Chang HH, et al. (2005) Protective role
of interleukin-10 promoter gene polymorphism in the pathogenesis of invasive
pulmonary aspergillosis after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 36: 1089–1095.
33. Bellocchio S, Bozza S, Montagnoli C, Perruccio K, Gaziano R, et al. (2005)
Immunity to Aspergillus fumigatus: the basis for immunotherapy and
vaccination. Med Mycol 43 Suppl 1: S181–188.
34. Bellocchio S, Moretti S, Perruccio K, Fallarino F, Bozza S, et al. (2004) TLRs
govern neutrophil activity in aspergillosis. J Immunol 173: 7406–7415.
35. Dubourdeau M, Athman R, Balloy V, Huerre M, Chignard M, et al. (2006)
Aspergillus fumigatus induces innate immune responses in alveolar macrophages
through the MAPK pathway independently of TLR2 and TLR4. J Immunol
177: 3994–4001.
36. Meier A, Kirschning CJ, Nikolaus T, Wagner H, Heesemann J, et al. (2003)
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4 are essential for Aspergillus-induced
activation of murine macrophages. Cell Microbiol 5: 561–570.
37. Netea MG, Warris A, Van der Meer JW, Fenton MJ, Verver-Janssen TJ, et al.
(2003) Aspergillus fumigatus evades immune recognition during germination
through loss of toll-like receptor-4-mediated signal transduction. J Infect Dis 188:
320–326.
38. Overland G, Stuestol JF, Dahle MK, Myhre AE, Netea MG, et al. (2005)
Cytokine responses to fungal pathogens in Kupffer Cells are Toll-like receptor 4
independent and mediated by tyrosine kinases. Scand J Immunol 62: 148–154.
39. Hector RF, Yee E, Collins MS (1990) Use of DBA/2N mice in models of
systemic candidiasis and pulmonary and systemic aspergillosis. Infect Immun 58:
1476–1478.
40. Hinners RG, Burkart JK, Contner GL (1966) Animal exposure chambers in air
pollution studies. Arch Environ Health 13: 609–615.
41. Steinbach WJ, Benjamin DK Jr, Trasi SA, Miller JL, Schell WA, et al. (2004)
Value of an inhalational model of invasive aspergillosis. Med Mycol 42:
417–425.
42. Guo Y, Lu P, Farrell E, Zhang X, Weller P, et al. (2007) In silico and in vitro
pharmacogenetic analysis in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 17735–17740.
43. Wang J, Liao G, Usuka J, Peltz G (2005) Computational genetics: from mouse to
human? Trends Genet 21: 526–532.
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 11 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
44. Wang JaPG (2005) Haplotype-Based Computational Genetic Analysis in Mice.
In: Peltz G, ed. Computational Genetics and Genomics Tools for Understanding
Disease Palo Alto, CA: Humana Press. pp 51–70.
45. Bowman JC, Abruzzo GK, Anderson JW, Flattery AM, Gill CJ, et al. (2001)
Quantitative PCR assay to measure Aspergillus fumigatus burden in a murine
model of disseminated aspergillosis: demonstration of efficacy of caspofungin
acetate. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 45: 3474–3481.
46. Walsh TJ, McEntee C, Dixon DM (1987) Tissue homogenization with sterile
reinforced polyethylene bags for quantitative culture of Candida albicans. J Clin
Microbiol 25: 931–932.
47. Wall FE, Henkel RD, Stern MP, Jenson HB, Moyer MP (1995) An efficient
method for routine Epstein-Barr virus immortalization of human B lymphocytes.
In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 31: 156–159.
48. Ascioglu S, Rex JH, de Pauw B, Bennett JE, Bille J, et al. (2002) Defining
opportunistic invasive fungal infections in immunocompromised patients with
cancer and hematopoietic stem cell transplants: an international consensus. Clin
Infect Dis 34: 7–14.
49. Lee E (1980) Statistical Methods for Survival Data Analysis. Belmont, California:
Lifetime Learning Publications.
50. Prentice R, Mason MW (1986) EPICURE User’s Guide: Hirosoft International.
51. Greenland S, Pearl J, Robins JM (1999) Causal diagrams for epidemiologic
research. Epidemiology 10: 37–48.
52. Cornell WD, Cieplak P, Bayly CI, Gould IR, Merz Jr KM, Ferguson DM,
Spellmeyer DC, Fox T, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA, A second generation force
field for, the simulation of proteins na, and organic molecules (1995) A second
generation force field for the simulation of proteins, nucleic acids, and organic
molecules. J Am Chem Soc 117: 5179–5197.
53. Case TAD DA, Cheatham TE, Simmerling CL, Wang J, Duke RE, R,
Luo KMM, Pearlman DA, et al. (2006) AMBER 9. San Francisco, CA.
54. Nicholls A, Sharp KA, Honig B (1991) Protein folding and association: insights
from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons. Proteins
11: 281–296.
Plasminogen Polymorphisms and Aspergillosis
PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org 12 June 2008 | Volume 4 | Issue 6 | e1000101
