PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1200
Synopses of Research Articles
Open access, freely available online
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e403 | e404
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma
or SSc) is the name for a group of
progressive diseases, all of which involve
the abnormal growth of connective
tissue.They are chronic degenerative
disorders in which there is widespread
vascular deterioration and tissue loss.
The recognition of SSc dates back
many years. Indeed, the characteristic
stretched thickening of the skin was
probably ﬁrst described by Hippocrates.
A more deﬁnitive description of the
condition was made by Carlo Curzio
in 1753, who described a patient as
having wood-like skin with“tight
eyelids, difﬁculty in opening her mouth,
coldness of her skin.”
The etiology of SSc is still not
completely understood,but appears
to be autoimmune.Downstream of the
immune activation,the molecules that
have been implicated are the proﬁbrotic
cytokines,such as transforming growth
factor-beta (TGFβ),interleukin-4 (IL-4),
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF),
and connective tissue growth factor,all
of which can cause ﬁbrosis.In addition
to the proﬁbrotic effects,TGFβ and PDGF
may also contribute to vasculopathy.
Furthermore,the vascular changes in SSc
skin lesions are associated with anti-
endothelial cell autoantibodies.
One problem in the research on SSc
has been ﬁnding an appropriate animal
model.One such model has now been
developed:the transplantation of skin
samples from patients with SSc into
immunodeﬁcient mice.Without the
interference of an effective murine
immune system,it is possible to test the
effect of various interventions on the
patients’skin samples.
In a paper in PLoS Medicine,Chunming
Dong and colleagues used this model to
investigate the effect of paclitaxel on SSc
skin samples.Paclitaxel is an attractive
drug because it stabilizes microtubules,
which affect the propagation of TGFβ
signaling.TGFβ is a multifunctional
regulatory cytokine involved in a large
number of cellular activities.It initiates
its effects by binding to and activating
speciﬁc cell-surface receptors.These
activated TGFβ receptors stimulate a
family of proteins (R-Smads),some of
which act to stimulate further TGFβ
signaling,and others of which act to
inhibit it.The microtubules regulate the
R-Smad access to and activation by TGFβ
receptors.
Dong and colleagues were able to
show that in this model of SSc,paclitaxel
markedly suppressed the activation of
two of the Smads,Smad2 and Smad3,
and,hence,collagen deposition in SSc
grafts.They also showed that the SSc
grafts had increased neovessel formation
relative to normal grafts,regardless of
paclitaxel treatment,thus indicating that
paclitaxel did not have a negative effect
on angiogenesis.In fact,they found that
the neovascular cells were likely derived
from the mouse hosts.
Do these ﬁndings indicate that
paclitaxel is a good drug for SSc?
Certainly more work needs to be done
before this can be said.A particular
concern that paclitaxel can itself lead
to ﬁbrosis at high doses when used,for
example,in the treatment of certain
tumors (in contrast to low doses used
here) needs to be assessed further.
However,SSc is a difﬁcult progressive
disease,and results such as these should
be considered seriously as avenues for
future therapies.
Liu X, Zhu S, Wang T, Hummers L, Wigley
FM, et al. (2005) Paclitaxel modulates
TGFβ signaling in scleroderma skin grafts
in immunodeﬁcient mice. PLoS Med 2(12):
e354. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020354
Manipulating Microtubules in Systemic Sclerosis
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020403
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020403.g001
Suppression of Smad2 phosphorylation by
paclitaxel in in SSc skin graft
Human parvovirus B19 (B19) can cause a wide range of
conditions,which can depend to a large extent on an individual’s
immunological and hematological status.In a normal host,
parvovirus infection can be asymptomatic or cause a range of
clinical syndromes,from erythema infectiosum (“slapped cheek”
disease) to chronic arthritis.Hydrops fetalis and fetal death are
complications of intrauterine B19 infection,and patients who are
immunocompromised or who have hematologic disorders are at
risk of aplastic anemia.
To date,it has been believed that clearance of acute infection
is associated with the lifelong emergence of antiviral IgG,but
there is increasing evidence for an important role for cellular
immune responses,which suggests there might be more to the
way the body deals with this virus.One previous study detected
CD8+
T cell responses—which kill virus-infected cells by cytokine
secretion—in three asymptomatic seropositive individuals.
A better understanding of this aspect of the body’s immune
response could have important implications not only for vaccine
development and treatment for B19,but also for other viral
infections.The long-lasting CD8+
T lymphocyte response means
that parvovirus-based vectors could be considered in vaccine
strategies for other infections.The identiﬁcation of B19 epitopes
for CD8+
T lymphocytes also offers the chance to analyze the
role of such effector cells in chronic arthritis,a disease in which
B19 has been implicated.Better understanding of this response
might also allow researchers to use B19 as a model for analyzing
immunological memory,immunodominance,and the interplay
between cellular and humoral immune responses to a common
clinically relevant human pathogen.
In this month’s PLoS Medicine,Adiba Isa and colleagues
describe evolution of long-lived CD8+
immune responses against
B19 in 11 adults with primary B19 infection.The phenotype of
A Persistent Immune Response to an Acute Virus
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020404
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1201
CD8+
T cells in acute B19 infection has not been studied before.
Normally,the symptoms of this virus are short lived,but the
immune responses showed here indicate sustained activity
many months after initial infection.The team studied two groups
of people:11 who had been recently infected and ﬁve who had
the virus many years ago.CD8+
T cell responses were mapped
using a screening system,which took advantage of the B19’s
compact and stable viral genome.The researchers used human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)–peptide multimeric complexes to
detect CD8+
T cell responses during acute B19 infection.
The researchers believe their results show a new style of
host–virus relationship in which an acute human viral infection
induces persistent activated CD8+
T cell responses.They found
that these responses continued to increase,in some cases
for many months,long after acute symptoms had resolved—
something not seen with other viruses.For example,responses
to HIV are strong in acute infection but typically decline as the
virus is controlled.
Alongside the expansion of antiviral responses was the
continued change in the B19 CD8+
T cells,as indicated by a
range of markers.The evolution of markers could represent a
maturation pathway,said the authors,driven by restimulation in
vivo with antigen.
This T cell response to B19 infection indicated the persistence
of antigen long after the resolution of acute infection.However,
the authors said the status of the virus postinfection is still not
understood.For example,in this study,PCR analysis found B19
DNA in the blood early on during infection,but assays were
negative after 6–12 months when T cell populations remained
active.The most likely reason for these immune responses is
low-level replication at a tissue site for weeks or months after
infection,suggest the authors.But this hypothesis can only be
checked by more sensitive PCR assays.
In addition,the relationship between joint or bone marrow
pathology and T cell responses seen was not clear.In the patients
with arthritis,the most active CD8+
T cell responses were seen at
stages where joint symptoms had resolved.
Altogether,this study is the ﬁrst demonstration that a virus,
not considered a true or classical persistent infection,can lead
to a persistent activated CD8+
T cell response.It suggests that
B19 persists after acute infection,provoking sustained activated
CD8+
T cell responses,which might then play a role in viral
clearance.A better understanding of cytotoxic T lymphocytes
could improve understanding of the role of T cells in acute and
persistent infections and be of great value in vaccine design and
immunotherapy.
Isa A, Kasprowicz V, Norbeck O, Loughry A, Jeffery K, et al (2005)
Prolonged activation of virus-speciﬁc CD8+
T cells after acute B19
infection. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020343
Malaria parasites invade human red
blood cells,and it had already been
recognized in the 1940s that diseases
of red blood cells such as thalassemia
and sickle-cell anemia,which are
the most common group of genetic
disorders in humans,are mainly found
in populations exposed to malaria and
their descendants.It seems that much
of the genetic variation that affects the
phenotype of red blood cells appears to
have evolved due to natural selection by
malaria.Susceptibility to malaria is also
thought to be determined by genetic
variation in the human immune system.
We know less about the speciﬁc immune
system genes involved,but this is an
important area of research because
researchers hope that understanding the
molecular basis of natural immunity will
speed up the development of an efﬁcient
malaria vaccine.
Rather than focusing on the
identification of specific genes and
gene variants, Margaret J. Mackinnon
and colleagues are interested in the
relative contributions of host genetics
and other factors to the risk of malaria.
To estimate the overall contribution
of genetic factors to the difference in
disease incidence between individuals
within a population, one needs three
types of data: (1) disease incidence
for individuals over a certain period
of time (to be able to determine an
individual’s risk), (2) information on
genetic relatedness of the individuals
in the population, and (3) a setup
in which individuals with different
levels of relatedness share the
same environment and/or where
related individuals live in different
environments. (The third condition
is essential to distinguish between
genetic and environmental effects.)
Mackinnon and colleagues studied
two populations of children from a
malaria-endemic area in Kenya for which
they could obtain the necessary data.
In one case, they determined incidence
of mild clinical malaria in 640 children
over a period of ﬁve years. Genetic
relatedness between the children was
determined by verbal interviews with
their mothers. A typical household (i.e.,
shared environment) consisted of a
group of three to six adjacent houses.
Malaria Susceptibility—It’s Not All in the Genes
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020411
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020411.g001
Contributors to variation in mild malaria risk
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e404 | e411
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1202
Within each household, the children
formed several full-sibling, half-sibling,
and ﬁrst-cousin groups.The second
study monitored severe malaria that
led to hospitalization and nonmalaria
hospitalizations in 2,900 children, also
over a ﬁve-year period.This analysis
concentrated on full-siblings.
Using a standard statistical genetics
method of relating similarity in
phenotype to similarity in genotype,
they found that host genetic factors
accounted for approximately one-
quarter to one-third of the total variation
in susceptibility in the populations to
malaria.Of this percentage,only a small
proportion could be attributed to the
best known malaria resistance genes.
This is consistent with other studies
that suggest that malaria susceptibility
is under the control of many different
genes,with each individual gene having a
relatively small epidemiological effect.
When assessing the contribution
of household factors,the researchers
found that for mild clinical malaria,those
factors accounted for slightly more
than a quarter of the total variation.For
hospitalized malaria,they contributed
about 15%,and for hospitalizations with
fever that turned out not to be malaria,
they contributed approximately 35%.
Overall,children living in the 10% of
households with the highest malaria
incidence had approximately twice as
many infections per year than those
living in the 10% of households with the
lowest incidence.
The researchers do not question the
long-term beneﬁts of understanding
the genetic factors but conclude that
“identifying and tackling the household
effects must be the more efﬁcient route
to reducing the burden of disease in
malaria-endemic areas.”Factors such
as suitable conditions for mosquitoes
to breed and survive as well as human
behavior are likely to play major roles.
“We need to determine what makes
the difference between low-risk and
high-risk households,”Mackinnon
says,“but whatever it is, it seems likely
to be an easy target using tools such
as education and the low-cost, low-
tech devices that we already have at
hand such as bed nets, residual indoor
spraying, and cleaning up backyards for
mosquito breeding sites.”
Mackinnon MJ, Mwangi TW, Snow RW,
Marsh K, Williams TN (2005) Heritability
of malaria in Africa. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.0020340
One of the tools in the scientist’s
armory for resolving a medical issue or
consolidating a body of clinical trials is
the systematic review of the published
medical literature.This technique
involves doing a literature search and
critical appraisal of individual studies,
and in addition,may also use statistical
techniques to combine the results of
these studies.One of the aims of such
reviews is to assess and then,ideally,
include all appropriate studies that
address the question of the review.But
ﬁnding all studies is not always possible,
and researchers have no way of knowing
what they have missed.But does it matter
if some studies are left out?
It would deﬁnitely matter if the
missing studies differed signiﬁcantly
from the included ones.And the worst-
case scenario is that the accumulation
of evidence might point to the wrong
answer if the studies included are
unrepresentative of all those that have
been done.
Studies of publication bias have noted
that papers with signiﬁcant positive
results are easier to ﬁnd than those with
nonsigniﬁcant or negative results.As a
result,overrepresentation of positive
studies in systematic reviews might mean
that such reviews are biased toward a
positive result.Publication bias is just one
in a group of related biases,all of which
potentially lead to overrepresentation
of signiﬁcant or positive studies in
systematic reviews.Other types of bias
include time lag bias (positive studies
are more likely to be published rapidly);
multiple publication bias (positive studies
are more likely to be published more
than once); citation bias (positive studies
are more likely to be cited by others); and
language bias (positive studies are more
likely to be published in English).
In PLoS Medicine,John Ioannidis and
colleagues have taken a closer look at bias
in Chinese genetics studies.Research done
in non-English-speaking countries has
two outlets.A study might be published
in English-language journals,which are
usually indexed in major international
bibliographic databases such as
PubMed,or in domestic journals,many
of which are not indexed in international
databases.The Chinese literature is a
prominent example of where domestic
scientiﬁc journals are not catalogued in
international databases.There is some
evidence that the decision to publish in
international versus domestic journals
might be inﬂuenced by the results.For
example,signiﬁcant results are often
published in international journals,
whereas nonsigniﬁcant results appear in
the local literature,resulting in a language
bias—although,the reverse situation has
also been described.
Genetics studies pose particular
problems for impartial reporting.There
are millions of polymorphisms in the
human genome,and an exponentially
increasing number of studies are trying
to associate genetic polymorphisms with
risk of disease or treatment outcomes.
Selective publication might invalidate the
overall picture of genetic risk factors.
The authors examined 13 gene–
disease associations.Studies were more
likely to be published when the disease
was considered common in China.They
found 161 Chinese studies on 12 of these
gene–disease associations,only 20 of
which were indexed in PubMed.Chinese
studies had signiﬁcantly more prominent
genetic effects than non-Chinese
studies,and 48% were statistically
signiﬁcant per se,despite their smaller
sample size.Moreover,the largest,most
exaggerated genetic effects were often
seen in PubMed-indexed Chinese studies.
Chinese studies usually appeared several
years after their equivalent was ﬁrst
postulated in the world literature.
The larger genetic effects in Chinese
studies are unlikely to reﬂect genuine
heterogeneity and are more likely to do
with publication bias operating within
the Chinese literature,say the authors.
It is possible that there was reluctance
to submit and publish negative or
inconclusive results when a large body
Bias in Reporting of Genetic Association Studies
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020419
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020419.g001
Different results in local literature studies
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e411 | e419
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1203
of English-language literature has shown
the presence of genetic effects.However,
such“forced”conﬁrmation negates the
importance of independent conﬁrmation
of research results.This problem is
probably not limited to the Chinese
literature.These phenomena haven’t been
noted in molecular medicine before,but
could become a serious problem in such a
fast-moving ﬁeld.Moreover,the inclusion
of poor-quality research and additional
selectively reported data may contaminate
the better literature rather than provide a
more accurate,comprehensive picture.
The ﬁndings have two broad
implications.First, language bias might
be important to consider in meta-
analyses of observational studies, where
its effect might be larger than its effect
on randomized evidence.Second,
because human genome epidemiology
is a global enterprise, a comprehensive
global view is important to help decipher
artifacts from true genetic effects.The
Chinese literature in particular will be
essential for the evaluation of evidence
on genetic risk factors.China is making
rapid scientiﬁc progress in this ﬁeld and
joining in international collaborative
projects, such as the Human Genome
Project.To develop a global perspective,
one way forward might be for all
investigators working on the genetics
of a speciﬁc disease to register with
a common network, making it easier
to trace additional unpublished or
nonindexed data.
Pan Z, Trikalinos TA, Kavvoura FK, Lau
J, Ioannidis JPA (2005) Local literature
bias in genetic epidemiology: An empirical
evaluation of the Chinese literature. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pmed.0020334
Every year at least 30 million women in malarious areas of
Africa become pregnant.The symptoms and complications of
malaria during pregnancy differ with the intensity of malaria
transmission and with the level of immunity acquired by the
pregnant woman. In areas where malaria is endemic, most
adult women have developed sufficient immunity such that,
even during pregnancy, P. falciparum infection does not
usually result in fever or other clinical symptoms. In these
areas, the principal impact of malaria infection is due to
the presence of parasites in the placenta. Placental malaria
frequently results in low birth weight, and estimates suggest
that in endemic areas 19% of cases of infant low birth weight
are due to malaria, and that 6% of infant deaths are due to
low birth weight caused by malaria.
In addition to affecting birth weight, placental malaria
might increase the susceptibility of infants to malaria, but
so far studies on this subject have been inconclusive. Patrick
Duffy and colleagues examined the effect of placental malaria
on infant malaria susceptibility in a prospective cohort study
of newborns in a malaria-endemic area.They monitored
parasitemia in 453 infants in a region of northeastern Tanzania
where malaria transmission is very high (with an estimated 400
infective mosquito bites per individual per year). Sixty-nine
of the infants were born to mothers with placental malaria.
Placental malaria is caused by a different form of the malaria
parasite, which does not commonly infect nonpregnant
individuals. Even in endemic areas, women, therefore, lack
immunity to the placenta-speciﬁc form of the parasite prior to
their ﬁrst pregnancy, but acquire it over successive pregnancies.
As a consequence, placental malaria is most frequent
and severe in ﬁrst-time mothers. Of the 69 mothers with
placental malaria in this study, 45% were ﬁrst-time mothers
(or primigravid), 38% were giving birth to their second child
(secundigravid), and 17% had had multiple prior pregnancies
(multigravid).
Overall, infants of mothers with placental malaria were 41%
more likely to experience malaria parasitemia themselves
in the first year of life. However, the odds of parasitemia
throughout infancy were also strongly influenced by the
mother’s gravidity.The researchers found a surprising
protective effect of placental malaria of primigravid mothers
on their firstborns’ risk of parasitemia. Placental malaria of
multigravid women, on the other hand, significantly increased
risk of parasitemia during infancy. And even in the absence of
placental malaria, firstborn children were less likely to have
parasitemia than infants born to multigravid mothers.These
results suggest that risk of parasitemia during infancy was
modified by an interaction between placental malaria and
gravidity.
Duffy and colleagues speculate that the stronger
inﬂammatory response to placental malaria in ﬁrst-time
mothers could reduce congenital transmission or somehow
strengthen the fetal immune system against malaria.They
also suggest that the opposing effects of placental malaria
in different gravid groups might explain why earlier studies
found no signiﬁcant risk between placental malaria and malaria
susceptibility during the ﬁrst two years of life.The results here
are provocative but preliminary.Additional larger studies are
necessary to conclusively demonstrate an interaction between
placental malaria and gravidity in infant malaria susceptibility,
and to examine potential modulation of congenital malaria
transmission and infant immunity to the parasite by placental
inﬂammation.
Mutabingwa TK, Bolla MC, Li JL, Domingo GJ, Li X, et al. (2005)
Maternal malaria and gravidity interact to modify infant susceptibility
to malaria. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020407
Surprising Effects of Maternal Malaria and Gravidity on Infant Malaria Burden
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020413
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020413.g001
Section from a malaria-infected placenta (Photo: Michal Fried)
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e419 | e413
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1204
There are many instances in medical
practice of an intervention becoming
adopted despite evidence of it not being
of the highest quality.The converse is
also true; despite good evidence for the
effectiveness of a treatment,it may not
be implemented for a variety of different
reasons.Reasons may be social or
ﬁnancial or due to a lack of knowledge of
the beneﬁts of the intervention.
In this issue of PLoS Medicine,Randall
Stafford and colleagues investigate the
use of one such underused intervention,
aspirin,in the United States.Many studies
have shown that aspirin is beneﬁcial as
both primary and secondary prevention
of cardiovascular disease in a wide range
of patients who do not otherwise have
contraindications such as increased
bleeding risk.For example,the American
College of Chest Physicians has issued
a grade 1A recommendation (such
recommendations are“strong and indicate
that the beneﬁts … outweigh risks,
burden,and costs”) that aspirin be used for
secondary prevention of acute coronary
events.The American Diabetes Association
recommends aspirin to all people with
diabetes over 40,or younger if they have
additional cardiovascular risk factors.
Stafford and colleagues used the
1993–2003 US National Ambulatory
Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) and
National Hospital Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey (NHAMCS) to estimate
aspirin use by cardiovascular risk.These
validated surveys are comprehensive
collections of data on prescribing;NAMCS
captures health-care services provided by
private ofﬁce-based physicians,whereas
NHAMCS captures services offered at
hospital outpatient departments.Their
data are representative of care provided
in a huge number of outpatient visits—
around 750 million in 2003.
What the authors found was that
although aspirin use increased steadily
over the time of the survey,even at its
highest—in 2003—it was prescribed
at only 32.8 % of high-risk visits; for
low-risk visits,the rate was just 1%–3%.
They also compared prescribing of
aspirin and statins,and found that the
rate of prescribing of statins overtook
that of aspirin in1997–1998,and rose
steadily thereafter.There were also
substantial differences in the age of
patients prescribed aspirin,with lower
usage found in those below 45 than
those 45 or above,and lower usage in
women.Also,there was lower prescribing
by noncardiologists than cardiologists,
in private practices versus hospital
outpatient departments,and at return
visits versus ﬁrst-time visits.In people
with diabetes who were at intermediate
risk,aspirin use was only 11.7% by 2003.
So despite all the recommendations
and evidence for the use of aspirin,rates
of prescribing are low,even for conditions
where clear guidelines exist.As the authors
say,“gaps observed with secondary
prevention are particularly concerning,
given the existence of conclusive clinical
evidence and unequivocal practice
guidelines.”One particular cause of this
lack of adherence to guidelines may be
speciﬁc to the US—the less restrictive
regulations on newer drug advertising
of drugs such as statins,particularly
widespread consumer advertising.
Hence,despite good evidence and the
cost effectiveness of aspirin,statins are
increasingly preferred over aspirin.
As the authors conclude,“marked
changes in clinical practice are unlikely
to occur unless more aggressive,
innovative means are implemented to
enhance health-care provider and patient
adherence to consensus guidelines.”
Stafford RS, Monti V, Ma J (2005)
Underutilization of aspirin persists in US
ambulatory care for the secondary and
primary prevention of cardiovascular
disease. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.0020353
Flying in the Face of the Evidence; Low Aspirin Use in the US Outpatient Setting
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020416
Dementia is a common condition in
the elderly; around 6% of people over
65 and up to 50% over 90 have some
form of dementia,about half of which
are due to Alzheimer disease (AD).The
dementia caused by AD has an insidious
onset and a progressive course with
slow deterioration in cerebral function,
initially affecting short-term memory and
cognitive skills,and later speech,motor
functions,and personality.Death usually
occurs within four to eight years after
diagnosis.
The aim of treatment is to reverse
cognitive decline and improve behavioral
and psychological functions.Key
questions in Alzheimer research are how
best to halt the progression of disease
to maintain and if possible restore
cognitive skills,and when to initiate such
interventions in order to be effective.
AD is identiﬁed at autopsy by the
presence of hallmark lesions in key
regions of the brain.These lesions,
known as amyloid plaques,are formed
by the aggregation of small peptides,
called amyloid β peptide (Aβ),that are
produced when amyloid precursor
protein (APP) is cleaved by the action of
two enzymes,β-APP cleaving enzyme
and γ-secretase.One approach to the
treatment of Alzheimer is,therefore,
limiting the production of Aβ from its
precursor by inhibiting one or both of
these enzymes.However,it is not yet clear
whether this approach will prevent the
brain lesions and cognitive symptoms
from getting worse,and if it will then
promote the removal of preexisting
plaques and reverse cognitive decline.
To answer such questions,Joanna
Jankowsky and colleagues have
developed mice that produce Aβ at
levels sufﬁcient to induce severe amyloid
burden by six months of age.The
animals carry an additional transgene
that acts as a switch to control when
Aβ is produced.Commonly known as
the tet-off system,the switch is turned
off when the mice are fed tetracycline
Will Stopping Aβ Production Reverse the Damage in Alzheimer Disease?
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020418
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020418.g001
Amyloid plaques,shown here as false-color
images,are highly stable structures in vivo
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e416 | e418
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1205
Type 2 diabetes has been loosely
deﬁned as“adult onset”diabetes, but as
diabetes becomes more common, cases
are being diagnosed in younger people
and children. In determining the risk
of developing diabetes, environmental
factors, such as food intake and exercise,
are known to have an important role;
most people with type 2 diabetes are
either overweight or obese. Inherited
factors are also important, but the
genes involved remain poorly deﬁned.
In rare forms of diabetes, mutations of
one gene can result in disease, whereas
in type 2 diabetes, many genes are
thought to be involved. One difﬁculty in
understanding the genetic role is that
genes associated with diabetes might
show only a subtle variation in their
sequence, and these variations may be
extremely common. Hence, it can be
very hard to link such common gene
variations, known as single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), with increased
risk of developing diabetes.
One method of ﬁnding these
diabetes genes is by whole-genome
linkage studies in which associations
between parts of the genome and risk
of developing diabetes are looked for.
Studies so far have identiﬁed several
candidate genes associated with type
2 diabetes,although many results have
been difﬁcult to replicate.The list of
genes for which there is good evidence
from meta-analyses includes genes
encoding for PPARG,calpain 10,Kir 6.2,
and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1).
These genes have a variety of effects;
PPARG P12A polymorphism is associated
with enhanced insulin sensitivity and
protects against type 2 diabetes.Two
SNPs in the gene encoding for cystein
protease calpain 10 (CAPN10) confer
increased susceptibility to insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes.Kir 6.2 is
involved in glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion in pancreatic cells.And carriers
of a polymorphism in the IRS1 gene have
been shown to have reduced islet insulin
content in pancreatic islets.
In this issue of PLoS Medicine,Valeriya
Lyssenko and colleagues from Lund
University sought to consolidate previous
work by studying the predictive value of
these variants for type 2 diabetes side
by side in the largest study of its kind
to date.They investigated the effect of
these gene variants in 2,293 nondiabetic
people aged 18–70 years old in western
Finland—the Botnia study—over a
median of six,range 2–12,years.In
Predicting the Development of Type 2 Diabetes
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020406
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020406.g001
Genetic prediction of type 2 diabetes in the Botnia study
or its analog,doxycycline.Once given
the drug,Aβ production in the brains
of these mice diminishes by more than
95% of pretreatment levels within two
weeks.This system,thus,mimics the
effect of shutting down Aβ production
with enzyme inhibitors that are being
developed for use in human patients.
In the study, the researchers used
doxycycline to switch off production of
Aβ, and examined what happened to the
amyloid pathology. Not surprisingly, the
increase in number and size of amyloid
lesions that normally occurs as the mice
get older was completely prevented
by suppressing Aβ production.
However, the researchers also found
no substantial clearance of preexisitng
plaques, even after six months of
treatment (one-quarter of the normal
mouse lifespan).
What do these ﬁndings mean for
human Alzheimer research? First,the
study provides evidence that the lesions
found in AD may be more difﬁcult
for the brain to repair than protein
aggregates found in other diseases
such as Huntington or prion disease.
Second,the ﬁndings suggest that the
removal of plaques,once formed,may
require more than simply halting the
production of the Aβ peptide.However,
as with all animal models,there are
differences in comparison to the
human disease,leading to both over-
and underestimation of the relative
importance of an effect in humans.The
researchers do not yet know whether the
plaques formed in mice may be more
resistant to clearance than those seen in
human disease.Conversely,the human
brain,unlike the murine one,may have
a more efﬁcient way of clearing amyloid
plaques.What this study makes clear is
that treatments directed at reducing Aβ
peptide production in AD will likely be
most effective when started as early as
possible.
Jankowsky JL, Slunt HH, Gonzales V,
Savonenko AV, Wen JC, et al. (2005)
Persistent amyloidosis following suppression
of Aβ production in a transgenic model of
Alzheimer disease. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.0020355
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e418 | e406
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org 1206
C-type lectins are carbohydrate-binding cell surface molecules
with a wide range of biological functions,many of which are
related to immunity.Despite its name,dendritic cell–speciﬁc
intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing nonintegrin
(DC-SIGN) is not only expressed on dendritic cells but also on
specialized macrophages in the placenta and lung.A number
of pathogens are known to interact with DC-SIGN,and some
(including HIV) seem to have evolved to derive advantages from
these interactions.
Recent in vitro studies have shown that DC-SIGN can
interact with Mycobacterium tuberculosis through a lipoglycan
(a molecule composed of sugars and fatty acids) on the
mycobacterial envelope called lipoarabinomannan (LAM).Trying
to understand the role of DC-SIGN in tuberculosis (TB),Ludovic
Tailleux and colleagues have focused on the interaction between
M.tuberculosis and DC-SIGN–expressing cells in the lungs of
human patients.
The researchers studied a total of 74 individuals, including 40
with TB, 11 with sarcoidosis, 14 with asthma, and nine control
participants without active lung infection or inﬂammation. All
patients underwent bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), a procedure
that yields cells and proteins from the lower respiratory tract.
The researchers then examined BAL cell populations after
staining for various cell-surface markers by ﬂow cytometry,
and found that, in individuals without TB, very few alveolar
macrophages (an average of 3%) expressed DC-SIGN. In
contrast, an average of 30% (and up to 70%) of macrophages
from patients with TB expressed the lectin.
Tailleux and colleagues then incubated alveolar
macrophages from a patient without TB ex vivo with M.
tuberculosis, which resulted in infection of a subset of the cells.
When the researchers examined DC-SIGN expression, they
found that both infected and noninfected (bystander) cells
in the population started to express DC-SIGN.The effect on
bystander cells suggests that soluble factors from the microbe
and/or the infected cells can induce DC-SIGN expression.
Further functional ex vivo studies with cells from human
patients indicated that DC-SIGN expression renders alveolar
macrophages more susceptible to infection.
The authors propose a scenario where complement receptors
mediate most of the initial infection of alveolar macrophages in
a naïve host,and where—once the infection is established—DC-
SIGN–expressing alveolar macrophages become preferential
target cells for M.tuberculosis.Future work will be focused on
identifying the soluble factors involved,and on determining
whether DC-SIGN induction is an essential part of TB pathogenesis.
Tailleux L, Pham-Thi N, Bergeron-Lafaurie A, Herrmann JL,
Charles P, et al. (2005) DC-SIGN induction in alveolar macrophages
deﬁnes privileged target host cells for mycobacteria in patients with
tuberculosis. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020381
DC-SIGN and Lung Pathogenesis in Patients with Tuberculosis
DOI:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020410
addition,they also studied the uncoupling
protein 2 gene (UCP2)—a polymorphism
in the promoter of this gene (UCP2
−866G>A) (rs659366) has been
associated in some,but not all,studies
with increased risk of type 2 diabetes and
impaired insulin secretion.
The study took place from 1990 to
2002, and enrolled patients from ﬁve
health centers in western Finland who
were asked to have health checks
every two to three years. Six percent
(132) of people developed type 2
diabetes.The key ﬁnding was that
variants in the PPARG and CAPN10 genes
increased future risk for type 2 diabetes,
particularly in individuals with other risk
factors. In individuals with a high risk
of developing diabetes—with a fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) of 5.6 millimoles
per liter and body mass index (BMI) of
30 kilograms per square meter—the
hazard ratio increased to 21.2 for the
combination of the PPARG PP and
CAPN10 SNP43/44 GG/TT genotypes
compared with those with low-risk
genotypes with normal FPG and BMI less
than 30 kilograms per square meter.
The researchers found that replacing
the family history with the PPARG and
CAPN10 variants in a predictive model
(particularly in combination) gave
almost the same strong prediction
of subsequent type 2 diabetes.
These genotypes also inﬂuenced the
relationship between BMI and FPG,that
is,in carriers of risk genotypes,there was
a steeper increase in FPG for any given
BMI.
The authors argue that the comparison
of all the key gene variants side by side
in one large study adds substantially
to previous papers that have examined
the effect of single gene variants on the
risk of conversion to type 2 diabetes in
interventional trials.
However,it is important to understand
the effect of these variants on the
risk of disease in a large,prospective
observational study before studying
additive or synergistic effects with
interactions such as lifestyle changes,
they said.One of the problems of other
studies has been that results have been
different between different subgroups.
Although this study has limited power,
as the largest of its kind it suggests that
genetic variants in candidate genes can
predict future type 2 diabetes,particularly
in association with conventional risk
factors such as obesity and abnormal
glucose tolerance.With accumulating
data from prospective studies,it should
be possible to deﬁne whether there will
be a future role for genetic prediction of
type 2 diabetes or whether these variants
will inﬂuence response to prevention or
treatment.
Lyssenko V, Almgren P, Anevski D, Orho-
Melander M, Sjögren M, et al. (2005)
Genetic prediction of future type 2 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020345
December 2005 | Volume 2 | Issue 12 | e406 | e410
