A Spectrum of Severe Familial Liver Disorders Associate
with Telomerase Mutations
Rodrigo T. Calado1.
*, Joshua A. Regal1.
, David E. Kleiner2
, David S. Schrump3
, Nathan R. Peterson1
,
Veronica Pons5
, Stephen J. Chanock4
, Peter M. Lansdorp6
, Neal S. Young1
1 Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 2 Laboratory of Pathology,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 3 Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 4 Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 5 Hematology Department, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 6 British Columbia Cancer Agency
and Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Abstract
Background: Telomerase is an enzyme specialized in maintaining telomere lengths in highly proliferative cells. Loss-of-
function mutations cause critical telomere shortening and are associated with the bone marrow failure syndromes
dyskeratosis congenita and aplastic anemia and with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Here, we sought to determine the
spectrum of clinical manifestations associated with telomerase loss-of-function mutations.
Methodology/Principal Findings: Sixty-nine individuals from five unrelated families with a variety of hematologic, hepatic,
and autoimmune disorders were screened for telomerase complex gene mutations; leukocyte telomere length was
measured by flow fluorescence in situ hybridization in mutation carriers and some non-carriers; the effects of the identified
mutations on telomerase activity were determined; and genetic and clinical data were correlated. In six generations of a
large family, a loss-of-function mutation in the telomerase enzyme gene TERT associated with severe telomere shortening
and a range of hematologic manifestations, from macrocytosis to acute myeloid leukemia, with severe liver diseases marked
by fibrosis and inflammation, and one case of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis but not with autoimmune disorders.
Additionally, we identified four unrelated families in which loss-of-function TERC or TERT gene mutations tracked with
marrow failure, pulmonary fibrosis, and a spectrum of liver disorders.
Conclusions/Significance: These results indicate that heterozygous telomerase loss-of-function mutations associate with
but are not determinant of a large spectrum of hematologic and liver abnormalities, with the latter sometimes occurring in
the absence of marrow failure. Our findings, along with the link between pulmonary fibrosis and telomerase mutations, also
suggest a common pathogenic mechanism for fibrotic diseases in which defective telomere repair plays important role.
Citation: Calado RT, Regal JA, Kleiner DE, Schrump DS, Peterson NR, et al. (2009) A Spectrum of Severe Familial Liver Disorders Associate with Telomerase
Mutations. PLoS ONE 4(11): e7926. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007926
Editor: Robyn Klein, Washington University School of Medicine, United States of America
Received August 7, 2009; Accepted October 26, 2009; Published November 20, 2009
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Public Domain declaration which stipulates that, once placed in the public
domain, this work may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose.
Funding: This research was supported in part by the NIH Intramural Research Program (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and National Cancer Institute).
Work in the Lansdorp laboratory is supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP38075 and GMH79042) and the National Cancer
Institute of Canada (with support from the Terry Fox Run). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: Dr. Lansdorp reports being a founding shareholder in Repeat Diagnostics, a company that specializes in length measurement of
leukocyte telomeres with the use of flow-FISH.
* E-mail: calador@nhlbi.nih.gov
. These authors contributed equally to this work.
Introduction
Telomeres consist of tandem TTAGGG repeats and associated
proteins located at the ends of chromosomes that serve to prevent
recombination, end-to-end fusion, and activation of DNA damage
responses [1]. Telomere attrition occurs with each cell division as a
result of DNA polymerase’s inability to replicate the extreme 39-
end of template strands [2,3]. Progressive telomere shortening
signals proliferation arrest and cellular senescence via p53, p21,
and PMS2 [4]. In order to maintain proliferative capacity without
compromising chromosome stability, embryonic and adult stem
cells and certain somatic cells counter telomeric attrition by
telomerase-catalyzed addition of TTAGGG repeats to the 39
telomeric overhangs [5]. Constitutional loss-of-function telomerase
mutations result in rapid telomere shortening and premature
cellular senescence in proliferative somatic tissues [6].
Defective telomere repair has been causally associated with
several human diseases. Genetic linkage analysis of the constitu-
tional marrow failure syndrome dyskeratosis congenita led to the
discovery of mutations in the genes DKC1 (which encodes dyskerin)
[7] and telomerase RNA component (TERC) [8]. We reported
mutations in TERC [9] and telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) [10] to be risk factors for apparently acquired aplastic
anemia, a marrow failure disease occurring in patients who lack
the typical physical anomalies and family history of dyskeratosis
congenita. Mutations in telomerase complex genes also appear in
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 1 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
families with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [11–13], and pulmo-
nary disease, esophageal stricture, malignancy, and liver disease
also have been reported in twenty, seventeen, eight, and seven
percent of dyskeratosis congenita patients, respectively [14].
Prior investigation of the clinical manifestations related to
telomerase deficiency has been restricted to the screening of
patient cohorts with specific diagnoses (bone marrow failure,
pulmonary fibrosis). Using a different approach, we studied the
family members of five unrelated patients with marrow failure and
telomerase mutations; we genetically screened relatives who had a
variety of hematologic, hepatic, and autoimmune disorders. We
found that mutations were associated with a wide range of
hematologic abnormalities, from macrocytosis to acute myeloid
leukemia, and with severe liver diseases characterized by fibrosis,
inflammation, and regeneration occurring independently of
marrow failure or other affected organs. Idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis was diagnosed in one mutation-carrier individual. No
other investigated illnesses tracked with mutational status.
Results
Family A
The proband (Subject A-V-23; Fig. 1A) presented at age
twenty-five with a ten-year history of progressive pancytopenia
(Fig. 2A). We have previously found that he was heterozygous
for a loss-of-function TERT K570N mutation [15]. Eighteen
members of his immediate family (Fig. 1A, inset) were previously
screened and eight tested positive for the mutation [15]. A long
history of hematologic diseases was well known in the family back
to the patient’s paternal great-great-grandmother, Subject A-I-2,
who died of an apparent blood disorder at the age of sixty-five.
However, the great-grandmother and the grandfather, Subjects
A-II-7 and A-III-16 (the latter previously found to be positive for
the mutation [15]), had not manifested hematologic symptoms.
The proband’s father (Subject A-IV-29) had thrombocyto-
penia and mild anemia from childhood. By age thirty-three, he
developed myelodysplasia, which rapidly progressed to acute
myeloid leukemia and death subsequent to an induction cycle of
chemotherapy (Fig. 2B). The father was an obligatory carrier, as
three of his sisters and his father also tested positive and his wife
(the proband’s mother) tested normal. Another of the proband’s
heterozygous paternal aunts (Subject A-IV-26) and the index
patient’s two heterozygous sisters, Subjects A-V-19 and A-V-20,
ages forty-seven, twenty-two, and nineteen, respectively, only have
macrocytosis, whereas his two wild-type sisters (Subjects A-V-21
and A-V-22) are healthy and without hematologic abnormalities.
The patient’s eldest of three sons, now six years old, carries the
mutation, but he is asymptomatic and has normal blood counts.
The family has a history of severe liver disease. In our first
report [15], only one paternal aunt (Subject A-IV-23) was found to
carry the mutation and have liver disease. She underwent
successful liver transplantation at age twenty for a non-A, non-B
hepatitis that rapidly evolved to submassive hepatic necrosis with
early fibrosis (Fig. 2C). Pathological examination of her liver
uncovered massive necrosis without significant hepatitis, which is
not specific for a particular etiology. Masson stain revealed early
fibrosis in areas of parenchymal collapse and at the edges of portal
areas and around central veins. She experienced anemia during
pregnancy, but she otherwise had no history of hematologic
abnormalities. The paternal aunt with a twenty-year history of
aplastic anemia (Subject A-IV-25) and also heterozygous for the
mutation developed dyspnea and cough at the age of forty-six after
our first report. Spirometry revealed a moderately restrictive
pattern and a very severe diffusion defect. Chest computed
tomography showed heterogeneous bilateral peripheral lower lung
infiltrates, suggestive of pulmonary fibrosis. Prednisone therapy
was initiated, but she developed rapidly accumulating ascites, and
was diagnosed with non-cirrhotic portal hypertension. She tested
negative for hepatitis-associated viruses. Hepatocellular and
canalicular enzymes were in the normal range, but her albumin
was mildly low (3.6 g/dL) and total bilirubin was mildly increased
(1.6 g/dL). Liver biopsy revealed no fibrosis connecting portal
areas or perisinusoidal fibrosis. However, portal areas were small
without visible vein (Fig. 2D). Hepatocytes showed variation in
cell and nuclear size, and varying plate width, consistent with
regeneration on reticulin stain (Fig. 2E). CD34 abnormally
stained in the sinusoidal endothelial cells around the portal areas
and central veins, consistent with an abnormal proportion of
arterial blood flow to the sinuses (Fig. 2F). Iron was heavily
accumulated, mainly in hepatocytes in zone 1. Her pulmonary
function rapidly deteriorated, and she died of respiratory
insufficiency.
We now expanded the genetic screening to an additional 35
relatives (Fig. 1A). Only one relative tested positive for the mutation,
which was a first-cousin-twice-removed (Subject A-III-11) who died
at the age of forty-eight with the diagnosis of liver cirrhosis. Her
mutational status was demonstrated by sequencing DNA extracted
from a paraffin-embedded liver biopsy obtained from hospital
archives. She presented with pyoderma gangrenosum and upon
workup, her liver enzymes and bilirubin were elevated (AST,
124 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 410 IU/L; albumin, 3.8 g/dL; total
bilirubin, 3.8 mg/dL), and liver biopsy (Fig. 2G) demonstrated pre-
cirrhotic chronic cholestatic liver disease with a differential diagnosis
of primary sclerosing cholangitis or a sclerosing cholangitis secondary
to autoimmune hepatitis. Serology for hepatitis A and B were
negative at the time. She was treated with azathioprine and
prednisone for one month, after which time she became severely
jaundiced. Her clinical state deteriorated, and she died of fungemia.
Her mother, a great-great-aunt to the index patient (Subject A-II-4)
died at forty-nine of liver cirrhosis. Unfortunately, no biopsy
specimen or clinical records were available. Because her husband
was not related to the proband, and her daughter (A-III-11) carried
the mutation, she was an obligatory carrier (Fig. 1A).
There was no nail dystrophy, leukoplakia, or skin hyperpig-
mentation, all physical features characteristic of dyskeratosis
congenita, in any of the mutation-carriers. Although the index
patient and some of his relatives showed a strikingly premature
graying of hair, surprisingly this characteristic did not track with
the mutation. No history of alcohol consumption or smoking was
present in the family.
Family B
The proband (Subject B-II-3; Fig 1B), a 57-year-old man
heterozygous for a novel TERC nucleotide 341–360 deletion not
found in 188 controls, presented a six-year history of Barrett’s
esophagus and recently worsening dysphagia. Imaging displayed a
tumor at the gastro-esophageal junction, which was identified as
esophageal cancer by biopsy. During the initial evaluation, the
patient was pancytopenic, and his bone marrow revealed 5%
cellularity with trilineage hypoplasia but without malignant
infiltration. His liver enzymes and function tests also were abnormal
(alkaline phosphatase, 482 IU/L; albumin, 2.2 g/dL; total biliru-
bin, 0.9 mg/dL). The tumor was surgically resected, and concurrent
liver biopsy showed cirrhosis with foci of lobular inflammation
dominated by plasma cells, extensive sinusoidal fibrosis, and
Mallory bodies (Fig. 2H). Serological tests for hepatitis-associated
viruses were negative. His father (Subject B-I-1) had suffered from
gastroesophageal reflux disease and died at age eighty of a poorly
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 2 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
Figure 1. Pedigrees showing Telomerase Mutations and Disease Phenotypes. (A) The TERT K570N mutation tracked with hematological
disorders and severe liver disease (lower pedigree) in Family A. In the extended family (upper pedigree), several disorders are found, including
autoimmune diseases, anemia, thyroid diseases, liver diseases, and multiple miscarriages; however, the mutation was only associated with liver
disease and multiple miscarriages. Two consanguineous relationships are not show: Subject A-IV-17 is a grand-daughter of Subjects A-II-7 and A-II-8,
and Subject A-IV-7 is a grandson of Subjects A-III-14 and A-III-15. The genetic status for the immediate family (lower pedigree) and its association with
bone marrow failure have been previously reported by us [15]. In smaller pedigrees, (B) TERC nucleotide 341-360 deletion tracked to liver disease in
family B, (C) liver disease occurred in a family with a TERC nucleotide 28–34 deletion, and (D) in a family with TERC nucleotide 109–123 deletion. The
following are denoted by their abbreviations: common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), aplastic anemia (AA), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), idiopathic thrombocytic purpura
(ITP), and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007926.g001
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 3 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
differentiated adenocarcinoma at the gastroesophageal junction
with hepatic metastasis. The proband’s brother (Subject B-II-2) also
had gastroesophageal reflux disease and Barrett’s esophagus. No
pathological specimens were available from his father and his
brother for genetic screening. His brother’s son (Subject B-III-4) was
reported to abuse alcohol and to have cirrhosis, but he tested
Figure 2. Hematoxylin and Eosin Bone Marrow and Liver Sections from Probands and Relatives with Aplastic Anemia, Acute Myeloid
Leukemia, and Severe Liver Disease. (A) Family A proband’s bone marrow was hypocellular with isolated regions of normal cellularity (hematoxylin
and eosin [H&E] staining; low power magnification). (B) Proband’s father’s bone marrow smear (Subject A-IV-29), illustrating dysplastic changes and
increased number of blasts (H&E, high power magnification). (C) Subject A-IV-23’s liver biopsy revealing islands of liver surrounded by zones of necrosis
and parenchymal collapse (H&E, low magnification). The necrosis was far enough in the past that hepatocytes have mostly disappeared. In the inset, in
some of the areas where hepatocytes were preserved there was still necrosis near the central veins. Little evidence of inflammation exists. (D) Subject’s
A-IV-25’s liver biopsy showing small portal areas and poorly formed veins (H&E, low power magnification). (E) Same liver biopsy exhibiting widened
hepatocyte plates on the reticulin stain (high power magnification), but clear changes of nodular regenerative hyperplasia were not seen. (F) The CD34
stain by was positive in sinusoidal endothelial cells consistent with an abnormal proportion of arterial blood flow to the sinuses (immunohistochemistry,
low power magnification). (G) Liver biopsy of Subject A-III-11 in which the hepatic architecture is distorted by bridging fibrosis (low power
magnification); the inset gives a close-up of the fibrosis. The biopsy revealed moderate inflammation but not elevated levels of plasma cells relative to
other inflammatory cells. Other changes included interface hepatitis and cholatestasis. (H) Subject B-II-3’s liver biopsy demonstrating portal
inflammation with interface hepatitis (H&E, low power magnification). In the inset, Masson staining shows sclerosis around central vein with
perisinusoidal fibrosis. (I) Subject B-III-7’s liver biopsy with mild, macrovesicular steatosis in a zone 3 distribution. The inset indicates that there is mild
lymphocytic portal inflammation with focal interface hepatitis (H&E). (J) Subject C-III-3’s liver biopsy shows mild hepatocellular iron accumulation in a
pericanalicular pattern; the sinusoidal-lining cells show mild to moderate iron accumulation. The inset illustrates mild variation in hepatocyte nuclear
size. (K) Subject C-III-3’s reticulin staining exemplifying several zones in which the hepatocyte plates were abnormally widened, consistent with
regeneration. (L) Subject E-II-1’s liver biopsy revealing some portal areas with mild inflammation and all with poorly formed, slit-like veins (H&E). (M) The
reticulin stain showed evidence of nodular regenerative hyperplasia, with zones of plate widening alternating with areas of compression. (N) CD34 stain
was abnormally positive in the sinusoidal endothelial cells by immunohistochemistry, indicating abnormal proportion of arterial blood flow to the
sinuses.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007926.g002
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 4 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
negative for the mutation. The proband’s thirty-two year-old son
(Subject B-III-7) is heterozygous for the TERC deletion; he had mild
macrocytic anemia during a routine medical visit. Upon further
investigation, he was found to have an enlarged fatty liver on
ultrasound though his liver enzymes were normal; his bone marrow
biopsy was hypocellular (20%), and his liver biopsy showed
macrovesicular steatosis with foci of lobular inflammation, portal
chronic inflammatory infiltrate, and mild hepatocellular iron
accumulation (Fig. 2I). Tests for hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses
were all negative. Pulmonary function test results were within
normal limits. He has an eleven-year history of social alcohol
consumption.
Family C
The proband (Subject C-III-1; Fig. 1C), a thirty year-old
Caucasian male previously fond to be heterozygous for a TERC
nucleotide 28-34 deletion [15], had a thirteen-year history of
moderate aplastic anemia. His father (Subject C-II-2) had a long
history of thrombocytopenia and died at age thirty-two of fungal
sepsis; autopsy revealed mixed micro and macronodular liver
cirrhosis, chronic congestive splenomegaly, esophageal varices,
diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosis with mild chronic inflamma-
tion, and a mildly hypoplastic bone marrow (50%). The index
patient’s paternal uncle (Subject C-II-1) had died of myelodyspla-
sia. We now screened his brother (Subject C-III-3), with a long
history of mild pancytopenia and elevated liver enzymes, and he
also tested positive for the TERC deletion. Liver biopsy
demonstrated hepatocytes with mild variation in nuclear size,
mild hepatocellular iron accumulation in a pericanalicular pattern
(Fig. 2J), and several zones displaying abnormally widened
hepatocyte plates, consistent with regeneration (Fig. 2K).
Family D
The proband, a thirty-eight year-old female, was found to be
heterozygous for a novel TERC nucleotide 109–123 deletion not
observed in 188 controls. She had a six-year history of transfusion-
independent pancytopenia first detected during pregnancy. At
that time, her hemoglobin was 6 g/dL, and her anemia was
unresponsive to erythropoietin treatment. Her bone marrow
biopsy was 5% cellular with trilineage hypoplasia and a transient
clonal chromosome 1 abnormality [der(1) t(1;1)(p36.2;q;12)]. Her
wild-type mother (Subject D-II-2) had history of resolved anemia
in the past but is otherwise healthy. Her father (Subject D-II-1), a
probable carrier as her mother tested negative, had a 15-year
history of hepatitis and liver cirrhosis and died at the age of forty-
five years of massive gastrointestinal bleeding. At necropsy, the
liver was cirrhotic and microscopically showed moderate fatty
change and hyaline Mallory bodies; spider angiomata, jaundice,
ascites, and esophageal varices also were present. He had a history
of moderate alcohol consumption. Unfortunately, no pathologic
specimen was available for further analysis or genetic testing. The
index patient’s paternal grandfather, (Subject D-I-1) also died of
cirrhosis at a young age (pathologic specimens were not available).
Family E
The proband (Subject E-III-3), a fifteen-year-old male,
presented in 1992 with a history of hemorrhage. Laboratory tests
revealed pancytopenia and elevated alkaline phosphatase; liver
function tests were within normal limits. Bone marrow biopsy
showed 25% cellularity with normal cytogenetics. He was treated
with androgens without much benefit for his blood counts. As his
hematological status deteriorated, he underwent an unrelated
hematopoietic stem cell transplant but died of a transplant-related
complication. His father (Subject E-II-1) was forty-four years old
when first seen, and at the time, he had a 10-year history of
thrombocytopenia and leukopenia along with a mildly hypocel-
lular bone marrow. This unusual association between aplastic
anemia and liver cirrhotic disease observed in this pedigree and in
an additional family led us to describe a ‘‘new familial syndrome’’
in 1997, which appeared to have an autosomal dominant inheri-
tance, but genetic analysis was not available at that time (family E
in the present series corresponds to family A in our previous
report) [16]. Six years post-presentation, the father developed a
nonproductive cough and dyspnea on exertion. Spirometry
revealed a reduced diffusion capacity and computed tomography
of the chest was consistent with pulmonary fibrosis. During
evaluation, some liver enzymes were elevated, and liver biopsy
findings were consistent with hepatoportal sclerosis complicated by
nodular regenerative hyperplasia. He had no history of ethanol
consumption or smoking. Microscopic examination revealed
portal areas with chronic inflammatory infiltrate but with no
interface hepatitis (Fig. 2L). The portal veins were either missing
or slit-like in most of the portal areas. Hepatic architecture was
subtly distorted by nodularity with zones of small compressed
hepatocytes alternating with zones of large hepatocytes with
widened plates (Fig. 2M). CD34 staining was abnormally positive
in sinusoidal endothelial cells, mainly around the portal areas and
central veins (Fig. 2N). There was sinusoidal dilatation and
congestion near central veins. Iron was accumulated within
hepatocytes in zones one and two. Ultimately, the respiratory
symptoms evolved, and the patient died of respiratory insufficien-
cy. Serological tests for hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses were
negative. Sixteen years post-presentation, the DNA extracted from
his paraffin-embedded liver specimen revealed a novel heterozy-
gous TERT S368F mutation not present in 528 healthy controls.
The proband’s paternal grandfather (Subject E-I-1) died at age
sixty-four, and autopsy revealed pulmonary fibrosis, nodular
hyperplasia of the liver, and splenomegaly. A paternal aunt
(Subject E-II-3) died at age thirty-seven with extensive pulmonary
fibrosis and liver cirrhosis. She presented macrocytosis in
peripheral blood but normocellular bone marrow. A paternal
uncle (Subject E-II-4) died at age twenty-three with massive
gastrointestinal bleeding and thrombocytopenia. Autopsy revealed
splenomegaly with expanded red pulp, consistent with portal
hypertension, and the liver appearance was consistent with portal
fibrosis but not cirrhosis. The other paternal uncle (Subject E-II-5)
died at age thirty-five years, and autopsy revealed aplastic anemia,
splenomegaly, macronodular cirrhosis, and portal fibrosis. No
samples were available for the genetic testing of the other affected
individuals, including the proband. The proband’s two siblings
(Subjects E-III-1 and E-III-2), mother (Subject E-II-2), and cousin
(Subject E-III-4) appear to be healthy, and each tested negative for
the mutation.
Further details of the clinical cases described here are available
to other researchers on request.
Leukocyte Telomere Length and Genotype
In the three generations of Family A analyzed by flow-FISH,
mutation carriers (Subjects A-III-16, A-IV-23, A-IV-25, A-IV-26,
A-V-19, A-V-20, and A-V-23) had total peripheral blood white
cell telomere lengths below the shortest percentile of healthy age-
matched controls (Fig. 3A). In contrast, the wild-type individuals
analyzed (Subjects A-IV-28, A-V-21, and A-V-22) were found to
have telomere lengths between those of their heterozygous family
members and the 50th percentile. In the additional four families
studied, all tested mutation carriers had lymphocyte and
neutrophil telomere length below the shortest percentile
(Fig. 3A). Interestingly, four non-carriers in families A and E,
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 5 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
each of whom had a heterozygous parent, also had short telomeres
for their age (Fig. 3A).
Mutation Functional Analysis
We previously showed that TERT K570N results in a complete
loss of the ability of telomerase to add hexameric repeats to
telomeres and that TERC nucleotide 28–34 deletion reduces
telomerase enzymatic activity - each by haploinsufficiency [15].
Here we found by co-transfection experiments that TERC
nucleotide 109–123 deletion completely abolished telomerase
enzymatic activity, TERC nucleotide 341–360 deletion reduced
telomerase activity to approximately one-third of that observed for
wild-type TERC, and TERT S368P reduced telomerase activity to
approximately 10% of that observed for wild-type TERT (Fig. 3B).
Discussion
Hepatic disease is mentioned in reviews of dyskeratosis
congenita, estimated at about seven percent of patients, but not
well characterized and often blamed on hemochromatosis from
frequent blood transfusions [14]. A few case reports describe
cirrhosis and hepatic cell necrosis in affected individuals in
autosomal dominant pedigrees [8,11,17]. Liver complications are
described as more frequent and severe in occasional case reports of
bone marrow transplantation in dyskeratosis congenita [18]. In a
recent series of 150 patients with idiopathic interstitial pneumo-
nias, four patients (3%) also had cryptogenic liver cirrhosis
diagnosed in the sixth or seventh decades of life; none of these
four patients, however, carried a telomerase mutation [17].
Our families did not present in childhood or display the
characteristic physical anomalies typical of dyskeratosis congenita,
except for the premature graying of hair in families A and C that did
not track with the mutations. Similar to the spectrum of
hematological findings associated with telomerase mutations,
ranging from isolated macrocytosis to acute myeloid leukemia,
liver disease was heterogeneous in severity and pathology among
telomerase-mutation carriers. However, in our comprehensive
histopathological analysis, some findings were recurrent: most
patients had both inflammatory and fibrotic components; several
patients developed cirrhosis; individuals from three different families
(A, C, and E) had histological findings consistent with hepatic
nodular regeneration (Table 1). In others, iron accumulation was
observed, in the absence of a history of blood transfusion or HFE
gene mutation. In two instances from different families, CD34
stained positive in sinusoidal endothelial cells, consistent with portal
hypertension. Alcohol consumption was observed in affected
individuals in families B and D, suggesting a role for environmental
factors triggering organ injury; however, serologies for viral hepatitis
were negative for all individuals tested. Of interest, more than a
decade ago, we identified two families with a ‘‘new familial
syndrome’’ characterized by a combination of bone marrow failure
and chronic liver disease [16]. A recent study reports a family with
pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic nodular regenerative hyperplasia, and
aplastic anemia [19] and another describes a case of regenerative
hyperplasia and aplastic anemia [20]. Unfortunately, telomerase
complex genes were not sequenced in these two families. The wide
range in clinical phenotypes associated with telomerase mutations is
compatible with the variable genetic penetrance of these mutations
and of their effects on telomere shortening. The variety in
histopathological findings in liver specimens also suggests that other
genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors are essential for
disease development and progression.
Our current findings parallel the recently reported association of
loss-of-function TERT and TERC mutations with familial
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [12,13]. As was hypothesized for
pulmonary fibrosis, shortened telomeres may result from dysfunc-
tional telomere repair, increased cell turn-over, or a combination
of factors and contribute to liver fibrosis.
In murine models, chronic chemical liver injury is associ-
ated with increased regeneration defects and liver cirrhosis in
Figure 3. Functional analysis of telomerase mutations. (A)
Telomere length in peripheral-blood total white blood cells (ordinate) from
patients and their relatives with or without telomerase gene mutations as a
function of age (abscissa) compared to healthy controls. Telomere lengths
were measured by flow fluorescence in situ hybridization (flow-FISH). Small
gray circles represent the telomere lengths for 400 healthy volunteers [10],
and the curve marks the 50th
percentile for healthy controls as a function of
age. (B) Telomerase activity - measured by telomeric-repeat amplification
assay - of lysates of telomerase-negative WI38-VA13 cells cotransfected with
mutated TERC and wild-type TERT expression vectors (2 mg per vector per
transfection reaction). Enzymatic activity was normalized to TERC expression
as measured by Real Time RT-PCR and to the telomerase activity of wild-
type TERC, which was set at 100%. Quadruplicate measurements were
performed using one microgram of cell lysate protein per reaction. ‘‘Empty
vector’’ refers to protein from VA13 cells transfected with an empty
pcDNA3-Flag vector in lieu of TERC.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007926.g003
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 6 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
telomerase-deficient mice; restoration of telomerase activity by
gene transduction abrogates liver cirrhosis and improves liver
function [21]. Short and dysfunctional telomeres in Tert-deficient
(and p53-mutated) mice also increase susceptibility to toxin-
induced hepatocellular carcinoma [22]. In murine livers lacking
telomeric repeat binding factor 2, hepatocytes remained viable
and regenerated despite telomeric deprotection and fusion through
endoreduplication [23]. Telomeres in liver cells might be main-
tained by recombination only as long as lengthy telomere repeat
tracts are available on some chromosome ends, which is unlikely
when telomerase is deficient. Alternatively, the presence of inflam-
matory cells in liver sections even at very early stages of liver
disease (Subject B-III-7, Fig. 2I) suggests that these cells may be
the key mediators of pathogenic fibrosis in the setting of telomere
shortening. At damaged sites of chronically injured tissues or
organs, such as the liver and lung, the release of inflammatory
mediators recruits leukocytes to the extracellular matrix [24]. T cells
chronically secrete profibrotic cytokines that activate macrophages
and fibroblasts, which subsequently stimulate myofibroblasts, which
may be of bone marrow derivation. Telomere erosion in neutrophils
and lymphocytes, cells critical to the inflammatory response, may
elicit an abnormal, sustained profibrotic response.
The pathophysiology for hepatic nodular regenerative hyperpla-
sia is unknown. It is associated with vasculitis and exposure to drugs,
such as azathioprine; one case in our series (Subject A-III-11)
developed fatal liver disease after azathioprine administration. More
than five percent of autopsied individuals over eighty years old have
nodular regenerative hyperplasia, and portal hypertension is a
major complication [25]. Taken together, the link of telomerase
deficiency to pulmonary fibrosis and the present findings open a
new perspective in the investigation of inflammation, regeneration,
and fibrosis and lend support to a crucial role of telomerase in these
processes. Up-regulation of telomerase expression and activity may
be an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of fibrotic and
regenerative diseases.
In family A, both the patient and his father showed clonal evolution
of a malignant cell population, a finding also observed in families C
and D. Leukemic cells appear to require telomerase activity for
proliferation. However, telomerase deficiency increases the presence
of critically short telomeres, which are prone to chromosomal
instability. Myelodysplasia and acute leukemia are observed in classic
dyskeratosis congenita in 1% [26] to 3% of cases [14], and the risk of
developing acute myeloid leukemia in dyskeratosis congenita patients
is increased almost 200 fold in comparison to the expected incidence
in the population [27]. We recently found an increased rate of
constitutional TERT hypomorphic mutations in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia [28]. Telomerase mutations were associated with
cytogenetic abnormalities, especially trisomy 8 and inv(16). Short
telomeres may limit normal stem cell division by inducing proliferation
arrest and select for stem cells with dysfunctional telomeres and
defective DNA damage responses that are prone to chromosomal
instability. Additionally, genome-wide association studies implicated
TERT as a strong susceptibility locus (chr 5p15.33) for a large variety
of cancers [29–32].
Notable characteristics of telomerase mutations in these families
include incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Some
family members have the mutation and short telomeres but appear
healthy. Of clinical relevance, these findings indicate that the
presence of a telomerase gene mutation and very short telomeres do
not necessarily translate into disease. In addition, the phenotypes
associated with the mutation are quite disparate in nature.
Mutations in telomerase and short telomeres must work in concert
with other genetic and environmental factors to result in the diverse
phenotypes with which these mutations now have been associated.
Methods
Ethics Statement
Patients and their relatives or guardians of minors provided
written informed consent for genetic testing, according to
protocols approved by the institutional review board of the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, protocol 04-H-0012
(www.ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00071045). Clinical in-
vestigation was conducted according to the principles expressed in
the Declaration of Helsinki. Continuing review application of the
protocol was last renewed by NHLBI IRB in February 26th
, 2009;
the protocol was last amended on September 9th
, 2009. Patients
who are described in detail have read the manuscript and provided
written informed consent for publication.
Patients and Controls
The probands of each family were referred to the National
Institutes of Health Hematology Branch clinic for evaluation of
Table 1. Hepatic profile of patients with telomerase mutations and liver disease.
Subject Age/Gender (years) Liver function tests Liver histology
A-IV-23 20/F (not available) Massive necrosis without significant hepatitis; some early fibrosis in areas of parechymal
collapse as well as at the edges of portal areas and around central veins
A-IV-25 46/F Bilirubin mildly elevated; albumin
mildly decreased
Hepatocyte variation in cell and nuclear size, and variation in plate width, consistent with
regeneration on reticulin stain; CD34 stained positive in sinusoidal endothelial cells; iron
heavily accumulated, mainly in hepatocytes in zone 1
A-III-11 48/F Enzymes elevated; normal albumin Hepatic architecture is distorted by bridging fibrosis; moderate inflammation, hepatitis, and
cholatestasis
B-II-3 57/M Alkaline phosphatase elevated;
normal bilirubin; low albumin
Cirrhosis with foci of lobular inflammation dominated by plasma cells, extensive sinusoidal
fibrosis, and Mallory bodies
B-III-7 32/M normal Macrovesicular steatosis with foci of lobular inflammation and portal chronic inflammatory
infiltrate and mild hepatocellular iron accumulation
C-III-3 30/M Enzymes elevated Hepatocytes with mild variation in nuclear size, mild hepatocellular iron accumulation in a
pericanalicular pattern, and several zones displaying abnormally widened hepatocyte plates
E-II-1 52/M Enzymes elevated Nodular regenerative hyperplasia with zones of small compressed hepatocytes alternating
with zones of large hepatocytes with widened plates; CD34 positive in sinusoidal
endothelial cells mainly around the portal areas and central veins
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007926.t001
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 7 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
bone marrow failure, and they were diagnosed with aplastic
anemia based on conventional bone marrow and blood-count
criteria [33]. In Family A, relatives were invited for clinical and
genetic evaluation and responded a questionnaire regarding their
health status and specifically addressing hematologic, immune,
pulmonary, and hepatic diseases. When a clinical history was
positive, subjects were requested to provide clinical tests and
medical records for further analysis. Medical records also were
obtained from deceased relatives who had had liver or pulmonary
disease, upon family approval. In the other families, relatives were
invited for clinical evaluation at the NIH Clinical Center and
medical records from outside institutions were obtained after
consent; medical records also were obtained from deceased
relatives, upon family consent. Complete blood counts were
performed at the NIH Clinical Center for clinically healthy
subjects found to carry a telomerase mutation, and the diagnosis of
macrocytosis or anemia were established based on the standard
laboratory parameters. Patients and their relatives or guardians of
minors provided written informed consent for genetic testing,
according to protocols approved by the institutional review board
of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. DNA was
extracted from peripheral-blood or buccal mucosal cells as pre-
viously described [34]; for Subject A-III-11 and Subject E-II-1,
DNA was obtained from paraffin-embedded liver tissue (PicoPure
DNA Extraction Kit, Arcturus, Mt View, CA).
DNA samples from 188 healthy persons served as controls for
TERC and TERT gene mutations: 117 were white (94 from Human
Variation Panel HD100CAU, Coriell Cell Repositories [http://locus.
umdnj.edu/nigms/cells/humdiv.html], and 23 from SNP500Cancer
[http://snp500cancer.nci.nih.gov]), 24 black (from SNP500Cancer),
23 Hispanic (from SNP500Cancer), and 24 Asian (from SNP500Can-
cer) [35]. An additional 340 healthy controls were screened for TERT
gene mutations: 94 blacks from Human Variation Panel HD100AA
and 246 anonymous healthy subjects of Hispanic origin (52 percent
Peruvians, 28 percent Latin Americans, and 20 percent Pima and
Maya Amerindians) [10].
Mutational Analysis
TERT and TERC genotyping was performed as previously
described [10].
Telomere Length by Flow-FISH
Telomere length of peripheral blood leukocytes was measured
after red cell lysis with ammonium chloride solution by flow
cytometry-fluorescent in situ hybridization (flow-FISH) as reported
previously [15,36].
Telomerase Enzymatic Activity
Wild-type vector was mutagenized by Mutagenex, and
sequence was confirmed by direct sequencing of the whole insert,
and plasmids were purified using the HiSpeed Plasmid Maxi Kit
(Qiagen). Vectors containing disease-associated telomerase muta-
tions were transfected into VA13 cells, and telomerase activity
measured as previously described with slight modifications [10]. In
the present study, we used a fluorescent telomere repeat
amplification protocol (TRAP), XL TRAPeze assay (Chemicon)
and fluorescence was measured in a Victor 3 multilabel plate
reader (Perkin Elmer). Telomerase activity was measured in total
product generated (TPG) units based on the standard curve results
and calculated strictly according to the manufacturer’s manual
and expressed as telomerase activity relative to wild-type TERT
and TERC, which was considered 100%.
Acknowledgments
The authors are greatly indebted to the patients and their family members
for their cooperation. We thank Irma Vulto for her excellent technical
assistance and Olga Nun˜ez and Barbara Weinstein for patient care.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: RTC SJC PML NSY.
Performed the experiments: RTC JAR DEK NRP. Analyzed the data:
RTC JAR DEK DSS NRP SJC PML NSY. Contributed reagents/
materials/analysis tools: RTC DSS VP SJC PML NSY. Wrote the paper:
RTC JAR DEK SJC PML NSY.
References
1. Blackburn EH (2001) Switching and signaling at the telomere. Cell 106:
661–673.
2. Olovnikov AM (1971) [Principle of marginotomy in template synthesis of
polynucleotides]. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 201: 1496–1499.
3. Aubert G, Lansdorp PM (2008) Telomeres and aging. Physiol Rev 88: 557–579.
4. Blasco MA (2007) Telomere length, stem cells and aging. Nature Chemical
Biology 3: 640–646.
5. Blackburn EH, Greider CW, Henderson E, Lee MS, Shampay J, et al. (1989)
Recognition and elongation of telomeres by telomerase. Genome 31(2):
553–560.
6. Calado RT, Young NS (2008) Telomere maintenance and human bone marrow
failure. Blood 111: 4446–4455.
7. Heiss NS, Knight SW, Vulliamy TJ, Klauck SM, Wiemann S, et al. (1998) X-
linked dyskeratosis congenita is caused by mutations in a highly conserved gene
with putative nucleolar functions. Nat Genet 19: 32–38.
8. Vulliamy T, Marrone A, Goldman F, Dearlove A, Bessler M, et al. (2001) The
RNA component of telomerase is mutated in autosomal dominant dyskeratosis
congenita. Nature 413: 432–435.
9. Fogarty PF, Yamaguchi H, Wiestner A, Baerlocher GM, Sloand EM, et al.
(2003) Late presentation of dyskeratosis congenita as apparently acquired
aplastic anaemia due to mutations in telomerase RNA. Lancet 362: 1628–1630.
10. Yamaguchi H, Calado RT, Ly H, Baerlocher GM, Kajigaya S, et al. (2005)
Mutations in TERT, the gene for telomerase reverse transcriptase, in aplastic
anemia. N Eng J Med 352: 1413–1424.
11. Armanios M, Chen J-L, Chang Y-PC, Brodsky RA, Hawkins A, et al. (2005)
Haplonsufficiency of telomerase reverse transcriptase leads to anticipation in
autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita. PNAS 102: 15960–15964.
12. Armanios MY, Chen JJ, Cogan JD, Alder JK, Ingersoll SG, et al. (2007)
Telomerase mutations in families with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. N Eng J Med
356(13): 1317–1326.
13. Tsakiri KD, Cronkhite JT, Kuan PJ, Xing C, Raghu G, et al. (2007) Adult-onset
pulmonary fibrosis caused by mutations in telomerase. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
104: 7552–7557.
14. Dokal I (2000) Dyskeratosis congenita in all its forms. Br J Haematol 110:
768–779.
15. Xin ZT, Beauchamp AD, Calado RT, Bradford JW, Regal JA, et al. (2007)
Functional characterization of natural telomerase mutations found in patients
with hematological disorders. Blood 109: 524–532.
16. Qazilbash M, Liu J, Vlachos A, Fruchtman S, Messner H, et al. (1997) A new
syndrome of familial aplastic anemia and chronic liver disease. Acta Haematol
97: 164–167.
17. Alder JK, Chen JJ, Lancaster L, Danoff S, Su SC, et al. (2008) Short telomeres
are a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 105:
13051–13056.
18. Rocha V, Devergie A, Socie G, Ribaud P, Esperou H, et al. (1998) Unusual
complications after bone marrow transplantation for dyskeratosis congenita.
Brit J Haem 103: 243–248.
19. Talbot-Smith A, Syn WK, MacQuillan G, Neil D, Elias E, et al. (2009) Familial
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in association with bone marrow hypoplasia and
hepatic nodular regenerative hyperplasia: a new ‘‘trimorphic’’ syndrome.
Thorax 64: 440–443.
20. Gonzalez-Huezo MS, Villela LM, Zepeda-Florencio MC, Carrillo-Ponce CS,
Mondragon-Sanchez RJ (2006) Nodular regenerative hyperplasia associated to
aplastic anemia: a case report and literature review. Ann Hepatol 5: 166–169.
21. Rudolph KL, Chang S, Millard M, Schreiber-Agus N, DePinho RA (2000)
Inhibition of experimental liver cirrhosis in mice by telomerase gene delivery.
Science 287: 1253–1258.
22. Farazi PA, Glickman J, Horner J, DePinho RA (2006) Cooperative interactions
of p53 mutation, telomere dysfunction, and chronic liver damage in
hepatocellular carcinoma progression. Cancer Res 66: 4766–4773.
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 8 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
23. Lazzerini Denchi E, Celli G, de Lange T (2006) Hepatocytes with extensive
telomere deprotection and fusion remain viable and regenerate liver mass
through endoreduplication. Genes Dev 20(19): 2648–2653.
24. Wynn TA (2007) Common and unique mechanisms regulate fibrosis in various
fibroproliferative diseases. J Clin Invest 117: 524–529.
25. Wanless IR (1990) Micronodular transformation (nodular regenerative hyper-
plasia) of the liver: a report of 64 cases among 2,500 autopsies and a new
classification of benign hepatocellular nodules. Hepatology 11: 787–797.
26. Alter BP (1994) Dyskeratosis congenita. In: Young NS, Alter BP, editors.
Aplastic Anemia, Acquired and Inherited. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. pp
325–339.
27. Alter BP, Giri N, Savage SA, Rosenberg PS (2009) Cancer in dyskeratosis
congenita. Blood 113: 6549–6557.
28. Calado RT, Regal JA, Hills M, Yewdell WT, Dalmazzo LF, et al. (2009)
Constitutional hypomorphic telomerase mutations in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 106: 1187–1192.
29. McKay JD, Hung RJ, Gaborieau V, Boffetta P, Chabrier A, et al. (2008) Lung
cancer susceptibility locus at 5p15.33. Nat Genet 40: 1404–1406.
30. Wang Y, Broderick P, Webb E, Wu X, Vijayakrishnan J, et al. (2008) Common
5p15.33 and 6p21.33 variants influence lung cancer risk. Nat Genet 40:
1407–1409.
31. Rafnar T, Sulem P, Stacey SN, Geller F, Gudmundsson J, et al. (2009) Sequence
variants at the TERT-CLPTM1L locus associate with many cancer types. Nat
Genet 41: 221–227.
32. Hosgood HD3, Cawthon RM, He X, Chanock SJ, Lan Q (2009) Genetic
variation in telomere maintenance genes, telomere length, and lung cancer
susceptibility. Lung Cancer Epub ahead of print.
33. Kaufman DW, Kelly JP, Levy M, Shapiro S (1991) The Drug Etiology of
Agranulocytosis and Aplastic Anemia. New York: Oxford.
34. Yamaguchi H, Baerlocher GM, Lansdorp PM, Chanock SJ, Nunez O, et al.
(2003) Mutations of the human telomerase RNA gene (TERC) in aplastic anemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood 102: 916–918.
35. Packer BR, Yeager M, Staats B, Welch R, Crenshaw A, et al. (2004)
SNP500Cancer: a public resource for sequence validation and assay develop-
ment for genetic variation in candidate genes. Nucleic Acids Res 32:
D528–D532.
36. Baerlocher GM, Vulto I, de JG, Lansdorp PM (2006) Flow cytometry and FISH
to measure the average length of telomeres (flow FISH). Nat Protoc 1:
2365–2376.
Telomerase and Liver Disease
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 9 November 2009 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e7926
