© 2008 Gerstner et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(3) 645–647 645
C A S E R E P O RT
Valproate-associated reversible encephalopathy
in a 3-year-old girl with Pallister-Killian syndrome
Thorsten Gerstner
Nellie Bell
Stephan A Koenig
University Children’s Hospital,
Mannheim, Germany
Correspondence:Thorsten Gerstner
University Children’s Hospitals,Theodor-
Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 69167 Mannheim,
Germany
Tel +49 621 2466
Email thorsten-gerstner@web.de
Abstract: Valproic acid (VPA) is considered to be a drug of ﬁrst choice for the therapy of
generalized and focal epilepsies, including special epileptic syndromes. The drug is usually
well tolerated, rare serious complications may occur in some patients, including hemorrhagic
pancreatitis, coagulapathies, bone marrow suppression, VPA-induced hepatotoxicity and
encephalopathy. We report a case of VPA-associated encephalopathy without hyperammone-
mia in a 3-year-old girl with Pallister-Killian-Syndrom, combined with a mild hepatopathy and
thrombopathy. After withdrawal of VPA, the clinical symptoms and the electroencephalogra-
phy-alterations vanished rapidly.
Keywords: pallister-killian, valproate, encephalopathy, EEG, ammonia
Case report
Pallister-Killian syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder that occurs due to
tetrasomy of the twelfth chromosome (tissue-limited isochromosome 12p). Symptoms
include varying degrees of mental retardation, epilepsy, or hypotonia. Patients also
exhibit a distinctive facial structure, characterized by high foreheads, sparse hair on the
temple, a wide space between the eyes, a fold of skin over the inner corner of the eyes,
and a ﬂat nose. Patients may also exhibit congenital heart defects, gastroesophageal
reﬂux, cataracts, and congenital diaphragmatic hernias (CDH).
Because of a prenatal diagnosed sinistral CDH, the ﬁrst-born of healthy, noncon-
sanguine parents was a patient in our intensive care united. The patient was born in the
36th week of gestation with a birth weight of 2.74 kg. The hernia was closed ﬁve days
after birth without any severe complications. However, after a period of 5 months, the
child showed typical symptoms of a Pallister-Killian syndrome with focal seizures,
hypotonia, and the characteristical facial features. The diagnosis was conﬁrmed by
detection in samples of skin ﬁbroblasts.
Anticonvulsant therapy was initiated with oxcarbazepine (OCBZ) up to a level of
30 mg/kg/BW. The seizures stopped for the next 10 months, but the electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG) still showed multifocal sharp-waves. At the age of 13 months, the seizures
returned with focale myoclonias and atypical absences. We decided to add VPA to
OCBZ and achieved complete seizure control with a VPA-level of 25 mg/kg/BW. The
child didn’t show any incompatibilities or side effects associated to the antiepileptic
therapy. Before the VPA-therapy was started, extended laboratory tests (including
metabolic disorder screenings) were done. This included disorders in amino acid,
carbohydrate, beta-oxidation, urea-cycle, and carnitin metabolism.
At the age of 38 months the girl was presented at our emergency ward with
increased seizure frequency, augmented fatigue, and vomiting. On examination the
girl appeared moderately ill, but the mother was worried about a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in alertness and attention. The laboratory investigations showed slight changes
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(3)646
Gerstner et al
in transaminases and decreased platelets. Additionally we
found generalized slowing (theta-delta-activity) in the EEG,
in contrast with former EEG ﬁndings. The serum-VPA-level
was 90 mg/l, the serum ammonia showed normal levels
(Table 1).
We immediately stopped the VPA medication but contin-
ued the antiepileptic therapy with OCBZ. In the course of the
next ten days the medical condition as well as the laboratory
ﬁndings improved. The EEG-pathologies normalized within
4 days after withdrawal of VPA.
The antiepileptic medication was continued with OCBZ
and topiramate (TPM) in unmodiﬁed dosages. Although a
few publications showed an increased risk of encephalopathy
when VPA was combined with TPM (Longin et al 2002;
Cheung et al 2005), there is only one paper that shows an
increased risk of encephalopathy with TPM monotherapy in
adults. Long-term inhibition of cerebral glutamine synthetase
and TPM as an inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase, which leads
to hyperammonemia because it restricts the path of the urea
cycle were appointed as possible mechanisms (Fraser et al
1999; Latour et al 2004).
The focal slowing of the EEG vanished, the seizure
frequency remained acceptable, and the girl’s vigilance
normalized.
Conclusion
In most cases, VPA is a well tolerated antiepileptic drug
with high effectiveness in seizure control. Most of the side
effects are mild and transient, but there are also rare, but
severe side effects, especially hepatotoxicity (Koenig et al
2006), encephalopathy (Gerstner et al 2006a), coagulation
disorders (Gerstner et al 2006b), pancreatitis (Gerstner et al
2007), and bone marrow suppression (Acharya and Bussel
2000; Kohli and Golsti 2006).
In our case of a two-year-old girl with Pallister-Killian
syndrome, we found a combination of encephalopathy,
thrombopenia, and slight hepatopathy associated with a
VPA-therapy.
Interestingly, the girl received the VPA-therapy for
about 2 years at the same dosage without any signs of
encephalopathy. According to previous publications, VPA-
associated side effects vanish rapidly under withdrawal of
VPA (Gerstner et al 2006a). A chromosomal alteration
due to the underlying syndrome in this patient wasn’t ever
described as a predisposition for a VPA (drug) associated
encephalopathy.
Especially in mentally retarded patients, the physi-
cians should show speciﬁc advertence to VPA-associated
problems. An overhaul of parameters like blood count,
coagulation parameters, transaminases, ammonia, and
pancreatic enzymes is necessary, the EEG could provide
further indices of a VPA-associated encephalopathy. As
shown here, VPA-associated encephalopathy could be
presented without increased ammonia and with a lack of
pronounced symptoms. Additionally, every new changes in
transaminases, lipase, coagulation parameters or blood count
is suspicious for a VPA-associated effect. The encephalopa-
thy could appear with hyperammonemia, but also without
hyperammonemia, possibly as a direct inﬂuence of VPA
on neurotransmitters (Kwan and Brodie 2001). In this case,
the encephalopathy is not related to the VPA plasma level.
Another possible mechanism is direct neuronal toxicity
induced by increased intracellular concentrations of gluta-
mate and ammonium in astrocytes (Ricard et al 2005), which
may lead to potential neuronal injury and perhaps cerebral
edema (Verrotti et al 2002).
In consideration of this approach, the side effects van-
ish and the patients’ outcome is proper. At this time, we
do not understand why most patients never have any side
effects related to VPA and why other patients show such
a variety of side effects related to different mechanisms.
Our patient emphasizes nevertheless that VPA-associated
encephalopathy has to be looked for in any individual patient
and that they may be totally reversible after withdrawal of
VPA. Sometimes, the EEG is the only diagnostic criteria of
ﬁnding the diagnosis.
From our case we can learn, that VPA-associated side
effects can occur at any time of the VPA-therapy. Especially
in psychomotoric retarded patients, the physicians should
show speciﬁc advertence to VPA-associated problems. An
overhaul of parameters like blood count, coagulation param-
eters, transaminases, ammonia and pancreatic enzymes is
necessary, the EEG could provide further indices of a VPA-
associated encephalopathy.
Table 1 Overview of laboratory ﬁndings
Laboratory ﬁndings Laboratory ﬁndings
while presented at 10 day after
the pediatric ward
Valproic acid-level 90 mg/dl –
Ammonia 16 µmol/l –
ALAT/ASAT 73 U/l/ 63U/l 42U/l/ 45U/l
Lipase 133U/l 159U/l
Platelets 83000/µl 220000/µl
White blood cells 6500/µl 8900/µl
Red blood cells hb 12.2g/dl, erythr. hb 12,1g/dl, erythr.
3.45 Mill./µl 3,88 Mill./µl
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(3) 647
VPA-associated reversible encephalopathy in Pallister-Killian syndrome
In case of such side effects, an immediate withdrawal is
required and a supportive therapy with intravenous carni-
tine could be necessary, when signs of hepatopathy occur
additionally.
References
Longin E, Teich M, Koelfen W, et al. 2002. Topiramate enhances the
risk of valproate associated side effects in three children. Epilepsia,
43:451–4.
Cheung E, Wong V, Fung CW. 2005. Topiramate-valproate-induced
hyperammonemic encephalopathy syndrome: case report. J Child
Neurol, 20:157–60.
Latour P, Biraben A, Polard E, et al. 2004. Drug induced encephalopathy
in six epileptic patients: Topiramate? Valproate? Or both? Hum Psy-
chopharmacol, 19:193–203.
Fraser CM, Sills GJ, Forrest G, et al. 1999. Effects of anti-epileptic drugs
on glutamine synthetase activity in mouse brain. Br J Pharmacol,
126:1634–8.
Gerstner T, Buesing D, Longin E, et al. 2006a. Valproic acid induced
encephalopathy – 19 new cases in Germany from 1994 to 2003 – A
side effect associated to VPA-therapy not only in young children.
Seizure, 15:443–8.
Gerstner T, Teich M, Bell N, et al. 2006b. Valproate-associated
coagulopathies are frequent and variable in children. Epilepsia,
47:1136–43.
Gerstner T, Busing D, Bell N, et al. 2007. Valproic acid-induced pancre-
atitis: 16 new cases and a review of the literature. J Gastroenterol,
42:39–48.
Koenig S, Buesing D, Longin E, et al. 2006. Valproic acid induced hepa-
topathy – Nine new fatalities in Germany from 1994–2003. Epilepsia,
47:2027–31.
Acharya S, Bussel JB. 2000. Hematologic toxicity of sodium valproate.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol, 22:62–5.
Kohli U, Golsti S. 2006. Valproate induced isolated neutropenia. Indian
J Pediatr, 73:844.
Handoko KB, Souverein PC, van Staa TP, et al. 2006. Risk of aplastic anemia
in patients using antiepileptic drugs. Epilepsia, 47:1232–6.
Kwan P, Brodie MJ. 2001. Neuropsychological effects of epilepsy and
antiepileptic drugs. Lancet, 357:216–22.
Ricard C, Martin K, Tournier M, et al. 2005. A case of Parkinsonian
syndrome, cognitive impairment and hyperammonemia induced
by divalproate sodium prescribed for bipolar disorder. Encephale,
31:98–101.
Verrotti A, Trotta D, Morgese G, et al. 2002. Valproate-induced hyperam-
monemic encephalopathy. Metab Brain Dis, 17:367–73.
