© 2008 Dove Medical Press Limited. All rights reserved
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1305–1313 1305
R E V I E W
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitor treatment
for sarcoidosis
José Luis Callejas-Rubio
Lourdes López-Pérez
Norberto Ortego-Centeno
Unit of Autoimmune Systemic
Diseases, Hospital Clinico San Cecilio,
Granada, Spain
Correspondence: José Luis Callejas-Rubio
Unit of Autoimmune Systemic Diseases,
Hospital Clinico San Cecilio,
Avda Dr Olóriz s/n 18007, Granada, Spain
Tel +34 958 023 558
Email jlcalleja@telefonica.net
Abstract: Sarcoidosis is a chronic multisystem disease of unknown etiology, characterized by
noncaseating granulomatous inﬁltration of virtually any organ system. Treatment is often under-
taken in an attempt to resolve symptoms or prevent progression to organ failure. Previous studies
have suggested a prominent role for tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) in the inﬂammatory
process seen in sarcoidosis. TNF-α and interleukin-1 are released by alveolar macrophages in
patients with active lung disease. Corticosteroids have proved to be efﬁcacious in the treatment of
sarcoidosis, possibly by suppressing the production of TNF-α and other cytokines. Three agents
are currently available as speciﬁc TNF antagonists: etanercept, inﬂiximab, and adalimumab.
Although data from noncomparative trials suggest that all three have comparable therapeutic
effects in rheumatoid arthritis, their effects in a granulomatous disease such as sarcoidosis are
less consistent. In this review, current data on the effectiveness are summarized.
Keywords: sarcoidosis, inﬂiximab, etanercept, adalimumab, anti-TNA alpha
Introduction
Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disorder of indeterminate origin, manifested
by the presence of noncaseating granulomas of virtually any organ system. Although
precise epidemiological studies have not been undertaken, there are several reasons
why we might infer that an infective agent or agents might be the trigger(s), including
spatial, seasonal, and occupational clustering (Bowman et al 2003).
There are two aspects of the granulomatous response of sarcoidosis: the initial
event, leading to granuloma formation, and the evolution of the response as either
resolution or chronic disease. In studies of patients with an acute form of the disease, a
high proportion of CD4-positive lymphocytes have been identiﬁed in bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) ﬂuid (Pinkston et al 1983). These T cells are activated, as shown by their
increase of interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptors and the spontaneous release of IL-2 by these
cells. IL-18 has also been reported as possibly playing a central part in sarcoid granu-
loma formation (Shigehara et al 2001). This activation is associated with macrophage
activation, interferon production, and formation of the granuloma, and has been cited
as an example of the Th-1 response (Baumer et al 1997). In more than 60% of sar-
coidosis patients, the granulomatous response resolves during the following 2–5 years.
The events leading to resolution include an inﬂux of CD-8 positive lymphocytes. The
maintenance of the granuloma may be through the IL-12, and resolution is associated
with the cytokine IL-10, which suppresses the inﬂammatory response (Moller et al
1996). The cytokines associated with chronic disease include IL-8, IL-12, and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) (Ziegenhagen et al 1997).
TNF-α and sarcoidosis
TNF-α is a 17.5-kd protein that plays a signiﬁcant role in antigen-stimulated, cell-
mediated immune responses and in the development of noncaseating granulomas in
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1306
Callejas-Rubio et al
a variety of diseases (Tracey 1994; Chensue et al 1995). In
sarcoidosis, alveolar macrophage-derived TNF-α participates
in the induction and maintenance of granulomas (Kunkel
et al 1989). High levels of TNF-α and high levels of TNF-α
released from alveolar macrophages seem to correlate with
disease progression (Marques et al 1999). In light of its
inhibitory activity against TNF-α, pentoxifylline has been
proposed as a therapeutic agent for sarcoidosis and patients
exhibited a favorable response, so other pure and potent TNF-
α antagonists, such as the new biological anti-TNF-α, would
be an alternative for the treatment of sarcoidosis.
The TNF-α inhibitors have distinct efﬁcacy proﬁles.
Whereas all 3 available agents (etanercept, inﬂiximab, and
adalimumab) have demonstrated efﬁcacy in the treatment of
RA, efﬁcacy in other inﬂammatory arthritides and granulo-
matous diseases such as Crohn’s disease, Wegener’s granu-
lomatosis and sarcoidosis varies (Haraoui 2005a, 2005b).
There are no trials comparing efﬁcacy among different
anti-TNF-α in sarcoidosis.
Multiple reasons for this discrepancy have been theorized.
They all target the same molecule, but in a different way.
Inﬂiximab is a humanized mouse monoclonal antibody, adali-
mumab a fully human monoclonal antibody and etanercept
a construct comprising two human p75 TNF-α receptors
coupled to the Fc portion of a monoclonal human antibody.
Etanercept, adalimumab and inﬂiximab have different bind-
ing characteristics, with inﬂiximab and adalilumab binding
to both soluble and membrane-bound TNF and etanercept
binding primarily to soluble TNF (Scallon et al 2002). These
differences in binding may manifest as differing effects on
complement activation and apoptosis. Inﬂiximab and adali-
mumab may lyse in vitro TNF-producing cells via activation
of complement (Reinold 2003) and also appears to induce
apoptosis of immune/inﬂammatory cells (Lügering et al
2001). Other differences in the efﬁcacy proﬁles of these
drugs are likely related to the pathophysiology of the diseases
(eg, role of lymphotoxin) as well as drug characteristics (eg,
dosing, pharmacokinetics, or immunogenicity).
Clinical use and adverse effects
There are no clinical trials comparing efﬁcacy among differ-
ent TNF inhibitors in patients with sarcoidosis. The choice of
agent therefore depends on other factors, including patients’
convenience, access to treatment, and patients’ preferences.
Inﬂiximab requires infusion intravenously every four to eight
weeks, performed by a health care professional. The usual
dose is 3 mg/kg body weight; some patients require higher
doses. Etanercept and adalimumab are self-administered by
subcutaneous injection. Etanercept is given at a dose of 25 mg
twice weekly or 50 mg weekly, and adalimumab is given at
a dose of 40 mg every 2 weeks.
Common minor adverse events include injection site
reactions with etanercept and adalimumab and infusion reac-
tions with inﬂiximab. Rare serious adverse events include
optic neuritis, exacerbations of previously quiescent multiple
sclerosis, aplastic anemia, and interstitial lung disease; lupus-
like syndromes and hepatotoxicity may also occur. Serious
infections are a particular concern, especially respiratory and
skin infections (Scott and Kingsley 2006). TNF inhibitors
should be stopped in the presence of serious infections. Sus-
ceptibility to intracellular pathogens may be increased, and
primary tuberculosis and reactivation of prior tuberculosis are
speciﬁc problems; and, as a rule, patients should be screened
for tuberculosis before the initiation of therapy. The overall
risk of cancer is controversial (Scott and Kingsley 2006).
The only systematic review, which focused on randomized,
controlled trials involving inﬂiximab and adalimumab, but
not etanercept, reported a dose-related increased risk of
cancer (Pettersen et al 2002). In contrast, national registries
have not yet found an increase in solid cancers after treat-
ment with TNF inhibitors. An increase in lymphomas has
been reported with all TNF inhibitors. However, because
there is a preexisting association of lymphomas with severe
RA and systemic inﬂammation, the exact contribution of
therapy with TNF inhibitors is difﬁcult to dissect. Given
these uncertainties, it seems sensible to use extreme caution
when considering the use of TNF inhibitors in many patients
with a history of malignant disease, or even to avoid them
altogether, and to warn patients that the risk of cancer with
this form of therapy remains unknown. Since inﬂiximab
increases mortality when used to treat severe heart failure
in patients without arthritis, TNF inhibitors should be used
cautiously, if at all, when mild heart failure is present, and
are best avoided when heart failure is severe. Nonetheless,
there is no evidence that TNF inhibitors increase the risk of
new-onset cardiac failure in patients with RA. Patients are
usually advised not to conceive while taking TNF inhibitors
and to avoid these treatments during pregnancy or lactation.
To date, no actual adverse events have been described in
those pregnancies that have occurred in patients taking TNF
inhibitors. Table 1 summarizes the dose, route of administra-
tion, and most prevalent adverse effects.
Because the experience with anti-TNF in patients with
sarcoidosis is still limited, multicenter trials are needed to
validate the safety and efﬁcacy in these patients. Currently,
there is insufﬁcient data to support anti-TNF as ﬁrst-line
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1307
Anti-TNF treatments for sarcoidosis
therapy for sarcoidosis or neurosarcoidosis, but is deﬁnitely
an option in refractory cases. The optimal dose, duration
of therapy, and long term toxicity of anti-TNF in patients
with refractory sarcoidosis are yet to be determined in
prospective trials.
Treatment with anti-TNF
in different manifestations
of sarcoidosis
To present the scientiﬁc evidence of anti-TNF-α treatment in
patients with sarcoidosis we have made a division according
to the organ affected.
Cutaneous sarcoidosis
Cutaneous sarcoidosis occurs in up to one third of patients
with systemic sarcoidosis. Recognition of cutaneous lesions
is important because they provide a visible clue to the diagno-
sis, and are an easily accessible source of tissue for histologic
examination. Because lesions can exhibit many different
morphologies, cutaneous sarcoidosis is known as one of the
“great imitators” in dermatology. Speciﬁc manifestations
include papules, plaques, lupus pernio, scar sarcoidosis, and
rare morphologies such as alopecia, ulcers, hypopigmented
patches, and ichthyosis (Katta 2002).
Treatment of cutaneous lesions can be frustrating. For
patients with severe lesions or widespread involvement,
the most effective treatment is systemic glucocorticoids.
Other medications may be used in refractory cases, includ-
ing such agents as hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, and
thalidomide.
A growing number of publisher reports suggest that
anti-TNF-α therapies may be effective in the treatment of
numerous inﬂammatory skin diseases including sarcoidosis
(Alexis and Strober 2006). The majority of these reports
are in the form of individual case reports and small case
series. Tuchinda and Wong (2006) reported a patient with
chronic progressive cutaneous sarcoidosis, unsuccessfully
treated with systemic steroid and immunosuppressive agents,
who responded signiﬁcantly to etanercept as monotherapy.
Khanna and colleagues (2003) described a patient with lupus
pernio, resistant to corticosteroids and disease modifying
antirheumatic agents, who responded to the addition of
etanercept.
Doty and associates (2005) reported their experience
with inﬂiximab in ten patients with sarcoidosis, ﬁve with
disﬁguring lupus pernio lesions; the response was dramatic.
Heffernan and Anadkat (2005) reported a case of recalcitrant
cutaneous sarcoidosis with multiple and disseminated vio-
laceous papules and plaques which achieved 90% clearance
by week 6 with intravenous inﬂiximab therapy. Roberts
and colleagues (2003) described a woman with systemic
sarcoidosis with cutaneous manifestations in form of a mass
in a right eyelid that resolved between the third and fourth
dose of inﬂiximab. Haley and associates (2004) reported a
patient with severe mutilating cutaneous sarcoidosis (lupus
pernio), who showed partial response to courses of a wide
spectrum of immunomodulators and cytotoxic therapies who
developed signiﬁcant side effects due to prolonged high-
dose corticosteroids, and responded rapidly to inﬂiximab.
Pritchard and Nadarajah (2004) reported ﬁve patients, one
with sarcoid skin nodules that disappeared after 2 days of inf-
liximab infusions. Sweiss and colleagues (2005) described 9
patients, three with cutaneous manifestations (one with mass
lesions of the lip and nose, one with extensive psoriasiform
rash and one with extremely painful bilateral lower extremity
ulcerative sarcoidosis requiring high-dose narcotics for pain
control), without response to corticosteroids and methotrex-
ate and mycophenolate mofetil that resolved with inﬂiximab.
Another individual case has been described with response to
inﬂiximab (Baughman and Lower 2001; Mallbris et al 2003;
Meyerle and Schorr 2003).
Finally, there are 2 cases of cutaneous sarcoidosis
responding to adalimumab, one with ulcer on lower extremity
that persisted despite of treatment with prednisone, hydroxy-
chloroquine and methotrexate and resolved nine weeks after
the initiation of adalimumab (Philips et al 2005) and other
one with reddish-purple nodules on the face and shins and
numerosus hyperpigmented patches and erosions on the legs
(Heffernan and Smith 2006).
Table 1 Principal characteristics of anti-TNF drugs
Drug Dose Route of administration Adverse effects (common for all anti-TNF)
Inﬂiximab 3–5 mg/kg Infusion intravenously every four to eight weeks Local erythema Increased risk of infections
Etanercept 25 mg Subcutaneous injection, twice weekly Increased risk of tuberculosis reactivation
Etanercept 50 mg Subcutaneous injection, weekly Congestive heart failure Desmyelinating diseases
Adalimumab 40 mg Subcutaneous injection every two weeks Neoplasm
Abbreviation: TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1308
Callejas-Rubio et al
Patients with cutaneous sarcoidosis who are refractory to
corticosteroids and/or steroid-sparing agents, or those who
develop signiﬁcant drug toxicity, may be candidates for
treatment with TNF inhibitors. The optimal dose, duration of
therapy, and long-term toxicity of anti-TNF in patients with
refractory cutaneous sarcoidosis are yet to be determined in
prospective trials.
Neurosarcoidosis
Central and peripheral nervous system involvement
is estimated to be 5%, but other studies have reported
a prevalence of 15%–16%. The clinical course may be
acute, subacute or chronic with insidious onset (Lower et al
1997; Marangoni et al 2006). A growing number of papers,
specially reports in form of individual case reports, suggest
that anti-TNF-α therapies may be effective in the treatment
of neurosarcoidosis.
Carter and colleagues (2004) presented a 41-year-old
woman who presented with headaches, fatigue, diffuse myal-
gias and arthralgias, galactorrhea, and short term memory
problems; an elevated serum prolactin level was detected.
A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain showed
an enlarged pituitary gland and transphenoidal resection
revealed multiple noncaseating granulomas. Prednisone
and methotrexate was administered. Two months later, the
patient developed left homonymous superior quadrant hemi-
anopsia. A repeat MRI of the brain showed multiple areas
of prominent enhancement, including the suprasellar and
parasellar region, intracranial prechiasmal optic nerves and
optic chiasm, intracranial ﬁfth nerve bilaterally, cavernous
sinus, and infundibulum. After a total of ﬁve treatments of
intravenous cyclophosphamide, while on prednisone 10 mg
daily, the patient developed acute bilateral vision loss caused
by recurrence of her optic neuropathy. She was started on
intravenous inﬂiximab 5 mg/kg at 0, 2, 6 weeks, and then
every 8 weeks. After 5 months, and a total of ﬁve treatments
of inﬂiximab, the patient symptomatically improved, with
decreased headaches and arthralgias and no new visual
symptoms or worsening of her visual acuity.
Solberger and colleagues (2004) reported a patient with
a biopsy-proven progressive neurosarcoidosis involving the
hypophysis, the right vestibulocochlear nerve, the spinal
cord, and the peripheral nervous system, refractory to cortico-
steroids and azathioprine, in whom inﬂiximab was associated
with a markedly improved clinical outcome.
Pettersen and colleagues (2002) described a man who
developed biopsy-proven sarcoidosis 16 years previously,
initially involving the skin (lupus pernio), and subsequently
the liver (granulomatous hepatitis), knees (synovitis), lungs
(hilar lymphadenopathy), and brain (left temporal lobe lesion
with associated focal seizures). His neurosarcoidosis was
complicated by an episode of prolonged status epilepticus.
Despite undergoing radiation therapy to the left temporal
lobe and receiving full courses of prednisone, azathioprine,
methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and cyclo-
sporine, he experienced progressive neurologic involve-
ment with confusion, disorientation, aggressive behavior,
and right hemiparesis, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesis and
truncal ataxia. MRI revealed multiple supratentorial granu-
lomas, including a large, left medial temporal lobe lesion
with associated vasogenic edema. Despite receiving regular
rehabilitation therapy and medications to control seizures and
aggressive behavior, he remained confused and disoriented.
Inﬂiximab was administered IV at a dose of 5 mg/kg and
was repeated at 2 and 6 weeks. Within 1 week of receiving
the ﬁrst dose of inﬂiximab, the patient experienced a marked
reduction in agitation. At 6 weeks, his right hemiparesis and
hyperreﬂexia resolved and his right facial weakness, right
appendicular ataxia, and truncal ataxia improved. Repeat
MRI revealed reduced volume of all lesions and almost
complete resolution of surrounding edema.
Doty and colleagues (2005) reported their experience
with inﬂiximab in ten patients with sarcoidosis, one with
neurosarcoidosis with headache, seizures and paresthesias
in whom MRI demonstrated parenchymal and meningeal
enhancement in frontal lobe region. Inﬂiximab was associ-
ated to prednisone and 3 months later the clinical symptoms
showed improvement.
Katz and colleagues (2003) presented 2 patients with
optic disc swelling secondary to neurosarcoidosis; one of
them requiring treatment with inﬂiximab: a woman with
headache, chronic visual loss, papilledema, and optic atro-
phy characteristic of chronic intracranial hypertension. MRI
showed bifrontal cerebral edema with a plaque frontal pachy-
meningeal enhancement. Her visual loss progressed despite
conventional therapies, and maintained with inﬂiximab.
On the other hand, Guilpain and colleagues (2004)
reported a patient with optic bilateral neuropathy secondary
to granulomatous inﬁltration of nerve optic, where therapy
combining prednisone, methotrexate and inﬂiximab was
started without signiﬁcant improvement of visual acuity.
Finally, Pritchard and Nadarahaj (2004) described a
report of ﬁve patients, one with a myelopathy secondary to
neurosarcoidosis, with a pronounced response to treatment
with inﬂiximab.There is no case with neurosarcoidosis and
etanercept or adalimumab.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1309
Anti-TNF treatments for sarcoidosis
Currently, there is insufﬁcient data to support inﬂiximab
as ﬁrst-line therapy for neurosarcoidosis, but it does hold
promise as a potential second-line therapy. It deﬁnitely is an
option in refractory cases. The combination of inﬂiximab and
methotrexate is recommended if this therapeutic strategy is
employed for neurosarcoidosis.
Ocular sarcoidosis
Ocular disease is a common feature of sarcoidosis (Jabs
and Johns 1986; Usi et al 2002). The manifestations include
anterior, intermediate, and posterior uveitis. The interme-
diate and/or posterior uveitis is often chronic and can be
associated with a loss of vision (Dana et al 1996). In addition
to the inﬂammation, lumpy or ﬂat glial membrane, known
as snowbanking, over the pars plana of the ciliary body
transforms intermediate uveitis into pars planitis. The pars
plana has been used as a speciﬁc landmark for inﬂammation.
Inﬂammation in that area is associated with chronic disease
and represents a difﬁcult management issue for the ophthal-
mologist. Sarcoidosis is one of the more important causes
of pars planitis. The treatment for uveitis includes therapy
with corticosteroids, used topically, periocularly, and/or
systemically (Krystolik et al 1998). However, the long term
local and systemic use of corticosteroids is often associated
with side effects, including cataracts and glaucoma. Because
of these complications, alternatives to steroid therapy are
often sought for the treatment of chronic uveitis. Among
the immunosuppressive drugs, methotrexate has been com-
monly used (Dev et al 1999; Samson et al 2001). Although
methotrexate is useful in many patients, incomplete control
of the uveitis can sometimes occur. In these cases treatment
with anti-TNF-α may be an option.
Baughman and colleagues (2005) studied the effective-
ness of etanercept in the treatment of patients with ocular sar-
coidosis who have persistent disease despite treatment with
methotrexate for at least 6 months. Patients were randomized
to receive either etanercept, 25 mg, or an equal volume of
physiologic saline solution subcutaneously twice a week for
6 months. All patients were maintained with methotrexate
therapy throughout the study. The primary end point of the
study was the change of the ophthalmologist examination
after 6 months of therapy. Anterior uveitis was present in
16 patients, posterior uveitis in 5 and pars planitis in 9.
Etanercept was well tolerated. However, it was not associated
with a marked improvement in this group of patients with
chronic ocular sarcoidosis.
There are various reports about treatment of sarcoid-
osis with inﬂiximab. Saurenmann and colleagues (2006)
described the efﬁcacy of anti-TNF-α (etanercept 11 patients
and inﬂiximab 13 patients) in children with persistently active
uveitis despite treatment with at least 1 standard immuno-
suppressive drug. One patient had sarcoidosis and received
inﬂiximab. Inﬂiximab resulted in better clinical responses
with less ocular complications than etanercept.
Benitez del Castillo and colleagues (2005a) evaluated
the long term efﬁcacy and safety of inﬂiximab as treatment
for noninfectious posterior uveitis in 7 patients (5 diagnosed
with Behçet´s disease, 1 with chronic idiopathic multifocal
choroiditis and one diagnosed with sarcoidosis). Three intra-
venous doses of 5 mg/kg of inﬂiximab was administered at
weeks 0, 2 and 6, and was repeated in patients undergoing a
relapse of uveitis after initial remission. Improvement was
deﬁned as amelioration of visual acuity or disappearance of
retinal exudates and/or vitreous opacities. All patients were
followed up for at least 36 months and at the end all eyes
had improved in term of signs of inﬂammation.
Baughman and colleagues (2005b) reported their expe-
rience with inﬂiximab in chronic ocular inﬂammation in
14 patients with various underlying ocular conditions includ-
ing 7 patients with sarcoidosis. All patients had persistent
inﬂammation despite systemic immunosuppressive agents
and all but 1 experienced marked improvement. Four patients
who had previously received etanercept with either no
response or subsequent relapse responded to inﬂiximab.
Lindstedt and colleagues (2005) described the effect of
additional treatment with anti-TNF-α therapy in a case series
of 13 patients with serious sight threatening uveitis (6 with
Behçet’s disease, one with sarcoidosis). Inﬂiximab treatment
resulted in an effective suppression of ocular inﬂamma-
tion in all patients. In patients with non-Behçet’s disease
uveitis visual acuity in 6 out of 8 improved or was stable.
Pritchard and Nadarajah (2004) report 5 patients, 2 with
chronic granulomatous uveitis and 1 with several organs
affected by sarcoidosis including uveitis, who showed rapid
improvement after the infusion.
For ocular sarcoidosis refractory to conventional treat-
ment, inﬂiximab must be considered as second-line treat-
ment; with the actual evidence indicating nﬂiximab resulted
in better clinical responses with less ocular complications
than etanercept.
Pulmonary sarcoidosis
The lungs are affected in more than 90% of patients, usually
presenting as interstitial disease. Symptoms are dry cough,
dyspnea, and chest discomfort. Pulmonary sarcoidosis has
an unpredictable course that may result in spontaneous
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1310
Callejas-Rubio et al
remission or lead to progressive loss of lung function with
ﬁbrosis. There are four stages of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Patients with stage I or II disease may have no symptoms,
whereas stages III and IV can be characterized by progressive
dyspnea, loss of lung function, and ﬁbrosis. Airway involve-
ment can occur and may result in airﬂow limitation, persistent
cough and, in severe cases, bronchiectasis. Spontaneous
remission can be expected in 55%–90% of patients with
stage I disease, 40%–70% with stage II disease, 10%–20%
with stage III disease, and 0% to 5% with stage IV disease
(Baughman 2004; Wu and Schiff 2004).
Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for sarcoid-
osis. Alternative drugs are required in chronic resistant sar-
coidosis and/or in conditions where systemic corticosteroids
are contraindicated. Immunosuppressive agents (chlorambu-
cil, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, cyclosporine, azathio-
prine), anticytokine agents (thalidomide, pentoxifylline), and
antimalarials (chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine) have been
used in such situations. Chlorambucil and cyclophosphamide
have been used in anecdotal cases of pulmonary sarcoidosis
as corticosteroid-sparing agents. Therapy with anti-TNF-α
may be an option in these situations (Fazzi 2003).
Ulbricht and colleagues (2003) described a patient with
severe sarcoidosis involving the lung and liver. Various
treatment regimens with azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclo-
phosphamide, and pentoxifylline failed to control the disease
and therapy with inﬂiximab was commenced. Arthritis, pul-
monary and liver involvement improved, and they were able
to taper the corticosteroid treatment to a lower-dose regimen
with no need for additional immunosuppressive treatment.
Pritchard and Nadarajah (2004) reported ﬁve patients,
including a woman with pulmonary sarcoidosis with dys-
pnoea, arthralgias and fatigue.This patient was receiving
prednisone 40 mg daily and methotrexate 7.5 mg weekly
when infliximab was started. Dyspnoea and arthralgia
improved 1–2 months after treatment. A computed tomog-
raphy (CT) scan of the thorax before and after 6 months
of treatment with inﬂiximab showed improvement in the
enlarged hilar lymph nodes.
Roberts and associates (2003) presented a case of multi-
system sarcoidosis that was refractory to treatment with mul-
tiple immunosuppressive agents. Treatment with inﬂiximab,
as part of combination therapy, was added. At the time that
inﬂiximab therapy was started, patient’s lung function was
stable on a regimen of systemic steroids and azathioprine
and its addition provided no further beneﬁt.
Sweiss and colleagues (2005) described 9 patients,
4 of them with systemic and pulmonary affectation that
were treated with inﬂiximab. All cases showed partial or
complete resolution of adenopathy, and shortness of breath
improved.
A prospective, open-label, phase-2 treatment trial with
etanercept in pulmonary sarcoidosis has been published
recently (Utz et al 2003). Study hypotheses included the
following: (1) patients treated with etanercept will clinically
improve or remain stable, obviating the need for corticoste-
roid treatment; and (2) patients responding to etanercept will
exhibit higher pretreatment lung TNF-α expression as well
as the suppression of lung TNF-α expression during treat-
ment compared to nonresponders. Fourteen patients demon-
strated stage II, and 3 demonstrated stage III disease. Five of
17 patients were treatment successes, while another patient
withdrew from the study after 3 months. Eleven patients did
not respond to therapy. The fact that patients did not respond
to therapy was secondary to the deterioration seen both in
radiographs and in the results of pulmonary function tests.
Serum TNF-α was present at low but measurable levels
at baseline. Interestingly, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay measurements at 6 months demonstrated signiﬁcant
increases in total serum level of TNF-α. No consistent dif-
ferences were observed in either TNF-α level or bioactivity
comparing those patients whose conditions had improved or
those in whom the disease had progressed while receiving
etanercept.
Another phase 2, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study has been conducted in 138 patients
with chronic pulmonary sarcoidosis (Baughman et al 2006).
Eligible adult patients had histologically proven sarcoidosis,
diagnosed at least 1 year prior to screening, evidence of
parenchymal disease on chest radiograph and a forced vital
capacity (FVC) 50%–85% of the predicted value. Patients
must have been treated with at least 10 mg/day of prednisone
or equivalent or one or more immunosuppressants for at
least 3 months prior to screening. Patients were randomized
to receive intravenous infusions of inﬂiximab or placebo at
weeks 0, 2, 6, 12, 18, 24, and followed through week 52. The
primary endpoint was the change from baseline to week 24
in percent of predicted FVC. Inﬂiximab therapy resulted in a
statistically signiﬁcant improvement in percent of predicted
FVC at week 24 Finally, we recently described a patient with
pulmonary and pleural sarcoidosis resistant to treatment with
prednisone and methotrexate who resolved with adalimumab
(Callejas-Rubio et al 2005).
In patients with progressive stage II or III pulmonary
sarcoidosis, there are a preponderance of treatment failures
using etanercept as a single agent. It is not clear whether there
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1311
Anti-TNF treatments for sarcoidosis
exists a small subset of patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis
who respond to therapy with etanercept alone. In patients
with refractory or recurrent pulmonary sarcoidosis, inﬂix-
imab and probably adalimumab must be considered as an
alternative treatment.
Renal sarcoidosis
The kidneys may be involved in sarcoidosis in various
ways. Because the granuloma epithelioid cells may produce
calcitriol, sarcoid patients commonly have hypercalciuria,
nephrocalcinosis, and stone disease and may develop
hypercalcemia. The renal interstitium may be involved with
granuloma formation. An association with renal neoplasms,
notably papillary carcinomas, has been described. The glom-
eruli may be involved in sarcoidosis and IgA nephropathy,
membranous IgG deposits, or even extracapillary crescent
formation may occur (Gobel et al 2001). Although cortico-
steroids are effective in advanced tubulo-interstitial nephri-
tis due to sarcoidosis, long term treatment is necessary to
preserve renal function and to delay the onset of end-stage
renal disease (Rajakariar et al 2006). Steroid-dependant or
refractory cases may respond to other immunosuppressants
including anti-TNF-α agents.
There are two case reports of treatment with inﬂix-
imab in renal sarcoidosis. Thumfart and colleagues (2005)
described the case of a boy presenting with severe arterial
hypertension and acute renal failure caused by an isolated
sarcoid granulomatous interstitial nephritis. Renal function
improved initially with prednisone treatment but later, the
patient showed signs of severe steroid toxicity and progres-
sive renal failure. Monthly treatment with inﬂiximab was
started, resulting in steady improvement in renal function and
resolution of renal granulomata. In addition, antihypertensive
medication could be reduced.
Ahmed and associates (2007) present a patient with acute
renal failure due to isolated granulomatous inﬁltration of
the renal parenchyma. Renal biopsy showed granulomatous
interstitial nephritis with noncaseating granulomas. There was
no evidence of extrarenal sarcoid involvement. Prednisone of
60 mg daily resulted in signiﬁcant improvement in renal func-
tion. Because of recurrent ﬂares on steroid taper and steroid
toxicity, treatment with inﬂiximab was instituted and resulted
in stabilization of renal function. Steroid-dependant or refrac-
tory renal sarcoidosis cases may respond to inﬂiximab.
Other manifestations
Fouchier and colleagues (2004) reported a patient with
persistent, refractory symptomatic pulmonary sarcoidosis,
complicated by a congenital muscular disease: McArdle’s
disease (a glycogen storage disease caused by myophos-
phorylase deﬁciency). As the desaturations during mild
exercise caused by the sarcoidosis aggravated the negative
consequences of his muscle disease and he failed to respond
adequately to corticosteroids and methotrexate, the patient
was treated experimentally with inﬂiximab. The results
were favorable: after 17, 21, and 36 months there was an
improvement in various lung function parameters, and his
fatigue was reduced.
Menon and associates (2004) reported a patient treated
with interferon-α who developed hypercalcemia and renal
insufﬁciency as presenting clinical manifestation of sarcoid-
osis. Prednisone therapy was effective in controlling hyper-
calcemia but had to be discontinued due to an increase in
hepatitis C viral RNA count. Inﬂiximab was used as therapy.
The patient received three doses of inﬂiximab (5 mg/kg) and
achieved a rapid decline in serum calcium to normal levels
in 7 days; the serum calcium level has remained normal
3 months after the last infusion.
Yee and Pochapinet (2001) described a woman with sar-
coidosis presenting with severe protein-losing enteropathy,
hypoalbuminemia, and proximal myopathy who had not
responded adequately to corticosteroid therapy and whose
clinical course was further complicated by acute tubular
necrosis and renal failure requiring long term hemodialysis.
Enteropathic and myopathic symptoms resolved after inﬂix-
imab therapy, and the serum albumin level also improved.
Mandel and colleagues (2005) describe a case report of a
patient with sarcoidosis with parotid gland swellings who did
not respond to standard therapy. Despite the use of various
immunosuppressive agents, the swellings failed to resolve
over a three-year period. The patient’s condition was treated
successfully with inﬂiximab. Finally, Hobbs (2005) presented
the ﬁrst documented evidence that intraarticular injection of
etanercept is clinically beneﬁcial and well tolerated in the
setting of sarcoid arthritis.
Table 2 summarizes the studies of anti-TNF-α on
different manifestations of sarcoidosis.
Table 2 Summary of studies of effects of anti-TNF on sarcoidosis
Clinical manifestation Anti-TNF considered
Cutaneous sarcoidosis Inﬂiximab and adalimumab
Neurosarcoidosis Inﬂiximab
Ocular sarcoidosis Inﬂiximab
Pulmonary sarcoidosis Inﬂiximab and adalimumab
Renal sarcoidosis Inﬂiximab
Abbreviation: TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1312
Callejas-Rubio et al
Conclusions
Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for sarcoidosis.
Neverthless, alternative drugs, such as anti-TNF-α may be
required in chronic resistant sarcoidosis and/or in conditions
where systemic corticosteroids are contraindicated.
Three agents are currently available as speciﬁc TNF-
α antagonists: etanercept, inﬂiximab and adalimumab.
Although date from noncomparative trials suggest that all
3 have comparable therapeutic in rheumatoid arthritis, their
effects in granulomatous diseases as sarcoidosis probably
are more variable. Most of the information available comes
from isolated clinics cases or series of cases, and as these
type of papers usually suffers from the publication bias,
the results must be taken with precaution. Inﬂiximab, and
probably adalimumab, appears to be more effective in the
treatment of different manifestation of refractory sarcoid-
osis, and would probably be the anti TNF of election in
these patients.
Additional studies are needed to better deﬁne these differ-
ences and optimize the clinical utilization of these agents.
Disclosure
The authors report no conﬂicts of interest.
References
Ahmed MM, Mubashir E, Dossabhoy NR. 2007. Isolated renal sarcoidosis:
a rare presentation of a rare disease treated with inﬂiximab. Clin
Rheumatol, 26:1346–9.
Alexis AF, Strober BE. 2006. Off-label dermatologic uses of anti-TNF-a
therapies. J Cutan Med Surg, 9:296–302.
Baughman RP, Bradley DA, Lower EE. 2005b. Inﬂiximab in chronic ocular
inﬂammation. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther, 43:7–11.
Baughman RP, Drent M, Kavuru M, et al. 2006. Inﬂiximab therapy in
patients with chronic sarcoidosis and pulmonary involvement. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med, 174:795–802.
Baughman RP, Lower EE, du Bois RM. 2003. Sarcoidosis. Lancet,
361:1111–8.
Baughman RP, Lower EE. 2001. Inﬂiximab for refractory sarcoidosis.
Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis, 18:70–4.
Baughman RP, Lower EE, Bradley DA, et al. 2005a. Etanercept for refrac-
tory ocular sarcoidosis:results of a double-blind randomized trial.
Chest, 128:1062–7.
Baughman RP. 2004. Pulmonary sarcoidosis. Clin Chest Med, 25:521–30.
Baumer I, Zissel G, Schlaak M, et al. 1997. Th1/Th2 cell distribution in
pulmonary sarcoidosis. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol, 16:171–7.
Benitez del Castillo JM, Martínez de la Casa JM, Pato-Cour E, et al. 2005.
Long-term treatment of refractory posterior uveitis with anti-TNF alpha
(inﬂiximab). Eye, 19:841–5.
Callejas Rubio, JL, Ortego Centeno N, López-Pérez L, et al. 2005. Treat-
ment of therapy-resistant sarcoidosis with adalimumab. Clin Rheumatol,
25:1–2.
Carter JD, Valeriano J, Vasey FB. 2004. Refractory neurosarcoidosis: a
dramatic response to Inﬂiximab. Am J Med, 117:277–9.
Chensue SW, Warmington KS, Ruth JH, et al. 1995. Cytokine function
during mycobacterial and schistosomal antigeninduced pulmonary
granuloma formation: local and regional participation of IFN-alpha,
IL-10, and TNF. J Immunol, 154:5969–76.
Dana MR, Merayo-Lloves J, Schaumberg DA, et al. 1996. Prognosticators
for visual outcome in sarcoid uveitis. Ophthalmology, 103:1846–53.
Dev S, McCallum RM, Jaffe GJ. 1999. Methotrexate for sarcoid associated
panuveitis. Ophthalmology, 106:111–18.
Doty JD, Mazur JE, Judson MA. 2005. Treatment of sarcoidosis with
inﬂiximab. Chest, 127:1064–71.
Fazzi P. 2003. Pharmacotherapeutic management of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Am J Respir Med, 2:311–20.
Fouchier SM, Moller GM, Van Santen-Hoeufft M, et al. 2004. Successful
treatment with inﬂiximab of a patient with refractory sarcoidosis.
Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd, 148:2446–50.
Gobel U, Kettritz R, Schneider W, et al. 2001. The protean face of renal
sarcoidosis. J Am Soc Nephrol, 12:616–23.
Guilpain P, Andreu MA,Cassoux N, et al. 2004. Neuropathie optique bilaté-
rale révélatrice d’une sarcoïdose systémique Bilateral optic neuropathy
revealing systemic sarcoidosis. Rev Med Interne, 25:755–8.
Haley H, Cantrell W, Smith K. 2004. Inﬂiximab therapy for sarcoidosis
(lupus pernio). Br J Dermatol, 150:146–9.
Haraoui B. 2005a. Differentiating the efﬁcacy of the tumor necrosis factor
inhibitors. Semin Arthritis Rheum, 34:7–11.
Haraoui B. 2005b. Differentiating the efﬁcacy of tumor necrosis factor
inhibitors. J Rheumatol, 32:3–7.
Heffernan MP, Anadkat MJ. 2005. Recalcitrant cutaneous sarcoidosis
responding to inﬂiximab. Arch Dermatolol, 141:910–11.
Heffernan MP, Smith DI. 2006. Adalimumab for treatment of cutaneous
sarcoidosis. Arc Dermatol, 142:17–9.
Hobbs K. 2005. Chronic sarcoid arthritis treated with intraarticular etaner-
cept. Arthritis Rheum, 52:987–8.
Jabs DA, Johns CA. 1986. Ocular involvement in chronic sarcoidosis.
Am J Ophthalmol, 102:297–301.
Katta R. 2002. Cutaneous sarcoidosis: a dermatologic masquerader.
Am Fam Physician, 65:1581–4.
Katz JM, Bruno MK, Winterkorn JM, et al. 2003. The pathogenesis and
treatment of optic disc swelling in neurosarcoidosis: a unique thera-
peutic response to inﬂiximab. Arch Neurol, 60:426–30.
Khanna D, Liebling MR, Louie JS. 2003. Etanercept ameliorates sarcoidosis
arthritis and skin disease. J Rheumatol, 30:1864–7.
Krzystolik M, Power WJ, Foster CS. 1998. Diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges of sarcoidosis. Int Ophthalmol Clin, 38:61–76.
Kunkel SL, Chensue SW, Strieter RM, et al. 1989. Cellular and molecular
aspects of granulomatous inﬂammation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol,
1:439–47.
Lindstedt EW, Baarsma GS, Kuijpers RW, et al. 2005. Anti-TNF-a therapy
for sight threatening uveitis. Br J Ophthalmol, 89:533–6.
Lower EE, Broderick JP, Brott TG, et al. 1997. Diagnosis and management
of neurological sarcoidosis. Arch Int Med, 157:1864–8.
Lügering A, Schmidt M, Lügering N, et al. 2001. Inﬂiximab induces
apoptosis in monocytes from patients with chronic active Crohn’s
disease by using a caspase-dependent pathway. Gastroenterology,
121:1145–57.
Mallbris L, Ljungberg A, Hedblad MA, et al. 2003. Progressive cutaneous
sarcoidosis responding to necrosis factor alpha therapy. J Am Acad
Dermatol, 48:290–3.
Mandel L, Wolinsky B, Chalom EC. 2005. Treatment of refractory sarcoidal
parotid gland swelling in a previously reported unresponsive case.
J Am Dent Assoc, 136:1282–5.
Marangoni S, Argentiero V, Tavolato B. 2006. Neurosarcoidosis: clinical
description of 7 cases with a proposal for a new diagnostic strategy.
J Neurol, 253:488–95.
Marques LJ, Zheng L, Poulakis J, et al. 1999. Pentoxifylline inhibits TNF-
alpha production from human alveolar macrophages. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med, 159:508–11.
Menon Y, Cucurull E, Espinoza LR. 2004. Interferon-alpha-associated
sarcoidosis responsive to infliximab therapy. Am J Med Sci,
328:173–5.
Meyerle JH, Schorr A. 2003. The use of inﬂiximab in cutaneous sarcoidosis.
J Drugs Dermatol, 2:413–4.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1313
Anti-TNF treatments for sarcoidosis
Moller DR, Forman JD, Liu MC, et al. 1996. Enhanced expression of IL-12
associated with Th 1 cytokine proﬁles in active pulmonary sarcoidosis.
J Immunol, 156:4952–60.
Pettersen JA, Zochodne DW, Bel RB, et al. 2002. Refractory neuro
sarcoidosis responding to Inﬂiximab. Neurology, 59:1660–1.
Philips MA, Lynch J, Azmi FH. 2005. Ulcerative cutaneous sarcoidosis
responding to adalimumab. J Am Acad Dermatol, 53:917.
Pinkston P, Bitterman PB, Crystal RG. 1983. Spontaneous release of
interleukin-2 by lung lymphocytes in active pulmonary sarcoidosis.
N Engl J Med, 308:793–800.
Pritchard C, Nadarajah K. 2004. Tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibitor
treatment for sarcoidosis refractory to conventional treatments: a report
of ﬁve patients. Ann Rheum Dis, 63:318–320.
Rajakariar R, Sharples EJ, Raftery MJ, et al. 2006. Sarcoid tubulo-interstitial
nephritis: long-term outcome and response to corticosteroid therapy.
Kidney Int, 70:165–9.
Reinold AM. 2003. New indications for treatment of chronic inﬂammation
by TNF-alpha blockade. Am J Med Sci, 325:75–92.
Roberts SD, Wilkes DS, Burgett RA, et al. 2003. Refractory sarcoidosis
responding to inﬂiximab. Chest, 124:2028–31.
Samson CM, Waheed N, Baltatzis S, et al. 2001. Methotrexate therapy for
chronic nonifectious uveitis: analysis of a case series of 160 patients.
Ophthalmology, 108:1134–9.
Saurenmann RK, Levin AV, Rose JB, et al. 2006. Tumour necrosis factor
{alpha} inhibitors in the treatment of childhood uveitis. Rheumatology,
45:982–9.
Scallon B, Cai A, Solowski N, et al. 2002. Binding and functional compari-
sons of two types of tumor necrosis factor antagonists. J Pharmacol
Exp, 301:418–26.
Scott DL, Kingsley GH. 2006. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors for
rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med, 355:704–12.
Shigehara K, Shijubo N, Ohmichi M, et al. 2001. IL 12 and IL 18 are
increased and stimulate IFN-gamma production in sarcoid lungs.
J Immunol, 166:642–49.
Sollberger M, Fluri F, Baumann T, et al. 2004. Successful treatment
of steroid-refractory neurosarcoidosis with infliximab. J Neurol,
251:760–1.
Sweiss NJ, Welsch MJ, Curran JJ, et al. 2005. Tumor necrosis factor inhibi-
tion as a novel treatment for refractory sarcoidosis. Arthritis Rheum,
15:788–91.
Thumfart J, Muller D, Rudolph B, et al. 2005. Isolated sarcoid granu-
lomatous interstitial nephritis responding to infliximab therapy.
Am J Kidney Dis, 45:411–4.
Tracey KJ. 1994. Tumour necrosis factor-alpha. The cytokine handbook.
2nd ed. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 289–304.
Tuchinda C, Wong HK. 2006. Etanercept for chronic progressive cutaneous
sarcoidosis. J Drugs Dermatol, 5:538–40.
Ulbricht KU, Stoll M, Bierwirth J, et al. 2003. Successful tumor necrosis
factor alpha blockade treatment in therapy-resistant sarcoidosis.
Arthritis Rheum, 48:3542–3.
Usui Y, Kaiser D, Kaiser E. 2002. Update of ocular manifestations of
sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis, 19:167–75.
Utz JP, Limper AH, Kalra S, et al. 2003. Etanercept for the treatment of stage
II and III progressive pulmonary sarcoidosis. Chest, 124:177–85.
Wu JJ, Schiff KR. 2004. Sarcoidosis. Am Fam Physician, 70:312–22.
Yee AMF, Pochapin MB. 2001. Treatment of complicated sarcoidosis
with inﬂiximab anti-tumot necrosis alpha therapy. Ann Intern Med,
135:27–31.
Ziegenhagen MW, Benner UK, Zissel G, et al. 1997. Sarcoidosis: TNF-
alpha release from alveolar macrophages and serum level of sIL 2R are
prognostic markers. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 156:1586–92.
