© 2009 Kelly et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5 911–921
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management
911
r e v i e w
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
The pathophysiology of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria and treatment with eculizumab
Richard Kelly1
Stephen Richards1
Peter Hillmen1
Anita Hill2
1
Institute of Oncology, St. James’s
University Hospital, Leeds, UK;
2
Department of Haematology,
Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Bradford, UK
Correspondence: Richard Kelly
Department of Haematology, Level
3 Bexley  Wing, St. James’s University
Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds LS9 7TF
Tel +44 113 2068513
Fax +44 113 2067468
Email richardkelly@nhs.net
Abstract: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is a rare disorder of hemopoietic stem cells.
Affected individuals have a triad of clinical associations – intravascular hemolysis, an increased
risk of thromboembolism, and bone marrow failure. Most of the symptoms experienced in this
disease occur due to the absence of complement regulatory proteins on the surface of the red
blood cells. Complement activation is thus not checked and causes destruction of these cells.
Eculizumab is a monoclonal antibody treatment which specifically binds to the complement
protein C5, preventing its cleavage, and so halts the complement cascade and prevents the
formation of the terminal complement proteins. Eculizumab prevents intravascular hemolysis,
stabilizes hemoglobin levels, reduces or stops the need for blood transfusions, and improves
fatigue and patient quality of life as well as reducing pulmonary hypertension, decreasing the
risk of thrombosis and protecting against worsening renal function. It is not a curative therapy
but has a great benefit on those with this rare debilitating condition.
Keywords: eculizumab, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, hemolysis
Introduction
Eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody which binds to the complement
protein 5 (C5), thereby inhibiting the formation of the terminal components of the
complement cascade.1
It was licensed by the Food and Drug Administration in March
2007 and by the European Medicines Agency in June 2007 for the treatment of
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). It has been shown to be a well tolerated
and highly effective treatment for patients with PNH.2–4
PNH is a rare hematological
disorder where hematological stem cells (HSCs) acquire an abnormality that is then
passed on to their progeny. The red blood cells derived from these abnormal HSCs
are extremely sensitive to complement mediated lysis which leads to many of the
symptoms of the disease.5
Prior to eculizumab, treatment was mainly supportive in
nature with a median survival of 10 to 15 years for patients treated between 1940 and
1970.6
More recently, data from France reported a median survival of 22 years.7
This
increase in survival may reflect improved supportive care as well as better treatment
of more specific complications, such as thromboses.
The genetic defect
The disease is characterized by hemopoietic clones which harbor somatic muta-
tions of the phosphatidylinositol glycan synthetic pathway due to inactivation of the
complementation class A gene (PIG-A).8
The PIG-A gene is one of a number of genes
needed for the synthesis of the glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor within the
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management
18 November 2009
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5912
Kelly et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
endoplasmic reticulum (ER).9
GPI biosynthesis occurs via
a stepwise addition of sugar nucleotides and phospholipids
within the ER before the completed protein is transferred
to the cell surface10
(Figure 1). The GPI moiety serves as
a membrane anchor for a variety of cell surface proteins.
Mutations of the PIG-A gene disrupt the first step of GPI
biosynthesis leading to an absence of the GPI anchor and, in
turn, a marked deficiency of all GPI linked proteins.11
PIG-A is located on the X chromosome and is mono-
allelically expressed. All the other genes involved in GPI
biosynthesis are autosomal. A single mutation in the PIG-A
gene is therefore sufficient to disrupt GPI assembly leading
to complete loss of function. For the remainder of genes in
this pathway, both alleles would need to be mutated in the
same cell to affect GPI production. This explains why all
cases of acquired PNH which have been examined, harbor
PIG-A mutations.12,13
The complement cascade
and hemolysis in PNH
The complement cascade is an integral part of the innate
immune system. It involves sequential reactions that
ultimately cause cell lysis either by opsonization and sub-
sequent cell phagocytosis, or by the formation of a phos-
pholipase, called the membrane attack complex (MAC)
that punches holes in the cell membrane (Figure 2). CD55
(decay accelerating factor, DAF) and CD59 (membrane
inhibitor of reactive lysis, MIRL) are widely expressed on
all hemopoietic cells and are both involved in the regulation
of complement activation. CD55 increases the removal of
C3 convertase, thereby reducing the amount of C3 that is
cleaved.14
CD59 inhibits C9 binding to C5b, C6, C7 and C8
which together make up the MAC.The MAC is then inserted
into the cell membrane causing cell lysis.
The absence or reduced expression of CD55 and CD59
on PNH red blood cells leads to their increased sensitivity to
complement mediated attack. This in turn causes the major-
ity of symptoms of the disease. Based on their sensitivity to
complement attack, erythrocytes in PNH have been classi-
fied into 3 groups.14
Type I cells are normal red blood cells,
type III cells have a complete deficiency of GPI anchored
proteins and type II cells have a partial deficiency (Figure 3).
The degree of hemolysis suffered by individuals is relative to
the proportions of the type II and III cells present. In general,
the larger the proportion of type III cells, the more severe the
hemolysis suffered by the affected individual.
PNH diagnosis
As PNH is a rare disease, its precise incidence and prevalence
has not been well documented. It is not unusual for patients to
be misdiagnosed or remain undiagnosed for long periods.The
most reliable data on the incidence and prevalence of the dis-
ease is from work undertaken inYorkshire, England.15
In this
study, the prevalence of patients with PNH clones of any size
is 15.9 per million and the incidence is 1.3 per million of the
total population. Eighty-two percent of these patients had a
granulocyte clone size greater than 1%, with 43% of these
greater than 10% and a quarter greater than 50%. Clone sizes
down to 0.05% were detected in this study while evaluating
a minimum of 1 × 106
flow cytometry events.
Initially, PNH diagnosis relied on a biochemical assay,
the Ham test, in which red blood cells are exposed to acidified
serum. Under these conditions, complement is activated
via the alternative pathway and causes lysis of PNH cells
as they are sensitive to complement attack.16
This test
was time consuming, non-specific, insensitive and lacked
standardization. It was succeeded by flow cytometry in
the 1990s.
Flow cytometry is routinely performed to evaluate the
size of erythrocyte and granulocyte clones and is considered
the “gold standard” for diagnosing PNH. Peripheral blood
granulocyte clone size is believed to be the best marker for
evaluating the extent of affected HSCs in the bone marrow
as the erythrocyte clone size can vary depending both on
the degree of intravascular hemolysis present and whether
an individual has had a recent red cell transfusion of normal
erythrocytes.The granulocyte clone size also correlates well
with the platelet clone size.
Initially, flow cytometry was used to look for the absence
of specific GPI-linked proteins such as CD55 and CD5917
PI
NA
M
PIPI
NA NA
PIG-A
Endoplasmic reticulum
PIG-M
M
M
M
M
NA
M
NA
PI PI Cell
surface
Figure 1 Glycophosphatidylinositol biosynthesis:an illustration showing the stepwise
addition of sugar residues and the sites at which PIG-A and PIG-M are required.
Abbreviations: M, mannose; NA, N-acetylglucosamine; PI, phosphatidylinositol.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5 913
Eculizumab for treatment of PNHDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
and determination of the presence of these antigens is still
routinely used in evaluating the proportion of PNH red blood
cells present. The use of both of these targets in conjunction
excludes rare single antigen deficiencies and allows a red
cell clone as small as 0.01% to be detected.18
Evaluation of
CD59 expression usually provides the clearest separation of
type I, II and III red blood cells (Figure 3).
A wide variety of different GPI-linked proteins have
been used to assess the PNH granulocyte clone size. The
most recent development in this diagnostic field is the devel-
opment of the FLAER reagent.18
FLAER is a fluorochrome-
labeled inactive variant of the protein aerolysin which
selectively binds directly to the GPI anchor. It cannot be
used to ascertain the extent of the PNH red cell clone size
as the presence of glycophorin, a non-GPI-linked protein on
erythrocytes, binds to the FLAER non-specifically. FLAER
can be used alone or in combination with other monoclonal
antibodies to GPI-linked antigens to evaluate the granulo-
cyte clone size. At the moment there is no standardization
for the diagnosis of PNH with a marked diversity seen in
the antibodies used between different centers. FLAER is
becoming increasingly used for granulocyte clone evaluation
and provides a more accurate assessment, especially of small
PNH clones.19
In our center, one of the 2 National Centers for
treating PNH patients in England, we routinely use 6 color
flow cytometry with a combination of FLAER, CD16, CD24,
CD33, CD15 and CD14 for granulocyte analysis and CD59,
CD55 and CD235a for evaluating erythrocyte clone sizes.
A standardized approach to PNH
A proposed classification to allow a standard approach to
PNH patients for clinicians is to divide them into three
distinct groupings.20
1. Classical PNH – these patients have the characteristic
symptoms of PNH with intravascular hemolysis and a
cellular bone marrow. They have no evidence of any
other bone marrow pathology.
2. PNH in the setting of another specified bone marrow
disorder – these patients have symptoms of intravascu-
lar hemolysis but also have, or have previously had, an
underlying bone marrow abnormality such as aplastic
anemia (AA) or myelodysplasia (MDS).
3. Subclinical PNH – these patients have no evidence of
ongoing hemolysis.They have small PNH clones present
and are often seen in patients with bone marrow failure
especially in AA and MDS. These patients have been
identified due to the development of improved diag-
nostic flow cytometry as prior to this these small clones
Classical
pathway
Lectin
pathway
Alternative
pathway
C4 + C2
C1qrs
C4a
C4d
Weak
anaphylatoxin
C3a C3bi CR3
C5a
C5b
C6
C7
C8
C9
TerminalProximal
C5
C3b
C4b2a
C4b2a3b
C3 C3bBb
D + B
Ba
C3b
C3bBb3b
C2b
C5-convertase
C5b-9 terminal complement complex
C5-convertase
Potent anaphylatoxin
Chemotaxis
Cell activation
Proinflammatory
Prothrombotic
Microbial
opsonization
Immune complex
clearance
Cell lysis
Cell activation
Proinflammatory
Prothrombotic
Figure 2 The complement cascade showing the proximal and the terminal complement components which lead to the formation of the membrane attack complex which in
turn causes hemolysis of erythrocytes in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5914
Kelly et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
would have remained undetected.19
The significance
and relevance of subclinical PNH is unclear and will
be evaluated in ongoing studies on otherwise healthy
individuals.
The concern with this approach relates to the overlap
between those with classical PNH that may have a small
degree of aplasia and those with PNH in the setting of another
specified bone marrow disorder that may have significant
intravascular hemolysis.
The pathogenesis of PNH
There is good evidence to suggest that all patients who
develop PNH have bone marrow failure (usually AA and
occasionally MDS) either before or at the time their PNH
is diagnosed.21,22
Since there is no definitive evidence that
GPI deficient cells have an intrinsic survival advantage
over normal cells, a cell extrinsic effect is likely to explain
the preferential development of PNH clones concurrent
with bone marrow failure.22
Bone marrow failure, AA in
particular, appears to provide the environment needed for
the expansion of PNH clones and small PNH clones can be
found in up to two thirds of patients with AA.23
While the etiology of AA is often poorly defined, a pri-
mary role for immune mediated destruction of hemopoietic
marrow elements is generally accepted. Consequently one
of the main therapies used in AA is immunosuppression,
via antithymocyte globulin and ciclosporin. The success
of these therapies supports the proposed immune etiology.
Furthermore, in vitro experiments demonstrate that removal
of T-cells from aplastic bone marrow improves the number
of colonies formed in tissue culture and analysis of these
T-lymphocytes has identified them as activated cytotoxic
T-cells (CTL).24
The cause of T-cell activation in AA is
unknown but drug exposure and viral infection are potential
candidates. The role of immune activation in AA leads to
the hypothesis that immune evasion is a mechanism for the
emergence of the PNH clone.
Some patients with PNH have multiple PNH clones
detectable.25–27
Multiple clones are also found in those with
PNH who have co-existing AA.28
Endo et al reported other
features in relation to the presence of multiple clones.26
Their
study identified four PIG-A mutations in one PNH patient
and they proposed that the phenotypic mosaicism was due to
genotypic mosaicism.They hypothesized that this genotypic
mosaicism was due to hypermutability of the PIG-A gene.
In cases where multiple clones are present in a patient, one
of these often makes up the majority of mature PNH cells.
This domination of a single clone may be due to only one of
the clones developing in the HSC pool,29
whereas the others
are generated later during hemopoiesis in progenitor cells.
Alternatively, accumulation of a dominant clone may reflect
that an additional factor, not related to the PIG-A mutation,
is responsible for clonal expansion.
Despite dramatic improvements in treating PNH, the
underlying process that determines the expansion of PNH
clones remains unclear. Occurrence of a PIG-A mutant clone
is not sufficient for development of PNH, since these occur
frequently in the normal population at very low levels.30
In view of the association with bone marrow failure, and
especially AA, it is likely that expansion of the clone is
immune mediated. The simplest theory is that the immune
attack in AA requires a GPI-linked protein and that absence
of one of these proteins protects PNH cells from attack.
Consequently, in the absence of a PIG-A mutant clone, an
affected individual would present with AA, but in the pres-
ence of a PIG-A mutant clone, hemopoiesis is rescued and
the individual presents with PNH, the clinical manifestations
of PIG-A deficient hemopoietic cells.25
An alternative theory
to this, involving the absence of specific GPI-linked proteins
which provide a clonal advantage to PNH cells, has also
been proposed.31
Hanaoka et al proposed that the absence
of stress inducible proteins on PNH blood cells provide the
basis for clonal expansion. Such a model however does not
readily explain the link with AA, the failure of PNH clones
to become dominant in normal individuals, and the lack of
intrinsic proliferative advantage in vitro.
Inoue et al proposed a two stage model for the disease
whereby clonal selection and clonal expansion occur by two
separate events.32
In this model, clonal selection relates to
0
−233
CD59 FITC-A
0
PNH
Type III
Type II
Type I
−10
2
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
Count
5001.0001.500
Figure 3 PNH red blood cell analysis showing type III paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria (PNH) erythrocytes which express no CD59 (shown on the x axis),
type II PNH erythrocytes with reduced levels of CD59 and type I erythrocytes with
normal levels of CD59.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5 915
Eculizumab for treatment of PNHDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
the PIG-A mutation, occurring in the setting of bone marrow
failure with clonal expansion being due to a separate mutation
within the PIG-A mutated HSC which confers a proliferative
advantage.
Another potential mechanism that has been proposed is
that lack of GPI molecules on PNH cells can render them
resistant to apoptosis.33,34
However, other investigators have
failed to observe this difference in apoptosis rates between
GPI deficient and normal granulocytes.35
Furthermore, mouse models of PIG-A deficiencies do not
develop clonal expansion of PNH-like cells.36,37
These results
argue against a cell intrinsic role for PIG-A deficiency in the
development of PNH. One clear explanation for the failure to
develop a PNH-like syndrome is that these mouse models do
not have underlying bone marrow failure or immune insult.
Hence, the conditions for clonal expansion of PNH-like cells
are not met.
Clinical symptoms and the role
of nitric oxide
In general, the size of the PNH clone correlates with the
degree of symptoms observed. Therefore, patients who
have symptomatic PNH tend to have larger clones of
PNH cells present. Affected individuals have chronic low
grade hemolysis with episodes, or “paroxysms”, of severe
intravascular hemolysis. During periods of intravascular
hemolysis, free hemoglobin is released into the circulation.
Haptoglobin, a protein produced mainly by hepatocytes in
the liver, rapidly binds free hemoglobin and this haptoglobin–
hemoglobin complex is then degraded in the liver. This
process is overwhelmed in PNH and leads to excess free
hemoglobin avidly and irreversibly binding to nitric oxide
(NO).38,39
NO plays an important role in the maintenance of
vascular tone by relaxation of smooth muscle which conse-
quently causes blood vessel vasodilation. Depletion of NO
in individuals with PNH leads to smooth muscle dystonia
and this may be responsible for many of the symptoms of
the disease.These include esophageal spasm and dysphagia,
abdominal pain, severe lethargy and erectile dysfunction in
men. NO depletion is associated with the development of a
number of cardiovascular morbidities including pulmonary
hypertension. Recently it has been shown that PNH patients
have a high prevalence of pulmonary hypertension which
is likely secondary to NO depletion.39
The clinical outcome of patients with PNH is highly vari-
able from one individual to the next.Thrombosis remains the
commonest cause of death in the disease, occurring in 40% of
patients, with a third of these being fatal.6,7
These thromboses
predominantly occur in the venous system with an increase
in thromboses in typical sites such as deep vein thromboses
and pulmonary emboli as well as at unusual sites, such as
the hepatic, mesenteric and cerebral veins.6
The arterial
thrombosis risk is also elevated with increased occurrences
of myocardial infarctions and strokes. Hall et al reported the
risk of thrombosis in patients with a 50% or greater PNH
clone to be 44%, and those with a less than 50% PNH clone
to be 5.8%.40
Although the risk is far greater in those with
larger PNH clones, even those with small clones (as low as
10%) have a much higher thrombotic risk when compared
with the general population.41,42
The underlying mechanisms causing thromboembolism
in individuals with PNH has not been clearly defined and
may be multifactorial in nature. NO depletion due to bind-
ing of NO to free hemoglobin causes both increased platelet
aggregation and adhesion.38
Additionally, platelets lacking
GPI-linked proteins are susceptible to complement mediated
attack which leads to platelet activation and the formation
and exocytosis of prothrombotic microvesicles containing
the MAC.43
These microvesicles have been shown to be
present at high levels in the blood of patients with PNH.44
Another potential cause for the increased thrombotic risk is
due to GPI deficient neutrophils lacking urokinase type plas-
minogen activator thereby reducing plasminogen activation
and causing a reduction in fibrinolysis.45
It is likely that the
increased thrombotic risk in PNH is due to a combination of
these factors rather than a single underlying mechanism.
PNH treatment
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is the only cura-
tive therapy for PNH.46–48
However it carries a high rate of
mortality and morbidity due to infection, graft versus host
disease and graft failure. It is only an option for a minority
of patients either because they are not suitable candidates
for the procedure, a donor is unavailable or treatment with
eculizumab may be deemed more appropriate.The introduc-
tion of eculizumab treatment plus the fact that around 15%
of patients with PNH undergo a spontaneous remission of
the disease, result in transplantation only being undertaken
in specific circumstances.6
Transplantation should be consid-
ered when there is an associated severe bone marrow failure,
life-threatening hemolysis with no access to eculizumab,
recurrent thromboses despite eculizumab treatment and in
cases of syngeneic twins.
Prior to eculizumab, the mainstay of treatment for patients
with PNH has been supportive in nature. Folic acid is rou-
tinely taken, as in other hemolytic anemias, in view of the
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5916
Kelly et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
increased red cell production. Many patients have become
transfusion dependent in an effort to alleviate symptoms
related to their anemia. Some of these patients have devel-
oped iron overload due to the number of transfusions and
require treatment with iron chelation.The majority, however,
remain in an iron deficient state due to their persistent hemo-
globinuria and therefore need to take oral iron supplements.
In those patients with a large PNH clone, warfarin therapy
has been employed, which can reduce the risk of developing
thrombosis.40
Eculizumab
Eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds
to the complement protein C5 and prevents its cleavage into
C5a and C5b. It is comprised of murine complementarity-
determining regions within a human antibody framework that
includes IgG2 and IgG4 regions.Treatment with eculizumab
therefore prevents C5b formation which is necessary to form
MAC through binding to the complement proteins C6, C7,
C8 and C9. As the clinical features in PNH are caused by
the MAC attack on erythrocytes, preventing its formation
was likely to protect PNH red blood cells in the circulation
(Figure 4). Information on the possible effects eculizumab
might have in treating PNH was first seen in a case reported
by Yonemura et al of a patient with co-existing PNH and
a deficiency of C9.49
This patient was well with only mild
hemolysis and only became unwell after receiving a whole
blood transfusion after an operation. Transfusion of whole
blood includes exogenous C9 allowing the symptoms of
PNH to manifest.
The importance of both the proximal and the terminal
complement proteins can be shown by examining people with
rare inherited complement protein deficiencies. Congenital
deficiencies of proximal complement proteins result in recur-
rent severe infections and death early in life.50
Deficiencies
of the terminal complement proteins, C5, C6, C7, C8 or
C9 increase the susceptibility to infection with the bacteria
Neisseria meningitidis.50
In these individuals however, the
proximal complement cascade remains intact allowing the
formation of C3b and its subsequent opsonization and clear-
ance of most other bacteria.
C5 is a good therapeutic target as all the proximal comple-
ment pathways converge at C5 (Figure 2). Complement
blockade at C5 will therefore halt the complement cascade
preventing activation of the terminal complement compo-
nents no matter which initial pathway has been activated.
Eculizumab was initially evaluated in the treatment
of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosis.51,52
These early clinical studies provided
information on the frequency of dosing as well as the doses
required to provide complement blockade.
Clinical trials of eculizumab
The pilot study
Eleven patients were entered into this initial study in 2002
to assess the effect of eculizumab in PNH patients.2
Indi-
viduals needed to have received 4 or greater red blood
cell transfusions in the preceding 12 months to enter the
study. Patients were also vaccinated against N. meningitidis
(serotypes A + C).
Eculizumab was administered at a dose of 600 mg
weekly for the first 4 weeks followed by a dose of 900 mg
every fortnight from the 5th week onwards. Data were col-
lected on the drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
markers of hemolysis (lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),
haptoglobin and bilirubin), hemoglobin and reticulocyte
levels, PNH clone size proportions as well as the degree
of hemoglobinuria and the individual transfusion require-
ments. European Organization for Research and Treatment
of Cancer (EORTC) questionnaires were employed to assess
potential changes in quality of life. Concomitant medication
such as immunosuppressive and anticoagulant medication
was continued.
There was a dramatic reduction in LDH levels in these
patients from a mean level of 3111 IU/L prior to treatment
down to 594 IU/L in the study. The proportion of type III
erythrocytes during the 12 weeks increased significantly
from a mean of 36.7% to 59.2% which supports an increased
survival of these cells due to the prevention of intravas-
cular hemolysis. Transfusion requirements reduced in all
11 patients with 5 becoming transfusion independent for the
entire trial period. Hemoglobinuria resolved in most and there
was a rapid and sustained improvement in quality of life.
On completion of the pilot study these 11 patients all
enrolled into a 12 month extension trial to evaluate the
opsonization
C3 C5
C5, 6, 7, 8, 9
C5a
C5b
C3b
Membrane attack complex
Alternative
pathway
Classical
pathway
Blocked by
eculizumab
Figure 4 Eculizumab binding to C5 inhibiting formation of the membrane attack
complex and release of C5a.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5 917
Eculizumab for treatment of PNHDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
long-term safety and efficacy of eculizumab.53
Complement
blockade with a consequent sustained reduction in both
intravascular hemolysis and transfusion requirement was
observed during the extension period. The initial dramatic
improvement in quality of life was also maintained. The
use of eculizumab appeared to be safe and well tolerated in
these patients.
The pilot study supported the importance of terminal
complement activation in PNH and suggested that eculi-
zumab could be used to reduce hemolysis and transfusion
requirements whilst increasing the proportion of type III
erythrocytes and improving quality of life in this debilitat-
ing disease.
The TRIUMPH study
Following the success of the pilot study, a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter phase 3 trial
(TRIUMPH) was undertaken.3
Patients could enter into a
3 month observation period if they were more than 18 years
old, had received four or more red cell transfusions in the
preceding twelve months, had 10% PNH type III eryth-
rocytes present, a platelet count 100 × 109
/L and an LDH
level 1.5 times the upper limit of normal. Patients that were
transfused during the observation period were then eligible
to enter the study. Eighty-seven patients were randomized to
receive either eculizumab or placebo for 6 months with 44 of
these receiving eculizumab and the rest being given placebo
infusions.At the end of the 26 week period patients who had
been given placebo were allowed to cross-over and receive
eculizumab. The protocol for administration of eculizumab
was the same as in the pilot trial.
The TRIUMPH study was designed to see if eculizumab
stabilized hemoglobin levels and reduced transfusion
requirements. Secondary trial endpoints included assessment
of intravascular hemolysis, fatigue and quality of life.
Stabilization of hemoglobin levels was achieved in 49%
of the patients treated with eculizumab and this did not occur
in any patient in the placebo group. Fifty-one percent of the
study group remained transfusion independent throughout
the 26-week study whereas all the placebo group patients
had been transfused by the 14th week of the study. There
was a 44% reduction in the number of transfusions needed
by the patients who did not become transfusion independent
on eculizumab. As in the pilot study, there was a marked
reduction in intravascular hemolysis in the eculizumab
group with LDH levels falling from a mean of 2199.7 IU/L
to 327 IU/L. Levels in the placebo group remained high with
a mean of 2418.9 IU/L during the 26 weeks. Fatigue was
assessed using the FunctionalAssessment of Chronic Illness
Therapy (FACIT) instrument and quality of life by EORTC
questionnaires. Both showed huge improvements in those
treated with eculizumab.Although theTRIUMPH study was
not designed to look at thrombotic events, no thromboses
occurred in the patients receiving eculizumab.
This study confirmed the importance of eculizumab in
stabilizing hemoglobin levels, reducing or stopping the need
for transfusions as well as improving anemia, fatigue and
quality of life for PNH patients.
The SHEPHERD study
The SHEPHERD study was a phase 3 trial designed to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of eculizumab in treat-
ing a more diverse population of patients with PNH
including those with fewer transfusion requirements and
thrombocytopenia.4
The trial entry criteria included patients
transfused at least once in the preceding 2 years, a platelet
count of 30 × 109
/L, 10% PNH type III erythrocytes
present and an LDH level 1.5 times the upper limit of
normal. Ninety-seven patients were enrolled and 96 of
these completed the 52 week study period. The protocol for
administration of eculizumab was the same as in the pilot
and the TRIUMPH trials.
Eculizumab was well tolerated with a similar rate of
adverse events (AE) reported to the TRIUMPH study.
The commonest AEs reported were headaches (53%),
nasopharyngitis (32%) and upper respiratory tract infec-
tions (30%). The incidence of headaches was greater in
the first 26 weeks (49%) of the study compared to the last
26 weeks (15%). The majority of these headaches were
mild to moderate in severity and most occurred only within
the first 2 weeks of their eculizumab infusions. Forty-four
serious AEs were reported but none were thought to be
probably or definitely due to eculizumab though 7 of them
were possibly related to the drug. These 7 events included
2 of pyrexia, 1 of headache, 1 of abdominal distension, 1 of
a viral infection, 1 of anxiety and 1 of renal impairment.Two
patients, both with a prior history of thromboembolism, had
a further thrombosis during the study. Eighty-nine patients
(91%) had mild or moderate infections during the study with
the majority of these thought to be unrelated to eculizumab.
Low titer anti-eculizumab antibodies occurred in 2 patients
(2%) but with no loss of drug efficacy.
Eighty-nine patients (91%) had serum eculizumab
levels 35 µg/mL, throughout the trial period. This level
has been shown to completely block terminal complement
activation and prevent intravascular hemolysis.2
The other
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5918
Kelly et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
8 patients experienced breakthrough hemolysis 1 to 2 days
prior to their next eculizumab infusions, but after reducing
the dosing interval from 14 to 12 days, consistent comple-
ment blockade was resumed. There was a marked reduction
in intravascular hemolysis in the eculizumab group with LDH
levels falling from a mean of 2201 IU/L to 297 IU/L and the
proportion of type III erythrocytes present increased from a
mean of 33.5% to 55.7%.Transfusion requirements reduced
from a mean of 12.3 units per patient in the 12 months prior
to the study to 5.9 units per patient, with 51% of patients
remaining transfusion independent for the entire 52 weeks.
This trial shows that eculizumab appears to be safe and
well tolerated and provides marked benefits to a broader group
of PNH patients by reducing intravascular hemolysis.
Eculizumab: its effect
on thromboembolism
and renal function
Clinical trial patients from all three of these trials were
entered into an extension study and the rate of thromboem-
bolism assessed.54
Thrombosis rates in these 195 trial patients
were compared before and after treatment with eculizumab.
Prior to eculizumab treatment this group had a thromboem-
bolic rate of 7.37 thromboses per 100 patient years. This
decreased dramatically to 1.07 thromboses per 100 patient
years with complement blockade. The question arises as to
whether patients that are treated with eculizumab should also
receive warfarin. Warfarin has been shown to reduce the risk
of thrombosis in PNH but it also carries a significant risk
(2% to 13%) of severe bleeding.55
Patients who have had a
prior thrombosis have a high risk of subsequent thrombosis7,56
and in view of this, these patients are often treated with both
eculizumab and anticoagulation. However it remains unclear
whether it is better to use eculizumab alone or in conjunction
with anticoagulation in patients with PNH who have not suf-
fered a thrombosis and are deemed to be high-risk.
Renal damage is a common finding in patients with
PNH and this damage may be due to repeated microvascular
thrombosis, renal cortical hemosiderosis, repeated exposure
of the kidney to heme proteins or reduced kidney perfusion
due to the reduced availability of NO.57–60
The 195 patients
from the PNH clinical trials were screened for evidence of
chronic kidney disease (CKD) before and after 18 months
of treatment with eculizumab.61
Sixty five percent (126/195)
of patients had evidence of CKD and administration of
eculizumab was generally associated with an improvement
in renal function with 21% of patients with prior CKD no
longer classified with CKD during eculizumab treatment.
The patients with more mild baseline kidney disease were the
most likely to have an improvement in their renal function.
Specific issues on eculizumab
treatment
Neisseria meningitidis infection
One of the main concerns for physicians treating patients
with eculizumab is that of infection with N. meningitidis.
In the PNH clinical studies, 2 out of 195 patients experienced
meningococcal sepsis. Both patients were treated promptly
and remain well. Since the completion of these clinical trials
there has been 1 fatality due to meningococcal sepsis. The
risk of this infection is low and has been further reduced by
vaccinating patients with the quadravalent vaccine against
serotypesA, C, W andY, prior to starting eculizumab. Unfor-
tunately at present there is no vaccine against serotype B
which is a common strain of the bacteria in Europe. As in
the TRIUMPH and SHEPHERD studies in our center we
routinely give the patients two 750-mg doses of ciprofloxacin
to keep at home and take if unwell while also seeking medical
attention. It is important that both patients and physicians are
educated and remain vigilant about the signs of the disease
so that they seek and receive prompt targeted medical treat-
ment when needed.
Breakthrough hemolysis
A significant minority of patients treated with eculizumab
develop symptoms of intravascular hemolysis 1 to 2 days prior
to their next eculizumab infusion (around 7%–9% – personal
experience). In some patients this can be resolved by reducing
the treatment from every 14 days to every 12 days.2,4
Treatment
every 12 days can be inconvenient as the day of treatment
varies and infusions are also required at weekends.A 1200-mg
dosing schedule every 14 days has been used in our center
and found to consistently block complement even in patients
who still have breakthrough symptoms on 900mg eculizumab
every 12 days.62
Patients treated with this 1200 mg dose were
found to have a good correlation between eculizumab and
LDH levels, suggesting that a breakthrough in complement
activity due to insufficient drug levels can be monitored by
measuring LDH near the end of the dosing interval.
Extravascular hemolysis
Despite the enormous health improvements seen in most
patients with PNH there are some patients that remain anemic
and dependent on transfusions. This suboptimal response
may be due to the complement protein C3 binding to PNH red
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5 919
Eculizumab for treatment of PNHDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
blood cells causing an increase in extravascular hemolysis.63
Co-existent bone marrow failure is also likely to be con-
tributory. Eculizumab blocks the formation of the terminal
components of the complement cascade but has no effect on
the proximal components. The absence of CD55 (DAF) on
the surface of the PNH red cells means the usual regulation
and accelerated decay of cleaved C3 products is disrupted
and the red cells are bound with C3. This phenomenon has
emerged with the use of eculizumab as prior to it these blood
cells were likely to hemolyzed intravascularly.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy carries an increased risk of mortality and morbidity
in PNH compared with the non-pregnant state.64–66
The main
risks to the mother are in the form of thromboembolism and
infection, whereas in the baby most complications relate to
prematurity which occurs in around half of pregnancies to
mothers with PNH. Eculizumab has been used in pregnancy
in one patient during the third trimester.67
It has also been
used for the first time from conception and through the entire
pregnancy.68
In this case eculizumab was not detected in the
cord blood or breast milk, suggesting it does not cross the
placenta or into mother’s milk. The use of eculizumab in
pregnancy will become an increasingly frequent conundrum
as more young women treated with the drug feel well enough
to consider starting a family.
Conclusion and summary
Eculizumab has dramatically changed the way clinicians
approach treatment for patients with PNH. It took just 5 years
from the pilot study in 2002 to the drug gaining its Food and
Drugs Administration license and its European Medicines
Agency license in March and June 2007 respectively. The
eculizumab clinical trials have shown that it is safe and well
tolerated and provides huge benefits for PNH patients who
previously received supportive therapies. It has been shown
to stop intravascular hemolysis and the subsequent symptoms
patients develop, reduce or abolish the need for transfusions,
stabilize hemoglobin levels, improve patient quality of
life, reduce fatigue, reduce the risk of developing thromboses,
protect against worsening renal function and decrease pulmo-
nary hypertension. It is likely that in the future eculizumab
will improve patient mortality.
Although it has many positive points, there are some
negatives to eculizumab treatment. It has to be given as
an intravenous infusion every 2 weeks, there is a small
but definite increase in susceptibility to N. meningitidis, it
costs ∼ US$400,000 per year and it does not cure the disease.
Eculizumab is of use in treating classical PNH, ie, where
hemolysis is the predominant disease component. It does
not have a role in the treatment of patients with subclinical
PNH with no evidence of hemolysis.
Further research into PNH is needed to ascertain why and
how it occurs and may allow future therapies to be developed
to cure the disease. For the time being, eculizumab provides
patients who have previously suffered with a chronic illness
the ability to lead normal family and working lives within
their communities.
Disclosures
Richard Kelly, Stephen Richards andAnita Hill have received
honoraria for lecture fees and have sat on advisory boards
for Alexion Pharmaceuticals. Peter Hillmen has received
research funding, honoraria for lecture fees and has sat on
advisory boards for Alexion Pharmaceuticals.
References
	 1.	 Thomas TC, Rollins SA, Rother RP, et al. Inhibition of complement
activity by humanized anti-C5 antibody and single-chain Fv. Mol
Immunol. 1996;33:1389–1401.
	 2.	 Hillmen P, Hall C, Marsh JCW, et al. Effect of eculizumab on hemolysis
and transfusion requirements in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:552–559.
	 3.	 Hillmen P, Young N, Schubert J, et al. The complement inhibitor
eculizumab in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. N Engl J Med.
2006;355:1233–1243.
	 4.	 Brodsky RA, Young NS, Antonioli E, et al. Multicenter phase 3
study of the complement inhibitor eculizumab for the treatment of
patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2008;111:
1840–1847.
	 5.	 Rosse WF, Dacie JV. Immune lysis of normal human and paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) red blood cells. The sensitivity of
PNH red cells to lysis by complement and specific antibody. J Clin
Invest. 1966;45:736–748.
	 6.	 Hillmen P, Lewis SM, Bessler M, Luzzatto L, Dacie JV. Natural
history of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. N Engl J Med.
1995;333:1253–1258.
	 7.	 de Latour RP, Mary JY, Salanoubat C, et al. Paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria: natural history of disease subcategories. Blood.
2008;112:3099–3106.
	 8.	 Takeda J, Miyata T, Kasagoe K, et al. Deficiency of the GPI anchor
caused by a somatic mutation of the PIG-A gene in paroxysmal noc-
turnal hemoglobinuria. Cell. 1993;73:703–711.
	 9.	 Miyata T, Takeda J, Iida Y, et al. The cloning of PIG-A, a component
in the early step of GPI-anchor biosynthesis. Science. 1993;259:
1318–1320.
10.	 Vidugiriene J, Menon AK. The GPI anchor of cell-surface proteins
is synthesized on the cytoplasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum.
J Cell Biol. 1994;127:333–341.
11.	 Kinoshita T, Ohishi K, Takeda J. GPI-anchor synthesis in mammalian
cells: genes, their products, and a deficiency. J Biochem. 1997;122:
251–257.
12.	 Tomita M. Biochemical background of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999;1455:269–286.
13.	 Rosti V. The molecular basis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Haematologica. 2000;85:82–87.
14.	 Rosse WF. Variations in the red cells in paroxysmal nocturnal haemo-
globinuria. Br J Haematol. 1973;24:327–342.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5920
Kelly et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
15.	 Hill A, Platts PJ, Smith A, et al. The incidence and prevalence of
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) and survival of patients
in Yorkshire. Blood. 2006;108:985.
16.	 Rosse WF. Dr Ham’s test revisited. Blood. 1991;78:547–550.
17.	 Hall SE, Rosse WF. The use of monoclonal antibodies and flow
cytometry in the diagnosis of paroxysmal noctural hemoglobinuria.
Blood. 1996;87:5332–5340.
18.	 Brodsky RA, Mukhina GL, Nelson KL, Chiurazzi PL, Buckley JT,
Borowitz MJ. Improved detection and characterization of paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria using fluorescent aerolysin. Am J Clin Pathol.
2000;114:459–466.
19.	 Richards SJ, Hill A, Hillmen P. Recent advances in the diagnosis,
monitoring, and management of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Cytometry B Clin Cytom. 2007;72:291–298.
20.	 Parker C, Omine M, Richards S, et al. Diagnosis and management of
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2005;106:3699–3709.
21.	 Rotoli B, Robledo R, Luzzatto L. Decreased number of circulating
BFU-Es in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 1982;60:
157–159.
22.	 Maciejewski JP, Sloand EM, Sato T, Anderson S, Young NS. Impaired
hematopoiesis in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria/aplastic
anemia is not associated with a selective proliferative defect in the
glycosylphosphatidy linositol-anchored protein-deficient clone. Blood.
1997;89:1173–1181.
23.	 Mukhina GL, Buckley JT, Barber JP, Jones RJ, Brodsky RA.
Multilineage glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor-deficient haema-
topoiesis in untreated aplastic anaemia. Br J Haematol. 2001;115:
476–482.
24.	 Sloand E, Kim S, Maciejewski JP, Tisdale J, Follmann D, Young NS.
Intracellular interferon-γ in circulating and marrow T cells detected
by flow cytometry and the response to immunosuppressive therapy in
patients with aplastic anemia. Blood. 2002;100:1185–1191.
25.	 Bessler M, Mason P, Hillmen P, Luzzatto L. Somatic mutations and
cellular selection in paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Lancet.
1994;343:951–953.
26.	 Endo M,Ware RE,VreekeTM, et al. Molecular basis of the heterogene-
ity of expression of glycosyl phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins in
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 1996;87:2546–2557.
27.	 Nishimura J, Inoue N, Wada H, et al. A patient with paroxysmal noc-
turnal hemoglobinuria bearing four independent PIG-A mutant clones.
Blood. 1997;89:3470–3476.
28.	 Mortazavi Y, Merk B, McIntosh J, et al. The spectrum of PIG-A gene
mutations in aplastic anemia/paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
(AA/PNH): a high incidence of multiple mutations and evidence of a
mutational hot spot. Blood. 2003;101:2833–2841.
29.	 Traulsen A, Pacheco JM, Dingli D. On the origin of multiple
mutant clones in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Stem Cells.
2007;25:3081–3084.
30.	 Araten DJ, Nafa K, Pakdeesuwan K, Luzzatto L. Clonal populations
of hematopoietic cells with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
genotype and phenotype are present in normal individuals. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:5209–5214.
31.	 Hanaoka N, Kawaguchi T, Horikawa K, Nagakura S, Mitsuta H,
Nakakuma H. Immunoselection by natural killer cells of PIGA mutant
cells missing stress-inducible ULBP. Blood. 2006;107:1184–1191.
32.	 Inoue N, Murakami Y, Kinoshita T. Molecular genetics of paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Int J Hematol. 2003;77:107–112.
33.	 Brodsky RA, Vala MS, Barber JP, Medof ME, Jones RJ. Resistance
to apoptosis caused by PIG-A gene mutations in paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94:8756–8760.
34.	 SavageWJ, Barber JP, Mukhina GL, et al. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-
anchored protein deficiency confers resistance to apoptosis in PNH. Exp
Hematol. 2009;37:42–51.
35.	 Ware RE, Nishimura J, Moody MA, Smith C, Rosse WF, Howard TA.
The PIG-A mutation and absence of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-
linked proteins do not confer resistance to apoptosis in paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 1998;92:2541–2550.
36.	 Jasinski M, Keller P, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, Bessler M. GATA1-Cre
mediates Piga gene inactivation in the erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage
and leads to circulating red cells with a partial deficiency in glycosyl
phosphatidylinositol-linked proteins (paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglo-
binuria type II cells). Blood. 2001;98:2248–2255.
37.	 Rosti V. Murine models of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2002;963:290–296.
38.	 Rother RP, Bell L, Hillmen, Gladwin MT. The clinical sequelae of
intravascular hemolysis and extracellular plasma hemoglobin: a novel
mechanism of human disease. JAMA. 2005;293:1653–1662.
39.	 Hill A, Rother RP, Wang X, et al. Eculizumab reduces pulmonary
hypertension through inhibition of hemolysis-associated nitric oxide
consumption in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Blood. 2008;112:486.
40.	 Hall C, Richards S, Hillmen P. Primary prophylaxis with warfarin
prevents thrombosis in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
Blood. 2003;102:3587–3591.
41.	 Fowkes FJ, Price JF, Fowkes FG. Incidence of diagnosed deep vein
thrombosis in the general population: systematic review. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg. 2003;25:1–5.
42.	 HillA, Richards S, Hillmen P. Recent developments in the understand-
ing and management of paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Br J
Haematol. 2007;137:181–192.
43.	 Wiedmer T, Hall SE, Ortel TL, Kane WH, Rosse WF, Sims PJ.
Complement-induced vesiculation and exposure of membrane pro-
thrombinase sites in platelets of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Blood. 1993;82:1192–1196.
44.	 Hugel B, Socié G, Vu T, et al. Elevated levels of circulating procoagu-
lant microparticles in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobin-
uria and aplastic anemia. Blood. 1999;93:3451–3456.
45.	 Ploug M, Plesner T, Rønne E, et al. The receptor for urokinase-type
plasminogen activator is deficient on peripheral blood leukocytes
in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood.
1992;79:1447–1455.
46.	 Saso R, Marsh J, Cevreska L, et al. Bone marrow transplants for par-
oxysmal haemoglobinuria. Br J Haematol. 1999;104:392–396.
47.	 Hegenbart U, Niederwieser D, Forman S, et al. Hematopoietic cell
transplantation from related and unrelated donors after minimal
conditioning as a curative treatment modality for severe paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Biol Blood Marrow. Transplant 2003;9:
689–697.
48.	 Matos-Fernandez NA, Abou Mourad YR, Caceres W, Kharfan-
Dabaja MA. Current status of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Biol Blood
Marrow Transplant. 2009;15:656–661.
49.	 Yonemura Y, Kawakita M, Koito A, et al. Paroxysmal nocturnal
haemoglobinuria with coexisting deficiency of the ninth component
of complement: lack of massive haemolytic attack. Br J Haematol.
1990;74:108–113.
50.	 Overturf GD. Indications for the immunological evaluation of patients
with meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;36:189–194.
51.	 Rother RP, Mojcik CF, McCroskery EW. Inhibition of terminal
complement: a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of systemic
lupus erythematosus. Lupus. 2004;13:328–334.
52.	 Rother RP, Rollins SA, Mojcik CF, Brodsky RA, Bell L. Discovery
and development of the complement inhibitor eculizumab for the
treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Nat Biotechnol.
2007;25:1256–1264.
53.	 HillA, Hillmen P, Richards SJ, et al. Sustained response and long-term
safety of eculizumab in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood.
2005;106:2559–2565.
54.	 Hillmen P, Muus P, Dührsen U, et al. Effect of the complement inhibitor
eculizumab on thromboembolism in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2007;110:4123–4128.
55.	 Wiedermann CJ, Stockner I.Warfarin-induced bleeding complications –
clinical presentation and therapeutic options. Thromb Res. 2008;122:
S13–S18.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2009:5
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/therapeutics-and-clinical-risk-management-journal
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management is an international, peer-
reviewed journal of clinical therapeutics and risk management, focusing
on concise rapid reporting of clinical studies in all therapeutic areas,
outcomes, safety, and programs for the effective, safe, and sustained
use of medicines. This journal is indexed on PubMed Central, CAS,
EMBase, Scopus and the Elsevier Bibliographic databases. The
manuscript management system is completely online and includes a
very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use. Visit
http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from
published authors.
921
Eculizumab for treatment of PNHDovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
56.	 Nishimura J, Kanakura Y, Ware RE, et al. Clinical course and flow
cytometric analysis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria in the
United States and Japan. Medicine (Baltimore). 2004;83:193–207.
57.	 Clark D, Butler SA, Braren V, Hartmann RC, Jenkins DE Jr. The
kidneys in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 1981;57:
83–89.
58.	 TanakaYO,Anno I, ItaiY,AbeT. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria:
MR findings. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1993;17:749–753.
59.	 Rimola J, Martin J, Puig J, Darnell A, Massuet A. The kidney in
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria: MRI findings. Br J Radiol.
2004;77:953–956.
60.	 Mulopulos GP, Turner DA, Schwartz MM, Murakami ME, Clark JW.
MRI of the kidneys in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. AJR Am
J Roentgenol. 1986;146:51–52.
61.	 Hillmen P, Elebute O, Kelly R, et al. High incidence of progression
to chronic renal insufficiency in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. Blood. 2007;110:3678.
62.	 Kelly RJ, Arnold L, Richards S, et al. Successful management of intra-
vascular breakthrough hemolysis on standard dose eculizumab therapy
in PNH. Blood. 2008;112:3441.
63.	 RisitanoAM, Notaro R, Marando L, et al. Complement fraction 3 binding
on erythrocytes as additional mechanism of disease in paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria patients treated by eculizmab. Blood.
2009;113:4094–4100.
64.	 Fieni S, Bonfanti L, Gramellini D, Benassi L, Delsignore R. Clinical
managementofparoxysmalnocturnalhemoglobinuriainpregnancy:acase
report and updated review. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2006;61:593–601.
65.	 Ray JG, Burows RF, Ginsberg JS, Burrows EA. Paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria and the risk of venous thrombosis: review and recom-
mendations for management of the pregnant and nonpregnant patient.
Haemostasis. 2000;30:103–117.
66.	 Tichelli A, Socie G, Marsh J, et al. Outcome of pregnancy and disease
course among women with aplastic anemia treated with immunosup-
pression. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:164–172.
67.	 Danilov AV, Smith H, Craigo S, Feeney DM, Relias V, Miller KB.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and pregnancy in the era
of eculizumab. Leuk Res. 2009;33:4–5.
68.	 Kelly RJ, Arnold L, Richards SJ, et al. Successful pregnancy outcomes
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria with long-term eculizumab
treatment. Blood. 2008;112:4576.
