© 2008 Zaragoza et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1261–1280 1261
R E V I E W
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment
of invasive fungal infections in adult patients.
Prophylaxis, empirical, preemptive or targeted
therapy, which is the best in the different hosts?
Rafael Zaragoza1
Javier Pemán2
Miguel Salavert3
Ángel Viudes2
Amparo Solé4
Isidro Jarque5
Emilio Monte6
Eva Romá6
Emilia Cantón7
1
Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital
Universitario Dr Peset,Valencia,
Spain; 2
Servicio de Microbiología;
3
Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas;
4
Unidad de Trasplante Pulmonar;
5
Servicio de Hematología; 6
Servicio
de Farmacia; 7
Unidad de Microbiología
Experimental, Centro de Investigación,
Hospital Universitario La Fe Valencia,
Spain
Correspondence: Rafael Zaragoza
Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital
Universitario Dr Peset,Av Gaspar Aguilar,
90, 46017Valencia, Spain
Tel +34 9 6162 2569
Fax +34 9 6162 2501
Email zaragoza_raf@gva.es
Abstract: The high morbidity, mortality, and health care costs associated with invasive fungal
infections, especially in the critical care setting and immunocompromised host, have made it
an excellent target for prophylactic, empiric, and preemptive therapy interventions principally
based on early identiﬁcation of risk factors. Early diagnosis and treatment are associated with
a better prognosis. In the last years there have been important developments in antifungal phar-
macotherapy. An approach to the new diagnosis tools in the clinical mycology laboratory and
an analysis of the use new antifungal agents and its application in different clinical situations
has been made. Furthermore, an attempt of developing a state of the art in each clinical scenario
(critically ill, hematological, and solid organ transplant patients) has been performed, trying
to choose the best strategy for each clinical situation (prophylaxis, pre-emptive, empirical, or
targeted therapy). The high mortality rates in these settings make mandatory the application of
early de-escalation therapy in critically ill patients with fungal infection. In addition, the pos-
sibility of antifungal combination therapy might be considered in solid organ transplant and
hematological patients.
Keywords: invasive fungal infections, prophylaxis, empirical therapy, preemptive treatment,
targeted therapy
Introduction
Hospital medicine has advanced greatly in the past few decades. Patients with complex
medical and surgical disorders are surviving longer due to equally complex medical
and surgical interventions, which often involve “collateral damage” by avoiding normal
body defensive mechanisms.
Invasive fungal infections (IFIs) in adult patients, especially in the critical care
setting, solid organ transplant (SOT), and hematological patients, have become an
excellent target for prophylactic, empiric, and pre-emptive therapy interventions due to
their increasing incidence, high morbidity and mortality rates, and associated health care
costs. Early diagnosis and treatment are associated with a better prognosis. Although
at present, the number of systemic antifungal agents has increased signiﬁcantly, the
choice of antifungal drug must be based on the individual characteristics of the patient,
clinical scenario, and the presence of hemodynamic instability. A tailored therapy
(de-escalation) must also be considered in some clinical situations.
Different possible strategies based on diagnoses stage has been described as pro-
phylactic, empiric, pre-emptive and targeted antifungal therapy (Figure 1). Prophylactic
treatment refers to the preventive administration of an antifungal agent to patients
at risk of IFI without attributable signs and symptoms. Empiric treatment is deﬁned
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1262
Zaragoza et al
as the initiation of antifungal treatment in patients at high
risk of IFIs and established clinical signs and symptoms,
but without microbiological documentation, whereas pre-
emptive therapy is applied when the decision of treatment
is based on early diagnostic test. Finally, targeted therapy
needs a pathogen identiﬁcation to be deﬁned.
The aim of this multidisciplinary review was to analyze
the best option for treating this special population of adults
patients, describing the antifungal armamentarium, making
an approach to the mycology laboratory diagnosis and ﬁnally
developing a state of the art clinical scenario (critically ill,
hematological and transplant patients) trying to choose
the best strategy for each clinical situation (prophylaxis,
empirical, pre-emptive, or targeted therapy).
Role of the mycology laboratory
in the antifungal therapy options
Microbiological diagnosis for preventive
treatment
The incidence of IFIs has steadily increased in the past two
decades. These infections represent an additional difﬁculty in
the management of immunocompromised patients and are a
contributory cause of death in allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell and SOT recipients and in patients undergoing intensive
chemotherapy (Cordonnier et al 2006).
The high mortality associated with IFIs is partly cor-
related to the difﬁculties of making an early diagnosis due
to the nonspeciﬁc clinical features and the low sensitivity
of microscopy, histological examination, conventional
radiology and cultures of specimens obtained from at-risk
patients (Hope et al 2005). However, improved survival
can be obtained by earlier initiation of antifungal therapy.
The time period between the biological onset of a fungal
infection and the appearance of clinical signs and symptoms
represents a window of opportunity that, if identiﬁed through
prospective screening, may allow for pre-emptive therapeutic
intervention. In this diagnostic area, progress could come
from prospective screening strategies using new serodiag-
nostic assays (galactomannan and (1-3)-β-D-glucan) and/or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques for the detection
of fungal-speciﬁc DNA.
Thus, to improve earlier diagnosis and survival of IFIs,
new nonculture-based microbiological tools should be used
in conjunction with modern imaging techniques in addition to
conventional microbiological, histological, and radiological
procedures.
Nonculture-based microbiological tools
With the aim of improving the rapid and early diagnosis of
IFIs, new microbiological nonculture-based assays have been
developed in the last years, including detection of fungal
galactomannan, (1-3)-β-D-glucan antigen, Candida albicans
germ tube antibodies and fungal DNA.
Galactomannan detection
Galactomannan (GM) is a polysaccharide cell wall
component released by the Aspergillus species dur-
ing hyphal growth. The detection of galactomannan by
sandwich-enzyme immunoassay (EIA), Platelia Aspergillus
Early diagnostic test
Risk factors
Positive culture results
Prophylaxis
Empirical Pre-emptive
treatment
Targeted
treatment
Figure 1 Different antifungal strategies for treatment in invasive fungal infections based on diagnostic stage.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1263
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Marnes-La-Coquette, France),
has been approved in Europe and the USA for use in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients.
Furthermore, its detection in body ﬂuids (mainly serum
and bronchoalveolar lavage) was included in the 2002
EORTC-MSG consensus deﬁnitions of invasive aspergil-
losis (IA) as a microbiological criterion having the same
weight as the isolation of Aspergillus spp. or the micro-
scopic demonstration of hyphae from a nonsterile body
site (Ascioglu et al 2002).
Using EIA, circulating galactomannan may be detected
at a median of 5–8 days (range 1–27 days) before clinical
signs and symptoms of IA become evident. Furthermore,
the concentration of circulating galactomannan corresponds
with the fungal tissue burden and may therefore be used
to monitor the patient’s response to antifungal treatment
(Maertens et al 2001).
The results of the unique meta-analysis published of
the diagnostic value of GM detection with the Platelia
Aspergillus®
assay have shown that for proven and probable
cases of IA, the pooled (adults and pediatrics) sensitivity was
only 61% whereas the overall speciﬁcity was 93%. In general,
the negative predictive value and the speciﬁcity are excel-
lent (Ͼ95%), suggesting that the assay can be used to rule
out the diagnosis of IA (Pfeiffer et al 2006). False-positive
results have been reported in adults (5.7%–14%), but among
pediatric patients and neonates these are notably higher (83%)
(Sulahian et al 2003). Reasons for false reactivity remain
largely unknown, although piperacillin – tazobactam could be
a cause of cross-reactivity in adults (Sulahian et al 2003), and
cross-reacting epitopes from Biﬁdobacterium spp. were pro-
posed as a cause in neonates (Mennink-Kersten et al 2004).
In summary, the GM assay has moderate accuracy for the
diagnosis of IA in immunocompromised patients. The test is
more useful in patients who have hematological malignancies
or who have undergone hematopoietic cell transplantation
than in solid-organ transplant recipients. Nevertheless, some
important issues in relation to the performance of this assay
still remain unanswered, such as the impact of antifungal
prophylaxis, the inﬂuence of therapy with fungal cell wall
inhibitors, or the handling of false-positive and false-negative
values (Maertens et al 2006).
Recenty, a very interesting study has evaluated GM
detection in BAL ﬂuid in critically ill patients with signs
of pneumonia. Patients were classiﬁed as having proven,
probable, or possible IA. Using a cutoff index of 0.5, the
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of GM detection in BAL ﬂuid
was 88% and 87%, respectively. The sensitivity of serum
GM was only 42%. In 11 of 26 proven cases of IA, BAL
culture and serum GM remained negative, whereas GM in
BAL was positive. Following these rresults GM detection in
BAL ﬂuid could be useful in establishing or excluding the
diagnosis of IA in intensive care units (ICU) (Meersseman
et al 2008).
Detection of (1,3)-β-D-glucan
Glucans are a cell wall component of most pathogenic fungi
except Zygomycetes and Cryptococcus spp. (1-3)-β-D-glucan
can be detected in serum in amounts as low as 1 pg/ml by
commercial assays. One of them, Fungitell (Associates of
Cape Cod Inc., East Falmout, MA), has been approved by
the FDA as an adjunct for the diagnosis of IFIs in the USA,
based on its evaluation in hematological patients (Odabasi
et al 2004). At a cut-off of 60 pg/ml, the negative predictive
value of twice-weekly sampling was 100%, and sensitivity
was 100% if one positive assay was considered a positive
result. Furthermore, the results were not inﬂuenced by the
use of prophylactic or empirical antifungals. (1,3)-β-D-glucan
is a broad spectrum fungal marker and can detect invasive
infections due to Aspergillus, Candida, Fusarium, Acremo-
nium, Scedosporium, Pneumocystis jiroveci, etc., but, after a
positive result, the invasive infection must be assessed using
radiological and microbiological techniques. To date, overall
experience with this test remains limited; furthermore, its
methodological concerns (use of endotoxin-free and glucan-
free glassware) and false-positive results (due to albumin,
immunoglobulins, glucan-containing gauze, hemodialysis or
Gram-positive bacteremia) make its use difﬁcult in a clinical
setting. However, based on the excellent negative predictive
value, detection of (1-3)-β-D-glucan seems to be most useful
for excluding IFIs (Pickering et al 2005).
Multicenter clinical trial results have demonstrated that
(1,3)-β-D-glucan assay can be used in clinical specimens with
a high speciﬁcity and positive predictive value for subjects
with proven or probable IFI when compared with control
subjects (Ostrosky-Zeichner et al 2005). This test appears
to be useful both as a single-point assay for hospitalized
patients with a possible fungal infection and as part of a
surveillance strategy in high-risk patients. A cut-off value of
60 or 80 pg/mL appears to be optimal for this test. At a cutoff
of 60 pg/mL, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the assay were
69.9% and 87.1%, respectively, with a positive predictive
value (PPV) of 83.8% and a negative predictive value (NPV)
of 75.1%. At a cutoff value of 80 pg/mL, the sensitivity and
speciﬁcity were 64.4% and 92.4%, respectively, with a PPV
of 89% and an NPV of 73%.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1264
Zaragoza et al
Detection of fungal DNA
In recent years novel molecular methods, notably the
ampliﬁcation of gene sequences unique to fungi by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assays, have been developed to improve
the diagnosis of life-threatening IFIs in high-risk patients. PCR
offers the potential for rapid diagnosis. However, due to the
absence of a standardized and validated commercial method,
the routine use of PCR in the diagnosis of IFI cannot yet be
recommended. Real-time techniques combined with auto-
mated DNA extraction may, however, allow standardization
and reproducibility between centers, and may broaden the
clinical applicability of PCR-based diagnosis in the near future
(Maertens et al 2006).
Antibodies against Candida albicans germ tubes
A C. albicans mannoprotein located on the germ tube cell
wall surface is recognized by sera from patients with invasive
candidiasis (IC). Recently, an indirect immunoﬂuorescence
assay to detect antibodies (CAGTA) against this antigen
has been developed and commercialized (C. albicans IFA
IgG; Vircell Laboratories, Spain) (Moragues et al 2004;
Ponton et al 1994). The test has shown an overall sensitivity
of 77%–89% and a speciﬁcity of 91%–100% and has been
useful in the diagnosis of IC in intravenous heroin users, bone
marrow transplant recipients and hematological or intensive
care patients (Quindos et al 2004). Detection of CAGTA
in patients with invasive infections caused by Candida
spp. other than C. albicans (C. tropicalis, C. parapsilosis,
C. glabrata, C. dubliniensis, C. guilliermondii, and C. krusei)
may also be positive, although titers are lower than for
candidiasis caused by C. albicans. In addition, the detection
of CAGTA may be useful for the therapeutic monitoring
of patients with IC, since the administration of antifungal
therapy usually results in decreasing titers of CAGTA
(Moragues et al 2004).
In 2006, our group evaluated an immunoﬂuorescence
assay for CAGTA detection in a selected population of
critically ill patients (Zaragoza et al 2006). Although there
were no differences between CAGTA-positive and -negative
patients in terms of age, gender, sequential organ failure
assessment score, and renal and hepatic failure, the intra-ICU
mortality rate was signiﬁcantly lower in patients who tested
positive for CAGTA (25% vs 65.2%; P = 0.025). These
results imply that a strategy based on the early determination
of CAGTA expression might reduce the ICU mortality rate
of patients with risk factors for the development of IC.
However, more studies are needed to validate this approach
in the critical care setting.
Combinations of nonculture-based
microbiological tools
Recent studies focusing on the combination of
nonculture-based microbiological tools have demon-
strated improved diagnostic accuracy when combining
galactomannan and (1-3)-β-D-glucan detection (Pazos et al
2005), as well as galactomannan and PCR (Millon et al
2005; Florent et al 2006). Additionally, its usefulness for
diagnosing and monitoring IC using (1-3)-β-D-glucan and
CAGTA was evaluated in neutropenic adults at high risk.
Both tests anticipated the clinical and radiological diagno-
sis, and the initiation of antifungal therapy in most patients.
A combination of both tests improved speciﬁcity and positive
predictive value to 100% (Pazos et al 2006). These studies
suggest that a combination of two tests to detect antigen,
antibodies, (1-3)-β-D-glucan and DNA will be needed to
optimize the diagnosis of systemic fungal infections (Ponton
and del Palacio 2007).
Culture-based microbiological tools
Diverse risk factors for IC, including prior Candida spp.
colonization, could allow the detection of patients that may
be potential candidates for preemptive antifungal therapy.
Numerous patients are colonized in the ICU but only few
subsequently develop systemic candidiasis. Screening for
Candida colonization assessment is performed routinely
in many ICUs. Nevertheless, the value of positive surveil-
lance cultures and of several developed colonization indexes
for the prediction of IC and the indication for preemptive
antifungal therapy is currently under active investigation
(Piarroux et al 2004). Recently, a simple scoring system
(“Candida score”) has been evaluated to assist clinicians in
differentiating between Candida species colonization and
proven Candida infection in nonneutropenic critically ill
patients (Leon et al 2006).
In conclusion, although substantial progress has been
made in the diagnosis of IFIs, no single test has found
widespread clinical use. There is a consensus in publica-
tions that results obtained from a panel of diagnostic tests in
association with blood culture ﬁndings and clinical aspects
of the patient will likely be the most useful strategy for the
early diagnosis of patients with IFIs and the monitoring of
therapeutic response.
The laboratory and the empirical
antifungal therapy
In patients at high risk of fungal infection, the administration
of empirical antifungal treatment must be considered
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1265
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
since a relationship between the delay in the initiation of
treatment and in clinical outcome and hospital mortality
has been demonstrated (Morrell et al 2005; Garey et al
2006). Empirical antifungal therapy is defined as the
treatment administered to patients who have several risk
factors and clinical features for IFIs, when microbiological
documentation, species identiﬁcation or susceptibility data
are still not available.
When this treatment is to be established, several factors
must be taken into account, such as: 1) the hospital area
epidemiology; 2) previous susceptibility data of species
isolated in the hospital area; 3) the multicenter surveillance
studies to predict the susceptibility patterns of isolates; 4) the
potential risk of emergence of ﬂuconazole resistance or
appearance of candidiasis due to ﬂuconazole-resistant species
among patients receiving ﬂuconazole prophylaxis (Agresti
et al 1994); 5) the presence of neutropenia; 6) the underlying
patient conditions which can affect the metabolism of the
drug; 7) the toxicity of the antifungal agent; and 8) previous
experience in fungal treatment. Furthermore, it must be kept
in mind that any individual isolate of any species may become
resistant to any antifungal agent.
Table 1 summarizes the in vitro susceptibility patterns
of yeasts and moulds against the most frequently isolated
species. These data are representative of those published in
numerous in vitro studies.
In summary, as epidemiological data and resistance to
antifungal agents depends on characteristics of patients and
geographical localization, it is convenient, in all invasive
mycoses, to perform both the identiﬁcation of all isolates at
species level and the antifungal susceptibility tests to identify
the local epidemiology so as to apply the most appropriate
empirical therapy in each institution.
Prophylaxis, empirical, pre-emptive
or targeted therapy, which is the
best in critically ill patients?
Approximately 10.4% of infections in an ICU are related to
Candida spp. with the majority being nosocomial (Alberti
et al 2002). However, this rate could be underestimated due
to the fact that at least 4% of critically ill patients who die in
an ICU present an unexpected fungal infection during post-
mortem examination (Dimopoulos et al 2004). Furthermore,
ICU admission itself has become an independent risk factor
Table 1 Usual susceptibility patterns for yeasts and moulds
Species Amphotericin B Fluconazole Itraconazole Voriconazole Posaconazole Echinocandins
C. albicans Sa
S S S S S
C. tropicalis S S S S S S
C. parapsilosis S S S S S Sb
C. glabrata S, R SDD, Rc
SDD, Rd
Sb
Sb
S
C. krusei S, R R SDD, Rd
Sb
Sb
S
C. lusitaniae S, Re
S S S S S
C. guilliermondii S, R S, SDD S S S
C. dubliniensis S, Rb
S, SDD, R S S S
Trichosporon spp. S, R S, SDD, R S, SDD S R
Blastoschizomyces S, R S, SDD, R S, SDD S R
Malassezia spp. S, R S S S ND
Rhodotorula spp. S S, SDD S, SDD S, SDD R
Cryptococcus spp. S S, SDD S S S R
A. fumigatus S R S, R S S S
A. terreus R R S S S S
A. niger S R S S S S
A. ﬂavus S R S S S S
Fusarium solani R R R S S R
S. apiospermum R R R S S S
S. proliﬁcans R R R R R R
Zygomycetes S R R R S R
Notes: a
S, susceptible; I, intermediate; R, resistant; SDD, susceptibility depends on the dose; ND, no data. b
Susceptible, but few clinical data are available. c
10%–15% of C. glabrata
isolates are resistant to ﬂuconazole. d
Resistant to itraconazole ∼50% and ∼30% of C. glabrata and C. krusei isolates, respectively. e
20% of isolates are resistant to amphotericin B.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1266
Zaragoza et al
for the development of a Candida spp. infection (Puzniak
et al 2004; Tortorano et al 2004).
Candida infections are associated with a signiﬁcant
mortality rate, particularly among critically ill patients
(Leleu et al 2002). The crude mortality rate of these infec-
tions has been estimated at 40%–75%, and the mortality
rate attributable to candidemia at 25%–38% (Nolla-Salas
et al 1997; Petri et al 1997; Tortorano et al 2004; Almirante
et al 2005). A review of matched cohort and case-control
studies has examined the mortality rate that could be linked
to candidemia (Falagas et al 2006). The data suggested that
candidemia is indeed associated with a considerable mortality
rate that can be attributed to the infection itself.
In recent years, the species of Candida that result
in candidemia have shifted from C. albicans to non-C.
albicans (NCA). Approximately half of the reported cases
of candidemia are now caused by NCA species (Pfaller
et al 2000; Tortorano et al 2004; Almirante et al 2005), and
several publications have indicated that these cases have
a worse prognosis than those caused by C. albicans (Ben
Abraham et al 2004; Klingspor et al 2004; Morgan et al 2005;
Dimopoulos et al 2008). This increase has been attributed to
the use of ﬂuconazole prophylaxis (Sendid et al 2006). Other
adverse outcome predictors described in candidemia episodes
are the length of ICU stay, renal failure, thrombocytopenia,
hematologic malignancy, and the need for mechanical ventila-
tion or inotropic support (Ben Abraham et al 2004; Almirante
et al 2005). In a Spanish multicenter study involving ICU
patients in 28 hospitals, an Acute Physiology and Chronic
Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score of Ͼ20 at the time of
candidemia was associated with a higher mortality rate (Nolla-
Salas et al 1997), whereas early treatment with antifungal
medication and the removal of central venous catheters were
protective against death (Nolla-Salas et al 1997; Almirante
et al 2005). Furthermore, inadequate empiric antibiotic treat-
ment it is associated with IFIs and a worse prognosis (Parkins
et al 2007). Two reports have demonstrated a strong associa-
tion between a delay in the start of antifungal therapy and an
increase in hospital mortality rates (Morrell et al 2005; Garey
et al 2006); thus, it is necessary to recognize that time is of the
utmost importance when considering the therapy of patients
who are at risk for IFIs.
Prophylaxis of Candida infections in ICU
The implementation of targeted antifungal prophylaxis
has been shown to be effective in certain ICU settings
(Calandra and Marchetti 2002). Results from controlled
randomized trials (Eggimann et al 1999; Pelz et al 2001;
Garbino et al 2002) support the efﬁcacy of azole prophylaxis
in nonneutropenic high-risk ICU patients, diminishing the
incidence of Candida infection but not mortality.
Three recently published meta-analysis have tried to
evaluate the impact of fluconazole prophylaxis on the
incidence of fungal infections and on mortality among
critically ill surgical patients (Cruciani et al 2005; Shorr
et al 2005; Playford et al 2006). The meta-analysis by Shorr
and colleagues (2005) demonstrated that prophylactic
ﬂuconazole administration in surgical ICU patients appears
to successfully decrease the rate of mycoses, but this strategy
does not improve survival. The second meta-analysis by
Cruciani and colleagues (2005) showed that patients who
received azole prophylaxis (ﬂuconazole and ketoconazole)
experienced a 80% relative risk reduction in candidemia,
31.5% relative risk reduction in overall mortality, and 79.4%
reduction in mortality attributable to Candida infections.
Finally, Playford and colleagues (2006) reported reduction
of the IFI incidence rate by about 50% and overall mortality
by about 25%.
Currently, because of the potential for both resistance
and emergence of non-albicans isolates, clinicians must
properly consider these issues when evaluating ﬂuconazole
prophylaxis in ICU, although the meta-analyses published
by Playford and colleagues (2006) describes above showed
no evidence of epidemiological shifts after ﬂuconazole
prophylaxis.
In addition, it has been criticized that all controlled ran-
domized trials included into the metaanalyses by Playford and
Cruciani and colleagues were limited by their monocentric
design and each of them focused on a group of clinically
distinctive patients.
Under these circumstances, prophylactic use of
fluconazole in high risk ICU patients cannot be gener-
ally recommended, but should be restricted to patients
with multiple risk factors for developing IC, for instance
as Playford recommend, if the cumulative incidence of
IC in a certain subpopulation of the ICU approaches or
exceeds 10%, in spite of active prevention, prophylaxis
should be initiated. Using this approach, the number
needed to treat to prevent one case of IC ranges between
17 (for a risk of 11%) and nine patients (for a risk of
20%). The subgroups of patients who might most benefit
from prophylaxis in ICU may be patients with upper
gastrointestinal perforation (Pelz et al 2001; Garbino
et al 2002), patients with heavy Candida colonization
(Piarroux et al 2004), and patients with severe acute
pancreatitis (De Waele et al 2003).
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1267
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
Empirical antifungal treatment in ICU
Assessing risk
The early identification of risk factors for the devel-
opment of candidemia such as peritonitis, abdominal
surgery, previous administration of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics, parenteral nutrition, multiple lumen catheters, prior
Candida spp. colonization, renal replacement therapy, and
mechanical ventilation (Petri et al 1997; Blumberg et al 2001;
Alvarez-Lerma et al 2003), has become the cornerstone of
empirictreatmentoffungalinfectionsintheICUsettinginorder
toreducethehighmortalityrateassociatedwiththeseinfections
(Ibanez-Nolla et al 2004; Garnacho-Montero et al 2005).
The Ostrosky-Zeichner prediction rule
In a multicenter retrospective setting, Ostrosky-Zeichner and
colleagues (2007) created a prediction rule for IC. The rule
was obtained through analysis of a group of 2890 patients,
in which incidence of IC was 3% (88 cases). Statistical
modeling revealed a particularly high risk for patients under
systemic antibiotic treatment (days 1–3) or with indwelling
central venous catheter (days 1–3) and at least two of the
following factors: total parenteral nutrition (days 1–3), any
dialysis (days 1–3), any major surgery (days −7–0), pancre-
atitis (days −7–0), any use of steroids (days −7–3), or use of
other immunosuppressive agents (days −7–0). The rule was
associated with a sensitivity of 34%, a speciﬁcity of 90%,
and a PPV and a NPV of 1% and 97%, respectively. This
rule applies to approximately 10% of patients who stay in
the unit for Ͼ4 days, and approximately 10% of patients to
whom this rule is applied will develop proven or probable
IC. In this study, patients with any combination of diabetes
mellitus, new-onset hemodialysis, use of total parenteral
nutrition, or receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics had an IC
rate of 16.6%. This compared with a rate of 5.1% in patients
who lacked these characteristics (P = 0.001). Fifty-two
percent of patients who stayed in the ICU for Ն4 days met
this rule, and the rule captured 78% of patients who eventu-
ally developed IC.
The Candida score
A Spanish group reported on the development of a bedside
scoring system that allows early antifungal treatment when
candidemia is suspected in nonneutropenic ICU patients
(Leon et al 2006). This “Candida score” is based on the
predictive value of previously reported risk factors. Using
a logistic regression analysis and adjusting for possible
confounding variables, the authors found several factors to
be independently associated with a greater risk for proven
candidal infection. The scores for the individual factors
were: parenteral nutrition (+0.908), prior surgery (+0.997),
multifocal Candida colonization (+1.112), and severe
sepsis (+2.038). The authors concluded that a “Candida
score” of Ͼ2.5 could accurately select patients who would
beneﬁt from early antifungal treatment (sensitivity 81%,
speciﬁcity 74%).
Pre-emptive antifungal treatment
in the ICU
Poor outcomes are, in part, associated with difﬁculties in
establishing the microbiologic diagnosis at an early stage
of infection. Blood culture results are positive in only 50%
of invasive Candida and Fusarium infections, and are very
rarely positive in cases of IA. Cultures of bronchoalveolar
lavage ﬂuid or brushing specimens are positive in Ͻ50%
of subjects with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Finally,
positive cultures of specimens from nonsterile body sites
may be related to either colonization or infection, and
distinguishing between these can be difﬁcult. Nonculture-
based diagnostic tests may provide a useful adjunct to these
more traditional approaches.
Corrected colonization index
Piarroux and colleagues (2004) assessed the efﬁcacy of a
pre-emptive antifungal therapy in preventing proven can-
didiasis in critically ill surgical patients, using a corrected
colonization index (CCI) (ratio of highly positive samples
to the total numbers of samples cultured) to measure the
intensity of Candida mucosal colonization. Patients with
a CCI value of Ն0.4 received early pre-emptive antifungal
therapy with ﬂuconazole, and the incidence of ICU-acquired
proven candidiasis decreased signiﬁcantly from 2.2 to 0%.
However, it is possible that the overload of samples sent to
the microbiology laboratory could limit the widespread use
of this approach.
Targeted treatment of invasive candidiasis
in the ICU
The best ﬁrst-line treatment for candidemia in critically ill
patients remains controversial. Clinical studies have shown
that amphotericin B (AmB), ﬂuconazole, echinocandins,
and voriconazole have similar efﬁcacy in the treatment of
Candida bloodstream infections (Rex et al 1994; Phillips
et al 1997; Mora-Duarte et al 2002; Kullberg et al 2005). In
accordance with the last IDSA guidelines (Pappas et al 2004),
many experts favor initial treatment with AmB in severely ill
or clinically unstable patients; although the recent published
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1268
Zaragoza et al
Swiss guidelines for fungal infections (Fluckiger et al 2006)
do not support this statement. However, its renal toxicity
could present a serious problem in these individuals, which
may often preclude its use as ﬁrst-line therapy (Bates et al
2001; Blot et al 2002).
While the triazole, ﬂuconazole, may be selected on the
basis of its efﬁcacy and safety (Rex et al 1994; Phillips
et al 1997), the increasing frequency of patients infected
with Candida strains that are resistant to this drug high-
light the need for initial treatment with a broader-spectrum
agent, at least until the Candida spp. is identiﬁed, in order
to avoid inadequate antifungal treatment and an associ-
ated increased mortality rate (Zaragoza and Peman 2006).
Results from the ﬁrst randomized, prospective, multicenter
study in nonneutropenic patients with candidemia who were
treated with either voriconazole alone or AmB deoxycholate
followed by ﬂuconazole have demonstrated equivalence of
these two regimens with regard to efﬁcacy and mortality
rates (Kullberg et al 2005). Response rates were similar in
the voriconazole and AmB/ﬂuconazole arms; however, for
C. tropicalis infection, the response rate was signiﬁcantly
higher in the group treated with voriconazole, despite in vitro
susceptibility of these strains to AmB. These results can be
easily applied to critically ill patients as approximately half
of the patients included in the study were admitted to an ICU.
The only limitation to the use of intravenous voriconazole
in these patients could be the accumulation and toxicity
of its excipient (cyclodextrin) in severe renal dysfunction,
although there are no data regarding this concern in patients
undergoing renal replacement therapy.
Published reports suggest that caspofungin is equiva-
lent in efﬁcacy to standard therapy with AmB in the treat-
ment of Candida infections (Mora-Duarte et al 2002).
Mora-Duarte and colleagues (2002) compared caspofungin
to AmB in the treatment of IC in nonneutropenic (n = 200)
and neutropenic patients (n = 24). Caspofungin was as
efficacious as AmB, with favourable response rates of
73.4% and 61.7%, respectively. Micafungin has become
the second available echinocandin approved for use in the
USA and Japan for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis
and prophylaxis in subjects with neutropenia (Chandrasekar
and Sobel 2006). Recently, two different studies have been
published for invasive candidiasis (Kuse et al 2007; Pappas
et al 2007). In these studies, micafungin was as effective
as liposomal AmB (Kuse et al 2007) or caspofungin (Pappas
et al 2007) as ﬁrst-line treatment of candidemia and IC and
caused fewer adverse events than liposomal AmB. Finally,
anidulafungin is the only antifungal compound that has been
able to demonstrate superiority over ﬂuconazole in IC (Reboli
et al 2007), although we must be cautious with the results
presented as the study involved was powered a priori for
equivalency. However, anidulafungin’s efﬁcacy and safety
proﬁle could indicate that it should be readily considered as
a ﬁrst-line option for the treatment of IC.
In the last years, some publications have shown a shift
toward the use of antifungal drugs other than ﬂuconazole
due to the increasing number of non-C. albicans (NCA)
isolates (Sendid et al 2006; Zaragoza and Peman 2006).
Consequently, the application of an early de-escalation
therapy in critically ill patients with fungal infection should be
recommended (Zaragoza and Peman 2006). For this reason,
voriconazole (due to its broad spectrum and good proﬁle in
the ICU setting), caspofungin, anidulafungin and micafungin
(particularly in renal dysfunction) could be attractive options
in critically ill patients. Finally, the choice of antifungal drug
must be based on the individual characteristics of the patient,
and particularly focus on the presence of renal or hepatic
failure, hemodinamic instability and possible interactions
with other drugs. The presence of hemodynamic instability is
a mayor factor for choosing empirical therapy. This fact has
been considered by the recent guidelines published enhanc-
ing a tailored therapy (de-escalation) especially with severe
sepsis or septic shock (Pappas et al 2004; Fluckiger et al
2006). All these guidelines heavily recommend, including
last ongoing IDSA guidelines, the use of echinocandins in
noneutropenic patients with IC when hemodynamic inesta-
bility was present. The high rate of clinical success of these
agents in candidemia, their low toxicity, their excellent safety
proﬁle and their broad spectrum against non-albicans spp.
makes this recommendation feasible. A recent publication
has corroborated the use of caspofungin in critically ill
patients (DiNubile et al 2007).
In conclusion, IFIs, especially in the critical care setting,
have become an excellent target for prophylactic, empiric,
and pre-emptive therapy interventions. Table 2 summarizes
the antifungal therapy strategies in ICU patients.
Prophylaxis, empirical, pre-emptive
or targeted therapy, which is the
best in hematological patients?
Hematological patients are prone to IFI since most of them
receive myelotoxic chemotherapy and usually have more
than one of well-known risk factors for IFI (eg, long-lasting
neutropenia, older age, active cancer, corticosteroid therapy,
administration of broad spectrum antibiotics, allogeneic
HSCT, central venous catheter, organ dysfunction).
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1269
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
These patients are usually polymedicated and are thus
exposed to harmful drug interactions. Furthermore, it is
important to emphasize that the same individual patient
will be at risk at several time points through the entire treat-
ment plan for his/her underlying disease. Thus, the planned
antineoplastic treatment should be kept in mind when design-
ing antifungal strategies for hematological patients.
Prophylaxis of IFI
in hematological patients
Historically, outcomes for IFI have been disappointing and
associated with a high mortality rate. Because of this, pro-
phylaxis has been the ﬁrst option to consider in hematological
patients. Since the early 90’s, ﬂuconazole prophylaxis has
reduced infections caused by Candida spp. but dramatic
changes in the epidemiology of IFI have occurred, with
Aspergillus spp. and NCA species becoming increasingly
common. These changes have affected the selection of
antifungals for first-line or prophylactic use, as not all
agents have the spectrum of activity required. At this point,
it should be noted that evidence based recommendations
are to be interpreted with caution and so we should always
consider the moment when they were formulated. For
example, beneﬁt of antifungal prophylaxis with ﬂuconazole
(400 mg/day) in allogeneic HSCT recipients continues to
be an A-I recommendation but today C. albicans is not
longer the predominant pathogen in this setting. However,
newer azoles have the potential to provide protection against
mould infections that are difﬁcult to treat once they occur.
Two large randomized, ﬂuconazole- or itraconazole-based
controlled clinical trials in acute leukemia patients (Cornely
et al 2007b) and in HSCT recipients with graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD) (Ullmann et al 2007) have demonstrated
the efﬁcacy of oral posaconazole (200 mg thrice daily) for
reducing invasive mould infections. Ideally prophylaxis
should usually be initiated in parallel with the administration
of cytotoxic therapy in order to ensure a protective effect at
the time of maximal neutropenia and intestinal epithelial
damage, but concerns over drug interactions make advisable
to start triazole-based prophylaxis after the administration
of cytotoxic therapy, especially in HSCT recipients. The
ability to switch from the oral to an intravenous formulation
for the same antifungal product in the setting of severe oral
mucositis is an advantage. Both oral solution and intravenous
formulation of itraconazole are suitable for prophylaxis in
high-risk patients, but compliance with the oral solution
is poor (Marr et al 2004b). A preliminary report of a large
trial to assess prophylactic voriconazole in allogeneic HSCT
recipients (oral or IV 200 mg BID) was recently presented
(Wingard et al 2007). Prophylaxis with micafungin (van
Burik et al 2004) and caspofungin (Mattiuzzi et al 2006) have
been studied at daily IV doses of 50 mg but echinocandins
are preferred in the clinical practice for therapy instead of
prophylaxis. The end of prophylaxis should be dictated by
the termination of the speciﬁc risk. Mould-active prophylaxis
may require administration into the late post-engraftment
period in allogeneic HSCT for those patients with higher
Table 2 Antifungal therapy strategies in ICU patients
Strategy Antifungal agent References
Prophylaxis No generally recommended. Patients with
upper gastrointestinal perforation, heavy
Candida colonization or with severe acute
pancreatitis might be beneﬁted
Fluconazole Pelz et al 2001; Garbino et al 2002; De
Waele et al 2003; Piarroux et al 2004
Empirical Use of “Candida score” or the
Ostrosky-Zeichner prediction rule
De-escalation therapy (*), the choice
of antifungal drug must be based on
the individual characteristics of the
patient
Leon et al 2006; Ostrosky-Zeichner
et al 2007
Pre-emptive Based on detection of galactomannan,
(1,3)-β-D-glucan or C. albicans germ tube
antibodies
De-escalation therapy (*), the choice
of antifungal drug must be based on
the individual characteristics of the
patient
Ostrosky-Zeichner et al 2005;
Zaragoza et al 2006; Meersseman
et al 2008
Targeted Based on sterile site culture results De-escalation therapy (*), the choice
of antifungal drug must be based on
the individual characteristics of the
patient (**)
Rex et al 1994; Phillips et al 1997;
Mora-Duarte et al 2002; Kullberg et al
2005; Zaragoza and Peman 2006; Kuse
et al 2007; Pappas et al 2007
Notes: *
An early broad-spectrum antifungal agent is initially prescribed,switching to a narrower-spectrum drug (ﬂuconazole) when mycological identiﬁcation and susceptibility
studies are provided. **
Focus on the presence of renal or hepatic failure, hemodynamic instability and possible interactions with other drugs.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1270
Zaragoza et al
risk due to acute or chronic GVHD requiring augmented
immunosuppressive therapy (Marr et al 2004b; Ullmann
et al 2007). Finally, the use of aerosolized lipid-based
formulations of AmB may prove to be useful as prophylaxis
for mould infection in the respiratory tract, the major portal
of entry of fungal conidia (Rijnders et al 2008). The combi-
nation of nebulized AmB with ﬂuconazole is an interesting
approach to avoid drug interactions (eg, in patients receiving
vinca alkaloids).
Empirical therapy of IFI in hematological
patients
For lower risk patients or when IFI is suspected in patients
receiving prophylaxis, empirical antifungal therapy is
often employed following a predeﬁned duration of fever.
During the early 1980s one quarter to one third of severely
neutropenic cancer patients with persistent or relapsing fever
despite broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy developed IFI.
Empirical AmB deoxycholate reduced the incidence of IFI and
overall mortality by 50%–80% and 23%–45%, respectively.
Fever is a poorly predictive surrogate upon which to base an
intervention such as empirical antifungal therapy (De Pauw
2005). Although a substantial number of leukemia patients
and HSCT recipients are given empirical antifungal therapy,
proven IFI occurs in only 2% to 15% (Kanda et al 2000;
Bow et al 2002; Ullmann et al 2002; Cornely et al 2007b)
suggesting that the current guidelines (Hughes et al 2002)
based upon persistent neutropenic fever are signiﬁcantly
ﬂawed and may result in unjustiﬁable excess treatment-related
toxicities and resource expenses (De Pauw 2005).
Currently, caspofungin and liposomal AmB are the
ﬁrst-line option for treating patients with febrile neutrope-
nia (Walsh et al 1999, 2004). The role of voriconazole as
an empirical treatment for patients with febrile neutropenia
remains unresolved, and in fact, voriconazole is currently
not licensed for this indication. The results of a large,
international, multicenter, randomized study that compared
voriconazole with liposomal AmB for the empirical treatment
of febrile neutropenic patients have been controversial
(Walsh et al 2002). According to the predeﬁned end point
of this study (noninferiority), voriconazole did not achieve
this goal relative to liposomal AmB; the overall success
rates were 26% and 30.6%, respectively. Breakthrough
fungal infections occurred in eight patients (1.9%) in the
voriconazole group compared with 21 patients (5%) in the
liposomal AmB group (P = 0.02). However, more patients
died in the voriconazole group and a claimed signiﬁcant
reduction in the number of breakthrough fungal infections
disappeared when patients arbitrarily excluded from analysis
by the trial authors were included (Jorgensen et al 2006).
Continuous infusion administration AmB has been
proposed over the past few years, claiming it could reduce
the risk of nephrotoxicity associated to this agent. The pre-
liminary results of an open study, including 80 neutropenic
patients during 4 hour infusion versus continuous infusion,
suggest more advantages for continuous infusion. A signiﬁ-
cantly lower incidence in reactions related with the infusion
was found in the case of continous administration, which also
favored the creatinine clearance values (Eriksson et al 2001).
Another cohort study on 81 febrile neutropenic hematologi-
cal patients with a higher IFI risk, evaluated the administra-
tion of AmB in intermittent infusion during 4h, compared
to a continuous infusion (Peleg and Woods 2004). Kidney
failure was seen in 45% and 10% of the patients, respectively
(OR 0.14; IC 95% 0.04–0.5; PϽ0.001). The result was
similar in patients with allogeneic transplant and in those
which were given other nephrotoxic drugs. A multivariate
logistic regression showed that the continuous infusion was
the only variable signiﬁcantly associated to kidney failure,
with a protective effect.
Nevertheless, the use of continuous infusion is still con-
troversial. Whilst some authors defend this strategy before
opting for lipid or liposomic formulations (Johnson 2004;
Schneemann and Bachli 2004), others do not consider it
totally acceptable because of limited experience. Altmanns-
berger and colleagues (2007), when repeating the experience
provided by Peleg and Woods (2004), found no signiﬁcant
advantages between intermittent and continuous infusion in
patients with a high IFI risk.
Pre-emptive therapy of IFI
in hematological patients
A more reﬁned approach is pre-emptive therapy where
treatment is only initiated upon positive identiﬁcation of a
surrogate marker of infection in combination with clinical
and radiological signs. This pre-emptive therapy will subject
fewer patients to toxic and expensive treatments. The interest
in this strategy is based upon the observation that early detec-
tion is associated with better outcomes. A study in acute
leukemia patients receiving ﬂuconazole prophylaxis exam-
ined an algorithm-based pre-emptive approach based upon
serial diagnostic testing and clinical monitoring (Maertens
et al 2005). Only patients with Ն2 positive serum GM assays
or CT and or bronchoscopic evidence for mould infection
received antifungal therapy. A total of 41 of 117 febrile
neutropenic episodes (35%) had persistent neutropenic
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1271
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
fever; however, only 9 patients (22% of the 41 persistent
neutropenic fevers; 8% of the original febrile neutropenic
episodes) satisﬁed the pre-deﬁned criteria for antifungal ther-
apy. Despite these promising observations, the appearance of
a clinical or radiological marker such as a suggestive nodular
pulmonary inﬁltrate on computerized thoracic tomography
in a high-risk patient will compel the anxious physician to
initiate antimould therapy independent of molecular markers.
Pre-emptive strategies are intellectually attractive because
they combine in an elegant manner newer diagnostic tools
in order to give antifungal therapy only to patients who
really deserve it. However, in the real world, they are dif-
ﬁcult to carry out. Furthermore, nonculture methods such
is serum GM assay lose diagnostic power if an anti-mould
prophylaxis is given, which in turn will be given to higher
risk patients. Thus pre-emptive therapy based on sensitive
diagnostic non-culture methods needs further validation in
larger randomized trials before becoming a standard.
Targeted therapy of IFI in hematological
patients
Targeted therapy is used in patients with conﬁrmed IFI. Again
hematological patients deserve especial consideration as they
are commonly at high risk of hemorrhagic complications
that render them unﬁt for aggressive diagnostic procedures
including biopsies. Therefore many suspected cases will be
diagnosed as probable IFI at the most.
A study comparing voriconazole to conventional AmB
in 277 patients (Herbrecht et al 2002) demonstrated higher
response rates among voriconazole recipients (52.8% versus
31.6%), a 67% improvement. Patients with early lesions
characterized by pulmonary nodules with halos had higher
treatment response rates (52.4% versus 29.1%) (Greene
2005). Moreover, a survival advantage for voriconazole
recipients was observed (70.8% compared to 57.9%,
P = 0.024). Despite this, response among allogeneic HSCT
recipients remained suboptimal (32.4% for voriconazole ver-
sus 13.3% for conventional AmB). A study of dose-intense
(10 mg/kg/d for 14 days followed by 3 mg/kg/d vs 3 mg/kg/d)
of liposomal AmB as primary therapy for IA demonstrated
similar response rates (46% vs 50%, respectively), but more
nephrotoxicity (31% versus 14%), hypokalemia (30% versus
16%), and higher mortality in the dose-intense group (41%
versus 28%) (Cornely et al 2007a). Based on this experience,
the value of dose-intensity for IA appears limited.
Poor response rates for primary and salvage monotherapy
therapy for IFI and the availability of increasingly safer
agents with differing mechanisms of action have prompted
hematologists to use early combination therapy. Arguments
for considering combination therapy include enhanced
fungal killing (synergy), an enhanced spectrum of activity,
prevention of development of resistance, and reduction of
drug-related toxicities (Kontoyiannis and Lewis 2004).
Favorable responses were observed among HSCT patients
failing polyene-based therapy for IA with a combination of
voriconazole and caspofungin compared to voriconazole
monotherapy (Marr et al 2004a). Recently, a French mul-
ticenter randomized study comparing combination therapy
with liposomal AmB (3 mg/kg/d) plus caspofungin (70 mg
day 1 and 50 mg/d thereafter) versus high-dose liposomal
AmB monotherapy (10 mg/kg/d) for primary treatment of
IA was published (Caillot et al 2007). A favorable over-
all response was observed in 67% combination therapy
recipients compared to 27% high-dose therapy recipients
(P = 0.028). The results of this small pilot, representing the
ﬁrst prospective study of combination therapy in IA, are
encouraging but need conﬁrmation. Combination antifun-
gal therapies are expensive and potentially toxic and there
are limited well-designed randomized-controlled trials to
guide the practicing clinician faced with managing these
problems.
In conclusion, risk-adapted prophylaxis is the best option
in hematological patients. Table 3 resumes the antifungal
therapy strategies in these patients.
Prophylaxis, empirical, pre-emptive
or targeted therapy, which is the
best in solid organ transplant
recipients (SOT)?
Renal, liver, heart, and lung transplantation are now consid-
ered to be the standard therapeutic interventions in patients
with end-stage organ failure. The use of newer more potent
immunosuppressive regimens as well as widespread use of
antifungal drugs has changed the landscape of fungal infec-
tions. The incidence of invasive mycoses following SOT
ranges from 5% to 42% depending on the organ transplanted
(Marik 2006; Singh 2004; Solé and Salavert 2007). Fungal
infections in SOT recipients continue to be a signiﬁcant cause
of morbidity and mortality. The clinical and epidemiological
characteristics of IFIs in recipients of nonpulmonary solid
organ transplantation (NP-SOT) are very different from
which occurs in the patients with lung transplantation (LT)
or HSCT. The incidence of invasive mycoses varies with type
of SOT, though Candida spp. and Aspergillus spp. account
for most IFI in SOT recipients (Silveira and Husain 2007).
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1272
Zaragoza et al
Liver transplant recipients have highest reported incidence
of Candida infections while LT recipients have highest rate
of Aspergillus infections (Singh 2005; Singh and Paterson
2005; Solé et al 2005; Solé and Salavert 2008). Recent epide-
miological studies suggest the emergence of resistant strains
of Candida as well as mycelial fungi other than Aspergillus
in these patients. Moreover, signiﬁcant percentages of fungal
infections are occurring late in the course of transplantation.
SOT recipients also are at risk for Cryptococcus infections
(Singh et al 2007) and reactivation of endemic mycoses
such as histoplasmosis and coccidiomycosis.. Emergence of
newer and more potent antifungal agents with lower toxicity
potentially changes the concept of antifungal prophylaxis
(van Burik 2005; Metcalf and Dockrell 2007).
Prophylaxis and pre-emptive therapy
of IFI in solid organ transplant patients
Several prophylactic strategies with antifungal drugs have
been reported to result in a decreased incidence and mortality
of fungal disease in LT recipients (Covarrubias and Milstone
2005; Husain et al 2006b; Magill and Dropulic 2006);
however, there has not been a uniform approach, data are
limited, and besides there is a considerable variation in anti-
fungal prophylaxis practices among LT centres throughout
the world. The majority of LT programs are using universal
antifungal prophylaxis in the postoperative period; about
30% use a pre-emptive approach for patients with pre- and/or
post-transplant fungal airway colonization. As the antifungal
agent used as the duration of prophylaxis varies substantially
from center to center (Husain et al 2006b). It is clear that there
is considerable uncertainty to which approach (prophylaxis
or pre-emptive therapy) is most appropriate, which agent is
the best, and what duration of prophylaxis or pre-emptive
therapy is needed. Antifungal prophylaxis in LT recipients
should be taken into account the incidence of colonization,
anastomoses healing, chronic rejection, and the time of LT,
thus providing a rationale for the duration of therapy.
To prevent invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, multiple
strategies and antifungal drugs have been utilized such as oral
itraconazole, voriconazole or aerosolized AmB used alone
or in combination. Aerosolized medication regimens are an
attractive option, as drug interactions and systemic toxici-
ties are likely to be limited (Drew 2006). Lipid preparations
of AmB appear to be ideal for inhalational administration;
however, there are not rigorous pharmacokinetic studies in
LT recipients, to determine the appropriate dose and sched-
ule of their administration. Monforte and colleagues have
demonstrated that aerosolized AmB and lipid preparations
of AmB are safe and achieve high concentrations in BAL
ﬂuid for the ﬁrst 24 hours and 14 days, respectively, follow-
ing nebulization (Monforte et al 2003, 2005). These lipid
formulations let a delayed administration (every 7–14 days),
which is rebounded and better accomplished by patient.
Several centers have reported on the safety of aerosolized
AmB with a variety of dosing regimens (Reichenspurner et al
1997; Calvo et al 1999; Monforte et al 2003), and others with
Table 3 Antifungal therapy strategies in hematological patients
Strategy Antifungal agent References
Prophylaxis High risk patients*:
Intermediate risk patients**:
Itraconazole or
Posaconazole or
Voriconazole
Fluconazole
Jarque et al 2004; Marr et al 2004b;
Cornely et al 2007b; Ullmann et al 2007;
Wingard et al 2007
Empirical Severely neutropenic cancer patients
with persistent or relapsing fever despite
broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy
Liposomal AmB or
Caspofungin
Hughes et al 2002;Walsh et al 1999, 2004
Pre-emptive Based on GM assays or CT
or bronchoscopic cultures
Liposomal AmB or
Caspofungin or
Voriconazole
Maertens et al 2005
Targeted Based on sterile site culture results Voriconazole
Combination therapy
Herbrecht et al 2002; Marr et al 2004a;
Caillot et al 2007
Notes: *
Acute leukemia patients,Allogenic HSCT recipients,autologous HSCT recipients,previous episode of IFI,rescue chemotherapy for acute leukemia patients and severe
aplastic anemia. **
Autologous HSCT recipients, acute linfoblastic leukemia, rescue therapy for myeloma and lymphomas.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1273
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
aerosolized AmB lipid formulations (Palmer et al 2001; Drew
et al 2004; Lowry et al 2007). Our group has used aerosolized
AmB as part of the post-LT protocol since 1994 (Calvo et al
1999). Since three years ago we also are using AmB lipid
complex, with the same respiratory tolerability and safety
that aerosolized AmB, but AmB lipid complex results more
comfortable for long periods of time (50 mg inhaled/ weekly),
and patients have better adherence to treatment. Recently, in
vitro suitability of caspofungin for aerosol administration has
been characterized (Wong-Beringer et al 2005). Caspofungin
solution appeared to have physicochemical and aerodynamic
characteristics suitable for aerosolization. However, further
in vivo testing is warranted. Although the incidence of IFI
seems to be reduced with aerosolized AmB prophylaxis, the
efﬁcacy of this approach has not been determined in a large
prospective clinical trial. Furthermore, without detectable
levels of AmB in the circulation, extrapulmonary fungal
infections may not be prevented by this strategy. Besides, it is
important to take into consideration the type of delivery sys-
tems used for inhaled drugs (Corcoran et al 2006; Hagerman
et al 2006). In addition, contamination of the nebulization
systems used in the prophylaxis with AmB nebulized in LT
has been described (Monforte et al 2003). The contamination
of the nebulizing systems may be the origin of respiratory
infections and it is frequent when no strict cleaning and
disinfection protocol is followed.
In conclusion, aerosolized antifungal therapy is a promis-
ing route of drug delivery for pulmonary aspergillosis due
to attainment of high localized concentrations (Mohammad
and Klein 2006; Solé and Nieto 2007).
Respect to oral prophylaxis, recently a study that
examined the efﬁcacy and toxicity of a strategy of universal
de novo antifungal prophylaxis with voriconazole compared
to targeted antifungal prophylaxis has been published (Husain
et al 2006a). The main ﬁnding of this study was that the
overall rate of IA at 1 year decreased to 1.5% with universal
voriconazole prophylaxis as compared to 23.5% with a tar-
geted prophylaxis strategy. Interestingly, the rate of Candida
colonization, particularly non-albicans spp. in the voricon-
azole group was signiﬁcantly higher. In the voriconazole
prophylaxis cohort, 27% of the LT recipients had normal
liver enzymes throughout the course of the study. The main
handicap of this azole therapy is the strong interaction with
immunosuppressors that obliges to monitoring calcineurin
inhibitors to avoid toxicity or rejection. Other interesting
ﬁnding was that universal voriconazole prophylaxis did
not increase the rate of non-Aspergillus fungal infections
(specially, zygomycosis).
Available echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin,
anidulafungin) may have an important role in prophylaxis
because of their antifungal proﬁle, pharmacokinetics and
security; however, they are expensive and need intravenous
administration.
Another question is how long should be prophylaxis
maintained? The majority of centers agree to apply universal
prophylaxis during ﬁrst period post transplant (3 months) after
this time, each center use a tailored prophylaxis. Besides, it is
recommended to use nebulized antifungal prophylaxis and/or
preemptive therapy with antifungal agents (voriconazole)
in patients with chronic rejection and respiratory samples
positive for Aspergillus, even without clinical or radiological
signs, mainly in single LT patients due to the high risk of IA
(Solé et al 2005). This preemptive treatment should last for
at least 6 months, the time period over which colonization
has been shown to precede disseminated infection (Singh
and Husain 2003) and in some cases for life. Table 4 shows
antifungal therapy strategies in LT patients.
Due to the difﬁculty in obtaining a proven diagnosis of
IFI, empiric and pre-emptive therapy plays an important role
in NP-SOT patients (Table 5) (Leather and Wingard 2006;
Bow 2008). As it is mentioned in Table 6, some of NP-SOT
recipients have additional risk factors that increases the prob-
ability of suffer an IFI caused by Aspergillus spp. (Echaniz-
Quintana et al 2004; Singh 2005; Singh et al 2006b, 2006c).
For this reason, the incorporation of a strategy of antifungal
prophylaxis adapted-to-risk is accepted and high risk patients
need to be identiﬁed in order to prevent the development of
the disease (Playford et al 2004; Castroagudin et al 2005;
Hellinger et al 2005).
Since the IFI risk is lower in the cardiac and kidney
recipient patients, we will make reference mainly to patients
with orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) as paradigm of
the indication of antifungal prophylaxis in NP-SOT patients.
However, prophylaxis of candidiasis in SOT recipients
is a challenging topic. Strategies to prevent IC should be
based on institutional trends and, when appropriate, should
target high-risk patients only (Singh 2000). Only a few
well-designed studies have been conducted and all of the
controlled trials were performed in liver transplant recipients.
Oral prophylaxis with nonabsorbable antifungal agents
(nystatin, clotrimazole, AmB) has shown inconsistent results
(Wiesner et al 1988; Arnow et al 1996; Hjortrup et al 1997;
Hellinger et al 2002). Two randomized controlled trials
have shown the efﬁcacy of ﬂuconazole in the prophylaxis
of IC. In one study, comparing ﬂuconazole 100 mg/day
for the ﬁrst 4 weeks following liver transplantation to oral
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1274
Zaragoza et al
Table 4 Antifungal therapy strategies in lung transplantation (LT) recipients
Strategy Antifungal agents References
Prophylaxis Generally recommended in the postoperative
period
Voriconazole or
Amphotericin B (intravenous
or aerosolized)
Calvo et al 1999; Monforte et al 2005;
Husain et al 2006a; Drew 2006;
Lowry et al 2007
Pre-emptive Patients with pre- and/or post-transplant
fungal airway colonization
Patients with chronic rejection and
respiratory samples positive for Aspergillus,
mainly in single LT patients
Detection of galactomannan antigen of
Aspergillus, (1,3)-β-D-glucan or C. albicans
germ tube antibodies are not reliable
methods with usefulness sufﬁciently
demonstrated in the LT
Voriconazole or
Amphotericin B (intravenous
or aerosolized)
Singh and Husain 2003;
Sole et al 2005
Targeted Based on sterile site culture results or
non-absolutely sterile samples (respiratory
specimens) processed by semi or quantitative
methods and considered clinically signiﬁcant
AND/OR
Based in histological studies of biopsies and
other clinical specimens obtained by instru-
mental or chirurgic procedures (respiratory
and non-respiratory samples)
Voriconazole or
Amphotericin B or
Echinocandins
Combination therapy (triazole plus
echinocandin) in those patients with
LT and renal failure or infected by
A. fumigatus
Herbrecht et al 2002;
Singh et al 2006a
Table 5 Antifungal therapy strategies in recipients of nonpulmonary solid organ transplantation (NP-SOT)
Strategy Antifungal agents References
Prophylaxis Universal prophylaxis is not recommended
Antifungal prophylaxis adapted-to-risk is
reasonable
High-risk NP-SOT recipients need
to be identiﬁed in order to prevent
the development of IFI
Oral prophylaxis with nonabsorbable
antifungal agents (nystatin,
clotrimazole, amphotericin B) has
shown inconsistent results.
Azoles (ﬂuconazole, itraconazole) or
Amphotericin B (lipid formulations)
or Echinocandins (caspofungin)
Lumbreras et al 1996;Winston
et al 1999; Singh et al 2001;
Winston and Busuttil 2002; Fortun
et al 2003, 2007; Sharpe et al 2003;
Hellinger et al 2002, 2005; Munoz
et al 2004; Castroagudin et al 2005
Pre-emptive Strategy not sufﬁciently validated in these
patients
Detection of galactomannan antigen of
Aspergillus, (1,3)-β-D-glucan or C. albicans germ
tube antibodies are not usefulness in NP-SOT
recipients
Azoles or
Amphotericin B
Akamatsu et al 2007; Perkins 2007
Targeted Based on sterile site culture results or
nonabsolutely sterile samples (respiratory
specimens) processed by semi or quantitative
methods and considered clinically signiﬁcant
AND/OR
Based in histological studies of biopsies
and other clinical specimens obtained
by instrumental or chirurgic procedures
(respiratory and non-respiratory samples)
Azoles or
Amphotericin B or
Echinocandins
Combination therapy (triazole plus
echinocandin) in patients with SOT
and renal failure or infected by
A. fumigatus
Herbrecht 2002; Singh et al 2006a
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1275
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
nystatin, ﬂuconazole was associated with a reduction in
Candida colonization and superﬁcial infections, as well as
a trend toward reduction of invasive infections (Lumbreras
et al 1996). In a randomized, placebo-controlled study,
ﬂuconazole 400 mg/day for 10 weeks after liver transplanta-
tion prevented most types of Candida infection, except those
caused by C. glabrata and C. krusei. In another double blind
randomized control trial itraconazole decreased the rate of
fungal infection from 24% to 4% in liver transplant recipients
(Sharpe et al 2003). A recently published meta-analysis
showed that antifungal prophylaxis in liver transplant recipi-
ents signiﬁcantly reduced the total episodes of superﬁcial
and IFI caused by yeasts (at least for C. albicans), as well
as mortality attributable to fungal infections; however, it did
not affect overall mortality or the need for empirical antifun-
gal treatment (Cruciani et al 2006). Compared to controls,
patients receiving prophylaxis experienced a higher propor-
tion of episodes of Candida non-albicans infections. Prophy-
lactic strategies against invasive Candida infections should
be reassessed periodically because risk factors continue to
evolve in liver transplant recipients (Husain et al 2003).
Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent IA remains an
unsettled issue in NP-SOT. To date, no prospective random-
ized studies have demonstrated that antifungal prophylaxis
Table 6 Etiological and clinical characteristics of IFI according to the type of SOT
Type of transplant Incidence of IFI (%) Usual etiologic agent (s) Variables portending higher
risk of IA
Mortality
(%) of IA
Renal 0–20 76%–95% Candida (mainly
urinary tract infections),
Graft failure requiring hemodialysis,
high level and prolonged duration
of corticosteroids
77
0%–25% Aspergillus
Heart 5–20 70%–90% Aspergillus,
8%–25% Candida
Isolation of Aspergillus species
in respiratory tract cultures,
reoperation, post-transplant
hemodialysis, CMV disease
78
Liver 5–40 35%–0% Candida, 9%–45%
Aspergillus
Retransplantation, renal failure
(particularly requiring renal
replacement therapy), fulminant
hepatic failure as an indication
for transplantation, primary
allograft failure, high transfusion
requirements, use of monoclonal
antibodies,
87
Lung/Heart–Lung 10–45 43%–72% Candida,
25%–50% Aspergillus
Single lung transplant, CMV
infection, rejection and augmented
immunosuppression, obliterative
bronchitis, Aspergillus colonization,
acquired hypogammaglobulinemia,
presence of bronchial stents,
reperfusion injury, airway ischemia
68
Pancreas (+kidney) 10–40 >90% Candida,
0%–3% Aspergillus
Similar factors to the liver
and kidney transplant,
graft lost (vascular graft
thrombosis, post-reperfusion
pancreatitis), enteric drainage,
alemtuzumab-containing
immunosuppresive regimen
100
Small bowel 30–60 80%–100% Candida, 0%–5%
Aspergillus
Not clearly determined, similar
factors to others intraabdominal
SOT recipients; Graft
rejection/dysfunction, enhanced
immunosuppression, anastomotic
disruption, multi-visceral transplant
66
Abbreviations: SOT, solid organ transplantation/solid organ transplant recipients; IFI, invasive fungal infection; IA, invasive aspergillosis; CMV, cytomegalovirus.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1276
Zaragoza et al
prevents IA in OLT. A recent meta-analysis of antifungal
prophylaxis in OLT demonstrated no beneﬁcial effect on
IA. Observational studies, however, suggest that targeted
prophylaxis with lipid formulations of AmB may be effec-
tive in preventing IA in high-risk OLT recipients (Singh et al
2001; Fortun et al 2003). Lipid formulations of AmB at a
dose of 5 mg/kg/day have been shown to be efﬁcacious in
reducing IFI in high-risk OLT recipients on renal replacement
therapy, although there was no reduction in mortality. A study
of universal prophylaxis with cumulative doses of 1–1.5 g of
liposomal or lipid complex AmB showed a reduction in the
incidence of IA, which was most signiﬁcant among patients
receiving renal replacement therapy (0% vs 32% on controls).
However, low doses of lipid formulations of AmB failed to
prevent IA (Tollemar et al 1995).
The efﬁcacy of the antifungal prophylaxis oral solution
of itraconazole as has been assessed in two reports on OLT
recipients. A randomized, controlled trial of itraconazole
in an oral solution (200 mg every 12 h) versus intravenous
or oral ﬂuconazole (400 mg every 24 h) documented no
signiﬁcant difference in the incidence of IA (Winston and
Busuttil 2002).
On the other hand, the Spanish group GESITRA
has communicated recently the preliminary results of a
prospective, noncomparative, open label trial on antifungal
prophylaxis with caspofungin in high-risk OLT recipients
(Fortun et al 2007). Overall, caspofungin prophylaxis was
successful in 87.8% of the patients. These results suggest
promise for the prophylactic use of echinocandins in high
risk OLT.
However, it is controversial the election of antifungal
agent for prophylaxis in these patients. The high cost and
the need of parenteral infusion limits the use of lipid for-
mulations of AmB and caspofungin. Despite in vitro data
suggestingthatcaspofunginincombinationwithcalcineurinor
TOR-inhibitors may have enhanced activity against Aspergil-
lus, breakthrough infections in patients on caspofungin have
been noted (Kontoyiannis et al 2003). The recommendations
for prophylaxis against Aspergillus in OLT are a lipid
formulation of AmB, voriconazole or caspofungin, with a
duration of 3–4 weeks or until resolution of risk factors. In
heart transplant recipients routine antifungal prophylaxis is not
warranted, but in patients deemed to be at high risk (Table 6),
itraconazole at 400 mg daily administered orally from day 5
after transplantation for 3 to 6 months is associated with a
signiﬁcantly lower incidence of IA (Munoz et al 2004).
Randomized studies in high-risk patients are needed to
determine the efﬁcacy of targeted antifungal prophylaxis
for the prevention of IA. In the meantime, each centre needs
to evaluate its own recipient risk factors and rates of IA to
determine whether these strategies are appropriate for its
patients (Biancoﬁore et al 2002).
In conclusion, targeted prophylaxis against Candida and
Aspergillus spp. is recommended in all SOT. Fluconazole
should be used for prophylaxis against Candida spp. unless
the institution has a high rate of non-albicans infections;
conversely, voriconazole is recomended for prophylaxis
against Aspergillus spp. allthough its signiﬁcant interactions
with immunosuppressive agents could be a potential limiting
factor.
Targeted therapy of IFI in solid organ
transplant patients
With regard to the treatment, voriconazole, an extended
spectrum highly lipophilic triazole with 98% oral bioavail-
ability, is actually the ﬁrst choice for initial therapy of IA
in LT patients and other immunosuppressed hosts. Further-
more, the ﬁrst experiences with LT patients also evidenced
that continuous infusion of AmB is well tolerated, safe and
efﬁcient (Speich et al 2002). Other potentially effective thera-
pies include lipid formulations of AmB and echinocandins.
Combination therapy using a triazole and an echinocandin
has been evaluated in SOT, with a signiﬁcant reduction in
mortality in those patients with renal failure and infected by
A. fumigatus (Singh et al 2006a).
In conclusion, IFIs, especially immunocompromised
and critical care patients, have become an excellent target
for prophylactic, empiric, and pre-emptive therapy interven-
tions due to high morbidity and mortality rates, an increasing
incidence, and associated health care costs. Early diagnosis
and treatment are associated with a better prognosis. In all
cases the choice of antifungal drug must be based on the
individual characteristics of the patient. A tailored therapy
(de-escalation) must also be considered in the ICU setting.
Furthermore, risk-adapted prophylaxis is the best option in
hematological and SOT patients.
Disclosure
The authors report no conﬂicts of interest in this work.
References
Agresti MG, De Bernardis F, Mondello F, et al. 1994. Clinical and myco-
logical evaluation of ﬂuconazole in the secondary prophylaxis of
esophageal candidiasis in AIDS patients. An open, multicenter study.
Eur J Epidemiol, 10:17–22.
Akamatsu N, Sugawara Y, Kaneko J, et al. 2007. Preemptive treatment of
fungal infection based on plasma (1 – Ͼ3)beta-D-glucan levels after
liver transplantation. Infection, 35:346–51.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1277
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
Alberti C, Brun-Buisson C, Burchardi H, et al. 2002. Epidemiology of sepsis
and infection in ICU patients from an international multicentre cohort
study. Intensive Care Med, 28:108–21.
Almirante B, Rodriguez D, Park BJ, et al. 2005. The Barcelona Candidemia
Project Study Group. Epidemiology and predictors of mortality in
cases of Candida bloodstream infection: results from population-based
surveillance, Barcelona, Spain, from 2002 to 2003. J Clin Microbiol,
43:1829–35.
Altmannsberger P, Holler E, Andreesen R, et al. 2007. Amphotericin B
deoxycholate: no signiﬁcant advantage of a 24 h over a 6 h infusion
schedule. J Antimicrob Chemother, 60:180–2.
Alvarez-Lerma F, Palomar M, Leon C, et al. 2003. Colonización y/o
infección fúngica en unidades de cuidados intensivos. Estudio
multicéntrico de 1.562 pacientes. Med Clin (Barc), 121:161–6.
Arnow PM, Carandang GC, Zabner R, et al. 1996. Randomized controlled
trial of selective bowel decontamination for prevention of infections
following liver transplantation. Clin Infect Dis, 22:997–1003.
Ascioglu S, Rex JH, de Pauw B, et al. 2002. Deﬁning opportunistic invasive
fungal infections in immunocompromised patients with cancer and
hematopoietic stem cell transplants: an international consensus. Clin
Infect Dis, 34:7–14.
Bates DW, Su L, Yu DT, et al. 2001. Mortality and costs of acute renal
failure associated with amphotericin B therapy. Clin Infect Dis,
32:686–93.
Ben Abraham R, Keller N, Teodorovitch N, et al. Predictors of adverse
outcome from candidal infection in a tertiary care hospital. J Infect,
49:317–23.
Biancoﬁore G, Bindi ML, Baldassarri R, et al. 2002. Antifungal prophylaxis
in liver transplant recipients: a randomized placebo-controlled study.
Transpl Int, 15:341–7.
Blot SI, Vandewoude KH, Hoste EA, et al. 2002. Effects of nosocomial can-
didemia on outcomes of critically ill patients. Am J Med, 113:480–5.
Blumberg HM, Jarvis WR, Soucie JM, et al. 2001. Risk factors for candi-
dal bloodstream infections in surgical intensive care unit patients: the
NEMIS prospective multicenter study. The National Epidemiology of
Mycosis Survey. Clin Infect Dis, 33:177–86.
Bow EJ. 2008. Considerations in the approach to invasive fungal infec-
tion in patients with haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol,
140:133–52.
Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, et al. 2002. Antifungal prophylaxis
for severely neutropenic chemotherapy recipients: a meta analysis of
randomized-controlled clinical trials. Cancer, 94:3230–46.
Caillot D, Thiebaut A, Herbrecht R, et al. 2007. Liposomal amphotericin B
in combination with caspofungin for invasive aspergillosis in patients
with hematologic malignancies: a randomized pilot study (Combistrat
trial). Cancer, 110:2740–6.
Calandra T, Marchetti O. 2002. Antifungal prophylaxis for intensive care
unit patients: let’s ﬁne tune it. Intensive Care Med, 28:1698–700.
Calvo V, Borro JM, Morales P, et al. 1999. Antifungal prophylaxis during
the early postoperative period of lung transplantation. Valencia Lung
Transplant Group. Chest, 115:1301–4.
Castroagudin JF, Ponton C, Bustamante M, et al. 2005. Prospective
interventional study to evaluate the efﬁcacy and safety of liposomal
amphotericin B as prophylaxis of fungal infections in high-risk liver
transplant recipients. Transplant Proc, 37:3965–7.
Chandrasekar PH, Sobel JD. 2006. Micafungin: a new echinocandin. Clin
Infect Dis, 42:1171–8.
Corcoran TE, Venkataramanan R, Mihelc KM, et al. 2006. Aerosol
deposition of lipid complex amphotericin-B (Abelcet) in lung transplant
recipients. Am J Transplant, 6:2765–73.
Cordonnier C, Maury S, Ribaud P, et al. 2006. A grading system based
on severity of infection to predict mortality in allogeneic stem cell
transplant recipients. Transplantation, 82:86–92.
Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. 2007a. Liposomal amphotericin
B as initial therapy for invasive mold infection: a randomized trial com-
paring a high-loading dose regimen with standard dosing (AmBiLoad
trial). Clin Infect Dis, 44:1289–97.
Cornely OA, Maertens J, Winston DJ, et al. 2007b. Posaconazole vs
ﬂuconazole or itraconazole prophylaxis in patients with neutropenia.
N Engl J Med, 356:348–59.
Covarrubias MB, Milstone AB. 2005. An overview of fungal prophylaxis in
lung transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant, 10:227–32.
Cruciani M, de Lalla F, Mengoli C. 2005. Prophylaxis of Candida infections
in adult trauma and surgical intensive care patients: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med, 31:1479–87.
Cruciani M, Mengoli C, Malena M, et al. 2006. Antifungal prophylaxis in
liver transplant patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Liver
Transpl, 12:850–8.
De Pauw BE. 2005. Between over- and undertreatment of invasive fungal
disease. Clin Infect Dis, 41:1251–3.
De Waele JJ, Vogelaers D, Blot S, et al. 2003. Fungal infections in patients
with severe acute pancreatitis and the use of prophylactic therapy. Clin
Infect Dis, 37:208–13.
Dimopoulos G, Ntziora F, Rachiotis G, et al. 2008. Candida albicans versus
non-albicans intensive care unit-acquired bloodstream infections:
differences in risk factors and outcome. Anesth Analg, 106:523–9.
Dimopoulos G, Piagnerelli M, Berre J, et al. 2004. Post mortem
examination in the intensive care unit: still useful? Intensive Care
Med, 30:2080–5.
DiNubile MJ, Lupinacci RJ, Strohmaier KM, et al. 2007. Invasive candidia-
sis treated in the intensive care unit: observations from a randomized
clinical trial. J Crit Care, 22:237–44.
Drew R. 2006. Potential role of aerosolized amphotericin B formulations in
the prevention and adjunctive treatment of invasive fungal infections.
Int J Antimicrob Agents, 27(Suppl 1):36–44.
Drew RH, Dodds AE, Benjamin DK Jr, et al. 2004. Comparative safety
of amphotericin B lipid complex and amphotericin B deoxycholate
as aerosolized antifungal prophylaxis in lung-transplant recipients.
Transplantation, 77:232–7.
Echaniz-Quintana A, Pita-Fernandez S, Otero-Ferreiro A, et al. 2004. Risk
factors associated with invasive fungal infection in orthotopic liver
transplantation. Med Clin (Barc), 122:444–8.
Eggimann P, Francioli P, Bille J, et al.1999. Fluconazole prophylaxis pre-
vents intra-abdominal candidiasis in high-risk surgical patients. Crit
Care Med, 27:1066–72.
Eriksson U, Seifert B, Schaffner A. 2001. Comparison of effects of
amphotericin B deoxycholate infused over 4 or 24 hours: randomised
controlled trial. BMJ, 322:579–82.
Falagas ME, Apostolou KE, Pappas VD. 2006. Attributable mortality of
candidemia: a systematic review of matched cohort and case-control
studies. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis, 25:419–25.
Florent M, Katsahian S, Vekhoff A, et al. 2006. Prospective evalua-
tion of a polymerase chain reaction-ELISA targeted to Aspergillus
fumigatus and Aspergillus ﬂavus for the early diagnosis of invasive
aspergillosis in patients with hematological malignancies. J Infect
Dis, 193:741–7.
Fluckiger U, Marchetti O, Bille J, et al. 2006. Treatment options of invasive
fungal infections in adults. Swiss Med Wkly, 136:447–63.
Fortun J, Martin-Davila P, Moreno S, et al. 2003. Prevention of invasive
fungal infections in liver transplant recipients: the role of prophylaxis
with lipid formulations of amphotericin B in high-risk patients.
J Antimicrob Chemother, 52:813–9.
Fortun J, Montejo M, Martin-Davila P, et al. 2007. Prospective, multicentre
study of caspofungin for prophylaxis in high-risk liver transplanta-
tion [abstract]. 17th European Congress of Clinical Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases. ICC, Munich, Germany, March 31–April 3.
pp. 1733–463.
Garbino J, Lew DP, Romand JA, et al. 2002. Prevention of severe Candida
infections in nonneutropenic, high-risk, critically ill patients: a random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients treated by selec-
tive digestive decontamination. Intensive Care Med, 28:1708–17.
Garey KW, Rege M, Pai MP, et al. 2006. Time to initiation of ﬂuconazole
therapy impacts mortality in patients with candidemia: a multi-institu-
tional study. Clin Infect Dis, 43:25–31.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1278
Zaragoza et al
Garnacho-Montero J, León C, Almirante B, et al. 2005. Recomendaciones
terapéuticas para infecciones fúngicas en el paciente crítico no
neutropénico. Conferencia de consenso. Conclusiones. Med Intensiva,
3(Suppl 1):43–52.
Greene R. 2005. The radiological spectrum of pulmonary aspergillosis. Med
Mycol, 43(Suppl 1):S147–S154.
Hagerman JK, Hancock KE, Klepser ME. 2006. Aerosolised antibiotics: a
critical appraisal of their use. Expert Opin Drug Deliv, 3:71–86.
Hellinger WC, Bonatti H, Yao JD, et al. 2005. Risk stratiﬁcation and targeted
antifungal prophylaxis for prevention of aspergillosis and other invasive
mold infections after liver transplantation. Liver Transpl, 11:656–62.
Hellinger WC, Yao JD, Alvarez S, et al. 2002. A randomized, prospective,
double-blinded evaluation of selective bowel decontamination in liver
transplantation. Transplantation, 73:1904–9.
Herbrecht R. 2002. Improving the outcome of invasive aspergillosis:
new diagnostic tools and new therapeutic strategies. Ann Hematol,
81(Suppl 2):S52–S53.
Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, et al. 2002. Voriconazole versus
amphotericin B for primary therapy of invasive aspergillosis. N Engl
J Med, 347:408–15.
Hjortrup A, Rasmussen A, Hansen BA, et al. 1997. Early bacterial and
fungal infections in liver transplantation after oral selective bowel
decontamination. Transplant Proc, 29:3106–10.
Hope WW, Walsh TJ, Denning DW. 2005. Laboratory diagnosis of invasive
aspergillosis. Lancet Infect Dis, 5:609–22.
Hughes WT, Armstrong D, Bodey GP, et al. 2002. 2002 guidelines for the
use of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with cancer. Clin
Infect Dis, 34:730–51.
Husain S, Paterson DL, Studer S, et al. 2006a. Voriconazole prophylaxis in
lung transplant recipients. Am J Transplant, 6:3008–16.
Husain S, Tollemar J, Dominguez EA, et al. 2003. Changes in the spectrum
and risk factors for invasive candidiasis in liver transplant recipients:
prospective, multicenter, case-controlled study. Transplantation,
75:2023–9.
Husain S, Zaldonis D, Kusne S, et al. 2006b. Variation in antifungal
prophylaxis strategies in lung transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis,
8:213–8.
Ibanez-Nolla J, Nolla-Salas M, Leon MA, et al. 2004. Early diagnosis of
candidiasis in non-neutropenic critically ill patients. J Infect, 48:181–92.
Jarque I, Salavert M, Roma E, et al. 2004. Hospital Universitario La Fe
Guide to the prophylaxis and treatment of fungal infections in immu-
nodepressed patients or in patients requiring special care. Rev Esp
Quimioter, 17:357–89.
Johnson JR. 2004. Reduction of nephrotoxicity associated with amphotericin
B deoxycholate. Clin Infect Dis, 38:303–7.
Jorgensen KJ, Gotzsche PC, Johansen HK. 2006. Voriconazole versus
amphotericin B in cancer patients with neutropenia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev, 1:CD004707.
Kanda Y, Yamamoto R, Chizuka A, et al. 2000. Prophylactic action of oral
ﬂuconazole against fungal infection in neutropenic patients. A meta-
analysis of 16 randomized, controlled trials. Cancer, 89:1611–25.
Klingspor L, Tornqvist E, Johansson A, et al. 2004. A prospective
epidemiological survey of candidaemia in Sweden. Scand J Infect
Dis, 36:52–5.
Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE. 2004. Toward more effective antifungal
therapy: the prospects of combination therapy. Br J Haematol,
126:165–75.
Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE, Osherov N, et al. 2003. Combination of caspo-
fungin with inhibitors of the calcineurin pathway attenuates growth
in vitro in Aspergillus species. J Antimicrob Chemother, 51:313–6.
Kullberg BJ, Sobel JD, Ruhnke M, et al. 2005. Voriconazole versus a regi-
men of amphotericin B followed by ﬂuconazole for candidaemia in
non-neutropenic patients: a randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet,
366:1435–42.
Kuse ER, Chetchotisakd P, da Cunha CA, et al. 2007. Micafungin versus
liposomal amphotericin B for candidaemia and invasive candidosis:
a phase III randomised double-blind trial. Lancet, 369:1519–27.
Leather HL, Wingard JR. 2006. New strategies of antifungal therapy in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients and patients with hema-
tological malignancies. Blood Rev, 20:267–87.
Leleu G, Aegerter P, Guidet B. 2002. Systemic candidiasis in intensive care
units: a multicenter, matched-cohort study. J Crit Care, 17:168–75.
Leon C, Ruiz-Santana S, Saavedra P, et al. 2006. A bedside scoring system
(“Candida score”) for early antifungal treatment in nonneutropenic
critically ill patients with Candida colonization. Crit Care Med,
34:730–7.
Lowry CM, Marty FM, Vargas SO, et al. 2007. Safety of aerosolized liposo-
mal versus deoxycholate amphotericin B formulations for prevention of
invasive fungal infections following lung transplantation: a retrospective
study. Transpl Infect Dis, 9:121–5.
Lumbreras C, Cuervas-Mons V, Jara P, et al. 1996. Randomized trial of
ﬂuconazole versus nystatin for the prophylaxis of Candida infection
following liver transplantation. J Infect Dis, 174:583–8.
Maertens J, Deeren D, Dierickx D, et al. 2006. Preemptive antifungal
therapy: still a way to go. Curr Opin Infect Dis, 19:551–6.
Maertens J, Theunissen K, Verhoef G, et al. 2005. Galactomannan and
computed tomography-based preemptive antifungal therapy in neutro-
penic patients at high risk for invasive fungal infection: a prospective
feasibility study. Clin Infect Dis, 41:1242–50.
Maertens J, Verhaegen J, Lagrou K, et al. 2001. Screening for circulating
galactomannan as a noninvasive diagnostic tool for invasive aspergil-
losis in prolonged neutropenic patients and stem cell transplantation
recipients: a prospective validation. Blood, 97:1604–10.
Magill SS, Dropulic LK. 2006. Antifungal prophylaxis in transplant recipi-
ents: where do we go from here? Transpl Infect Dis, 8:187–9.
Marik PE. 2006. Fungal infections in solid organ transplantation. Expert
Opin Pharmacother, 7:297–305.
Marr KA, Boeckh M, Carter RA, et al. 2004a. Combination antifungal
therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis, 39:797–802.
Marr KA, Crippa F, Leisenring W, et al. 2004b. Itraconazole versus ﬂucon-
azole for prevention of fungal infections in patients receiving allogeneic
stem cell transplants. Blood, 103:1527–33.
Mattiuzzi GN, Alvarado G, Giles FJ, et al. 2006. Open-label, randomized
comparison of itraconazole versus caspofungin for prophylaxis in
patients with hematologic malignancies. Antimicrob Agents Chemother,
50:143–7.
Meersseman W, Lagrou K, Maertens J, et al. 2008. Galactomannan in bron-
choalveolar lavage ﬂuid: a tool for diagnosing aspergillosis in intensive
care unit patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 177:27–34.
Mennink-Kersten MA, Klont RR, Warris A, et al. 2004. Biﬁdobacterium
lipoteichoic acid and false ELISA reactivity in aspergillus antigen
detection. Lancet, 363:325–7.
Metcalf SC, Dockrell DH. 2007. Improved outcomes associated with
advances in therapy for invasive fungal infections in immunocompro-
mised hosts. J Infect, 55:287–99.
Millon L, Piarroux R, Deconinck E, et al. 2005. Use of real-time PCR to
process the ﬁrst galactomannan-positive serum sample in diagnosing
invasive aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol, 43:5097–101.
Mohammad RA, Klein KC. 2006. Inhaled amphotericin B for prophy-
laxis against invasive Aspergillus infections. Ann Pharmacother,
40:2148–54.
Monforte V, Roman A, Gavalda J, et al. 2005. Prophylaxis for Aspergillus
infection in lung transplantation: Pharmacokinetics, safety and efﬁcacy
[abstract]. J Heart Lung Transplant.
Monforte V, Roman A, Gavalda J, et al. 2003. Nebulized amphotericin B
concentration and distribution in the respiratory tract of lung-trans-
planted patients. Transplantation, 75:1571–4.
Mora-Duarte J, Betts R, Rotstein C, et al. 2002. Comparison of caspo-
fungin and amphotericin B for invasive candidiasis. N Engl J Med,
347:2020–9.
Moragues MD, Ortiz N, Iruretagoyena JR, et al. 2004. Evaluation of
a new commercial test (Candida albicans IFA IgG) for the sero-
diagnosis of invasive candidiasis. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin,
22:83–8.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6) 1279
Multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of invasive fungal infections
Morgan J, Meltzer MI, Plikaytis BD, et al. 2005. Excess mortality, hospital
stay, and cost due to candidemia: a case-control study using data
from population-based candidemia surveillance. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol, 26:540–7.
Morrell M, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. 2005. Delaying the empiric treatment
of Candida bloodstream infection until positive blood culture results
are obtained: a potential risk factor for hospital mortality. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother, 49:3640–5.
Munoz P, Rodriguez C, Bouza E, et al. 2004. Risk factors of invasive asper-
gillosis after heart transplantation: protective role of oral itraconazole
prophylaxis. Am J Transplant, 4:636–43.
Nolla-Salas J, Sitges-Serra A, Leon-Gil C, et al. 1997. Candidemia in non-
neutropenic critically ill patients: analysis of prognostic factors and
assessment of systemic antifungal therapy. Study Group of Fungal
Infection in the ICU. Intensive Care Med, 23:23–30.
Odabasi Z, Mattiuzzi G, Estey E, et al. 2004. Beta-D-glucan as a diagnostic
adjunct for invasive fungal infections: validation, cutoff development,
and performance in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndrome. Clin Infect Dis, 39:199–205.
Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Alexander BD, Kett DH, et al. 2005. Multicenter
clinical evaluation of the (1 – Ͼ3) beta-D-glucan assay as an aid to
diagnosis of fungal infections in humans. Clin Infect Dis, 41:654–9.
Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Sable C, Sobel J, et al. 2007. Multicenter retrospective
development and validation of a clinical prediction rule for nosocomial
invasive candidiasis in the intensive care setting. Eur J Clin Microbiol
Infect Dis, 26:271–6.
Palmer SM, Drew RH, Whitehouse JD, et al. 2001. Safety of aerosol-
ized amphotericin B lipid complex in lung transplant recipients.
Transplantation, 72:545–8.
Pappas PG, Rex JH, Sobel JD, et al. 2004. Guidelines for treatment of
candidiasis. Clin Infect Dis, 38:161–89.
Pappas PG, Rotstein CM, Betts RF, et al. 2007. Micafungin versus caspofun-
gin for treatment of candidemia and other forms of invasive candidiasis.
Clin Infect Dis, 45:883–93.
Parkins MD, Sabuda DM, Elsayed S, et al. 2007. Adequacy of empirical
antifungal therapy and effect on outcome among patients with invasive
Candida species infections. J Antimicrob Chemother, 60:613–8.
Pazos C, Moragues MD, Quindos G, et al. 2006. Diagnostic potential of
(1,3)-beta-D-glucan and anti-Candida albicans germ tube antibodies
for the diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring of invasive candidiasis in
neutropenic adult patients. Rev Iberoam Micol, 23:209–15.
Pazos C, Ponton J, del Palacio A. 2005. Contribution of (1 – Ͼ3)-beta-
D-glucan chromogenic assay to diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring
of invasive aspergillosis in neutropenic adult patients: a comparison
with serial screening for circulating galactomannan. J Clin Microbiol,
43:299–305.
Peleg AY, Woods ML. 2004. Continuous and 4 h infusion of amphotericin B:
acomparativestudyinvolvinghigh-riskhaematologypatients.JAntimicrob
Chemother, 54:803–8.
Pelz RK, Hendrix CW, Swoboda SM, et al. 2001. Double-blind placebo-
controlled trial of ﬂuconazole to prevent candidal infections in critically
ill surgical patients. Ann Surg, 233:542–8.
Perkins JD. 2007. Use of Aspergillus galactomannan enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay (ELISA) in liver transplant patients. Liver Transpl,
13:304–5.
Petri MG, Konig J, Moecke HP, et al. 1997. Epidemiology of invasive
mycosis in ICU patients: a prospective multicenter study in 435 non-
neutropenic patients. Paul-Ehrlich Society for Chemotherapy, Divi-
sions of Mycology and Pneumonia Research. Intensive Care Med,
23:317–25.
Pfaller MA, Jones RN, Doern GV, et al. 2000. Bloodstream infections due
to Candida species: SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance program in
North America and Latin America, 1997–1998. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother, 44:747–51.
Pfeiffer CD, Fine JP, Safdar N. 2006. Diagnosis of invasive aspergil-
losis using a galactomannan assay: a meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis,
42:1417–27.
Phillips P, Shafran S, Garber G, et al. 1997. Multicenter randomized trial
of ﬂuconazole versus amphotericin B for treatment of candidemia in
non-neutropenic patients. Canadian Candidemia Study Group. Eur
J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis, 16:337–45.
Piarroux R, Grenouillet F, Balvay P, et al. 2004. Assessment of preemptive
treatment to prevent severe candidiasis in critically ill surgical patients.
Crit Care Med, 32:2443–9.
Pickering JW, Sant HW, Bowles CA, et al. 2005. Evaluation of a (1 – Ͼ3)-
beta-D-glucan assay for diagnosis of invasive fungal infections. J Clin
Microbiol, 43:5957–62.
Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorell TC, et al. 2004. Antifungal agents for pre-
venting fungal infections in solid organ transplant recipients. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev, 3:CD004291.
Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorrell TC, et al. 2006. Antifungal agents for
preventing fungal infections in non-neutropenic critically ill and surgical
patients: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials. J Antimicrob Chemother, 57:628–38.
Ponton J, del Palacio A. 2007. Advances and limitations in the early
diagnosis of invasive yeast infections. Rev Iberoam Micol, 24:181–6.
Ponton J, Quindos G, Arilla MC, et al. 1994. Simpliﬁed adsorption method
for detection of antibodies to Candida albicans germ tubes. J Clin
Microbiol, 32:217–9.
PuzniakL,TeutschS,PowderlyW,et al.2004.Hastheepidemiologyofnosoco-
mial candidemia changed? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol, 25:628–33.
Quindos G, Moragues MD, Ponton J. 2004. Is there a role for antibody
testing in the diagnosis of invasive candidiasis? Rev Iberoam Micol,
21:10–4.
Reboli AC, Rotstein C, Pappas PG, et al. 2007. Anidulafungin versus
ﬂuconazole for invasive candidiasis. N Engl J Med, 356:2472–82.
Reichenspurner H, Gamberg P, Nitschke M, et al. 1997. Signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in the number of fungal infections after lung-, heart-lung, and
heart transplantation using aerosolized amphotericin B prophylaxis.
Transplant Proc, 29:627–8.
Rex JH, Bennett JE, Sugar AM, et al. 1994. A randomized trial comparing
ﬂuconazole with amphotericin B for the treatment of candidemia in
patients without neutropenia. Candidemia Study Group and the National
Institute. N Engl J Med, 331:1325–30.
Rijnders BJ, Cornelissen JJ, Slobbe L, et al. 2008. Aerosolized liposomal
amphotericin B for the prevention of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
during prolonged neutropenia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Clin Infect Dis, 46:1401–8.
Schneemann M, Bachli EB. 2004. Continuous infusion of amphotericin B
deoxycholate: a cost-effective gold standard for therapy of invasive
fungal infections? Clin Infect Dis, 38:303–4.
Sendid B, Cotteau A, Francois N, et al. 2006. Candidaemia and antifungal
therapy in a French University Hospital: rough trends over a decade
and possible links. BMC Infect Dis, 6:80.
Sharpe MD, Ghent C, Grant D, et al. 2003. Efﬁcacy and safety of itracon-
azole prophylaxis for fungal infections after orthotopic liver transplanta-
tion: a prospective, randomized, double-blind study. Transplantation,
76:977–83.
Shorr AF, Chung K, Jackson WL, et al. 2005. Fluconazole prophylaxis
in critically ill surgical patients: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med,
33:1928–35.
Silveira FP, Husain S. 2007. Fungal infections in solid organ transplantation.
Med Mycol, 45:305–20.
Singh N. 2000. Antifungal prophylaxis for solid organ transplant recipients:
seeking clarity amidst controversy. Clin Infect Dis, 31:545–53.
Singh N. 2004. Antifungal prophylaxis in solid-organ transplant recipients:
considerations for clinical trial design. Clin Infect Dis, 39(Suppl 4):
S200–S206.
Singh N. 2005. Invasive aspergillosis in organ transplant recipients: new
issues in epidemiologic characteristics, diagnosis, and management.
Med Mycol, 43(Suppl 1):S267–S270.
Singh N, Alexander BD, Lortholary O, et al. 2007. Cryptococcus neoformans
in organ transplant recipients: impact of calcineurin-inhibitor agents on
mortality. J Infect Dis, 195:756–64.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2008:4(6)1280
Zaragoza et al
Singh N, Husain S. 2003. Aspergillus infections after lung transplantation:
clinical differences in type of transplant and implications for manage-
ment. J Heart Lung Transplant, 22:258–66.
Singh N, Limaye AP, Forrest G, et al. 2006a. Combination of voriconazole
and caspofungin as primary therapy for invasive aspergillosis in solid
organ transplant recipients: a prospective, multicenter, observational
study. Transplantation, 81:320–6.
Singh N, Limaye AP, Forrest G, et al. 2006b. Late-onset invasive aspergillosis
in organ transplant recipients in the current era. Med Mycol, 44:445–9.
Singh N, Paterson DL. 2005. Aspergillus infections in transplant recipients.
Clin Microbiol Rev, 18:44–69.
Singh N, Paterson DL, Gayowski T, et al. 2001. Preemptive prophylaxis
with a lipid preparation of amphotericin B for invasive fungal infec-
tions in liver transplant recipients requiring renal replacement therapy.
Transplantation, 71:910–3.
Singh N, Pruett TL, Houston S, et al. 2006c. Invasive aspergillosis in the
recipients of liver retransplantation. Liver Transpl, 12:1205–9.
SoléA,MorantP,SalavertM,et al.2005.Aspergillusinfectionsinlungtransplant
recipients: risk factors and outcome. Clin Microbiol Infect, 11:359–65.
Solé A, Nieto M. 2007. Nebulized antifungal prophylaxis:Role of ampho-
tericin B lipid complex. Med Intensiva, 5:64–70.
Solé A, Salavert M. 2007. Voriconazole for the therapy of mycoses in recipi-
ents of solid organ transplants. Rev Iberoam Micol, 24:217–22.
Solé A, Salavert M. 2008. Fungal infections after lung transplantation.
Transplant Rev (Orlando), 22:89–104.
Speich R, Dutly A, Naef R, et al. 2002. Tolerability, safety and efﬁcacy of
conventional amphotericin B administered by 24-hour infusion to lung
transplant recipients. Swiss Med Wkly, 132:455–8.
Sulahian A, Touratier S, Ribaud P. 2003. False positive test for aspergillus
antigenemia related to concomitant administration of piperacillin and
tazobactam. N Engl J Med, 349:2366–7.
Tollemar J, Hockerstedt K, Ericzon BG, et al. 1995. Liposomal amphoteri-
cin B prevents invasive fungal infections in liver transplant recipients.
A randomized, placebo-controlled study. Transplantation, 59:45–50.
Tortorano AM, Peman J, Bernhardt H, et al. 2004. Epidemiology of can-
didaemia in Europe: results of 28-month European Confederation of
Medical Mycology (ECMM) hospital-based surveillance study. Eur J
Clin Microbiol Infect Dis, 23:317–22.
Ullmann AJ, Heussel CP, Cornely OA. 2002. Voriconazole versus liposo-
mal amphotericin B for empirical antifungal therapy. N Engl J Med,
346:1745–7.
Ullmann AJ, Lipton JH, Vesole DH, et al. 2007. Posaconazole or ﬂuco-
nazole for prophylaxis in severe graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J
Med, 356:335–47.
van Burik JA. 2005. Role of new antifungal agents in prophylaxis of mycoses
in high risk patients. Curr Opin Infect Dis, 18:479–83.
van Burik JA, Ratanatharathorn V, Stepan DE, et al. 2004. Micafungin
versus ﬂuconazole for prophylaxis against invasive fungal infections
during neutropenia in patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Clin Infect Dis, 39:1407–16.
Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. 1999. Liposomal amphotericin B
for empirical therapy in patients with persistent fever and neutropenia.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study
Group. N Engl J Med, 340:764–71.
Walsh TJ, Pappas P, Winston DJ, et al. 2002. Voriconazole compared
with liposomal amphotericin B for empirical antifungal therapy
in patients with neutropenia and persistent fever. N Engl J Med,
346:225–34.
Walsh TJ, Teppler H, Donowitz GR, et al. 2004. Caspofungin versus
liposomal amphotericin B for empirical antifungal therapy in
patients with persistent fever and neutropenia. N Engl J Med,
351:1391–402.
Wiesner RH, Hermans PE, Rakela J, et al. 1988. Selective bowel decon-
tamination to decrease gram-negative aerobic bacterial and Candida
colonization and prevent infection after orthotopic liver transplantation.
Transplantation, 45:570–4.
Wingard JR, Carter SL, Walsh TJ, et al. 2007. Results of a randomized,
double-blind trial of ﬂuconazole vs. voriconazole for the prevention
of invasive fungal infections in 600 allogeneic blood and marrow
transplant patients. Blood, 110:163.
Winston DJ, Busuttil RW. 2002. Randomized controlled trial of oral
itraconazole solution versus intravenous/oral ﬂuconazole for preven-
tion of fungal infections in liver transplant recipients. Transplantation,
74:688–95.
Winston DJ, Pakrasi A, Busuttil RW. 1999. Prophylactic ﬂuconazole in liver
transplant recipients. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Ann Intern Med, 131:729–37.
Wong-Beringer A, Lambros MP, Beringer PM, et al. 2005. Suitability
of caspofungin for aerosol delivery: physicochemical proﬁling and
nebulizer choice. Chest, 128:3711–16.
Zaragoza R, Peman J. 2006. Invasive fungal infections in critically ill
patients: different therapeutic options and a uniform strategy. Rev
Iberoam Micol, 23:59–63.
Zaragoza R, Peman J, Ramirez P, et al. 2006. Clinical and management
utility of Candida germ tube antibody detection in critically ill
patients. Preliminary data [abstract]. 46th Interscience Conference on
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, San Francisco, CA, Sept
27–30. M-1618.
