© 2011 Tolman and Faulkner, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.  This is an Open Access
article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7 367–375
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
367
R e v i e w
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/TCRM.S8519
Treatment options for refractory and difficult
to treat seizures: focus on vigabatrin
Justin A Tolman
Michele A Faulkner
School of Pharmacy and Health
Professions, Creighton University,
Omaha, Nebraska, NE, USA
Correspondence: Justin A Tolman
School of Pharmacy and Health
Professions, Creighton University,
2500 California Plaza, Omaha,
NE 68178, USA
Tel +1 402 280 2915
Fax +1 402 280 1883
Email justintolman@creighton.edu
Abstract: Complex partial seizures are often refractory to current pharmacological therapies.
These difficult to treat seizures are typically managed using multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).
AEDs as a group are frequently associated with significant adverse drug effects, multiple drug
interactions, and numerous potential clinical complications due to their individual pharma-
cokinetic profiles and unique drug properties. Recently, the approval of vigabatrin by the US
Food and Drug Administration has necessitated that clinicians re-evaluate these risk-benefit
relationships and determine where the drug fits within the treatment scheme for the manage-
ment of complex partial seizures. This review will facilitate that re-evaluation through a brief
review of AEDs used in the treatment of complex partial seizures, followed by a focused
discussion on vigabatrin.
Keywords: vigabatrin, complex partial seizures, refractory seizures, risk evaluation and miti-
gation strategy, epilepsy
Introduction
Seizures are typically categorized into several general classifications, ie, idiopathic,
genetic (likely polygenic or oligogenic in origin), symptomatic (associated with inborn
or acquired anatomical or pathological abnormalities), provoked (caused by a definite
factor that is not anatomical or pathological in nature), or cryptogenic (suspected
definite cause of unknown origin). These classifications include wide-ranging causes
of seizure activity, such as chromosomal or gene-based abnormalities, structural
aberrations in neuronal growth or spatial arrangement, infectious processes, traumatic
injury, malignancies, metabolic abnormalities, cerebral hemorrhages or infarctions,
or inflammatory processes.1
Seizure activity is further defined based on the seizure
type(s), with additional information provided by the signs and symptoms of seizure
activity and radiological or electroencephalographic findings. Recurrent unprovoked
seizure activity usually results in a diagnosis of epilepsy.
The classifications and functional descriptions of seizure activity are used clinically
to inform therapeutic decisions. The treatment of recurrent seizures predominantly
centers on the utilization of one antiepileptic drug (AED), with possible adjunc-
tive use of a second or even third agent in the case of monotherapeutic failure. The
­majority of patients with recurrent seizures are successfully managed through the use
of a single AED. Some patients require successive monotherapeutic trials. However,
approximately 30%–40% of epileptic patients have inadequate seizure control with
just one AED, and require the use of adjunctive agents.2
A subset of this group will
have regular and persistent seizure activity despite reasonable doses of multipleAEDs.
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management
31 August 2011
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
368
Tolman and Faulkner
These seizures are considered refractory to treatment.3
One
of the most common refractory seizure types is complex
partial seizures.4
These seizures arise in specific and localized
cortical regions within one hemisphere and result in impaired
consciousness. They involve a focal cerebral alteration
with or without pathological specificity, have asymmetric
symptoms associated with the site of seizure generation, are
generally short in duration, and may evolve into secondary
generalized seizures. Complex partial seizures dramatically
impact quality of life measurements through functional and
social limitations imposed by periodic and unanticipated
impairments in consciousness.
Difficult to treat seizures are of particular concern due
to the risks of increased morbidity and mortality. Epileptic
patients have increased risks of accidental injuries, cerebral or
cognitive damage, and psychiatric or psychosocial ­conditions.
Epilepsy has also been linked to sudden unexplained death in
epilepsy (SUDEP), accidental death, and suicide.5
However,
AEDsthemselvesmaycauseseriousadverseeffects,including
hepatic and/or renal toxicity, cardiac aberrations, blood
dyscrasias, cognitive or psychiatric impairments, skin dis-
orders, and vision changes. The therapeutic management of
epilepsy, including difficult to treat seizures, has historically
been undertaken to balance adequate seizure control with
drug-related adverse effects.6
Recently, the approval of
vigabatrin by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
has necessitated that clinicians re-evaluate these risk-benefit
relationships, and determine where to place vigabatrin within
treatment schemes for the management of complex par-
tial seizures. This review will facilitate that re-evaluation
through a brief review of AEDs used in the treatment of
complex partial seizures, followed by a focused discussion
on vigabatrin.
Antiepileptic drugs
Many AEDs have been approved as monotherapy and/or as
adjunctive agents for the treatment of complex partial sei-
zures (Table 1).This discussion will focus on the medications
according to their FDA-approved indications, although data
do exist to support the use of some agents that are approved as
adjunctive therapy for use as monotherapies to treat complex
partial seizures.Therapeutic plans are often generated based
on individual disease and patient factors, and are influenced
by the experience of clinicians rather than by following a pro-
scribed treatment algorithm. AED activity against complex
partial seizures is often studied in populations of treatment-
refractory patients, with efficacy measures generally reported
as the percentage of patients with a $50% reduction in
seizure activity, or as some time period with the absence of
seizure activity (for example seizure-free periods of six, 12,
or 24 months).7
These reported measures of efficacy would
likely under-represent expected clinical antiseizure activity
in a normal complex partial seizure patient population. The
selection of antiepileptic drug regimens may be influenced
by numerous factors, including seizure type, frequency, and
intensity, expected response rates, adverse effect profiles,
therapeutic drug monitoring requirements, possible drug
interactions, patient age, neurological and cognitive func-
tioning, comorbid conditions, renal and hepatic function,
and measures of quality of life.
Monotherapy agents for complex
partial seizures
Phenytoin
Phenytoin has long been considered a first-line agent in
the treatment of complex partial seizures. It has well docu-
mented antiseizure activity, with studies reporting 30%–60%
response rates (Table 2).8,9
Despite strong efficacy results and
widespread clinical acceptance, phenytoin might no longer
be considered a first-lineAED in some clinical practices due
to its unusual pharmacokinetic properties, requirement for
regular therapeutic drug monitoring, significant drug interac-
tions, and problematic adverse drug effects.
Phenytoin is highly bioavailable, but with a slow and
variable rate of absorption that leads to variable maximal
drug concentrations (Cmax
) and times observed to reach the
Cmax
(tmax
). It is very highly bound to plasma proteins with
a small free fraction of unbound drug, making therapeutic
Table 1 Indications of common antiepileptic agents approved by
the US Food and Drug Administration for treatment of complex
partial seizures
Monotherapy
agents
Adjunctive therapy
agents
Phenytoin
Valproic acid Valproic acid
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine Oxcarbazepine
Phenobarbital
Topiramate Topiramate
Lamotrigine Lamotrigine
Felbamate Felbamate
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Tiagabine
Levetiracetam
Zonisamide
Lacosamide
Vigabatrin
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
369
Treating refractory seizures
adjustments necessary for patients with hypoalbuminemia
and creating the potential for competitive plasma protein
binding-based drug interactions. Adjustments to phenytoin
regimens are typically based on successful seizure con-
trol, which typically occurs within a therapeutic range of
10–20 µg/mL. Phenytoin is highly metabolized, with a widely
variable drug elimination half-life due to saturable drug
metabolism at therapeutic doses. Saturable drug metabolism
is also problematic when perturbations to normal enzymatic
functioning alter phenytoin concentrations, as occurs in
numerous drug-drug interactions. Phenytoin regimens should
be individualized based on clinical response and serum
concentrations, with special precautions taken whenever
adjusting drug doses.10
Phenytoin has an extensive list of side effects associated
with short-term and chronic use. Adverse central nervous
system (CNS) effects are prominent at therapeutic drug
concentrations, and include dizziness, drowsiness, lethargy,
headache, and nystagmus. Dystonia, seizures, coma, and
death are possible as drug concentrations increase to
the toxic (.40 µg/mL) or lethal (.100 µg/mL) range.
Additional common adverse effects include cutaneous
rashes, nausea, vomiting, and constipation. Idiosyncratic
hypersensitivity reactions to phenytoin may consist of blood
dyscrasias, including agranulocytosis, Hodgkin’s lymphoma,
and pancytopenia.
Dermatological abnormalities, such as exfoliative der-
matitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal
necrolysis, have also been observed. Phenytoin can induce
cardiac abnormalities, such as arrhythmias, hepatitis,
changes in blood glucose, and hypothyroidism. Chronic
therapy has also been associated with behavioral changes,
cognitive impairments, cerebellar ataxia, skin thickening,
fat redistribution, gingival hyperplasia, hirsuitism, acne, and
osteomalacia.1
Valproic acid
Valproic acid has antiseizure activity equivalent to that of
phenytoin in the treatment of complex partial seizures, with
similar response rates of approximately 20%–50%.8,11
It is
commercially available in different forms, including the free
acid form (valproic acid), its sodium salt (sodium valproate),
and a coordinated sodium salt complex (divalproex sodium),
each with slightly different formulations and pharmacokinetic
properties, but with equivalent pharmacological effects.The
extent of absorption is equivalent for all formulations, each
having a bioavailability of approximately 100%. Both food
and the formulation affect the rate of drug absorption and
can lead to differences in Cmax
and tmax
values, with altera-
tions of gastrointestinal pH affecting drug bioavailability.
Valproic acid has saturable protein binding that produces
nonproportional changes in drug effects and adverse effects
at the upper range of therapeutic drug concentrations.
A serum valproic acid concentration range of 50–100 µg/mL
is typically associated with optimal antiseizure effects, and
concentrations .100–125 µg/mL have been associated
with increased frequency and severity of adverse effects.
Adequate seizure control is achieved in some patients at
higher than normal concentrations, and efficacy and adverse
effects should be monitored, with dose regimen adjustments
made on a case-by-case basis. Valproic acid is extensively
metabolized by hepatic enzymes other than those in the cyto-
chrome P450 (CYP) system, with less than 3% of the dose
eliminated unchanged in the urine. It is involved in numerous
drug interactions, the potential for which should be evalu-
ated when starting valproic acid therapy or at the initiation,
termination, or adjustment of other medications.10
Valproic acid commonly induces gastrointestinal
adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain, with the possibility for substantial weight gain in
many patients. Adverse CNS effects are also common, and
include tremors, headaches, somnolence, weakness, and
dizziness, with rare reports of drug-induced encephalopathy.
Serious hepatotoxicity and associated fatalities have been
reported necessitating liver function testing, primarily at the
initiation of therapy or with changes to a dosage regimen.
Dermatological reactions have also been reported, including
transient alopecia and skin rash, with rare reports of Stevens-
Johnson syndrome. Valproic acid has been associated with
dose-dependent thrombocytopenia and infrequent instances
of bone marrow suppression. Rare reports of multiorgan
Table 2 Approximate antiseizure efficacy for the treatment of
complex partial seizures using agents approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for use as monotherapy
Antiepileptic drug Approximate efficacy
(patients with $50%
decrease in seizure activity)
Phenytoin 30%–60%
Valproic acid 20%–50%
Carbamazepine 20%–40%
Oxcarbazepine 20%–30%
Phenobarbital 30%–40%
Topiramate 20%–50%
Lamotrigine 10%–30%
Felbamate *
Note: *Felbamate efficacy is reported as an absolute decrease in seizure activity and
not as a percentage of patients with at least a 50% decrease in seizure activity.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
370
Tolman and Faulkner
system failure following initiation of valproic acid therapy
also necessitate early monitoring and evaluation.1
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine has also demonstrated good seizure control,
with a 20%–40% response rate, and equivalent activity to
phenytoin and valproic acid in the management of complex
partial seizures.8,12
The absorption of carbamazepine is slow
and variable following oral administration, leading to vari-
able Cmax
and tmax
values. It has clinically insignificant protein
binding, is substantially distributed throughout the body, and
has cerebrospinal concentrations approximately equal to free
drug concentrations in the blood, supporting a rationale for
serum drug level testing.
Carbamazepine is extensively metabolized, and sig-
nificantly induces its own metabolism over a period of
3–5 weeks. This metabolic autoinduction shortens the
elimination half-life from 72 hours to 12–17 hours, and
necessitates dose adjustments, with a usual target therapeu-
tic window of 4–12 µg/mL. Carbamazepine has numerous
clinically significant interactions with other AEDs, and
medications should be evaluated when initiating therapy or
making adjustments to this or other regimens.10
Commonly reported adverse effects of carbamazepine
include neurosensory disturbances of vision, balance, and
movement, as well as CNS effects, such as dizziness, head-
aches, confusion, nausea, and vomiting. On occasion, the
drug may induce clinically relevant hyponatremia. Severe
and potentially fatal cardiac disturbances have been rarely
reported, including thromboembolic events, thrombophlebi-
tis, development of arrhythmias and atrioventricular block,
congestive heart failure, edema, hypotension, syncope,
and cardiac arrest. Transient leukopenia is the most com-
monly reported hematological adverse event associated
with carbamazepine, necessitating periodic assessment of
white blood cell counts and possible drug discontinuation if
levels fall below critical predefined thresholds. Additional
blood disorders, including agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia,
pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia have been noted with
carbamazepine use.
Dermatological reactions have been associated with
carbamazepine use and include photosensitivity and rashes.
Exfoliative dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and acute generalized exanthematous
pustulosis are rare but serious conditions also sometimes
associated with carbamazepine therapy.1
It has recently been
recommended that patients of Asian descent be tested for
the presence of an allele encoding for a human leukocyte
antigen (HLA-B*1502) associated with increased risk of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome if carbamazepine therapy is
being considered.13
A risk evaluation and mitigation strategy
(REMS) has been put in place for carbamazepine, due to the
risk of cutaneous reactions and bone marrow ­suppression.
However, the only requirement is the distribution of a medi-
cation guide to the consumer.14
Oxcarbazepine
Oxcarbazepine is structurally similar to carbamazepine and
exerts its primary antiepileptic activity through its active
metabolite, the 10-monohydrate derivative. Oxcarbazepine
has equivalent efficacy to phenytoin, valproic acid, and car-
bamazepine, with typical response rates of 20%–30%.8,15–17
Some patients who have failed initial carbamazepine therapy
have responded to oxcarbazepine. The drug is extensively
metabolized, but avoids the enzymatic autoinduction of car-
bamazepine. It does have metabolism-based drug interactions
through inhibition of CYP 2C19 and 3A4 in a dose-dependent
manner, with mild induction of UDP-glucuronosyltrans-
ferase, that should be considered prior to therapy or when
additional medications are added. Oxcarbazepine is almost
exclusively eliminated renally as the10-monohydrate deriva-
tive metabolite or its derivatives, necessitating renal function
monitoring with accompanying dose regimen adjustments in
patients with renal impairment.Therapeutic drug monitoring
is not routinely done.
The most commonly reported adverse effects associated
with oxcarbazepine therapy include dizziness, headache, nau-
sea, vomiting, and fatigue. Movement or vision disturbances,
upper respiratory tract infections, and nervousness are also
commonly reported. A significant number of patients experi-
ence hyponatremia at a higher frequency with oxcarbazepine
as compared with carbamazepine, but this is most often
­asymptomatic. Unspecified rashes, Stevens-Johnson syn-
drome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis, as well as multiorgan
hypersensitivity reactions, have been rarely reported to occur
soon after therapy was initiated, and patients should be moni-
tored for such events after the start of oxcarbazepine use.1,10
Phenobarbital
Phenobarbital is a long-acting barbiturate sedative with an
approximate 30%–40% response rate in the treatment of com-
plex partial seizures.8
While it is not inferior to phenytoin or
carbamazepine, its adverse effect profile tends to limit therapy
and lead to higher patient withdrawal rates. Phenobarbital has a
very slow elimination half-life, which causes significant delays
to observed changes in seizure activity following dose regimen
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
371
Treating refractory seizures
adjustments. Drug metabolism is extensive and ­variable, with
significant induction of hepatic enzyme systems, resulting in
numerous drug interactions. Therapeutic drug monitoring
is often recommended, with a target phenobarbital range of
15–40 µg/mL. Concentrations .30 µg/mL are associated with
an increased incidence of side effects.
The adverse effect profile of phenobarbital severely limits
its clinical utility and often relegates it to a second-line or
third-line agent in adults. Specifically, CNS depression is
very common and typically leads to symptoms of sedation,
drowsiness, dizziness, and lethargy. Long-term use may
result in physical and psychological dependence, depres-
sion, and cognitive blunting. The possibilities of respiratory
depression, hypothermia, coma, and death increase with
phenobarbital concentrations .50 µg/mL. Hematologic,
hepatic, and renal disorders have been reported, and should
be evaluated through regular testing. Dermatological and
connective tissue disorders have also been reported. Rare
reports of severe drug hypersensitivity reactions, such as
exfoliative dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic
epidermal necrolysis are possible.1,10
Topiramate
Topiramate has demonstrated efficacy against complex partial
seizures, with significant reductions in seizure frequency in
20%–50% of patients when used as monotherapy.16–18
Topi-
ramate has good bioavailability and saturable but clinically
insignificant protein binding. It is eliminated renally, with
prominent tubular reabsorption taking place, and as such,
dosing regimen should be adjusted in patients with renal
impairment. Although topiramate is metabolized by both
phase 1 and phase 2 reactions without significant hepatic
contributions to elimination, it has been associated with
metabolism-based drug interactions and should be used with
caution if potential interactions are possible.10
CNS effects are the most prevalent adverse events asso-
ciated with topiramate therapy, and include somnolence,
dizziness, fatigue, paresthesia, and nervousness, with move-
ment, cognitive, and psychological changes also frequently
reported. Topiramate has been associated with the devel-
opment of metabolic acidosis, and may be responsible for
dose-dependent weight loss and anorexia following chronic
use. Acute narrow-angle glaucoma and development of kid-
ney stones are much more common with topiramate therapy
compared with the incidence in the general population.
Topiramate can impair sweat production and affect body
temperature regulation, particularly in pediatric and geriatric
patients, thus increasing the possibility of hyperthermia.1
Topiramate must be dispensed with a medication guide as
part of an FDA-mandated REMS so as to educate patients
on possible adverse effects.14
Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine has been shown to have a 10%–30% patient
response rate in the treatment of complex partial seizures,
with high adherence rates due in part to less severe adverse
effects compared with other AEDs.15,17
Comparative stud-
ies with phenytoin and carbamazepine have shown that
lamotrigine produces similar reductions in seizure activity.16
Other studies report only moderate comparative efficacy with
alternative monotherapy agents.8
Lamotrigine has excellent
oral bioavailability and clinically insignificant protein bind-
ing. Extensive UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-based hepatic
metabolism followed by renal elimination has led to the
recommendation of close monitoring for patients with severe
renal or hepatic disease. Lamotrigine pharmacotherapy is
sensitive to alterations in enzyme function and clearance
mechanisms, with dose adjustments potentially necessary
in the presence of other AEDs.10
Many of the adverse effects of lamotrigine are concen-
tration-dependent.The most common adverse effects include
dizziness, headache, weakness, rash, nausea, somnolence,
and vision disturbances. Some adverse effects occur more
frequently when administered with otherAEDs, for example,
diplopia with carbamazepine and tremor with valproic acid.
Dermatological rashes are often experienced near initiation
of therapy. These can be serious, are often age-related, and
may be minimized through slow dose titration to therapeutic
effects.1
Lamotrigine must be dispensed with a mandatory
medication guide for patient education as part of a REMS.14
Felbamate
Felbamate is highly efficacious as monotherapy or adjunc-
tive therapy in the treatment of complex partial seizures.19
However, postmarketing reports have associated felbamate
therapy with aplastic anemia and acute liver failure, includ-
ing some patient fatalities.20
These serious adverse effects
occurred at a much higher frequency than is seen in the
general population, and are estimated to be 1/3,000 for aplas-
tic anemia and 1/10,000 for hepatic failure, with possibly
higher rates in children and in those with other comorbid
factors.1,21
Patients and prescribers should sign an informed
consent form related to these serious adverse effects prior
to initiating therapy. However, this form is not required by
the FDA as part of a REMS and is kept with the prescriber.
No dispensing restrictions or ­monitoring ­parameters
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
372
Tolman and Faulkner
are imposed by the FDA. Aside from these serious effects,
felbamate is generally well tolerated, with common adverse
effects of anorexia, weight loss, insomnia, nausea, and
headache. Felbamate has favorable pharmacokinetic proper-
ties, but regimens should be adjusted in patients with renal
dysfunction. The drug has been associated with numerous
reported drug interactions that should be evaluated prior to
initiation of felbamate therapy or any other drug.Therapeutic
drug concentration monitoring is typically not required.10
Clinically, felbamate is considered a last-line treatment option
due to possibilities of serious and potentially fatal aplastic
anemia and/or acute liver failure.
Adjunctive agents for complex
partial seizures
Numerous agents have been approved by the FDA for the
adjunctive treatment of complex partial seizures. These
include gabapentin, pregabalin, tiagabine, levetiracetam,
zonisamide, lacosamide, and vigabatrin. Most studies of
these agents were conducted in treatment-refractory patients
who had responder rates similar to the different AEDs.16–18
However, these drugs are not easily compared to determine
superiority due to different study designs and variations in
inclusion criteria. Therefore, adjunctive therapeutic agent
selection is typically determined by patient and provider
preferences when comparing drug factors, including adverse
effect profiles, clinical precautions, and possible drug
interactions.
Gabapentin and pregabalin
Gabapentin and pregabalin are structurally and pharmaco-
logically similar, with comparable adverse effect profiles.
Commonly reported effects include headache, dizziness,
fatigue, drowsiness, depression, psychological changes, and
movement disturbances. Additional adverse effects include
substantial weight gain, a high incidence of peripheral edema
that might precipitate dyspnea, vision disturbances, and
rare reports of hypersensitivity reactions or blood disorders.
Gabapentin and pregabalin are almost exclusively eliminated
renally and should be used with caution in patients with renal
dysfunction. These agents have virtually no drug interac-
tions due to the avoidance of hepatic metabolism and clini-
cally insignificant protein binding.1,10
Both gabapentin and
pregabalin have patient education-based medication guides
as part of their approved labeling. The guide for gabapentin
must be provided to the patient as part of a REMS for the
drug. However, the REMS originally in place for pregabalin,
which also required presentation of the medication guide to
the consumer, was nullified by the FDA as of early 2011,
because the risk of use of the drug was no longer felt to
outweigh the potential benefits.14,22
Tiagabine
Tiagabine has been associated with dizziness, fatigue,
drowsiness, irritability, and mood and movement distur-
bances, with infrequent reports of moderate to severely
debilitating weakness. Tiagabine is also reported to cause
cognitive impairments and stupor, with altered cortical
electrical conduction. These electrical abnormalities might
be indicative of altered seizure activity, and warrant special
consideration for tiagabine use and avoidance of medica-
tions that lower the seizure threshold. Drug interactions with
tiagabine are primarily associated with its role as a substrate
for CYP 3A4. It does not inhibit or induce hepatic enzymes,
nor does it interact through competitive protein binding.1,10
Tiagabine must be dispensed with a medication guide for
patient education according to a REMS.14
Levetiracetam
Levetiracetamtherapyiscommonlyassociatedwithheadache,
drowsiness, sedation, weakness, movement disturbances,
behavioral disturbances such as agitation or hostility, hair
loss, loss of appetite, vomiting, and weight loss. Clinically
significant blood disorders such as leukopenia, neutropenia,
pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia have been reported and
warrant monitoring. Rare reports of pancreatitis and hepatitis
have been associated with levetiracetam therapy and warrant
additional monitoring. Renal function should be evaluated
and appropriate dose adjustments made in patients with renal
dysfunction taking levetiracetam, due to its extensive renal
elimination by glomerular filtration. Levetiracetam is asso-
ciated with minimal drug interactions.1,10
Patients receiving
levetiracetam must receive an educational medication guide
as mandated by a REMS.14
Zonisamide
Zonisamide has an adverse effect profile, much like topi-
ramate, due in part to the presence of similar chemical
moieties.23
Specifically, zonisamide is associated with
sedation, dizziness, cognitive impairment, headache, vision
disturbances, irritability, nausea, weight loss, and possible
impairment of sweat production with accompanying changes
in temperature regulation. Patients should be monitored for
signs and symptoms of metabolic acidosis and be counseled
to increase fluid intake to avoid the formation of kidney stones
if they are susceptible. Hypersensitivity reactions are rare,
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
373
Treating refractory seizures
but have been reported and include severe ­conditions, such
as toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
fulminant hepatic necrosis, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia,
and other blood disorders. Zonisamide does not have clini-
cally relevant competitive protein binding interactions with
other drugs. It does not inhibit or induce hepatic enzymes,
but is substantially metabolized by CYP 3A4 and UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase, and is involved in several clinically
relevant drug interactions.1,10
A medication guide must be
dispensed with zonisamide as part of a REMS according to
FDA mandate.14
Lacosamide
Lacosamide is a newer AED that has not been included in
meta-analyses or AED-based therapeutic reviews, but it
has similar reported response rates as compared with other
AEDs.24
It is associated with adverse CNS effects similar to
other agents, with dizziness, headache, fatigue, movement
disturbances, vision disturbances, and psychological changes
having been reported. Lacosamide also causes nausea, vomit-
ing, and easy bruising. There have been reports of euphoria
and psychological dependence following use. Potentially
serious cardiac arrhythmias have been reported, and patients
should be monitored with special precautions taken if comor-
bid cardiac disease is present. An isolated case of delayed
multisystem hypersensitivity was reported in clinical trials,
and additional reports of hepatitis, hepatic dysfunction, rash,
and myocarditis have also been noted.25
Lacosamide is a
CYP 2C19 substrate, but does not inhibit or induce hepatic
enzymes. It is extensively eliminated renally, and requires
renal function monitoring and dose regimen adjustments in
patients with severe renal impairment.1,10
Lacosamide must
also be dispensed with a patient medication guide due to
REMS’ requirements.14
Use of vigabatrin for refractory
partial seizures
Vigabatrin was approved in 2009 by the FDA following
lengthy regulatory discussions and clinical studies, with
an indication of adjunctive treatment for complex partial
seizures in adults. This indication is based on numerous
prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, in
which its efficacy has been clearly demonstrated.26,27
Positive
response rates, defined as a reduction in seizure frequency
of $50%, were observed in 24%–67% of patients.26,28,29
These robust response rates occurred consistently, despite
differing inclusion criteria, varied adjunctive vigabatrin
doses (although 3 g/day was the most common dose studied),
diverse concomitant AED use, wide-ranging study lengths,
and nonuniform study designs. Within these studies, subject
retention rates were equivalent or superior to rates reported
with other AEDs, which indicates that vigabatrin therapy is
well tolerated.
Vigabatrin is rapidly and thoroughly absorbed following
oral administration. It has negligible protein binding, with
virtually no hepatic metabolism. Vigabatrin is eliminated
primarily by the kidneys, and dosage regimen adjustments
are necessary in patients with renal dysfunction. The few
reported drug interactions with vigabatrin are minor, and
vigabatrin does not require therapeutic adjustment when
administered concomitantly with other AEDs.30
Theadverseeffectprofileofvigabatrinrequiresspecialcon-
siderations that come with rigorous monitoring ­requirements.
Vigabatrin has a lower reported incidence of adverse CNS
effects common to otherAEDs, including headache, drowsi-
ness, sedation, and fatigue.31
Adverse psychiatric effects
associated with vigabatrin therapy tend to be more prevalent
than with most other AEDs, and include agitation, depres-
sion, anxiety, emotional lability, psychosis, and mania.32
However, these psychiatric disturbances are usually mild
or have subtle symptomatology. Even so, they have been
associated with treatment withdrawal, and patients should
be monitored for such events.
There have been serious and frequent reports of idiosyn-
cratic permanent visual field loss with vigabatrin. Because of
this, vision testing prior to therapy and regularly throughout
therapy is an FDA requirement. This visual field loss was
originally reported to occur in approximately 30% of patients,
based on controlled studies that were primarily intended to
evaluate antiseizure efficacy rather than adverse effects.33
However, a recent review of all available studies involving
vigabatrin therapy suggested a median incidence of 45%.34
It
should be noted that up to 90% of patients who present with
measurable visual field loss are asymptomatic.35
The varia-
tion in reported incidences might be attributable to differing
detection methodologies, variances in patient enrollment, and
nonuniform researcher reporting methods.
As part of the drug’s approval process, a restrictive REMS
was mandated by the FDA to monitor and track permanent
visual field loss associated with vigabatrin therapy.14
This
REMS requires numerous steps that must take place prior
to the initiation of therapy.36
These include presentation of a
patient medication guide, baseline vision testing, prescriber
enrollment with accompanying education, and patient con-
sent and education. The FDA also currently restricts the
dispensing of vigabatrin prescriptions to four mail-order
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
374
Tolman and Faulkner
pharmacies in the US with prescription orders, refills, and
third-party reimbursements facilitated through a program
referred to as Support, Help and Resources for Epilepsy
(SHARE). A second patient consent is required if therapy
is found to be efficacious and is expected to continue after
an initial trial of up to 12 weeks.27
This trial duration is con-
sidered safe because the earliest reported incidence of visual
field loss in an adult is after nine months of vigabatrin use.37
The REMS also mandates quarterly testing for visual field
loss, with accompanying documentation as managed by the
SHARE program in order for vigabatrin therapy to continue.
Finally, the REMS mandates final vision testing within
3–6 months following discontinuation of vigabatrin therapy.
Ultimately, therapeutic decisions involving vigabatrin when
visual field loss has occurred are made by the provider and
patient. Failure to follow guidelines for regular vision test-
ing requirements and accompanying documentation could
result in eventual discontinuation of therapy as mandated
by the SHARE program. This restrictive REMS is unlike
that imposed on any other AED, and its implementation has
resulted in dramatically increased costs for therapy in the US
as compared with other countries.
Comparative AED analysis
There are only a few publishedAED comparisons focused on
antiseizure efficacy in complex partial seizures or refractory
epilepsy and they tend to be based on the systematic review
of drug-focused reports or studies rather than on head-to-head
comparisons in controlled clinical trials.7,11,12,15–18,38–41
The
clinical conclusions drawn from these reviews are limited
and sometimes conflicting, due in part to the design, patient
characteristics, comparators, and reporting variability in the
original studies as well as systematic reviews.42
However,
most AEDs are considered therapeutically equivalent in a
broad sense when used in difficult to treat seizures. In the
limited studies that have prospectively and directly compared
AEDs in patients with difficult to treat seizures, the efficacy
and long-term adverse effects of carbamazepine were
superior to those reported for valproic acid and phenobar-
bital, but were approximately equivalent to phenytoin.43,44
Separate studies demonstrated that lamotrigine and tiagabine
are equivalent, while levetiracetam has equivalent antiseizure
activity but produces a faster response than topiramate in
complex partial seizures.45,46
As previously discussed, drug
antiseizure efficacy must be balanced with the potential for
drug interactions, adverse effect profile, and numerous patient
factors, such as renal and hepatic function. Therefore, the
place of vigabatrin in the treatment of refractory complex
partial seizures will be based on the balancing of clinical
risks and possible patient benefits.
Conclusion
There is an extensive body of literature supporting the
efficacy of vigabatrin in refractory complex partial seizures
because the drug has been in clinical use outside the US
since the 1980s. However, the discovery of permanent visual
field loss and a high incidence of psychiatric disturbances
have relegated its use far down the line within the realm of
AED therapy for resistant epilepsy. Even so, vigabatrin is a
welcome addition to the treatment options for refractory com-
plex partial seizures. Prescriber and patient comfort, along
with the serious adverse effects associated with vigabatrin,
will ultimately impact its place in the treatment of complex
partial seizures.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
	 1.	 Shorvon SD. Handbook of Epilepsy Treatment. 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010.
	 2.	 Beleza P. Refractory epilepsy:A clinically oriented review. Eur Neurol.
2009;62(2):65–71.
	 3.	 French JA. Refractory epilepsy: Clinical overview. Epilepsia. 2007;
48 Suppl 1:3–7.
	 4.	 BlumeWT. Complex partial seizures. Clinical description and diagnosis.
Adv Exp Med Biol. 2002;497:9–18.
	 5.	 Monté CP,Arends JB,Tan IY,AldenkampAP, Limburg M, de Krom MC.
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy patients: Risk factors.A systematic
review. Seizure. 2007;16(1):1–7.
	 6.	 Brodie MJ. Antiepileptic drug therapy the story so far. Seizure. 2010;
19(10):650–655.
	 7.	 Treiman DM. Management of refractory complex partial seizures:
Current state of the art. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2010;6:297–308.
	 8.	 Glauser T, Ben-Menachem E, Bourgeois B, et al. ILAE treatment
guidelines: Evidence-based analysis of antiepileptic drug efficacy
and effectiveness as initial monotherapy for epileptic seizures and
syndromes. Epilepsia. 2006;47(7):1094–1120.
	 9.	 Pellock JM. Standard approach to antiepileptic drug treatment in the
United States. Epilepsia. 1994;35 Suppl 4:S11–S18.
	10.	 Rogers SJ, Cavazos JE. Epilepsy. In: DiPiro JT, Talbert RL, Yee GC,
Matzke GR, Wells BG, Posey LM, editors. Pharmacotherapy:
A Pathophysiologic Approach. 7th ed. Chicago, IL: McGraw Hill;
2008.
	11.	 Tudur Smith C, MarsonAG,Williamson PR. Phenytoin versus valproate
monotherapy for partial onset seizures and generalized onset tonic-
clonic seizures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001;4:CD001769.
	12.	 TudurSmithC,MarsonAG,CloughHE,WilliamsonPR.­Carbamazepine
versus phenytoin monotherapy for epilepsy. Cochrane ­Database Syst
Rev. 2002;2:CD001911.
	13.	 Loescher W, Klotz U, Zimprich F, Schmidt D. The clinical impact
of pharmacogenetics on the treatment of epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2009;
50(1):1–23.
	14.	 Anonymous. Approved Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies
(REMS). 2011.Available from: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/
PostmarketDrugSafetyInformationforPatientsandProviders/ucm111350.
htm. Accessed May 31, 2011.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/therapeutics-and-clinical-risk-management-journal
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management is an international, peer-
reviewed journal of clinical therapeutics and risk management, focusing
on concise rapid reporting of clinical studies in all therapeutic areas,
outcomes, safety, and programs for the effective, safe, and sustained
use of medicines. This journal is indexed on PubMed Central, CAS,
EMBase, Scopus and the Elsevier Bibliographic databases. The
manuscript management system is completely online and includes a
very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use. Visit
http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from
published authors.
Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2011:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
Dovepress
375
Treating refractory seizures
	15.	 Tudur Smith C, Marson Anthony G, Chadwick David W, Williamson
Paula R. Multiple treatment comparisons in epilepsy monotherapy trials.
Trials. 2007;8:34.
	16.	 French JA, KannerAM, Bautista J, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of the
new antiepileptic drugs II:Treatment of refractory epilepsy. Neurology.
2004;62(8):1261–1273.
	17.	 Beyenburg S, Stavem K, Schmidt D. Placebo-corrected efficacy of
modern antiepileptic drugs for refractory epilepsy: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. Epilepsia. 2010;51(1):7–26.
	18.	 MarsonAG, Kadir ZA, Hutton JL, Chadwick DW.The new antiepileptic
drugs: A systematic review of their efficacy and tolerability. Epilepsia.
1997;38(8):859–880.
	19.	 Brown WM, Aiken SP. Felbamate: Clinical and molecular aspects
of a unique antiepileptic drug. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 1998;12(3):
205–222.
	20.	 LaRoche SM.A new look at the second-generation antiepileptic drugs:
A decade of experience. Neurologist. 2007;13(3):133–139.
	21.	 Chung AM, Eiland LS. Use of second-generation antiepileptic drugs
in the pediatric population. Paediatr Drugs. 2008;10(4):217–254.
	22.	 Hertz SH. SupplementalApproval Release REMS Requirement. 2011.
Available from: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/appl
etter/2011/021446s023,s024,022488s001,s002,s003ltr.pdf. Accessed
May 31, 2011.
	23.	 De Simone G, Scozzafava A, Supuran CT. Which carbonic anhydrases
are targeted by the antiepileptic sulfonamides and sulfamates? Chem
Biol Drug Des. 2009;74(3):317–321.
	24.	 Patyar S, Medhi B. Lacosamide, a newer antiepileptic. Neurosciences
(Riyadh). 2010;15(1):3–6.
	25.	 KellinghausC.Lacosamideastreatmentforpartialepilepsy: ­Mechanisms
of action, pharmacology, effects, and safety. Ther Clin Risk Manag.
2009;5:757–766.
	26.	 Faulkner MA, Tolman JA. Vigabatrin in refractory complex partial
seizures: The evidence of its therapeutic value. Clinical Medicine
Insights: Therapeutics. 2010;2:849–856.
	27.	 Waterhouse EJ, Mims KN, Gowda SN.Treatment of refractory complex
partial seizures: Role of vigabatrin. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2009;5:
505–515.
	28.	 Sankar R, Derdiarian AT. Vigabatrin. CNS Drug Rev. 1998;4(3):
260–274.
	29.	 Hemming K, Maguire Melissa J, Hutton Jane L, Marson Anthony G.
Vigabatrin for refractory partial epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2008;3:CD007302.
	30.	 Rey E, Pons G, Olive G. Vigabatrin. Clinical pharmacokinetics. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 1992;23(4):267–278.
	31.	 Ben-Menachem E. Vigabatrin. Epilepsia. 1995;36 Suppl 2:S95–S104.
	32.	 Thomas L, Trimble M, Schmitz B, Ring H. Vigabatrin and behavior
disorders: A retrospective survey. Epilepsy Res. 1996;25(1):217.
	33.	 Kalviainen R, Nousiainen I. Visual field defects with vigabatrin:
Epidemiology and therapeutic implications. CNS Drugs. 2001;15(3):
217–230.
	34.	 Maguire MJ, Hemming K, Wild JM, Hutton JL, Marson AG.
­Prevalence of visual field loss following exposure to vigabatrin therapy:
A systematic review. Epilepsia. 2010;51(12):2423–2431.
	35.	 Wild JM, Martinez C, Reinshagen G, Harding GF. Characteristics
of a unique visual field defect attributed to vigabatrin. Epilepsia.
1999;40(12):1784–1794.
	36.	 Katz RG. Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS): Support,
Help and Resources for Epilepsy (SHARE). 2011.Available from: http://
www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafety
InformationforPatientsandProviders/UCM187533.pdf. Accessed May
31, 2011.
	37.	 Willmore LJ,Abelson MB, Ben-Menachem E, Pellock JM, ShieldsWD.
Vigabatrin: 2008 update. Epilepsia. 2009;50(2):163–173.
	38.	 Cramer JA, Fisher R, Ben-Menachem E, French J, Mattson RH.
New antiepileptic drugs: Comparison of key clinical trials. Epilepsia.
1999;40(5):590–600.
	39.	 Muller M, Marson AG, Williamson PR. Oxcarbazepine versus
phenytoin monotherapy for epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2006;2:CD003615.
	40.	 Taylor S, Tudur Smith C, Williamson PR, Marson AG. Phenobar-
bitone versus phenytoin monotherapy for partial onset seizures and
generalized onset tonic-clonic seizures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2001;4:CD002217.
	41.	 Tudur Smith C, Marson AG, Williamson PR. Carbamazepine versus
phenobarbitone monotherapy for epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2003;1:CD001904.
	42.	 Maguire MJ, Hemming K, Hutton JL, Marson AG. Overwhelming
heterogeneity in systematic reviews of observational anti-epileptic
studies. Epilepsy Res. 2008;80(2–3):201–212.
	43.	 Mattson RH, Cramer JA, Collins JF. A comparison of valproate with
carbamazepine for the treatment of complex partial seizures and sec-
ondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures in adults.The Department of
Veterans Affairs Epilepsy Cooperative Study No. 264 Group. N Engl
J Med. 1992;327(11):765–771.
	44.	 Smith DB, Mattson RH, Cramer JA, Collins JF, Novelly RA, Craft B.
Results of a nationwide Veterans Administration Cooperative Study
comparing the efficacy and toxicity of carbamazepine, phenobarbital,
phenytoin, and primidone. Epilepsia. 1987;28 Suppl 3:S50–S58.
	45.	 Chmielewska B, Stelmasiak Z. Clinical evaluation of Gabitril and
Lamictal for drug-resistant epilepsy in adults. Ann Univ Mariae Curie
Sklodowska Med. 2001;56:35–42.
	46.	 Specchio LM, Boero G, Specchio N, et al. Evidence for a rapid action
of levetiracetam compared to topiramate in refractory partial epilepsy.
Seizure. 2006;15(2):112–116.
