Rheumatoid Arthritis and Gold Salts Therapy
By T. A. KEAN, M.D.,
Physician, Mater Infirmorum Hospital, Belfast
IT is unfortunate that, in spite of the enormous amount of work that has been done
in recent years on chronic arthritis, there is but little agreement as to what consti-
tutes Rheumatoid Arthritis. Lawford Knaggs, in a report on the Strangeways
Collection of rheumatoid joints in the museum of the Roval College of Surgeons,
states that he was unprepared for the frequency witlh wihichi some of the special
features of osteo-arthritis were associated with others peculiar to rheumatoid
arthritis. The difficulty of distinguishing osteo-arthritis from rheumatic lesions was
such that two knee-joints from the same individual were separately (liagnosed by
an authority on the subject, one as being rheumatoid and(l the other as being osteo-
arthritic in character.
The cause of rheumatoicl arthritis is still unknown. 'Ihe bulk of opiniionl in these
countries is in favour of a low-grade non-specific infectioni. In Frailce the tubercle
bacillus is incriminated, but "rheumatisme tuberculeux" has never been accepted
here. Workers in England and elsewhere, using L6xvenstein's method, have failed
to find tubercle bacilli in blood or exudates in polyarticular rheumiiatismll.
The disease max occur at any age, but is most commoni betweeni twenty andcl
forty. Still's disease is probably rheumatoid arthritis modified by age, and there
does not appear to be any good reason why the polyarthritis of women at the
climacteric shouldl not be considered as rheumatoid arthritis. .A- villous reaction may
be evoked by infectioni or trauma as well as disordered metabolism. If chronlic
villous arthritis is due to endocrinie dysfunctioln alone, one would expect that the
coniditioni would be much more common at the menopause. Sex is a predisposing
factor, the frequency in females being four times that in males. '[he (lisease is said
to be extremelv rare in coloured races.
Mental strain and (lebility predispose to the disease. Denital caries, pvorrhoea
ailveolaris, septic conditions of the nose, ear, and throat, tonsils, pelvic diseases atnd
intestinal auto-infectionis, are among the conditions which are said to act as
infecting foci.
'Ihe morbid changes in the joinlts conisist of swellinig and hyperwmia of the
syniovial membranes, which may show marked proliferationi. The fluidl in the joint is
slightly turbid from the presence of small fibrous deposits and(i leucocytes. The
capsule of the joint becomes thickened, and degeneration with replacement by
fibrous tissue takes place in the auricular cartilage and bone. J. F. Mackenzie
(lescribes changes in the bone-marrow of long bones. This appears to be similar to
gelatiniouts degeneration, a conditioni which is sometimes found in starvation,
phthisis, and other chronic diseases.
The onset may be acute, subacute, or chronic. In the first form the condition may
closely resemble acute rheumatism, but the disease resists the salicvlates, and sooIn
the joints assume the typical characteristics. In the subacute form the joints shoxv
284
slight swellings at first, and later the condlitioni assumes the chronic form. The
chronic variety begins insidiously in one joint, and spreads slowly. The spread of
the disease is from the periphery to the centre. Usually the interphalangeal joints
of the fingers are first affectecl, then the metacarpo-phalangeal joints, then the
wrists, ankles, knees, and shoulders, anid last of all the hip-joints. The temporo-
maxillary and(1 vertebral joints are usually affectedi sooner or later.
The joints are sxvollein with a fusiform appearance. TIhere is marked limitation of
movement, and in the late stages great cleformity will be present. This deformity is
dlue to the formation of adhesionis around( the joint, secondary contraction of
muscles, and partial dislocation of the joint. In the hands the deformity takes the
form of ulnar deviation of the fingers, and( this is the most characteristic deformity
of rheumatoid arthritis. The skin is atrophic and glossy. TIhe muscles above and
below the affecte(d joints are very muclh wasted, but there is no alteration in tendon
reflexes. Enlarged glands in the groin and axilla are not uncommon.
Of the constitutional svmptoms, anaemia is most marked. TIhis is of a secondary
type. The pulse-rate is usually raised, the temperature rarelv affected. The general
nutrition is often impaired, and the patient is depresse(l. Mental symptoms are not
infrequent in those cases that have been bedriddeni for many years, but it is probable
that some factor other than rheumatoid arthritis is responsible for the insanity.
For some years, Forestier andl others have adlvocated the use of gold salts in the
treatment of rheumatoidi arthritis. This is base(l on the view that rheumatoid
arthritis is due to infection by tubercle bacilli of low virulenice. Although this view
has never been accepte(i in this country, we have seen remarkable improvement in
many cases treated bv this method. rhe modle of action of goldl salts is not known.
It may be that it acts by chemiotaxis, or it mav be due to the action which the
heavy metals in very small doses have on the bone-marrow ancd bones. The action of
the heavy metals on bonie and( bone-marrow is similar to that of arsenic. If small
(loses are given to animals, the red marrow becomes hyperv mic, the fat cells
(lisappear, and there is a clecided increase in the number of leucoblastic cells. The
erythroblasts are not increased. In the view of the writer, the favourable results
obtained by gold salts arc due to increasecd vascularitv of the marrow.
Jacques Forestier, at a lecture giveni to the Ulster Mle(lical Society (February,
1934), stressed the necessity for frequent observation of the blood sedimentation-
rate. He held that if the bloo(d sedimentation-rate was not raised, the arthritis was
of a dlegenerative nature (osteo-arthritis), an(d go]l salt therapy would not be
successful. He held further that the sedimentationi-rate is as important a guide to
the treatment of rheumatoi(l arthritis as is the \VNassermann reaction in syphilis.
Our experience at the Mater Hospital has faile(d to confirm his views up to the
presenit, but in view of the small number of cases at our disposal our findings cannot
be conisidere(l conclusive. TIhe blood sedimentatioin-rate has prove(l with us to be too
variable a factor to be reliable. For example, one patient wlhose sedimentation-rate
wxas 60 in one hour (XVcstgren's metho(l) when sufferinig from a slight corvza, was
w6when takeni one week later. Againi, a case of goniorrhoeal arthritis showed a
se(limenitation-rate of 120 for the first hour, but $howedino improvement with gold
salt therapy. Ouir present view is that the sedimentatiol-rate is not a reliable guide
287
in the selectionl of cases for treatmelnt, an(l cases are now selected on clinical
grouni(1s alone.
If the toxic properties of the heavy metals be borne in mind, it will be obvious
that patients who are sufl'ering from (lisease of the liver or kidneys are unsuitable
for this method of treatment. Gold is excreted by the kidnes, and if elimination is
defective, accumulationi of the drug is certain to occur. Some cases of severe toxic
jaundice have been reported followiing gold therapy, and( it is therefore important
to exclude hepatic disease when possible.
Unfortunately, tests for liver function are far from satisfactory. The laevulose test
is probably the best. 'I'he sedimentation-rate is lowered in functional disease of the
liver, so that a sedimentation-rate of less than 6 would be a contra-indication to
gold therapy.
'rhe preparation of gold which we have used since January of this year is a
substance known as myocrisin. This is an aqueous solution of aurothiomalate of
sodium and is of very low toxicity. The initial (lose is .01 gramme given intra-
muscularly. 'T'he injections are given at weekly intervals, anld are increased gradu-
ally. At no time is the dose allowed to exceed .20 gramme. W;heni two grammes have
been given, the patient is allowed a rest of two months, and the course is repeated
if necessary. The first two or three injections are definitely painful, but patients
state that subsequent inijections cause only very slight discomfort.
None of our cases has developed any toxic effects as a result of the treatment, but
we have to keep in mind always that prolonged treatment, even with small doses,
will cause eburnation of bone and(l egeneration of bonie-miiarrow. Aplastic anemia is
a very real danger if excessive amounts of gold salts be usedl. The following toxic
effects have been reportecl following the use of gold salts -Cutaneous eruptions,
lichen planus, jaundice, subcutancous anld submucous hwmorrhlages, hcmatemesis,
diarrhoea, ha.maturia, and anaemia. As our patients are treated at the extern depart-
ment, each patient is required to bring a letter from her private practitioner to the
effect that he is willing to co-operate witlh the hospital in the observation anid treat-
ment of the case. In the evenit of toxic signs arisinig, the patielnt xvould at onice con-
stult her (loctor. 'I'he treatment suggeste(d for such cases is the intravenous injection
of .6 gramme of so(lium thiosuLlphate in 10 c.c. of distille(d water daily for ten days.
Fifteeni cases have been treated by mvocrisitn since January, 1934. Fourteen were
women, and( their ages varie(d from 18 to 6.5 vears.
The following case reports will give an] idea of our experienices xvith gold salts
therapy
CASE 1.-Unmarrie(d female, aged 24. Durationi of illniess, otne and a half years.
Fusiform swellinigs at proximal interphalangeal joints, w,ith marked pain and limi-
tation of movement. No ulnar deviation. Metacarpo-phalangeal andl tarso-metatarsal
joints also affecte(l. Blood se(limentationi-rate (XVestgren's metlho(l): First hour, 40;
second hour, (iS; twenty-fourth hour, 120. 'I'reatment with myocrisin began onl
181/1/34. Course of two grammes completed Otl 21/6/'34. Improvement was
extremely slow in this case, but at the end of the course there was no evidence of
arthritis in the tarso-inetatarsal or in the metacarpo-phalangeal joints. There was
still slight swelling at the interphalangeal joints, but movements were free and
288
painless and the skin had lost the glossy appearance. She returned to work as a
stitcher.
CASE 2.-Unmarried female, age(d 38. Duration of illness, one year. Large fusi-
form swellings at proximal interphalangeal joints. No other joints affected. Blood
sedimentation-rate 45: 80: 120. Treatment with myocrisin began on 8/3/34. This
patient showed marked improvement afiter the second injection. The swellings
decreased in a remarkable manner. After the sixth injection she insisted on return-
ing to work, as her hands appeared to be normal. She had received .41 gramme of
mnocrisin. Slhe is still at work, andl visits hospital from time to time.
CASE 3. Unmarried female, age(l 20. Duration of illness, six months. Slight
fusiform swellings on middle fingers only. Very little pain or limitation of move-
ment. Blood sedimentation-rate 6 : 20: 80. 'T'reatment with myocrisin began
29/3/34. This patient ceased to attencd after she had received a total of 1.21
grammes. The swellings hadl decreased a little in size, but as the condition had
been verv slight the improvement was not marked.
CASE 4.-Unmarried female, aged 19. Duration of illness, two years. Inter-
phalangeal joints only affected. Slight fusiform swellings, and( marked limitation
of movement. Blood sedimentationl-rate 14 : 35: 110. Treatment began onl 12/4/.34.
On 21/6/34, when this patient had received one gramme of mvocrisin, the swelling
and limitation of movement had entirely clisappeared and she returned to work.
CASE 5.-Unmarried femuale, aged 20. Durationi of illness, five years. Swellings
at interphalanigeal, metacarpo-phalangeal, carpo-metacarpal, wrist, anld tarso-
metatarsal joints. Marked swelling and deformity, pain, and limitation of movement.
Blood sedimentationi-rate 9.5 : 12.5 : 140. Treatment began on 26/4/34. This patient
has now received 1.31 gramnies of mvocrisin, an(d is still under treatment. 'I'he
improvemenet is very marked, although there is still some swelling at the carpo-
metacarpal and wrist joints.
CASE 6. Married female, aged 52. Duration of illniess, four ylears. Slight swelling
at interphlalanigeal joints, with marked limitation of movement. Blood sedimentation-
rate 35: 60: 115. 'I'reatment began on 21/4/34. 'T'his patient received'.91 gramme
of myocrisin, but there being tno apparent benefit, she ceased to attend.
CASE 7.-Unmarried female, aged 61. Duration of illness, fourteen years. Very
little swelling or deformity in hands. Marked creaking at left elbow joint. Pain and
stiffness in neck. X-ray showed arthritis of intervertebral joints in cervical region.
Blood sedimientation-rate 60: 85 : 120. Treatment began on 29/3/34. 'T'his patient
received 1.4 gramimes of myocr-isin. As there was no evidence of improvement,
treatment was discontiniued.
CASE 8.-Unmarried female, aged 65. Duration of illness, twelve years. Slight
swelling in hanids. Marked swelling at tarso-mletatarsal anid ankle joints. X-ray
showe(d rheumatoid arthritis at anikle joints. Bloo(d se(limentationi-rate 45 : 82 : 126.
'Treatmenlt began on 12/4/34. Receive(d course of two grammes. 'T'his patient has
ma(le a very satisfactory improvement. She can now walk about two hundred yards
with the aid of a stick. For the past three years she was unable to walk without
assistance. The swelling had (lisappearedl at the ankles, and the skin has lost its
parclhment-like appearance.
289
