Hypersplenic Anaemia relieved by Splenectomy
By M. G. NELSON, M.D., M.R.C.P., M.R.C.P.(I)., D.T.M. & H.
Clinical Pathologist, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast
CONSIDERABLE interest has recently been aroused in the group of conditions
characterised by* anaemia, granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia occurring
alone or in association and accompanied by splenomegaly and a hyperplastic
marroow. The triad of cytopenia, splenomegaly and hyperplastic marrow constitutes
what might be called the 'hypersplenic syndrome.' This triad may be found in a
number of diverse disorders in which splenomegaly is a constant finding. It has
been noted in chronic infections such as syphilis, malaria, kala azar, brucellosis
and Felty's syndrome; in portal hypertension and Banti's syndrome, and in
lipoidal infiltrations, such as Gaucher's disease.
The evidence throughout this group seemed to point to the basic effect produced
in the blood by the enlarged spleen, but lack of complete knowledge of the
physiological functions of this organ has prevented full understanding of the
pathogenesis. There are two possible hypotheses to explain the observed
phenomena, and these have given rise to two schools of thought which might be
broadly termed the "Hormonal" and the "Phagocytic." The former conception
is that a pathologically hypertrophied spleen due to any cause produces a hormone
which acts on the bone marrow, and depresses the maturation or release of the
primitive cells of the erythrocytic, granulocytic and thrombocytic series. This
hormone is considered to be elaborated by the reticulo endothelial cells of the spleen
and its effect may be general, producing a pancytopenia or, selective producing
a granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia or aneemia. This theory has many
supporters, particularly Naegeli, who applied the term 'hypersplenism' to the
syndrome, and in this he has been ably supported by Dameskek (1947). The
second theory envisages an increased phagocytic activity of the spleen produced
by reticulo endothelial hypertrophy due to any cause. The reticulo endothelial cells
engulf and destroy the blood cells more rapidly than they can be replaced by the
marrow. Histopathological evidence of increased phagocytic activity has been
adduced by Wiseman and Doan (1942).
Although cases of this type are uncommon, yet the satisfactory response which
results from splenectomy in these cases prompted me to put on record this case
of intractable macrocytic anaemia associated with a progressive splenomegaly,
which had an excellent clinical and hwematological response to splenectomy.
The patient, M. K., an unmarried woman of 54. years of age, was first seen in
the medical out-patient department of the Royal Victoria Hospital on 11th August,
1948, because of loss of energy, breathlessness, palpitation and swelling of the
ankles. These symptons were of gradual onset, had been present for a year, and
had become progressively more noticeable. She also complained of a constant
178
pain in the right side of her abdomen which had beein present for about one month,
and this was associated with loss ot appetite. Ilhe only relevant findings in the
past history of this patient was that she had received injections in the United
States of America in 1920 for a 'blood condition.' She didl nlot knowZ the nature
of the 'blood condition,' but thouglht that the injectionis w%ere arseniic, and closer
enquiry revealed that thle spacing and courses of these injectionis resemiibled tllose
of anti-syphilitic arseniotlherapy.
On examinationi, the patient wvas grosssly aniemic but inot jaundiced. She was
small in stature and of a sallow coinplexion xvith pitting (edemia of the lower limbs.
There were nio enlarged superficial vmmph-glands. '1le nails were ridged and
flattened and the tongue w\as sm11ooth and moisl. Thlie skin exhibited a
maculopapular rash with numiierous scattered lesions which wvere Imlost marked
on the trunk. In colour, these spots variee from lilac to browni and in size, fromn
a lentil to a sixpence. Some were raised anid a few, formle(d definite soft, sessile
tumours soft to the touclh and pig-mented on top. Ihle appearanice of the tumours
was suggestive of a dliagniosis of Xvon Recklinighauseni's nieul-ofibromlliatosis, and
this was confirmed clinically by the (lermatologists. O(n physical examination, the
liver and spleen were both found to he grossly enlarge(d and palpable, but nothing
abnormal was founid on examination of the other bodily systems. Because of her
history, the patient was seen in the venereal diseases departmilenit, where it was
coinsidetred that the n;ature anid distribution of some depressed scars on her back
were consistent witlh a clinical (diaginosis of syphilis, and(l serological tests for
syphilis appeared to coonfiri this, as the Kahn reaction was doubt ful, and the
Wassermanin positive.
The initial examinatioin of the peripheral blood revealed at gross aniaemia
(he.moglobin=:36 per cenit. Ha'dane=-.1 g./100 nil., R.C.C.=1,410,000/c.mm.);
nacrocvtosis (M.C.V.=94 (.U,.); leukopenia (\V.C.C. = 2,500/c.mnm.); hyperbili-
rubinaemia (Van-den-Bergh= 1.2. mg/100 ml.); a reticulocvte count of 3 per cent.
The peripheral blood smear showed maciocytosis, anisocytosis and polychromasia,
but no primitive red cells were seen. 'IThese findlings weere suggestiv%e of a diagnosis
of Addisonian pernicious ariamiiia, buit a fractional test-meal revealedl the presence
of free acid in the stomach. T'his, together with the fact that the initial blood
examination showed 3 per cent. reticulocytes, was considered to weigh heavily
against the diagnosis of perniicious ainemia. Unfortunately, a bone-marrow biopsy
to determine the presence of megaloblastic hvperplasia wvas not carried out prior
to treatment.
A diagnosis of aplastic anemia (toxic pancytopenia), resulting from arseno-
therapy, was considered unlikely because of the twenty-eight year interval since
the last arsenic injection, but the possibility that the anwemia was of syphilitic
origin was explored by testing the response of the an,aemia to a therap-eutic trial
of anti-syphilitic drugs. AccordinglN, the patient was given three intramuscular
injections of 0.1 grams of bismuth and a course of penicillitn consisting of six
mega units spread over ten days. This therapy produced no hamatological
improvement.
179
The patient then received an adequate course of parenteral liver therapy
combined with oral iron, and on this therapy the haemoglobin rose from 36 per
cent. to 63 per cent. in 14 days but this was associated with a constant reticulocytosis
without any significant crisis. This response was satisfactory, but the absence of a
reticulocytosis was unusual and the therapy complicated by combined oral iron and
parenteral liver. Because macrocytic anzemias with free acid in the stomach
usually respond more satisfactorily to oral folic acid than parenteral liver, a
course of 15 mg. of oral folic acid daily was given for fifteen days without any
further haematological improvement. When on this treatment a bone marrow
biopsy was carried out which showed a markedly hyperplastic marrow due to
normoblastic proliferation and megaloblasts were not seen.
The patient was discharged from hospital on weekly injections of liver extract
and daily oral iron. She was seen from tithe to time as an out-patient between
November, 1948, and June, 1949, when it was noted that the splenomegaly was
increasing and the hoemoglobin, despite adequate therapy, was not being
maintained, so that, on two occasions, blood transfusions were required. Thus,
this patient was under observation for some eleven months, during which time
she was on haematinic therapy without significant benefit. Although the anamia
in this case was consistently macrocytic, the evidence for the diagnosis of
Addisonian pernicious anaemia was incomplete, viz., presence of free acid in the
stomach, inability of liver therapy to maintain the blood level.
Following an attack of herpes zoster in April, 1949, she was re-admitted into
the Royal Victoria Hospital in June of the same year. When the htematological
records of this patient were reviewed, it was seen that she had a persistent aw-emia
I I IY I
1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 e0 iI 12
M ONTHS.
180
0 o o 6 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~V.D. B. M1
2
0 0 0
0 _ _
X. *6 . 6 __ _
U U.
Z 0 ,N
a2 ,.
905S0 g 0
0 I
704.0 OA A Z
soo00 /
70 4-
4
20~~~~~~~~~
2 I0 1-0 .. ..
IlI-I
not maintained by hrematinic therapy, a hyperplastic marrow, splenomegaly,
hyperbilirubinwmia, and a constant reticulocytosis. These findings were suggestive
of a haemolytic anwmia. That this hamolytic anaemia was of mild degree and
unlike either congenital or acquired haemolytic anaemia, was evident by the mild
degree of the reticulocytosis; by the absence of crisis, by the absence of
spherocytosis; by the normal osmotic fragility of the red cells, and by the
repeatedly negative Coomb's test (anti-human globulin test). It was considered
that hypersplenic anmeia seemed to be the most probable diagnosis, and
accordingly, following pre-operative preparation by the transfusion of four pints
of compatible blood, a splenectomy was performed. The haemoglobin, eight days
after the splenectomy, was 90 per cent., and this level has been maintained and
improved since then. This improvement has been associated with a rise in the
red cell and. white cell counts; a normal bilirubin level in the blood; and a normal
reticulocyte count.
The spleen, when examined after removal, was greatly enlarged and weighed
1,500 gm. The histological pattern of the spleen was well preserved. There was
a general increase in the cellularity of the pulp with thickening of the si.nusoidal
walls. This increased cellularity was in part due to a proliferation of reticulum
cells of -the pulp and also of the lining cells of the splenic sinusoids
which were unduly prominent. Follicular aggregations of reticulum cells
without giant cell formation were evident, both in the lymph follicles and in
the perifollicular zone. These resembled similar lesions found in the spleen in
Brucella abortus infection, but in this case the agglutination test for brucellosis
was negative. The lymph follicles throughout the spleen were rather small.
H'aemosiderosis was marked throughout the pulp, but erythrophagocytosis was
not conspicuous.
COMMENT
The haematological findings and response to splenectomy in this case satisfy the
criteriae laid down by Doan (1946) for splenic blood dyscrasia or hypersplenic
anaemia, namely:
1. Diminution of one or more of the circulating elements of the blood.
2. Normal or increased bone marrow activity.
3. Splenic enlargement.
4. Complete, rapid, clinical and haematological recovery following splenectomy.
The histological findings in the spleen after removal were those of a diffuse
hyperplasia of the reticulum cells, with nodular 'pseudofollicles' of reticulum cells
in relation to the lymph follicles, and there was no histological evidence of
syphilitic involvement of the spleen. These findings are similar to those described
by Haam & Awny (1948) in ten cases of splenic panhoematocytopenia.
The relationship of syphilis to the clinical condition in this case, if any, is
difficult to evaluate. This is further complicated by the results of the serological
tests for syphilis before and after splenectomy.
181
Kahn W/R.
26/ 8/1948 ... +2 ... + +
6/ 1/1949 ... +1 ... ++
21/ 3/1949 ... +2 ++
1/ 6/1949 ... +1 + + Splenectomy
7/ 7/1949 ... ...
3/ 8/1950
5/10/1950 ...
It is possible that the positive results found with the serological tests for
syphilis may have been false, and associated with the haemolytic anemia found
in the hypersplenic syndrome. Information on this point, in the literature, is
lacking, but false positive Wassermann results have been reported in haemolytic
anaemia by Rubenstein (1948). In this department, of eighteen cases of hemolytic
anaemia, where syphilis was excluded, false positive W/R results were found in
three, doubtful results in two, and negative in the remainder. Our own findings
have tended to suggest that these false serological results are associated mainly
with periods of crisis which did not occur in this case. However, the coincidental
reversal of the positive serology to negative associated with the removal of evidence
of active hemolysis following splenectomy suggests a possible relationship
between these findings.
SUMMARY
A case of hypersplenic anaemia with panhaematocytopenia, splenomegaly and
hyperplastic marrow, showing an excellent response to splenectomy is described.
REFERENCES.
RUBENSTEIN, M. A.: J. Lab. clin. Med., 33, 753; 1948.
DAMESHEK, W.: "The spleen and hypersplenism," New York, 1947.
DOAN, C. A., AND WRIGHT, C. S.: Blood, 1, 10; 194,6.
HAAM, E. VON., AND AWNY, A. J.: Amer. J. clin Path., 18, 313; 1948.
WISEMAN, 13. K., AND DOAN, C. A. Anin. imt. MlIed., 16, 1097; 1942.
REVIEW
BRONCHIOGENIC CARCINOMA AND ADENOMA. With a Chapter on
Mediastinal Tumours. By B. M. Fried, M.D.
AN extremely well produced book, with only a few typographical errors. The reproductions of X-ray
film and microphotographs are particularly good;.an extensive, bibliography is given at the end
of each section. Every aspect of carcinoma is meticulously discussed, the chapters on pathology,
metastases, and the combination of carcinoma and tuber-culosis being very good.
Bronchiogenic adenoma is very well done. The comparison to an iceberg, as regards the
endo-bronchial and extra-bronchial portions, is very apt, with reference to endo-bronchial
methods of dealing with the tumour.
Doctor Fried is a physician, and so does not discuss details of surgical treatment. He gives
the accepted contraindications. Regarding treatment by radiation, there is some evidence nowadays
that the results may be somewhat better than he has indicated.
A book to be recommended. G. R. B. P.
182
