g ULSTER MEDICAL JOURNAL
PUBLISHED ON BEHALF OF THE ULSTER MEDICAL SOCIETY
VOl. XXIV 1st NOVEMBER, 1955 No. 2
The Tragedy of Man-Made Disease
By F. M. B. ALLEN, M.D., F.R C.P.,(LOND.)
Presidential Address to the Ulster Medical Society, 2oth October, 1955
I. SOME TRIUMPHS.
I yIELI) to no one in mny admiration of and praise for our predecessors and our
colleagues who have achieved so much success in the science and art of medicine.
It is true to say that more progress has been made in the last fifty years (especially
in the last thirty-five) than in the previous five hundred years. Death rates, both
general and particular, have crashe(l dramatically; infectious diseases which used
to carry a heavy mortality are now under control; diseases hitherto regarded as
mysterious and "idiopathic" are now diagnosed with alacrity and accuracy;
treatment which was often non-existent or empirical is now becoming scientific and
rational.
The overall death rate of the general population has shown a steady decline-
in Northern Ireland from 15 per 1,000 to 10.8 in less than thirty years. During
the period 17130 to 1789 between 50 per cent. and 70 per cent. of childlren died
before reaching the age of 5 years, and one hundred years ago the number of
deaths undler 1 year was consistently above 150 per 1,000. Infant mortality has
declined from 79 in 1926 to 38 in 1953 in Northern Ireland, and in England and
Wales from 117 in 1906 to 68 in 1926 and 27 in 1953.
In 1850 it is estimated that 6(5,0() people died of tuberculosis out of a population
of 20,000,000 in England and Wales; in 1953 this was reduced to 9,000 out of a
population of 45,000,000. TIhe death rate from tuberculosis in Northern Ireland
during the past four years has fallen steadily from 48 per 100,000 to 30, 23, 18,
and almost certainly to a still lower figure for the current year.
The same story holds for diphtheria, where notifications have fallen from 18,596
to 182 and deaths from 722 to 9 in England and Wales between the years 1945 and
1954. Scarlet fever used to be a mortal disease, often killing three or four children
in a family and causing serious illnesses in all age groups. Now it is a relatively
benign inconvenience in children, only rarely being associated with complications.
These are some of the triumphs of which we may legitimately be proud; but they
carry new responsibilities. The power of medicine has increased and is likely to
increase further. We can relieve pain, keep a patient unconscious for prolonged
periods, perform intricate operations not even contemplated before, prevent
conception, terminate pregnancy, prevent and treat successfully an increasing
number of infections, modify the reactions of the mind with drugs and influence
the personality of an individual with a scalpel.
A medical philosopher recently said that "medicine is tending to become a science
and much less an art; but more important is its increasing power over so much of
human health, welfare, and even existence. It has become so large a field of
intellectual exercise with so many details in and development of every subject that
any one individual knows relatively less and less about medicine as a whole."
In former times many diseases did not lend themselves to successful treatment
even when we knew the cause. Early and precise diagnosis was not of any great
consequence in the face of our therapeutic futility. Tuberculous meningitis was all
but invariably fatal in less than three weeks from its diagnosis. Now, if modern
therapy is to have the best chance of success early recognition of the disease is
imperative.
Every departure from the normal health rhythm is the subject of anxiety to the
patient or his relatives-and is a challenge to the physician. Therapy is becoming
more and more scientific, specific and rational. Therapeutic efficiency demands a
precise diagnosis; it is no longer sufficient to know that an infection is due to
staphylococci, we must know the sensitivity of the particular staphylococcus to
the range of drugs that are at our disposal. A wide knowledge of the effects of
therapeutic measures is essential so that the treatment may be not only successful
in overcoming the disease; but also that it may not give rise to ill-effects.
II. SOME FORTUITOUS DISCOVERIES.
It is strange how so much of medical discovery has been due to a fortuitous
association of two or more individuals with complementary knowledge or cognate
ideas, of the meeting of the man and the opportunity. How much, too, is due to
inspiration occurring in the enthusiastic searcher for truth. Pasteur noted that, in
the field of observation, chance favours only the mind that is prepared.
Banting qualified as a doctor in 1916, and in 1919 was resident surgeon in the
Children's Hospital in Toronto. He combined general practice with a part-time
assistantship in physiology in 1921. One day he had an inspiration that all the
frustration of the past in extracting the anti-diabetic hormone from the pancreas
was due to the presence of trypsin. "Carbohydrate physiology in the thirty years
following Minkowski's fundamental discovery had left a trail strewn with the
wreckage of attempts, many by workers of ripe experience, to extract the supposed
hormone from the pancreas." Pursuing this idea Banting succeeded where others
have failed.
It was fortuitous that a man of Fleming's temperament, enquiring mind and
intelligence should have been the victim when the mould Penicillium notatum
contaminated one of his plates of staphylococci. Many others would have cast the
70
plate away and the discovery of penicillin might have been delayed indefinitely or
never made at all. Fleming studied the "spoiled" plate and appreciated the novelty
of its effects. It was left to Florey and Cheyne to isolate the substance in a form
suitable for administration to humans.
The discovery of folic acid as a valuable principle in the treatment of certain
forms of anwmia was due to the association of two minds who jointly recognised
the significance of the (Irug and its possible use in treatment. The possibility of
therapeutic usefulness was the suggestion of a general practitioner and the evolution
of the drug for certain forms of anaemia was the work of a clinical scientist.
Similarly with pyridoxine (vitamin BG). Its absence in milk accounts for the
occurrence of convulsions in babies and when this is replaced in the feeds the
convulsions can be controlled. It was the combination of the observation of the
general practitioner in whose patients convulsions had occurred, with the fortuitous
meeting with the physiologist who was aware of the effects of pyridoxine-deficiency
in causing them, which solved a baffling (but short-lived) mystery.
Hirschsprung, in 1888, assumed that the form of constipation later associated
with his name was caused by congenital megacolon. In fact, the megacolon is now
recognised to be due to congenital constipation. Neurohistological observations in
1920 by Dalla Valle, by Robertson and Kernohan (19.38) and others recorded the
absence of ganglion cells in the distal alimentary canal in this condition. But
clinicians were slow to realise the significance of their absence. It was only when
Swenson in Boston fully appreciated that the failure of relaxation of the terminal
portion of the gut caused the constipation, which accounted for the megacolon that
a rational surgical procedure for the cure of Hirschsprung's disease was evolved.
Collaboration has been necessary in solving some problems of considerable
complexity. It is not essential that this should take place in the same laboratory,
or even in the same city. Todd and Coburn, working in cities three thousand miles
apart, between them presented anti-streptolysin 0 and anti-streptolysin S to man's
knowledge, so that a better evaluation of rheumatic infection is now available.
In the search for a new dye sulphanilamide (prontosil) was produced by the
chemists. But, more valuable to mankind, was the discovery that this drug was a
specific agent against streptococci. It was first used to combat puerperal infection.
From this beginning a series of "sulpha" drugs has flowed with specific action in
overcoming specific infections of which the end is not yet in sight.
These experiences should encourage doctors to realise that close observation of
their patients permits fundamental contributions to be made without the para-
phernalia of a hospital research centre. Conspicuous phenomena daily pass us
unseen, but we must use our eyes, our ears and our hands if we are to recognise
them in their course before our consciousness. Admittedly, the store of human
knowledge might have been increased if men of an enquiring mind and endowed
with the spirit of research had not been frustrated.
II I. SOME TRAGEDIES.
Osler names less than twelve drugs which he regarded as being therapeutically
useful; but added the warning that almost all (if not all) of them had side-effects.
71
1B
Mercury was a great stand-by of the older physicians because, while it was the
sheet-anchor in the treatment of syphilis, it also acted as a purgative and as a
diuretic. But it had, in addition, serious effects upon the mouth and teeth. Digitalis
introduced into medicine by Withering as a diuretic can cause anuria and cardiac
death. Citrate can result in "intoxication" when administered in large doses or for
prolonged periods. Serious conditions have arisen from massive transfusions of
citrated blood and hypocalcaemic tetany and cardiac depression have occurred.
Even oxygen can cause disease, as we know from our experineces in premature
infants where its administration is believed to account for retro-lental fibroplasia-
the greatest single cause of blindness in young children. It is also known to disturb
the electrolyte balance and non-protein nitrogen by its presence.
Osler's dictum that we should be sure our treatment does not harm the patient
is very pertinent in these days of therapeutic enthusiasm. It is estimated that there
are somewhere between 100,000 and 150,000 remedlies available and the number
is increasing at the rate of 10 per cent. every year. Thus it comes about that a
doctor who has reached 50 years of age will probably know little of the indications
for the proper use (or avoidance) of the vast majority of these therapeutic arms and
will be well advised to avail himself more of post-graduate instruction and not to
fall too readily to the charms of the specious advertiser.
1. Every drug is potentially dangerous. Even aspirin may cause great in-
convenience or even death; citrate may cause tetany; water injected into a
megacolon may cause "intoxication" with convulsions.
2. Every diagnostic procedure carries a risk, and when one contemplates the
hazards of venupuncture as regards infection and the serious consequences which
may result from catheterisation of the bladder, visceral punctures, angiograms,
lumbar punctures, the injection of opaque solutions, suspensions and emulsions
into organs, body cavities and canals one sympathises with and often admires the
conservatism of the more experienced physician or surgeon who justifiably hesitates
to embark upon heroic exploits. He uses his judgment to arrive at an accurate
diagnosis by the safest procedure which does not jeopardise either the comfort or
survival of the patient. He regards with disquiet the ill-founded complacency with
which the impetuous and inexperienced will undertake procedures which carry an
unseen and unrecognised risk.
3. Drugs of high potency demand care in their use and disposal. Digitalis is
a remedy widely used and of extreme value; but it can be death-dealing if
administered without discrimination. To the toddler it is a death sentence if left
about the house within his reach.
Curari, dicoumarol, heparin and the analeptics (coramine and nikethamide) must
be treated with discretion. An error in dosage of curari will be fatal, dicoumarol
must be under effective control in its use, the indiscriminate use of analeptics has
been known to "flog a failing heart to death."
4. The modern practice of parenteral therapy is not without risk. There is the
ever-present menace of the introduction of infection by faulty aseptic technique in
72
the operation; b)y the lack of sterility of every item of the infusion apparatus; anld
by the lowering of the natural resistance of the tissues at the site of injection.
'lThose of us who halve witnessed the prolonged administration of fluids are only
too well aware of the risks of local infection, thrombophlebitis and even of
septlcwcmia.
h'l'ere is further the profound disturbance to body metabolism which takes place
with the introduction of solutions containing sodium and potassium-admittedly
of known quantity and in the presence of precise biochemical information. Profound
changes in body chemistry can be readily created and cause complicated chemical
pathology of which we, as yet, know relatively little.
Apart from the partially understood or unknown effects of drugs there is the risk
of the injection of the wrong preparation. The coroners' courts are often the scene
where the story of an error due to ignorance or carelessness is exposed. A patient
was given mersalyl intrathecally instead of lipiodol, developed paraplegia, eventual
urinary infection, and died; an infant was given flaxedil instead of coramine;
paraldehyde was given in ounces instead of drachms-and so the story could be
multiplied.
5. Industrial diseases are largely "man-made," in coal mining, in textile mills
in chemical factories and in the other complicated processes of our modern civilisa-
tion. 'T'he excreta of chimneys, along with climatic conditions, gives rise to "smog,"
which can be death-dealing, especially to the elderly. Fifty tons of coal consumed
in a furnace annually can account for the deposit of two tons of soot, especially if
combustion is in unskilled hands.
Hospitals derive a high proportion of their patients from accidenits-on the roads,
in factories, and at home. In ten years 200,000 persons in Britain have died as
the result of accidents, and approximately 10,000,000 have been injured. Every
day 4.5 people die, 16 from travel, 5 from workshops, 17 from home accidents, and
7 in "everyday pursuits." Children are pathetic victims of street accidents, of falls
in the home, and of accidental poisoning. 'T'he (langerous age for children is when
they display the human spirit of adventure and begin to toddle, to explore drawers
and cupboards and to taste the contenits of bottles, boxes, andl tubes.
6. Allergic Reactions. It has been stated that some five hundre(d drugs used
in mocdern therapeutics are potentially allergic. It is common knowledge that
inhalants suclh as horse hair, feathers and dust and ingestants such as milk, eggs,
shell-fish, etc., can induce asthma, urticaria, eczemia, vaso-motor rhinitis. Most
doctors are aware of the unpleasant reactions whiclh occur with horse serum
products and of the effects of a relatively innocent drug such as aspirin in some
persons. 'l'he scope of allergenis has been considerably increased by the introduction
of antibiotics, as they are produced from moulds-the richest source of allergens.
Penicillin, the safest of the antibiotics, is known to produce at least two hundred
severe reactions yearly.
I have seen patients in atcute (listress as the result of the administration of an
antibiotic. 'I'his has beeni so pronounced that parents have been warned not to
agree to the use of the offending drug without it being known that the distressing
73
condition may recur or that even a fatal issue may ensue. I am in sympathy with
the doctor who insists on these patients in his practice wearing a label under their
clothing that they are not to be given this particular antibiotic.
Medical literature in recent years contains the record of experiences by
practitioners of severe allergic reactions to antibiotics-sometimes sudden death.
It is tragic to read of a mother of five children, 42 years of age, dying after an
injection of penicillin given (luring labour. Ihis mother had had penicillin for a
miscarriage four years previously. It should by now be realised that patients
(especially the allergic type) may become sensitizedl to it and discretion used in
prescribing it.
7. Antibiotics. The introduction of insulin and the evolution of sulpha drugs
must have satisfied the soul of the searcher for (Iramatic events. But to these there
has been added the discovery of penicillin by Fleming, and now the development
of the series of antibiotics since then has been accepted as almost commonplace.
Perhaps every one of us owes the recovery of a relative or friend from a dangerous
illness to one or other of the antibiotics. Mlany operations could not be undertaken
without them-lobectomy, cardiac and colon operations, tonsillectomy and dental
extractions are often safe only under their shielding influence; many chronic, in-
validing conditions such as bronchiectasis are made tolerable for the patient by
their use; overwhelming infections likely to prove fatal can be controlled; puerperal
sepsis is almost non-existent as a cause of maternal morbidity and death; infections
in the newborn wvhich were hitherto a major cause of (leath are now treated with
hope of success; the liaemolytic streptococcus which causes rheumatic fever responds
to penicillin and there is evidence that its use over a prolonged period may go far
to reduce the number and severity of recurrences; pneumonia which usedl to be
associated with a high death-rate, especially at the extremes of life, is now regarded
with complacency in the presence of penicillin; this illness, calling for all the skill
of the nursing staff and the all but futile treatment of the physician, is now shorn
of most of its drama.
Unfortunatey, these remedies are not without their hazards and are outstanding
examples of the Oslerian warning that practically all drugs have unpleasant side-
effects. The antibiotics are associated with complications of glossitis and stomatitis;
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea; anal pruritus; vestibular and auditory
disturbances; aplastic anaemia; allergic reactions of many kinds, including fatal
anaphylactoid reactions, serum sickness and skin rashes.
Most of the reactions to antibiotics are uncommon when related to their
widespread use and, fortunately, the majority of unpleasant consequences are no
more than temporarily inconvenient; but sufficient of these side-effects are
pro(luctive of serious damage and fatal outcomes to justify the earnest pleas of
many people that caution is necessary and incliscriminate use is to be avoided.
There is a fallacious generalisation that if a little of something does good, then
a lot will do proportionately more good. It is too often assumed that antibiotics
which are effective in grave illness will be useful in minor illnesses. It should be
more generally appreciated that many of these ailments are not caused by infective
74
agents-and if any of them are so caused, the sensitivity of the organism to the
proposed antibiotic should be assured. The general experience is that the use of
antibiotics in minor illnesses is disappointing and the most probable outcome is
that the patient becomes sensitised and is converted into a potential victim of allergic
reactions. It has been sai(d that antibiotics "are not for minor illnesses and
penicillin umbrellas should be erected for impending storms and not for minor
showers."
More serious, however, is the danger that the patient may become a reservoir
of resistant organisms, especially of staphylococci. It has been shown that the
more frequently staphylococci in a community are exposed to a particular antibiotic
the more likely they are to become resistant to it. WVe are all familiar xvith the
current reports (and some of us have had personal clinical experience) of severe-
or even fatal-staphylococcal enteritis arising during the energetic (and probably
fully justified) use of a group of antibiotics to deal with the primary and unrelated
infection.
Staphylococci and Gram-negative organisms are unpredictable, and before they
are attacked by antibiotics they should be subject to laboratory study for resistance.
It is different with tuberculosis, wvhere it is known that streptomycin along with
isoniazid is safe, that enteric organisms and Iwmcnophilius respond to chloramphenicol
and that the hcemolytic streptococcuts yields to penicillin.
It is surely folly on our part to indulge in the indiscriminate use of these valuable
remedies. It has been stated that in the instances in which a fatal outcome has
resulted from the use of an antibiotic the treatment was misdirected or was un-
necessary in one half. In a survey of a hospital medical unit it was determined that
of all the patients receiving treatment one in four was having some antibiotic ! In
another survey in a surgical unit it was found that in 95 per cent. of patients
treatment with antibiotics was not indicated an(l was unnecessary (Garrod). In
prophylaxis (iarro(d estimated that the abuse of antibiotics was 40 per cent. as
prophvlactics ancd 14 per cent. for treatment.
The family doctor is too often the victim of the modern custom of the patient
who (lemands as a right a "shot of penicillin" at the slightest sign of malaise; and
too often the doctor, to avoid losing a patient or to ensure a worry-free night,
agrees. An unexplained temperature is often treatedl with an "injection" where,
if patience had been exercised, the next day might reveal in all clearness the correct
diagnosis and a different line of treatment be in(licated. Instead, the correct
diagnosis remains shroudled in mystery. It is the experience of many of us that
the patient with an "unexplained" temperature in the evening, if left alone until
morning, will be found to have a normal temperature or the diagnosis will be more
readily ascertainecd in the absence of complicating therapy.
It has been stated that the annual production of antibiotics in the United States
is more than 900 tons-enough for 100 million courses of 10 grams-and Wayne
(1954) concludes "not more than 5 per cent. is administeredl on proper clinical
indications." It may surprise you to know that there are at present forty-seven
preparations of penicillin from whliChl to choose.
75
c
I would suggest, therefore, that regard should be paid to the widespread
warnings against the indiscriminate use of these valuable therapeutic agents,
especially in minor ailments whlichi will respond equally wvell to more conservative
measures. It is tragic to learn of a patient with peptic ulcer being given chlioram-
phenicol only to (lie of aplastic anemia; and it is surely the prostitution of antibiotic
therapv to see a child with cervical adenitis due to Pedicutli capitis beingl, given (lailY
injections of penicillin. More (liscrimination would avoid the tragic examples of
a case of pernicious an,emia which converted to aplastic anwimia as a result of
chloramphenicol lor intercurrent infection; or of laying the alimentarN tract open
to an overwhelming onslaught bx resistant staphylococci; of sudden death due to
penicillin andlall the unpleasant, inconvenient side-effects of administration.
8. Sulphonamides were introduce(d in 19:35 and their advent was hailed as one
of the therapeutic miracles of the century. Thle potency of sulphanilamide against
the streptococcius and its success in comllbating puerperal sepsis assured it of a
position in therapeutics. The han(licaps of the early products were overcome to some
extent bv refinements in manufacture, and development in the production of new
compounds reduced most of the unpleasant eflects associated with the adminis-
trattion of the original preparations. Blocking of the renal tubules with crystals,
.skin rashes and even profound mental changes were accepted as a price to pax for
ease of a(dministration and the dramatic effect on infections which hitherto yielded
only imperfectlv to older therapeutic routines. Pneumococcal infections were, for
the first time, successfully overcome by specific therapv; gonorrhea was treate(l
with spee(d and success instead of by prolonged and often ineffectual measures; the
streptococcus caiusing puerperal sepsis or tonsillitis was assaulted with efficiency.
B3efore, however, the) could be properlx' established in therapeutic favour,
penicillin was successfully prepare(l for administration to the human subject in
somewhat similar inlections. Tlhe novelty and drama of its presentation, its
outstanding success in the treatmilent of war WounLds almost swept the sulphonamili(les
out of the therapeutic orbit in spite of the inconivenience of administration by
injection. Fortunatelv, the chemists persisted in evolving new sulpha compounds
with less harmful side-effects and with a more specific purpose.
1'he occurrence of sulphhlemoglobinaimia was a common result of sulphanilamide
administration, but (foes not occur with modern compounds; nor is agranulocytosis
so frequent. Crystalluria may be an unpleasant complication of some of the
preparations but can usually be avoided by an a(lequate fluid intake. Polyarteritis
nodosa is a risk common to more than one potent drug and rashes are frequent
with many preparations in common use.
It is my opinion that if sulphonamides ha(l been intro(luced to medicine in 1940
instead of in 19:35 their wide field of usefulness and their ease of administration
would have considerably restrictedl the development of antibiotics and would at the
same time have resulted in their more popular use. It seems to me that the future
xvill bring forth chemical compounds based on the sulpha radicle with an in-
creasingly valuable specificity against known infections and( largely devoid of
(langerous ancd unpleasant side-effects.
_76
9. Hazards of Blood Transfusion. Blood transfusions play a large part in
modern therapeutic activity. Many major operations are accompanied, and quite
justifiably, by concurrent infusion of blood. The loss of blood by injury or child-
birth, or during an operation, can be rapidly made good by this life-saving measure.
In severe anawmias it may be the only means of giving the patient an opportunity
to respondl to other slowly acting remedies. A blood transfusion is a dramatic event
which evokes dliscussion in the press and provides a conversational topic for the
drawing-room-especially when a relative is in the hero's r6le of being the donor.
Nowadays it is a commonplace exercise with an annual distribution of well ov-er
half a million bottles of blood.
Do all those who administer blood transfusions lightheartedly realise the risks?
The donor may transmit homologous serum jaundice or even an unsuspected
tropical disease, the virus of measles or of influenza. Blood wlhich is stored may
become contaminated in spite of all recognised measures adopted for the
preservation of sterility; it may also contain an excess of free hamoglobin.
Incompatibility may be unrecognised or a false assumption of suitability of blood
for a specific patient may be made. Further, there is the danger of introducing an
Rh-positive blood into an Rh-negative patient already sensitised by a previous
Rh-positive transfusion or Rh-positive pregnancy. Other risks include overloading
of the circulation, air embolism, thrombophlebitis, excess of citrate in the blood
andl the lack of judgment in giving transfusions to patients with cardiac or renal
inefficiency or in anamia when the increased fluid is too great for the blood-starved
cardiac muscle.
The mortality attached to the operation (in spite of all the precautions of storage,
sterility and testing) has been assessed as about equal to that due to uncomplicated
appendicectomy-admittedly not very high, but creating a definite hazard-and the
advice which might be given to surgeons and other members of hospital staffs is-
"A bloo(d transfusion, like marriage, should not be undertaken lightly, but with
care and competence" (James, 1954).
10. A.C.T. H., Cortisone. The introduction of cortico-steroids in the treatment
of rheumatic disorders was hailed with worldwide interest and accompanied by an
urgent, clamorous demand for their universal distribution. It was not long after
their introduction, however, until enthusiasm for their use became dampened by
the more circumspect and cautious physicians and surgeons.
Deaths after the administration of A.C.T.H. for asthma were recorded and other
untoward effects resulted. In a series of 185 patients there were three gastro-
intestinal perforations (with two deaths), three "psychotic episodes" and one case
of steroid diabetes. There is now available a cumulative list of side-effects from
the administration of cortico-trophin which includes hyperadrenalism, endocrine
depression of the thyroid and gonads, potassium deficiency, psychoses, peptic
ulcer, occult cedema, Cushing-like syndrome, secondary infections, increased
susceptibility to infection, purpuric and thrombo-embolic phenomena as well as
examples of hypersensitivity.
77
D
11. Hypotensives. Hypertension, whether "essential" or associated with
constitutional factors, cardiac or renal disease, endocrine gland disorders or obesity,
is a diagnosis which must disturb the equanimity of the patient and create a feeling
of alarm. The discovery of drugs which were capable of reducing the pressure in
the blood vessels was therefore of outstanding importance. The young parent,
35 years of age, with a systolic pressure of 280 mm. of mercury, is no longer the
subject of dietarv control, sedatives and placebos whilst the disease progresses to
its ultimate end without hesitation. Hexamethonium, by its action in blocking
impulses at the ganglion level, is capable of reducing the pressure and maintaining
it at a level appropriate with the survival of the victim. Other drugs are available,
some are natural in origin, others are complex chemical compounds. Now no less
than thirty-eight preparations in more than a dozen colours and shades are
available. (Palmer, 1955.) Palmer states that fifteen million Americans are being
treated for hypertension, and the comment is made that dietary regulation would be
adequate in a high proportion of cases.
If these drugs had as their sole effect the reduction of systolic and diastolic blood
pressures there would not be the criticism that they are expensive or unnecessary.
Trage(lies, however, have happened with their use. Disturbing symptoms arise
and even death may occur, e.g. ,a patient developed ileus as a result of treatment
with hexamethonium and died. It should be realised that "in these drugs we have
a powerful weapon which is life.saving in suitable cases; but their administration
does require close and careful supervision."
12. Narcotics, Hypnotics, Sedatives.
"O sleep. 0 gentle sleep!
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more will weigh mine eyelids down
and steep my senses in forgetfulness?"
To many, if not most, of us sleep comes naturally at the end of the day's
activities. The mother in labour desires respite and is given a hypnotic or sedative;
the industrialist, harassed by his problems, brings his worries home to his bedroom
and justifiably is provided with a sedative; the neurotic, with his disturbed psyche,
full of anxieties, demands the blessed means of securing the repose which evades
him. Morphia and similar drugs were first replaced by the hypnotics which had
the clisadvantage of a prolonged effect persisting far into the following day.
Sedatives of the barbitone series have the advantage of quick action and relatively
rapid excretion, thereby avoiding dullness of perception after a night's sleep.
Finer and better compounds, each with its own particular advantage, appear at
frequent intervals.
The barbiturates are much used in modern medicine, reflecting possibly the state
of mental anxiety of the individual citizen of this turbulent world. At least 10
per cent. of prescriptions on the form E.C. 10 were for barbiturates, and this may
be an understatement (Dunlop, 1953). Surely it is difficult to justify such a high
proportion of sedatives in our therapeutic activity!
78
It should be appreciated that these drugs are true drugs of addiction; that they
provoke systemic toxic effects such as rashes; fatalities occur as a result of
sensitivity; porphyria occurs in acute form in susceptible persons. More serious,
perhaps, is the fact that, by making the drug so easily accessible, we are facilitating
the would-be suicide and opening a door to accidental poisoning, as these figures
show:
Total suicides - - - - - ,147 ... 4,469
Suicides due to barbiturates - - - 12 ... 248
Percentage - - - - - 0.23 ... 5.5
"Accidents" - - - - - 12 ... 117
Discretion must be exercised before the patient embarks upon a career of
phenobarbitone addiction and emphasis must be placed upon the doubtful practice
of "sedating" (horrible word !) during waking hours people whose symptoms are
the result of anxiety and frustration and those suffering from what it is fashionable
now to call psychosomatic disorders.
13. Chlorpromazine, phenylbutazone are potent drugs with severe side-effects
which demand from us circumspection and control in their exhibition. Rashes,
toxic hepatitis, blood changes occur with alarming frequency. The administration
of gold has been all but abandoned because of its side-effects. Iron has inconvenient
consequences if not used with discretion; fersolate can cause ulceration of the
gastric mucosa and lead to pyloric stenosis; it can cause death in an infant or young
child. Novalgin may cause agranulocytosis. lI'he dangers associated with
amidopyrine are generally appreciated; but unfortunately the presence of this drug
(or some other equally dangerous one) in a well-known proprietary is not always
recognised. Epanutin (phenytoin sodium) is widely used in epilepsy; but it is known
to produce hypertrophy of the gums and less frequently megaloblastic anaemia,
purpura, ulcerative stomatitis, and death. Even vitamins are suspect. I am unable
to contradict the statement that the excessive consumption of the liver of a polar
bear will give rise to headache, nausea, giddiness, drowsiness, and cramp, due to
the high vitamin A content. An unduly large dosage of vitamin D may be
responsible for the recently recorded cases of hypercalcwmia in this country.
Even the babies' napkins are not without danger. Modern detergents can account
for contact dermatitis; a baby was seriously ill with napthalene poisoning due to
storage of napkins in moth balls; marking ink caused fatal methamoglobinaemia
and boric acid used as a powder has had serious consequences. A baby of three
months died from boron poisoning due to the application of "boracic acid powder."
Synthetic preparations of vitamin K are not beyond suspicion, and it has been
recently asserted that kernicterus may be due to the enthusiastic use of this
preparation in endeavouring to avoid the risks of haemorrhage in the newborn in
a difficult or prolonged delivery.
I do not wish to subscribe to the creed of nihilism, but rather to appeal for
discrimination in selecting a drug for therapeutic action. I suggest that we should
cultivate a healthy scepticism and not attribute too many of our therapeutic
79
successes to the potency of the drugs we use and far too little to the tendency
of many diseases to remit spontaneously. It might be better if, more often, we
pondered on when not to treat and when to treat.
Discretion in diagnostic procedures and the avoidance of heroic therapeutic
measures is desirable-"The patient died on the sixth day. He had had no
operation, nor arteriogram performed. In other words death was spontaneous,"
said the cynic.
Disease-a departure from health-is regarded by the victim as a catastrophe:
by some it is looked upon as a divine visitation for the performance of an evil act;
by others as a purely fortuitous, haphazard incident in the life of an individual.
But to us, as doctors, it is a challenge-a mental exercise to determine the correct
diagnosis, an opportunity to evaluate the probable outcome of the illness and, more
importantly, an occasion for the application of the appropriate treatment.
Leonardo da Vinci said, five hundred years ago: "You know that medicines,
when well used, restore health to the sick : they will be well used when the doctor,
together with his understanding of their nature, shall understand also what man
is, what life is, and what constitution and health are."
We must realise that by our advances in knowledge, particularly in therapeutics,
we have created a revolution. Let us, therefore, have a sober assessment of these
remedies we use and a stern criticism of the multiplicity of their actions and effects.
Let me conclude with a "Modern Litany" composed by Sir Robert Hutchison
"From inability to let well alone; from too much zeal for the new
and contempt for what is old; from putting knowledge before wisdom,
science before art, cleverness before common sense, from treating
patients as cases, from making the cure of the disease more grievous
than the endurance of the same, good Lord, deliver us."
80
