ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE*
KURT G. STERN AND MIRIAM REINER
Electrophoresis may be defined as the migration of charged
particles in electrical fields. In principle, two different methods
may be employed in the study of electrokinetic phenomena, namely,
(1) by observing with the microscope the motion of inert particles,
e.g., quartz, which are coated with the colloid under study, and (2)
the measurement by various optical methods of the progress of
boundaries formed between colloidal and buffer solutions. In
recent years this moving boundary method has largely displaced
the microscopic 'method and the term electrophoresis today is almost
synonymous with the former. Studies of the behavior of colloid
systems such as proteins date back as far as the first half of the
nineteenth century, but 'the past decade has witnessed an unprece-
dented development of this field, largely due to the pioneering
researches of Arne Tiselius98 in Upsala and Hugo Theorell in Stock-
holm. For a full discussion of the history, theory, and practice of
electrophoretic analysis in its various forms reference is made to the
monograph by Abramson, Moyer, and Gorin' and to a symposium
published under the auspices of New York Academy of Sciences.'8
Perhaps the most potent stimulus for a wider application of
electrophoretic analysis to biological and medical problems con-
sisted in the availability from commercial sources of apparatus based
on the ideas of Tiselius96 and his coworkers, especially Svens-
son.88' ,89 In this country one of the most active groups in the
field has been that of McInnes and his colleagues, Longs-
worth37' 38, 9 41 and Shedlovsky at the Rockefeller Institute for
Medical Research, New York City. One of the first instruments
based on the original design of Tiselius was set up in the Department
of Physiological Chemistry at Yale University80 near the end of
1937 and applied to the study of anterior pituitary hormones.78
This and later instruments, built with the cooperation of the Sloan
Physics Laboratory of Yale University, have made it possible to
investigate a number of problems of medical interest in close coopera-
* From the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn and the Chemical Laboratories
of the Mt. Sinai Hospital.
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
tion with various investigators at the Yale University School of
Medicine. This work is now being continued and extended at
Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn in cooperation with the Mt. Sinai
Hospital and other metropolitan medical institutions. A similar
cooperative effort is being undertaken by the Electrophoresis Labora-
tory of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia Univer-
sity, under the direction of Dr. Dan H. Moore. Various other
groups associated with a number of other American institutions have
entered this field more recently. In England, work centers around
the group of MacFarlane* and Kekwick at the Lister Institute of
London, while in Scandinavia much clinical work is bing carried out
in close cooperation between the Medical School and the Institute
of Physical Chemistry at Upsala under the leadership of Tiselius.
Commercial instruments, including the optical cells, are now
available in the United States as well as in some of the European
countries. In view of the ever-increasing interest in electrophoresis
as a biochemical and clinical tool, it would appear that the chief
impediment in the way of a more rapid expansion of its application
is the lack of a simpler, less bulky, and less costly apparatus.
A survey of the literature shows that in the course of the last
five years several hundred publications have appeared dealing with
electrophoresis in its different aspects, and it is noteworthy that the
number of publications increases at a greatly accelerated tempo as
time goes on. It has, therefore, been necessary to limit the scope
of the present review to a discussion of some of the more significant
contributions to problems of predominantly medical interest. It is
proposed to discuss electrophoretic studies on normal and pathologi-
cal blood sera and plasma, reports on the electrochemical properties
of isolated serum proteins, and on normal and pathological body
fluids. Studies of immunological interest including those dealing with
immune bodies and antigens and some recent experiments on formed
blood elements will also be considered. This will be concluded by
an attempt to correlate changes observed in electrophoretic patterns
with the physiological state of the organism. Species differences
will be mentioned briefly. Space limitations have made it necessary
to exclude from the present discussion experiments on hormones
and enzymes except where they are incidental to investigations of
* Now at the National Institute for Medical Research, Hampstead, London.
68
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
medical interest. No attempt has been made to treat the subject
from a historical point of view or to cover the field completely.
I. Studies on normal blood serum and plasm-a
The first worker to apply the newly perfected electrophoresis
technique and optical observation of moving boundaries by Toepler's
"schlieren" band method9` to the analysis of serum was Tiselius
himself. He reported95 in 1937 that horse serum, when examined
in his apparatus, showed five boundaries of different electrophoretic
mobility. The fastest boundary was identified with that of serum
albumin; the three following boundaries were reoognized as due to
three different globulin components which were designated as alpha,
beta, and gamma globulin in decreasing order of mobility. The
fifth stationary boundary wvas attributed to a delta component.
Plasma exhibited, in addition to the boundaries just mentioned, a
sixth "schlieren" band si.tuated between the gamma and delta
boundaries which was shown to be due to fibrinogen.25" "
Shortly
afterward, the stationary delta boundary observed in the ascending
limb of the apparatus and the corresponding epsilon boundary in
the descending limb were recognized"'0 as boundary anomalies,
largely due -to the transport of buffer ions by the proteins during
electrophoresis, but also partly due to a superimposed protein
gradient38 rather than an additional protein component. A low peak
of high mobility (-18 X 10-' cm2/sec/V at pH 7.8) observed in
normal plasma and serum by Moore and Lynn5" has been recognized
as a "false" moving boundary 'by Svensson.9" It is due -to the use
of a ibuffer (lithium veronal, lithium chloride) containing two nega-
tive ions.
It could 'be shown90 95 that the so-called pseudoglobulin and
euglobulin fractions which may be obtained by salting out and dialy-
sis methods represent mixtures of several globulin components.
These two fractions differed chiefly in their solubility behavior rather
than in different compositilon fundamentally (pseudoglobulin was
found to contain 85 per cent a globulin and 15 per cent Y globulin,
while euglobulin contains more / and v but less a globulin). In
view of these findings the dassical terminology was quickly aban-
doned and the nomenclature of Tiselius based on electrochemical
properties of serum proteins has since been generally adopted. These
69
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
early observations were subsequently confirmed and considerably
extended with the aid of refined optical methods, namely, the opti-
cally integrating refractive index techniques of Thovert, Philpot, and
Svensson138 88 and the mechanically integrating "schlieren" scanning
method* of L.ongsworth."6 39, 42
At present it is only possible to determine the concentratiions of
the electrop!horetically separable proteins by differences in refractive
index (correcting for the differences in the refractive index in the
various components42) and not in terms of protein nitrogen or dry
weight. Two methods of distributing the areas among the plasma
components are used-drawing an ordinate from the lowest point
between two adjacent peaks, following the procedure of Tiselius
and Kabat,'00 or resolving the pattern into a series of symmetrical
A
FIG. 1. Electrophoretic pattern of normal human plasma, diluted 1:2 and diss'olved in a
0.1 N NaV-0.02 N HV buffer at pH 8.6. Patterns were obtained after electrolysis for 14,000
sec. at 5.38 volts per centimeter (Longsworth38).
curves as described by Pedersen. For a comparison of the two
methods illustrated by diagram and table refer to Longsworth.38
It could be shown that the number of boundaries observed in the
electrophoretic paJtterns of serum and plasma depends on the type
* Other optical methods such as the light absorption method of Svedberg and
the scale refractive index method of Lamm have been employed in electrophoretic
investigations.94 99
70
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
of buffer employed and on the species under study,* thus the use of
a sodium diethylbarbiturate buffer of pH 8.6 and an ionic strength
of 0.1 leads to the resolution of human plasma into six well-defined
components, namely albumin, a,, a2, /3, and y globulin in addition
to fibrinogen and the stationary anomalous boundaries38 as shown
in Fig. 1, whereas in phosphate buffer of pH 7.7 and ionic strength
0.2 or lithium veronal buffer of pH 7.9 and ionic strength of 0.05,
the a1 globulin fails to separate from the albumin and the v globulin
remains united with the 8 ande boundaries respectively.
The blood sera of different animal species yield markedly differ-
ent electrophoreitic patterns,'4' "
90 thus horse serum shows two
/-globulin peaks as well as two a components31 83, 90 while the blood
plasma of dogs gives rise to an even more complex pattern86' 1O3;
in addition to albumin, three a-gl6bulin peaks, two P components
as well as fibrinogen and Y globulin have been recorded.
As exemplified by the diagram shown in Fig. 1, the albumin
peak is iby far the tallest and best defined in normal blood sera
whereas the globulin peaks are considerably lower and frequently
subject to a greater degree of electrophoretic spreadingt. The pat-
terns given by the ascending and descending boundaries are not
identical. The extent of dissymmetry is a function of the ionic
strength of the solvenlt (cf. ref. 91). In general the rising albumin
boundary is better defined than is the falling albumin boundary, and
the / peak in the descending limb in the apparatus shows a peculiar
anomaly reminiscent of a total reflection phenomenon (see Fig. 1)
which has been ascriibed to an instability of this component after
electrophoretic separation from the accompanying serum proteins
(ref. 44, p. 402). Aging of serum for periods as long as 18 months
leads to a disappearance of this disturbance in the /-globulin bound-
ary."7 This phenomenon was correlated by the authors with the
simultaneous slight reduction of the /3-glcbulin maximum due to
dissociation of lipid from the protein.
* In the case of horse serum, the use of phosphate buffer yields a higher resolu-
tion than does sodium veronal buffer (ref. 38, p. 332).
t A progressive spreading or blurring of the boundary of a colloid migrating
in an electrical field is, as a rule, only partly due to diffusion, the remainder is
caused by a slight electrochemical inhomogeneity of the material under study. This
second component, in contrast to diffusion, is essentially reversible in nature
(cf. ref. 1, 75, 77).
71
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
The fact that a certain fraction of the serum or plasma migrates
at a more or less uniform rate in an electric field should not be
accepted as evidence of a chemical homogeneity of this material.
Indeed, it has been shown that the various electro-chemically
defined components of blood serum may be further fractionated into
chemically or biologically different entities, by other methods, e.g.,
salt and organic solvent precipitations (cf. ref. 10). It is also
important to note that the electrophoretic fractions designated
throughout this paper as albumin, a,#/3, and Y globulin do not consist
solely of protein but represent native complexes of these protein
moieties wilth low molecular, non-protein substances. Thus, accord-
ing to Tiselius,97 the albumin fraction contains bilirulbin in addition
to carbohydrate, while the / globulin contains an appreciable amount
of lipid such as cholesterol. It was subsequently shown7' 103 that all
serum protein fractions otbtained by electrophoretic separation con-
tain some cholesterol and phosphatids in bound form, although the
a and /-globulin fractions are richer in lipids than either albumin or
Y globulin, likewise all fractions were found to contain carbohy-
drate, with the a and /3 globulins again showing the highest per-
centage. In spite of this, 50 per cent or more of the total lipids and
carbohydrates in serum are contained in the albumin and y-globulin
fractions since a and / globulin constitute only a minor part of the
serum proteins.
The /3-globulin fraction has recently received careful attention
in the Harvard Medical School laboratories with particular refer-
ence to its nature as a lipo-protein complex and to the interaction
between the two components and with other ions.54 It now appears
that / gobulin -or one of its components is closely related to, if not
identical with, the "X" protein component observed by Pedersen57
in his studies of serum proteins in the ultracentrifuge.
The weak bonds between the proteins and these prosthetic groups
are broken in the course of chemical isolation procedures; the "puri-
fied" serum proteins, e.g., crystalline serum albumin, are actually
derivatives of the original complexes as they exist in native blood
serum. The majority of antibodies are known to be present in the
y-globulin fraction which is perhaps the most complex and hetero-
geneous of all.10
Quan-titative measurements on the relative and absolute concen-
trations of the various protein components in normal human plasma
72
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
and serum have been reported from various laboratories.5 29, 44, 51
When comparing these data, it should be borne in mind that some
of them were based on only a limited numlber of observations.
Thus, Moore and Lynn tabulate concentration ratios for a total of
25 experiments, 7, 6, and 12 of which were performed in three
different laboratories. It is evident that the interpretation of such
a small numfber of observations can have only a limited value even
though statistical methods were employed in the evaluation; fur-
thermore some of the data were obtained using buffer systems which
do not resolve completely the individual components of human
plasma. In the recent studies of Dole and Braun"5 veronal buffer
of optimum resolving power was used, and the results are sum-
marized in table 1. The albumin-globulin (A/G) ratio as deter-
mined electrophoretically is on the average near 1.5 according to
these authors. Higher values for this ratio ranging from 1.94 to
2.25 (cf. ref. 51) are due to lack of resolution of the a globulin
and the albumin gradient on account of the buffer used. The agree-
ment with the corresponding value as determined by the sodium
sulfate method of Howe, so widely used in clinical laboratories, is
not too satisfactory. Thus, Dole and Braun find that the A/G ratio
measured electrophoretically is approximately 30 per cent lower than
that obtained by chemical fractionation of the same plasma sample.
Taylor and Keys92 find in a comparative study of 8 normal sera that
the sodium sulfate technique assigned about 5.2 per cent more nitro-
gen to the albumin fraction than would be indicated by electro-
phoretic analysis. Tha-t the chemical method rather than the physi-
cal method is at fault is indicated by the findings of Pillemer and
Hutchinson,60 who found satisfactory agreement between the A/G
ratio obtained by electrophoresis and their low temperature methanol
precipitation technique. The values given in table 1 are based on
the results obtained with 15 normal plasma samples from young
adult males. On the whole no marked differences have been
observed in the experience of the present authors between patterns
recorded for adults of both sexes or for individuals of widely varying
age. Contrary to expectations in a recent study40 of 10 pairs of
maternal and fetal plasmas it was found that the protein components
of the maternal samples showed a greater variation from normal
than did those of the fetal plasmas, the relative concentration of the
1-globulin component being markedly elevated. On the other hand,
73
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
0 I'
o 4
0
C)
co;
co
.
4 -
C'
C
*9 o)
0
4-C
0
o
.C's
z
0 4
CC
.-
U C0
4-J
o* *U-
C's
UC
4- *
0 00
00C;
- 0
b tto 0
o 0cs0 0~~~~0
o 0
* e
t~~~O oeq
-o 0 l
o 0 00 I
CN L_
.t~~ ~~tM.N
0 Oq
0 0
OC 00 0' e
C>q I'
C'00
0 0~~~~C
C)
0
Ua1-
'-dCC4*0ct
CC
4f.)
U) 4)
*- >x
o El
ci
(L)
.- 0
4-CO
'IC CC
+t C)4. *L
74
m
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
the v-globulin concentration of the fetal samples was greater than
that of the normal or maternal values, a fact which was correlated by
the authors with the well-known natural immunity of newborn
infants.
The serum of the newborn calf contains a special globulin com-
ponent which amounts to 20 per cent of the total serum protein
and from 50 to 80 per cen,t of the globulin fraction.56' 5 This
globulin, which has been designated fetzin by Pedersen, has an elec-
trophoretic mobility similar to that of a2 or A globulin. Fetuin
differs from the other globulin components by its soluibility in
ammonium sulfate solutions and by its sedimentation constant and
molecular weight.*
In the serum of calf fetuses the new globulin may amount to as
much as one third of the ttotal protein and about 90 per cent of the
globulin fraction. A similar substance has been found in the fetus
of sheep56 and in the foal.56 57 According to fractionation experi-
ments followed by ultracentrifugal examination this globulin is
present only in small amounts in the sera from the human umbilical
cord, in agreement with the above-mentioned olbservations on fetal
plasma,40 and from the fetuses of rabbits."7 Gross differences in
the electrophoretic pattern in the serum of newborn, nursing, and
mature calves have previously been reported by Jameson and col-
leagues.27 These workers made the interesting observation that
serum of newborn calves before the ingestion of colostrum contains
no y globulin and only small amounts of e globulin. During nurs-
ing the v globulin makes its appearance. Moore49 has observed
that the serum of very young rats and kittens contains a minimum
amount of y globulin.
The values obtained for relative concentrations of various pro-
tein components as computed from electrophoretic data are affected
to some extent lby the ionic strength and the protein concentration
(cf. ref. 59); thus, in 2 per cent protein solution and with veronal
buffer of pH 8.6 the apparent alibumin concentration decreases from
57 to 54 per cent while the /-globulin value rises from 10 to 13 per
cent upon increasing the ionic strength from 0.1 to 0.3. Similar
variations were observed when the protein concentration was varied
* For information on the behavior of the various serum proteins in the analytical
ultracentrifuge reference is made to the recent study by Pedersen.57
75
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
and the ionic strength of the buffer was maintained at a constant
value. The limited number of values reported in the literature for
normal plasma and sera and the marked individual differences
among them render the demarcation between normal and abnormal
or pathological variations in the concentration of individual com-
ponents somewhat difficult at this time. Future standards will have
to be based on a large series of observations made under closely con-
trolled and uniform experimental conditions. For this reason only
gross changes in the composition of individual components and the
albumin-globulin ratio may 'be considered significant a.t this time.
Many of the publications mentioned above also contain data on
the electrophoretic mobility of the protein components of serum and
plasma (cf. ref. 15 and 44) (see table 1). The chief value of deter-
mining the mobility of the various components recorded during
electrophoretic separation lies in their use for correlation of the
individual maxima with the corresponding components. Tihis how-
ever is necessary only in those instances where additional peaks are
observed, as in certain pathological sera (see below), or where the
entire type of the electrophoretic diagram is changed, as, for
example, in nephrosis. As a rule, the mobility of the individual
components is affected only to a relatively minor degree by con-
centration changes.* For this reason the emphasis in the electro-
phoretic analysis of serum and plasma under a variety of patho-
physiological conditions centers at present on the shifts observable in
the relative concentrations of the individual components of the
protein spectrum.
The effect of various physical factors such as temperature, freez-
ing and thawing, aging, etc., on the electrophoretic pattern of serum
and plasma has not yet been studied in a comprehensive manner,
although isolated observations have been reported incidental to the
investigations of other problems. The changes observed in plasma
and serum after storage in the liquid, the frozen, and in the dried
* The values for electrophoretic mobility as computed from observations on the
rising and falling boundaries in the apparatus vary somewhat; furthermore the
areas under the individual maxima are likewise not identical in all instances.
Following Longsworth38 most workers prefer to use the mobility and concentration
values as derived from the descending boundaries although the anomalous shape of
the ,-globulin peak interferes somewhat with the area measurements by planimetry.
76
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
state have been reviewed in detail by Scudder.67 Storage of pooled
plasma from outdated "Bank" blood in the frozen state (-200 C.)
and thawing at 370 do not affect the electrophoretic pattern. The
same holds true for plasma dried from the frozen state by the
lyophile and similar methods. The patterns of plasma samples pre-
served by drying at 370 in vacuo or by drying in an air-stream in
cellophane containers show a decreased albumin component in both
instances, a strong turbidity interfering with the optical analysis in
the latter. Even in the absence of refrigeration, plasma exhibits a
remarkable stability during prolonged storage as judged by electro-
phoretic examination; however refrigeration appears to increase the
stability. Minor changes observed after storage for 53 days con-
cern a decline in the A/G ratio, due mainly to a decrease in the
albumin peak. Unrefrigerated and autopsy specimens exhibit more
marked changes in their pattern. For further details, reference is
made to table 2 in Scudder's paper and to the individual publica-
tions quoted by him. Observations similar to those reported on
human serum and plasma have been made on aliquots of one batch
of horse serum.8' When horse serum is heated at temperatures
ranging from 60 to 700 for periods of from 15 to 30 minutes65 the
serum not only becomes opalescent but the electrophoretic pattern
undergoes a series of pronounced changes consisting essentially of a
decrease in the albumin peak and a corresponding increase of the a
and f globulin gradients which fuse into a single sharply defined
peak. Upon continued heating, or increasing the temperature fur-
ther, the cloudiness and viscosity of the serum increased and gel
formation occurred. It has been observed23 that the heat stability
of bovine serum is considerably increased by the addition of rela-
tively large amounts of glucose.
Irradiation with ultraviolet light at from 21 to 250C. for about
280 hours leads13 to the appearance of a new peak in the electro-
phoretic diagram, presumably representing denatured protein at the
expense of other components. This material has a mobility like
that of P globulin. Similar observations have been made on heat-
denatured serum.'3 65 The effect of the removal of serum lipids
by acetone-ether extraction at low temperature on the electrophoretic
pattern of blood serum has been studied by Blix.5 The lipid-free
serum fails to show an a-globulin boundary at pH 6.1 or 7.4 in
contrast to pH 8.0 where this boundary may be observed although
77
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
at lower concentration than in normal serum. Whether this phe-
nomenon is due to the absence of lipids or to an incipient protein
denaturation could not be decided. The only other significant
change in the pattern of such sera is the absence of the opalescence
otherwise noted in the region of the A-globulin boundary.
Studies on pathological sera and body fluids
Two of the earliest studies on this subject were those of Blix6
and of Hesselvik4 in Sweden. Blix made the important observa-
tion that in pneumonia the a-globulin component is increased up to
twice the normal concentration, while the other components remain
unchanged. This finding has subsequently been confirmed in
various other laboratories and extended until it has become accepted
generally that the amount of a globulin is usually increased in all
conditions accompanied by high body temperatures. Thus, Longs-
worth et al.44 found for 8 samples of serum obtained from febrile
patients, suffering from rheumatic fever, pneumonia, peritofnitis, etc.,
an average a-globulin/albumin ratio of 0.30 which is more than twice
that found for normal sera. At the same time the A/G ratio was
found to be decreased. The same authors made the first electro-
phoretic survey of normal and pathological sera with the aid of the
"schlieren" scanning method which affords diagrams most suitable
for the quantitative estimation of relative and absolute concentra-
tions of the various components present in biological fluids. In
addition to the febrile conditions already mentioned, they examined
sera obtained from S cases of aplastic anemia, yielding somewhat
low values for the A/G ratio due to a relatively high v-globulin
concentration, and one serum from a case of lymphogranuloma,
showing a low A/G ratio and considerable increases in the relativea,
A, and v-globulin concentration. Their findings in a few cases of
lipoid nephrosis and myeloma will be discussed later. The early
work published by these and other authors suffered from the use of
buffers which failed to resolve the e globulin and the anomalous
stationary boundaries (8 and E) as well as the albumin and a-globulin
maxima. However the patterns reproduced by Longsworth and his
colleagues" for some of the investigated pathological conditions
were sufficiently striking to indicate considerable promise of this new
tool in clinical medicine. It was chiefly this paper which initiated
78
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE 79
and stimulated a flow of publications on the subject with the result
that well over a hundred studies of this type have been published
in the last five years.
TABLE 2 (Luetscher45)
PERCENTAGE COMPOSITION OF PROTEINS OF PLASMA AND EFFUSIONS
Total
protein Albumin a | Fibrinogen
NORMAL PLASMA
Plasma 6.5 62.5 7.0 13.2 | 11.6 | 5.7
CIRRHOSIS
Plasma 5.7 39.3 5.8 14.2 32.0 8.7
Ascites 0.6 41.1 4.5 13.8 34.5 6.1
Plasma 5.3 38.3 5.0 26.2 24.4 6.1
Ascites 0.5 52.0 3.4 20.0 22.5 2.1
Plasma 5.3 35.8 7.0 26.4 27.3 3.6
Ascites 0.3 48.0 6.5 19.5 26.0 -
TERMINAL GLOMERULONEPHRITIS WITH HEART FAILURE
Plasma 6.0 43.1 3.1 31.2 16.3 6.3
Pleura (left) 0.9 65.6 4.7 12.5 12.5 4.7
Pleura (right) 0.95 67.0 4.5 12.0 12.0 4.5
LOBAR PNEUMONIA
Plasma 5.6 40.6 10.3 26.8 13.6 8.7
Pleural fluid 4.0 50.5 14.5 19.1 13.8 2.1
Plasma 5.3 33.5 17.0 24.8 17.0 7.7
Pleural fluid 3.4 49.2 14.0 12.2 17.1 7.5
Pericardial 3.3 58.3 12.8 16.5 12.4
TUBERCULOSIS
Plasma 6.3 52.2 9.9 17.6 13.1 7.2
Pleural fluid 1 4.4 61.6 7.0 13.7 14.0 3.7
Plasma 5.7 36.1 9.5 10.9 32.1 11.4
Ascites 2.4 37.5 7.7 8.5 39.3 7.0
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Infectious diseases. The observations of Blix6 and Longsworth
et al." on sera obtained from pnemonia patients have already
been mentioned. Luetscher, in his survey of various pathological
states,46 has studied the plasma as well as the pleural and pericardial
effusions in several cases of lobar pneumonia. He finds that the
plasma has a greatly decreased albumin content with an increased
concentration of fibrinogen and usually of ft and y globulin in addi-
tion to the doubled a-globulin concentration previously reported by
Blix and Longsworth. The protein content of the effusions was
found to be as,high as.3 or 4 per cent with an albumin concentration
similar to that of serum. Globulin and fibrinogen concentrations
were low, the latter apparently due to defibrination -by the pleura.
No evidence was found of a selective secretion of any one protein
component into the exudate. The single sample of pericardial fluid
examined did not differ significantly electrophoretically from the
pleural effusions (see table 2).*-
Electrophoretic experiments have recently been reported by
Dole"7 and his colleagues of the Rockefeller Institute on 6 patients
originally admitted with scarlet fever, 3 of whom subsequently
developed rheumatic fever. Significant changes in electrophoretic
pattern of similar nature were observed in the rheumatic as well
as in the non-rheumatic scarlet fever patients. The albumin con-
centration decreased in the early stages of the disease accompanied
by increases in the al and a2 globulin fractions, while the v-globulin
concentration slowly increased in the course of the illness. While
there appeared to be a positive correlation between the increase in
the latter component and the titer of the an.tistreptolysin 0, the
authors were unable to remove detectable amounts of v globulin by
adsorp,tion on live streptococci of the strain responsible for the scarlet
fever of these patients. Excepting for a more delayed development
in the abnormal features of the electrophoretic pattern in the case of
the rheumatic individuals, no marked differences were found
between these sera and those obtained from non-rheumatic scarlet
fever patients. Longsworth et al.44 had previously noted the
increase in the a-globulin/albumin and the v-globulin/albumin ratios
* It should be noted that the experiments forming the substance of this table
were carried out with a phosphate buffer of ionic strength of 0.2 and pH 7.7. The
mobilities quoted for the individual components by the same author differ there-
fore somewhat from those contained in table 1.
80
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
in 3 cases of rheumatic fever. The latter phenomenon has been
confirmed by Luetscher who studied 2 instances of acute rheumatic
fever affecting the heart and leading to congestive failure.45 More
recently,6' Rutstein et al. determined the v-globulin/albumin and
Y-globulin/total protein ratios in 9 samples of sera from 8 patients
in acute stages of rheumatic fever. With the possible exception of
one, all of the ratios were elevated above the normal value. These
ratios persisted on a somewhat elevated level in 3 of these patients
during inactive stages of the disease. It is interesting to note that
in this series of experiments the a-globulin/albumin ratios were
found to be less consistently increased than had previously been
reported by other workers in this and other febrile diseases.
In the single instance where the serum of a patient was examined
before and after salicylate therapy by Rutstein et al.6" a drastic
decrease took place in the concentration of all globulin components.
However, this observation may be fortuitous, since in 2 other cases
which had received salicylate therapy, studied by these authors, the
y-globulin concentration was of the same order as in untreated
patients.
As in other febrile diseases, the plasma of patients with active
tuberculosis shows an increase in the a-globulin fraction.46 The
albumin is reduced to a variable extent while fibrinogen and Y globu-
lin is found to be increased, the latter especially in active cases (see
table 2). As may be seen in the data from the same table, the pro-
tein content of pleural effusion and 'of ascitic fluid from 2 cases of
tuberculosis was found to be relatively high: the distribution of
protein over the various components was similar to that in the plasma
of the same individual. The most extended electrophoretic studies
on crude and on purified tuberculin antigens and of the blood serum
of tubercular human patien'ts and rabbits have been carried out by
Seibert and her associates at the Phipps Institute of the University
of Pennsylvania. Tuberculin preparations were fractionated by
electrophoresis into several protein components, polysaccharides, and
nucleic acids.68' 72, 7 4 The two purified protein components, of
-different molecular weight, when injected into rabbits elicited the
formation of antibodies migrating with the a and v-globulin com-
ponents of the serum respectively.71' 72 The same workers have
been able to correlate the clinical progress of the disease with changes
in the electrophoretic pattern of the serum of experimental animals
81
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
69,70 eavneotuecls,aand human patients. With the advance of tuberculosis, a
progressive decrease occurred in 'the absolute and relative albumin
concentrations. The first change noticeable in the early stages of
the disease is usually a rise in the relative amount of a globulin,
as a rule accompanied by the appearance of an abnormal component
designated as "X" fraction (not to be confused with Pedersen's
"X" protein) having a mobility slighitly higher than that of albumin.
These changes are interpreted by Seibert and Nelson as probable
evidence of sensitization to tuberculin protein. As the disease
reaches the terminal stage, the P-globulin concentration increases,
whereas a rise in the ,
globulin possibly may accompany the develop-
ment of resistance to the disease.
A careful study of the plasma proteins in disseminated lupus
erythematosus, a disease of obscure but possibly infectious etiology,
has been carried out by Coburn and Moore.9 On the basis of
material covering 30 cases of the disease, the authors conclude that
a large increase in v globulin (hyper gamma-globulinemia) of
unknown origin is a constant feature of disseminated lupus erythema-
tosus. The y-globulin fraction as obtained by electrophoretic sepa-
ration had a sedimentation constant identical with that of normal
e globulin, and contained the relatively highest fraction of an anti-
body which reacts with certain phosphatids and which is responsible
for the false positive Wassermann and Kline tests given by the sera
of these patients. It is suggested "that the vascular lesions and
disturbances in nutrition observed in this disease may be associated
with the presence of a high concentration of circulating / globulin."
A considerable number of studies has been carried out on the
changes in electrophoretic pattern of the sera of experimental animals
during immunization and hyperimmunization with bacterial anti-
gens, chiefly for the production of antisera for therapeutic purposes
(cf. ref. 1). Inasmuch as studies of this type are somewhat beyond
the main scope of this review, only a few of the more significant
contributions will be mentioned here. Among the first observa-
tions in this field were those of Tiselius95 on the migration of the
antibody in highly potent egg albumin antiserum of rabbits with the
y-globulin fraction and those of Tiselius and Kabat100 on pneumo-
coccus antisera of various animals. They made the interesting
observation that the antibody present in antipneumococcus I horse
serum migrates with a mobility intermediate between that of the
82
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
P and e-globulin components, while in the majority of cases the cor-
responding antibodies in rabbit, pig, and monkey sera form a part
of the v-globulin fraction. Wyckoff and his collaborators (cf. ref.
53) extended these observations considerably. Thiey demonstrated
an extraordinary increase in the v-globulin component in horse serum
as a result of hyperimmunization to pneumococcus antigen and the
sharp decrease in this component after adsorption with specific poly-
saccharide. In contrast to the observations with antipneumococcal
serum, Wyckoff's group63 64 found that antitetanus and various
other antibacterial horse sera show, in addition to a considerable
increase in the v-globulin concentration, a new component called by
them "T" with an electrophoretic mobility intermediate between
P and v and frequently overlapping with these two globulin frac-
tions. The correlation between the amount of "T" component in
hyperimmune sera and their antitoxic activity was poor, suggesting
by inference that the latter is associated essentially with the e globu-
lin rather than with the "T" component. Kekwick and Record3'
attempted to correlate with flocculation time and other immunologi-
cal characteristics the physical properties of diphtheria antitoxic horse
sera, as determined by ultracentrifugal and electrophoretic methods.
They demonstrated that the immunization with diphtheria toxoid
leads to the formation of two antitoxins which are associated with
the P and v-globulin fractions respectively. This was substantiated
by the immunological examination of fractions rich in either P or Y
globulin prepared by salt fractionation followed by electrophoretic
separation. The changes occurring in the electrophoretic pattern of
horse serum as a result of hyperimmunization with diphtheria anti-
gen are illustrated83 in Fig. 2.
Upon adsorption of such hyperimmune serum on purified diph-
theria toxin in vitro, the area under the large maximum in the region
of the P-globulin boundary is reduced and its composite nature is
clearly indicated by a split in the peak.83 The reaction between
purified diphtheria antitoxic globulin and diphtheria toxin has been
studied by Pappenheimer et al.55 The effect of proteolytic enzymes
(pepsin and takadiastase) on the electrophoretic diagram of various
antibacterial horse sera has been studied by several investigators.", 62
In all instances the patterns of the enzyme-treated sera were con-
siderably simplified.
Relatively few electrophoretic studies have been published on
83
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
other infectious diseases, including those caused by protozoa, viruses,
or unknown agents. While it has been known for some time that
paroxysms in malaria are
followed by a decrease in
the albumin and by a rela-
tive increase in the globulin
fraction, as determined by
the usual methods of clinical
chemistry, the electropho-
retic changes in the plasma
proteins of patients with
relapsing malaria have been
described only recently by
Dole and Emerson,16 The
total serum protein in the
plasma of 8 patients with
relapsing P. vivax malariae
was found to be within the
normal range; however,
there was a shift in the
mBo AFR 4 MON= Of A/G ratio due to a relative
DTzC VM1IFwI EA TOfl increase in the fibrinogen/v-
(Sl3OFM RE N0. 5012) globulin concentration. In
FIG. 2. Horse serum before and after 4 months of the 2 cases which were
immunization with diphtheria toxin (Stern and Fell88) studied over a period of
time there was a tendency for thie electrophoretic pattern of the
plasma to return to normal although the infection persisted in a
patient suffering from severe P. falciparism malariae; the total pro-
tein concentration was greatly decreased, mainly due to a lowered
albumin content. It was the impression of the authors that the
determinations of total protein and of the A/G ratio may serve as
indicators of the severity of the disease, but that the changes in the
plasma protein pattern possessed no diagnostic significance.
H. B. Bull,'2 in his recent text on Physical Biochemistry, states
that J. A. Cooper and D. H. Atlas, working in his laboratory, have
made the striking observation that the /9 anomaly which is always
dbserved in fresh normal serum in the descending limb of the
Tiselius apparatus was completely absent in the serum of 13 syphilis
patients in the primary, secondary, and tertiary stages of the disease.
84
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
"So characteristic is the absence of beta anomaly in syphilitic sera
that they were able to use this feature as a diagnostic aid for syphilis.
As is well known, Wassermann and Kahn tests give false positive
reactions which are unrelated to syphilis. In some of these con-
ditions and possibly in all of them, beta anomaly is present."
As yet these findings do not appear to have been published in
full, and an independent confirmation would appear to be highly
desirable in view of the finding of Dole et al.7 that aged sera failed
to show disturbance in the c globulin. However, Cooper11 reported
electrophoretic experiments on syphilitic sera before and after inacti-
vation by heating to 56°C. for 30 minutes and also after inactivation
and flocculation with Kahn antigen. While the heat inactivation
alone produced no significant changes in the patterns, the reaction
with the antigen removed some of the v-globulin fraction. Electro-
phoretic and serological examinations of protein fractions isolated
from such sera with the aid of ammonium sulfate precipitation indi-
cated that the A or v-globulin fractions, or both, are the carriers of
the Kahn and Wassermann reagins.
In the virus-induced lymphogranuloma venereum an elevation
of the globulin fraction of the serum (usually limited to the v-globu-
lin fraction) appears to be an important feature of the disease.20
The observations made by Longsworth et al.44 on a single case of
lymphogranuloma (Hodgkin's disease) have already been men-
tioned. One of the present authors,87 in collaboration with the
research group studying this disease of unknown etiology at St.
Vincent's Hospital, New York, is conducting a study of the
electrophoretic pattern of sera from patients with Hodgkin's disease.
Although no definite conclusions may be presented at this time, one
has the impression that the changes observed in the electrophoretic
diagram of such sera bear a relation to the clinical state of the
patients rather than 'being specific or characteristic for the disease
itself.
Non-infectious diseases: An electrophoretic study of 7 cases of
cardiac failure48 revealed a lowered plasma albumin and a raised a
and v-globulin concentration, whereas the a-globulin and fibrinogen
levels were normal or slightly reduced (see table 2). Effusions
(pericardial and ascitic fluids) differ in their protein distribution
from the corresponding blood plasma in the sense that the albumin
concentration is relatively higher and the A globulin is relatively
85
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
lower. The absolute protein concentration in the effusions varied
from 1.0 to 3.7 gm./100 cc.
In liver disease only a limited number of cases have been studied
with the aid of this new physical chemical tool. The plasma of a
patient suffering from obstruetive jauindice was found to contain a
large amount of material moving with the mobility of P globulin,
along with an abnormally high content of cholesterol. Extraction
of the plasma with ether reduced the /-globulin peak greatly." In
a more extended study, Gray and Barron2' found, however, that
extrahepatic jaundice caused by gallstones, even though quite severe,
does not produce a significant alteration in the electrophoretic pattern
of the serum. In spite of the fact that the serum cholesterol was
greatly increased in all S cases studied, no consistent increases in the
/3-globulin peak were observed. The authors were inclined to con-
sider the increased /-globulin concentration as a manifestation of a
hepatic parenchymatous disorder as evidenced microscopically by
focal areas of necrosis and by pyknosis of the liver cell nuclei. Sera
of patients suffering from cirrhosis of the liver have been examined
by several workers. (See Fig. 3 for electrophoretic pattern of a
patient with cirrhosis of the liver.82) Luetscher45' 46 finds that the
total plasma proteins in the early stages of portal cirrhosis are
normal, or occasionally above normal. Electrophoretic analysis dis-
closes, however, that a decrease in the albumin fraction is at least
partially compensated by an increase of A and especially of the
y-globulin fraction. These changes are particularly marked when
ascites develops (see table 2). For a comparative study of the par-
tition of serum proteins by Howe's sodium sulfate method with the
results of the electrophoretic analysis of sera in a number of instances
of liver cirrhosis, reference is made to the work of Gutman and his
colleagues.22 More recently, Gray and Barron,21 after studying 12
patients with cirrhosis of the liver of various types, have stated that
the serum protein pattern is more abnormal in this than in any other
form of liver disease. The relative serum albumin concentration
was decreased on the average 45.7 per cent, varying from 31.6 to
64.5 per cent. The most consistent and characteristic change in the
globulin fraction consisted in a mean increase of 100 per cent over
the normal in the v-globulin fraction, whereas the changes in the a
and /3-globulin components were irregular. As the chief result of
their electrophoretic study of the serum proteins in acute parenchy-
86
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
matous liver disease, cirrhosis, and cancer of the liver, as well as in
extrahepatic jaundice, the authors conclude that the most character-
istic change consists A
in a large increase
in the Y globulin
and a decrease in
the serum albumin
concentration, with
the extent of
abnormality ti|.
depending on the d ,
severity of the
disease. It is
believed that the
serum pfrotein
changes occurring G
in diseases of the CI3DING
liver are caused F3*Of Electrophoretic patter of a serum from a patient with
chiefly by the fail-
ure of the liver to synthesize normal serum proteins rather than by
the loss of proteins in the ascitic fluid. The mechanism of the
flocculation of cephalin-cholesterol emulsions by the y-globulin frac-
tion isolated from normal and hepatitic serum has recently been
studied by Moore et al.52 with the result that the flocculating power
of the e-globulin fraction may increase in hepatitis whereas the
electrophoretically separated albumin fraction, especially from nor-
mal sera, may inhibit the phenomenon.
One of the most promising problems in the field of electro-
phoretic analysis of pathological states is that of renal disease.
The first observation of the highly atypical serum pattern in
nephrosis may be found in the paper by Longsworth, Shedlovsky,
and Maclnnes.44 This diagram showed an extremely low albumin
peak and an electrophoretic component migrating with the velocity
of a globulin and having a concentration comparable to that of
albumin in normal serum. The P-globulin component was also
markedly elevated. Shortly afterwards Longsworth and Maclnnes43
published the results of a study of nephrotic sera and urines
which, in spite of the small number of cases investigated, w-ere of
considerable significance. It was found that the urine of such
87
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
patients gave an electrophoretic pattern closely resembling that of
normal serum and in striking contrast to the highly abnormal
diagram of the serum of the same patients. Electrophoretic pat-
terns of the urine and serum from a case of nephrosis are presented
in Fig. 4.
A + (3
A
DESCfDfl BOUIN=AI
URE NLIS SEME
FIG. 4. Electrophoretic patterns of urine and serum from a nephrotic patient.82
This observation not only disproves the common notion that
the urinary protein in nephrosis essentially represents albumin but
it also indicates clearly that the excretion of urinary protein by
the kidney is a -highly selective process rather than a simple filtra-
tion. Ether extraction of a nephrotic serum causes a drastic reduc-
tion of the 3-component peak which together with chemical lipid
determinations strongly suggest that the A peak is due to a lipo-
protein complex. Osmotic pressure determinations by Bourdillon and
a comparison of the mobilities of the urinary albumin with that of
the serum are suggestive of the non-identity of the two proteins
although this point remains to be established by future experiments.
In the course of this work, Shedlovsky contributed the important
observation that nephrotic sera may be clarified by high-speed cen-
trifugation without the loss of protein-bound lipids which are present
in true solution. Many of these findings were independently
confirmed and extended by Luetscher.4" Plasma specimens of three
88
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE.
cases -of glomerulonephritis had an approximately normal protein
pattern with minor changes in the albumin and A3-globulin com-
ponents. The urine of these patients showed a lower total protein
concentration than was found in nephrosis, but showed similar rela-
tive concentrations of the constituents. Electrophoretic and chemi-
cal analyses of the 'proteins present in nephritic urine and of the
effect of proteinuria on the human kidney have 'been described by
Blackman and Davis.3' 4 It was found that the concentration of
e globulin was especially high in the urine of those patients where
renal insufficiency was advancing rapidly. In contrast to this find-
ing, the y-globulin c6ncentration was found to be very low in the
urine of a patient with chronic lipoid nephrosis and normal kidney
function. The absence of detectable amounts of fi-brinogen in the
urine of patients with progressing nephrotic nephritis indicates that
the hyaline materials which collect in the glomeruli and tubules of
the kidney in these patients are, in all probability, formed from
globulins rather than from fibrinogen. The phenomena observed
in a case of progressive renal insufficiency associated with multiple
myeloma2 are more complex and will be discussed later.
A protein spontaneously precipitated from the cooled blood of
a patient having acro pjrpura, chronic glomerulonephritis, and con-
gestive heart failure was isolated by Lerner and Greenberg.32 It
resembled Y globulin with respect to its solubility, ultraviolet absorp-
tion spectrum, and nitrogen content. The method of isolation, the
electrophoretic pattern, and phase rule studies indicated that the
purified protein preparation probably was homogeneous.
A limited number of studies has been conducted on the sera
of patients with defects in the organs of internal secretion. In
cases of hyperthyroidism the most notable and consistent deviation
from the normal was a low absolute and relative albumin concentra-
tion.3 This was frequently accompanied by an increase in a globu-
lin and occasionally also of fibrinogen. Within several months
after thyroidectomy the plasma protein had returned to normal or
nearly normal in agreement with the su-bsidence of the disturbance.
Progressive exophthalmus following thyroidectomy or x-ray irradia-
tion of the thyroid was accompanied by strongly abnormal plasma
protein diagrams characterized by a low albumin concentration. All
adult hypothyroid patients showed a decrease in the relative albumin
concentration, similar to that observed in hyperthyroid cases. How-
89
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
ever this time the A-globulin concentration was significantly increased
and the a globulin was decreased to a varying extent. Thyroid
therapy in these cases caused a fall in the A globulin and a rise in
concentration of a globulin.
The observations made on the sera of normal and of hypophysec-
tomized rats are somewhat conflicting. Li"5 finds that a component
labelled iby him as "X," which has a mobility intermediate between.
albumin and a globulin and which occurs in normal rat as well as
in mouse serum,8 is absent from the serum of hypophysectomized
animals. Furthermore, he found an increased total globulin con-
centration which was responsible for a decrease of the A/G ratio
from 3.0 in the normal to 1.33 in the hypophysectomized rat.
Moore et al.,50 on the other hand, state that in the serum of normal
rats only A and v globulin are present (as previously reported by
Jameson and Alvarez-Tostado,26) but that the a-globulin component
appears in rat serum after hypophysectomy, coupled with a moderate
increase in the v-globulin concentration. With regard to the shift
in A/G ratio the cubservations of the two groups of workers are
essentially in agreement. It is possible that the discrepancies here
mentioned are at least in part due to the different buffers and protein
concentrations employed.
Injection of a gonadotropic extract prepared from human pitui-
tary glands into goats93 produced an increase in the v-globulin frac-
tion of the serum corresponding to the increase in antihormone
activity. Experiments on serum fractions prepared by elec-
trophoresis demonstrated that the entire antihormone activity is
associated with the v-globulin fraction.
The sera of 30 patients with diabetes mellitus have been
examined in the Tiselius apparatus.34 In severe states of diabetic
acidosis the albumin concentration was decreased while the A globu-
lin was greatly increased, with the result that the total protein value
was within the normal range. In cases of mild diabetes the relative
protein concentrations were normal, while the total protein level
was slightly lowered. Adequate therapy restored to normal the
plasma protein concentration. When the diabetes was complicated
by diabetic retinitis the albumin concentration in the plasma remained
low in spite of the treatment of the underlying condition.
In patients with Addison's disease showing definite synmptoms
of adrenal insufficiency, the total protein was, as a rule, within the
90
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
higher normal range.46 While the relative albumin concentration
was significantly decreased throughout, the relative increases in
globulin content could not be attributed consistently to any one
fraction. Administration of large amounts of crude adrenal extract in
contrast to therapy with pure desoxycorticosteron-e restored the pro-
tein distribution to normal or nearly normal values.
Some of the most interesting observations in this field have been
made in electrophoretic studies on multiple myeloma patients.
Electrophoretic patterns of blood serum froim 2 multiple myeloma
patients8" are shown in Fig. 5. The report of Longsworth
et al.44 contains the diagram of a plasma cell myeloma, in
which the albumin component was decreased about 50 per cent and
A
e DS3CE IDING EE3DRI ABCDING _
FIG. 5. Electrophoretic patterns of sera from two patients with multiple myeloma.
a large peak in the A-globulin region was the outstanding feature.
Of the 3 cases of multiple myeloma studied by these authors another
gave a pattern similar to that just described, while the third yielded
a normal pattern. Myeloma sera have also been studied independ-
ently by several other groups of workers. Kekwick30 examined S
human myeloma sera by means of the analytical centrifuge as well
as in the Tiselius apparatus. According to this author, the sera of
myeloma patients fall into two groups-the first group shows the
same number of protein components as normal serum and a large
91
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
increase in the v-globulin fraction; the second group of sera shows
up to S components in the ultracentrifuge and a greatly increased
P-globulin peak in the electrophoresis apparatus. For additional
centrifugal studies of myeloma sera the papers of MacFarlane48 and
of Jersild and Pedersen28 should be consulted. The experiments
just cited throw no light on the relationship between serum proteins
and Bence-Jones protein: none of the cases studied by Kekwick
showed any proteinuria. The most extensive study on myeloma to
date has been conducted iby Gutman and his colleagues,22 who
examined 7 additional cases of multiple myeloma. Two of these
cases showed a very large increase in the y-globulin peak and an
extra component corresponding to that of fibrinogen in plasma; 2
others exhibited a pronounced increase in material of P-globulin
mobility but with no "M" boundary; 2 other cases finally yielded
patterns simulating those of normal plasma and serum, respectively.
These experiments were supplemented by serum protein studies by
the Howe method in 38 cases. It is noteworthy that by adding
urinary Bence-Jones protein to normal serum the essential pattern
observed in myelomatous sera could be reproduced. The electro-
phoretic examination of the plasma and serum of another patient75
disclosed a large peak with the mobility of -1.9X1 O- units at pH
7.8. This component had the molecular weight of about 160,000 and
was found to be identical with neither fibrinogen nor Bence-Jones
protein. On dialysis against distilled water a considerable amount
of viscous protein precipitated, which these authors believed to be
formed by the reaction of two different serum components. The
protein excreted in the urine of another patient with multiple mye-
loma and progressive renal insufficiency2 was demonstrated by
electrophoretic and chemical methods to be Bence-Jones protein.
The further claim of these authors that this is identical with the
P globulin of normal iblood plasma is very doubtful.
The electrophoretic patterns of the sera of 12 cases of sarcoid
have been studied by Fisher and Davis.20 In those instances where
there were no clinical signs of activity, the diagrams were almost
normal showing only a slight decrease of albumin and increase of
a globulin. The sera from clinically active cases, on the other hand,
showed a marked elevation of the v-globulin component at the
expense of the albumin. The patterns are similar to those observed
when antibodies are formed in response to an infectious agent.
92
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
Traiuma and pathophysiological states: Lymph and serum in
experimental burns have been examined electrophoretically by Perl-
man, Glenn, and Kaufman,58 who compared the patterns of normal
lymph and serum in calves with those obtained after the animal was
subjected to burns. Normal lymph contained the same components
as serum but lymph from the burned tissue revealed an additional
boundary, migrating with half the speed of y globulin, which they
designate as "s" component. The serum of the burned animals
showed a slight decrease in the A/G ratio with an increase in the
a-globulin fraction.
The electrophoretic pattern of plasma protein regeneration has
been investigated in dogs by Zeldis and Alling.101 Acute depletion
is accomplished by massive ibleeding with the simultaneous return
of washed red cells-plasmapheresis. During the first 24 hours
following depletion of appreciable quantities of all electrophoretic
components, all plasma proteins enter the circulating blood stream
even when food is not given. In such fasting periods, albumin
and globulin appear in approximately normal proportions. Both
a and A globulins continue relatively elevated during the early por-
tion of the recovery period, suggesting a rapid formation from tissue
reserves as w-ell as a rapid synthesis from dietary protein. Initial
albumin levels are regained more slowly than are those of total
globulin, so relative proportions of the electrophoretic pattern may
be disturbed for as long as from 2 to 3 weeks after the total protein
level has returned to normal. Similar observations have been made
by R. H. Silber and one of the present authors.86
Depletion of plasma proteins in dogs due to many weeks of low
protein feeding has been investigated in the same laboratory102 by
electrophoretic as well as by chemical analyses. Long-continued.
restriction of dietary protein results in striking decreases in plasma
albumin, although the depletion of electrophoretic albumin is con-
siderably greater than that of the chemical albumin fraction. All of
the electrophoretic globulin areas are increased during depletion,
especially the a globulin. This increase is not detectable by chemi-
cal protein analysis, but is found to be associated with the elevated
plasma lipid levels which occur in these depleted dogs. Normal
chemical albumin concentrations are usually restored within one week
when large amounts of protein are fed, while electrophoretically
determined albumin requires 3 weeks or longer to reach the normal
amount. Total circulating globulin concentrations are only slightly
93
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
decreased or may actually increase, particularly A globulins. Besides
the type of protein fed, the restoration of total plasma protein may
be influenced by the degree of depletion of tissue protein reserves,
the quantity of protein fed, or the specific amino acid requirement,
or possibly the vitamin supplement.
During the last year, the present authors had the opportunity to
investigate 2 cases of hypoproteinemia in children, characterized not
only by a low protein content but also by an almost complete absence
~~~~~~~A
'toe,oX I '-
d L
DESCNDING BOMMDARSI ASC} DIBG
FIG. 6. Electrophoretic pattern of 3-year.old boy (F. P.) showing absence of y-globulin.
of y globulin. The progress of the 12-year-old girl has been fol-
lowed since birth66 and all attempts to raise the total protein have
been only temporarily successful. Contrary to expectations she has
been singularly free from infections. The electrophoretic pattern of
a similar case in a 3-year-old boy (F. P.) demonstrates this lack of
7 globulin (see Fig. 6).81
Since the sedimentation rate is increased in many pathological
conditions, especially in acute infections, Shedlovsky and Scudder77
have attempited to correlate it with the electrophoretic patterns of 21
normal or pathological human bloods. No significant deviation
from normal was found in chemically induced shock in demented
patients. The a-globulin level and the sedimentation rate are sig-
94
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE
ilificantly increased in febrile infections as well as in cases of exten-
sive tissue destruction, as is evidenced by the patterns for coronary
thrombosis, burns, and fractures. The correlation between sedi-
mentation rates and a-globulin levels is as good as that with fibrino-
gen. The addition of purified fibrinogen to normal blood failed
to increase the rate of sedimentation of erythrocytes to the same
extent as does a comparable amount present in pathological blood.
Preliminary
electtrophoretic fibJib
experiments" on
hemolysates of
red blood cells
from several
species - man,
dog, chicken -
have disclosed
patterns consid- Q _Q
erably less com-
plex than those Descendtva < Asced-I- A C
for the sera of
FIG. 7. Electrophoretic patterns obtained with human red blood cell
the same species. hemolysates. The diagrams of the descending and ascending boundaries
The maj were obtained in different experiments with different samples of humanXllemJorcom- srythrocytes (Stern, Reiner, and Silber85).
ponent is repre-
sented by hemoglobin but, in addition, all hemolysates showed the
presence of a small amount of an opalescent, colorless fraction of
an anodic mobility of about 6 x 1 0-5cm2 per volt per second at pH
8.6, as compared to about 3 X 1O- for hemoglobin. The mobility
of the opalescent material is of the same order as that of intact
erythrocytes, suggesting that it is derived from the membrane. or
stroma of the cells. This fraction, called a-component, has recendy
been separated into a clear, low-molecular and an opalescent, macro-
molecular protein fraction by high-speed centrifugation. The rela-
tionship of these proteins to choline esterase is under investigation
in collaboration with Dr. R. Brauer of Harvard Medical School.
Conlusion
From the foregoing discussion it is evident that the diagnostic
value of the Tiselius technique in the field of dinical medicine does
not lie in the absolute specificity of electrophoretic patterns for
95
96 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
specified diseases. The protein spectrum in plasma and serum is
the resultant of a host of factors concerned with the formation, the
interaction, and the destruction of the individual components. The
blood, while often considered a tissue in itself, is perhaps more
dependent on the physiological state of the organism as a whole than
is any other tissue. It is, therefore, only natural to find that there
exists a close correspondence .between the blood, the protein system,
and th.e physiological. state of the individual as a whole, rather than
to a given pathological condition.
This explains why in all diseases accompanied by fever and
tissue destruction the concentrations of the a globulin components
are significantly increased and why in all instances, with few excep-
tions, where an antigen-antibody system is involved specifically, the
y-globulin concentration is found to be markedly elevated. There
is a strong indication that future work in this field might most
profitably be focused on long-range studies in which an attempt is
made to correlate the clinical course of various diseases with shifts
in the electrophoretic patterns of the blood and plasma of selected
patients, with due consideration to the effect of therapeutic measures
on these variables. In any event, there can be no douibt that the
electrophoretic -analysis of serum protein affords a more detailed
and reliable picture of this labile 'biological system than does any
other chemical or physical chemical method used thus far, including
even the ultracentrifugal method of analysis. Not only does this
new tool yield accurate values for the albumin/globulin ratio but it
yields quantitative information on a whole series of well-defined
blood proteins which cannot be differentiated by other methods and
which, no doubt, are of primary importance in the physiology of
the organism.
NOTE: As this paper goes to press, Dr. Eric L. Alling of the University of
Rochester School of Medicine is reported to have stated, at the Centennial Celebra-
tion of the University of Buffalo, held in September 1946, that of 125 sera of
cancer patients examined in the electrophoresis apparatus only one showed a normal
pattern. A critical evaluation of Dr. Alling's findings will have to await a detailed
publication of his experiments.
REFERENCES
1 Abramson, H. A., L. S. Moyer, and M. H. Gorin: Electrophoresis of
Proteins. Rheinhold Publishing Company, New York, 1942.
2 Blackman, S. S., W. H. Barker, M. V. Buell, and B. D. Davis: J. Clin.
Invest., 1944, 23, 163.
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE 97
3 Blackman, S. S., and B. D. Davis: J. Clin. Invest., 1943, 22, 545.
4 Blackman, S. S., and B. D. Davis: South. Med. J., 1943, 36, 247.
5 Blix, G.: J. Biol. Chem., 1941, 137, 495.
6 Blix, G.: Ztschr. f. d. ges. exper. Med., 1939, 105, 595.
7 Blix, G., A. Tiselius, and H. Svensson: J. Biol. Chem., 1941, 137, 485.
8 Bourdillon, J., and E. H. Lennette: J. Exper. Med., 1940, 72, 11.
9 Coburn, A. F., and D. H. Moore: Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1943, 73,
196.
10 Cohn, E. J.: Chem. Rev., 1941, 28, 395.
11 Cooper, J. A.: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med., 1944, 57, 248.
12 Cooper, J. A., and D. H. Atlas [cited by H. B. Bull in Physicdl Biochemis-
try, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1943, p. 177].
13 Davis, B. D., A. Hollaender, and J. B. Greenstein: J. Biol. Chem., 1942,
146, 663.
14 Deutsch, H. F., and M. B. Goodloe: J. Biol. Chem., 1945, 161, 1.
15 Dole, V. P., and E. Braun: J. Clin. Invest., 1944, 23, 708.
16 Dole, V. P., and K. E. Emerson, Jr.: J. Clin. Invest., 1945, 24, 644.
17 Dole, V. P., R. F. Watson, and S. Rothbard: J. Clin. Invest., 1945, 24,
648.
18 Electrophoresis: Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1939, 39, 105.
19 Fell, N., K. G. Stern, and R. D. Coghill: J. Immunol., 1940, 39, 223.
20 Fisher, M. A., and B. D. Davis: Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1942, 71, 364.
21 Gray, S. J., and E. S. Barron-Guzman: J. Clin. Invest., 1943, 22, 191.
22 Gutman, A. B., D. H. Moore, E. G. Gutman, V. McClellan, and E. A.
Kabat: J. Clin. Invest., 1941, 20, 765.
23 Hardt, C. R., I. F. Huddleson, and C. D. Ball: Science, 1943, 98, 309.
24 Hesselvik, L.: Acta med. Scandinav., 1939, 101, 461.
25 Horsfall, F. L.: Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1939, 39, 203.
26 Jameson, E., and C. Alvarez-Tostado: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med.,
1939, 40, 476.
27 Jameson, E., C. Alvarez-Toetado, and H. H. Sortor: Proc. Soc. Exper.
Biol. & Med., 1942, 51, 163.
28 Jersild, M., and K. 0. Pedersen: Acta path. et microbiol. Scandinav., 1938,
15, 426.
29 Kekwick, R. A.: Biochem. J., 1939, 33, 1122.
30 Kekwick, R. A.: Biochem. J., 1940, 34, 1248.
31 Kekwick, R. A., and B. R. Record: Brit. J. Exper. Path., 1940, 22, 29.
32 Lerner, A. B., and R. G. Greenberg: J. Biol. Chem., 1946, 162, 429.
33 Lewis, L. A., E. P. McCullagh, and J. Clark: Am. J. Med. Sci., 1944,
208, 727.
34 Lewis, L. A., R. W. Schneider, E. P. McCullagh, and J. Clark: J. Clin.
Endocrinol., 1944, 4, 535.
35 Li, C. H.: J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1944, 66, 1795.
36 Longsworth, L. G.: J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1939, 61, 529.
37 Longsworth, L. G.: Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1939, 39, 187.
38 Longsworth, L. G.: Chem. Rev., 1942, 30, 323.
39 Longsworth, L. G.: Indust. and Engin. Chem. (Anal. Ed.), 1946, 18, 219.
98 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
40 Longsworth, L. G., R. M. Curtis, and R. H. Pembroke Jr.: J. Clin.
Invest., 1945, 24, 46.
41 Longsworth, L. G., and D. A. Maclnnes: Chem. Rev., 1939, 24, 271.
42 Longsworth, L. G., and D. A. Maclnnes: J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1940, 62,
705.
43 Longsworth, L. G., and D. A. Maclnnes: J. Exper. Med., 1940, 71, 77.
44 Longsworth, L. G., T. Shedlovsky, and D. A. Maclnnes: J. Exper. Med.,
1939, 70, 399.
45 Luetscher, J. A. Jr.: J. Clin. Invest., 1940, 19, 313.
46 Luetscher, J. A. Jr.: J. Clin. Invest., 1941, 20, 99.
47 McCullagh, E. P., L. A. Lewis, and J. Clark: Am. J. Med. Sci., 1945,
210, 81.
48 MacFarlane, A. S.: Biochem. J., 1935, 29, 1175.
49 Moore, D. H.: J. Biol. Chem., 1945, 161, 21.
50 Moore, D. H., L. Levin, and J. H. Leathem: J. Biol. Chem., 1944, 153,
349.
51 Moore, D. H., and J. Lynn: J. Biol. Chem., 1941, 141, 819.
52 Moore, D. B., P. S. Pierson, F. M. Hanger, and D. H. Moore: J. Clin.
Invest., 1945, 24, 292.
53 Moore, D. H., J. Van der Scheer, and R. W. 'Wyckoff: J. Immunol., 1940,
38, 221.
54 Oncley, J. L.: Abstracts Am. Chem. Soc. Meeting, April 1946, p. 34.
55 Pappenheimer, A. M. Jr., H. P. Lundgren, and J. W. Williams: J. Exper.
Med., 1940, 71, 247.
56 Pedersen, K. O.: [In] The Svedberg Jubilee Volume, p. 490, Upsala, 1945.
57 Pedersen, K. O.: Thesis. Printed in Sweden by Almqvist and Wiksells
Boktryckeri-A.-B., Upsala, 1945.
58 Perlmann, G. E., W. W. L. Glenn, and D. Kaufman: J. Clin. Invest.,
1943, 22, 627.
59 Perlmann, G. E., and D. Kaufman: J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1945, 67, 638.
60 Pillemer, L., and M. C. Hutchinson: J. Biol. Chem., 1945, 158, 299.
61 Rutstein, D. D., F. H. Clarke, and L. M. Taran: Science, 1945, 101, 669.
62 Van der Scheer, J., and R. W. G. Wyckoff: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. &
Med., 1940, 45, 634.
63 Van der Scheer, J., R. W. G. Wyckoff, and F. H. Clarke: J. Immunol.,
1940, 39, 65.
64 Van der Scheer, J., R. W. G. Wyckoff, and F. H. Clarke: J. Immunol.,
1941, 40, 173.
65 Van der Scheer, J., R. W. G. Wyckoff, and F. H. Clarke: J. Immunol.,
1941, 40, 39.
66 Schick, B., and J. W. Greenbaum: J. Pediat., 1945, 27, 241.
67 Scudder, J.: Chapt. XVI [in] Blood Substitutes and Blood Transfusion,
edited by Stuart Mudd and Wm. Thalhimer, C. C Thomas, 1942.
68 Seibert, F. B.: Bact. Rev., 1941, 5, 69.
69 Seibert, F. B., and J. W. Nelson: Am. Rev. Tuberc., 1943, 47, 66.
70 Seibert, F. B., and J. W. Nelson: J. Biol. Chem., 1942, 143, 29.
ELECTROPHORESIS IN MEDICINE 99
71 Seibert, F. B., and J. W. Nelson: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med., 1942,
49, 77.
72 Seibert, F. B., and J. W. Nelson: J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1943, 65, 272.
73 Seibert, F. B., K. 0. Pedersen, and A. Tiselius: J. Exper. Med., 1938,
68, 413.
74 Seibert, F. B., and D. W. Watson: J. Biol. Chem., 1941, 140, 55.
75 Shapiro, S., V. Ross, and D. H. Moore: J. Clin. Invest., 1943, 22, 137.
76 Sharp, D. G., M. H. Hebb, A. R. Taylor, and J. W. Beard: J. Biol. Chem.,
1942, 142, 217.
77 Shedlovsky, T., and J. Scudder: J. Exper. Med., 1942, 75, 119.
78 Shipley, R. A., K. G. Stern, and A. White: J. Exper. Med., 1939, 69, 785.
79 Stenhagen, E.: Biochem. J., 1938, 32, 714.
80 Stern, K. G.: Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1939, 39, 147.
81 Stern, K. G.: Unpublished experiments.
82 Stern, K. G.: Unpublished experiments with B. 0. Kramer, A. Sobel, and
S. P. Gottfried.
83 Stern, K. G., and N. Fell: Unpublished experiments.
84 Stern, K. G., and N. Fell: Unpublished experiments.
85 Stern, K. G., M. Reiner, and R. H. Silber: J. Biol. Chem., 1945, 161,
731.
86 Stern, K. G., and R. H. Silber: Unpublished experiments.
87 Stern, K. G., A. Rottino, and D. Suchoff: Unpublished results.
88 Svensson, H.: Kolloid Ztschr., 1939, 87, 181.
89 Svensson, H.: Kolloid Ztschr., 1940, 90, 141.
90 Svensson, H.: J. Biol. Chem., 1941, 139, 805.
91 Svensson, H.: Thesis. Arkiv f. Kemi., 1946, 22A, No. 10.
92 Taylor, H. L., and A. Keys: J. Biol. Chem., 1943, 148, 379.
93 Thompson, K. W., and J. Melnick: Endocrinol., 1941, 28, 723.
94 Tiselius, A.: Nova Acta Soc. Sci., Upsala, 1930, 4, 7.
95 Tiselius, A.: Biochem. J., 1937,31, 1464.
96 Tiselius, A.: Trans. Faraday Soc., 1937, 33, 524.
97 Tiselius, A.: Svenska Kemisk Tidskrift., 1938, 50, 58.
98 Tiselius, A.: Harvey Lectures, 1940, 35, 37.
99 Tiselius, A., and F. L. Horsfall Jr.: Arkiv Kemi Mineral. Geol., 1939,
A 13, No. 18.
100 Tiselius, A., and E. A. Kabat: J. Exper. Med., 1939, 69, 119.
101 Zeldis, L. J., and E. L. Alling: J. Exper. Med., 1945, 81, 515.
102 Zeldis, L. J., E. L. Alling, A. B. McCoord, and J. P. Kulka: J. Exper.
Med., 1945, 82, 157.
103 Zeldis, L. J., E. L. Alling, A. B. McCoord, and J. P. Kulka: J. Exper.
Med., 1945, 82, 411.
