THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 63 (1990), 371-380
Regulation of Hematopoiesis
BRIAN R. SMITH, M.D.
Departments ofLaboratory Medicine, Internal Medicine, and Pediatrics, Yale
University School ofMedicine, New Haven, Connecticut
Received March 27, 1990
Normal hematopoiesis is a well-regulated process in which the generation of mature blood
elements occurs from a primitive pluripotent stem cell in an ordered sequence of maturation and
proliferation. Regulation occurs at the level of the structured microenvironment (stroma),
via cell-cell interactions and by way of the generation of specific hormones and cytokines:
erythropoietin, interleukin 3, granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), mono-
cyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF), interleukin 5, interleukin 4, and other less well-defined factors, including the megakary-
ocyte growth factors. Understanding of this complex process has revealed insights into the
pathophysiology ofhuman disease and provided a theoretical framework for the therapeutic use of
bone marrow transplantation and potential gene transfer therapy. Furthermore, ongoing clinical
trials suggest that the hematopoietic growth factors may represent a significant new group of
therapeutic reagents for patients with hematological and oncologic disease.
As opposed to most other organs in the body, the bone marrow in its native state
continuously regenerates and constantly recapitulates its own maturational and devel-
opmental program. Interference in this process, whether iatrogenic, genetic, or environ-
mental in origin, rapidly results in severe disease. It is also this aspect of normal bone
marrow function which forms the basis for the acceptance of blood cell donations from
a normal donor with relative impunity, permits the administration of high-dose
chemotherapy, and also allows for the ultimate transfusion procedure; that is, a bone
marrow transplant.
HISTORY AND TERMINOLOGY
Although the concept that the bone marrow might be able to regenerate itselfeven in
a foreign host and therefore be used to treat patients with anemia occurred to clinicians
as early as 1891 [1], the lack of a scientific basis for the physiology ofthe bone marrow
led to its use in fashions destined to fail therapeutically-for example, as an oral agent.
By 1949, however, Jacobson and colleagues had discovered that mice exposed to bone
marrow ablative radiation doses could be protected from death by shielding the spleen
from the radiation; they concluded that the beneficial effect of such manipulation was
due to a splenic autograft [2]. Initially, workers in the field believed that the salutary
autograft effect was solely a humoral one, enhancing the ability of the animal's own
blood-forming organs to recover from the radiation insult. By 1956, however, further
work involving marrow grafting from a donor to a host mouse led to the realization that
371
Abbreviations: ANLL: acute non-lymphocytic leukemia CFU,: colony-forming unit of the spleen
CML: chronic myelogenous leukemia G-CSF: granulocytecolony-stimulating factor GM-CSF: granulo-
cyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor M-CSF: monocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
NK: natural killer (cells)
Dr. Smith is a Scholar of the Leukemia Society ofAmerica.
Copyright © 1990 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
BRIAN R. SMITH
this protective effect was actually due to colonization of the host bone marrow by cells
derived from the donor's bone marrow and spleen, thus creating a "radiation chimera"
[3,4]. Work over the next ten years concentrated on further investigation of the source
of cells necessary to produce recovery from radiation injury [5]. Not surprisingly,
syngeneic bone marrow was the most efficient. These studies established the marrow
and spleen as a continuously regenerating source of the hematopoietic terminal
elements: that is, the mature red blood cells, granulocytes, monocytes, lymphocytes,
and platelets. In 1961, Till and McCulloch [6] investigated the physiology of marrow
reconstitution when limiting numbers of donor bone marrow cells were given to an
irradiated host recipient; they discovered that, in spleens removed from such mice after
injection of donor cells, clonal colonies of myeloid-erythroid cells developed. This
phenomenon was also observed in the bone marrow itself. These colonies were grossly
visible in the spleen and were designated CFUs for "colony-forming unit ofthe spleen."
Cytogenetic analysis for clonality using specific radiation-induced cytogenetic markers
demonstrated that each individual spleen colony was different in cellular origin from
all the other spleen colonies but that all cells within a particular colony appeared to be
derived from a single precursor (or progenitor) cell. When one examined mature blood
and spleen cells from reconstituted animals, these radiation-induced cytogenetic
markers of clonality were shared by both lymphocytes and myeloid elements [7,8]. By
the mid-I 960s, then, the basic paradigm of bone marrow development was established:
progenitor cells (stem cells) must be present in small numbers in normal marrow and
those cells could divide and either produce more progeny stem cells or differentiate
further into a more mature cell, which in turn could give rise either to more of itself or
to a yet more differentiated daughter cell. Furthermore, the most primitive, or
totipotent stem cell, must be able to give rise to both lymphoid and myeloid elements,
the latter including red cells, granulocytes, monocytes, and platelets.
As work progressed on understanding the cells that were involved in this reconstitu-
tion, the idea of humoral control of hematopoiesis was not entirely lost. It was clear,
however, that further dissection of this normal physiology would have to move from in
vivo studies to in vitro model systems. The laboratories of Sachs [9] and Metcalf [10]
worked to establish such systems, first in "liquid culture" and then, in order to identify
which cells gave rise to which other cells in a geographically limited fashion, a system
of solid-phase culture. It became apparent that in these in vitro systems, a single bone
marrow progenitor cell was able to give rise to more mature progeny. Indeed, when one
plated bone marrow or spleen cells in solid medium (methylcellulose, agar, or plasma
clot) small colonies of cells would develop, each apparently derived from a single clonal
precursor. Some of these colonies included granulocytes and macrophages, some
included only erythroid cells, and some included multiple cells of various mixed
lineages. Each colony in the solid phase could be examined and counted, and this
procedure gave rise to the nomenclature for progenitor cells. For example, the cell that
gave rise to a colony composed of granulocytes and macrophages was called a
"CFU-gm" for colony-forming unit, granulocytes and macrophages. Further painstak-
ing work over the next 20 years led to the evolving schema of hematopoietic stem cell
development, differentiation, and maturation that provided the framework for our
understanding ofboth marrow transplantation and the control ofnormal and abnormal
hematopoiesis (Fig. 1).
It should be noted that even with the current relatively sophisticated knowledge of
this normal process, many aspects of it still remain a mystery. For example, evidence in
372
REGULATION OF HEMATOPOIESIS 373
stem cell
GM-CSF CFU-GEMM
BFU-E Th00us
BU_@CFU-ME
IL-3; IL- CS|ILSF 1-3;3t t
GM-CSF GM-CSF GM-CSF
Epo
CFU-E
Epo CFU(-GM
IL-3 IL-3 GM-CSF IL-3
IL-3 GM-CSF/ GM-CSF IL-3
GM-CSF G-CSF
GM-CSF GM-CSF
ODMegakaryocyte M-CSF G-CSF
Epo~
RBC Platelets Monocyte n e b e cell T cell
GM-CSF Granulocytes
Macrophage
FIG. 1. Model of hematopoietic differentiation and the effect of hematopoietic
growth factors on prcgenitor cells (Courtesy of Clark SC, Kamen R: The human
hematopoietic colony stimulating factors. Science 236:1229-1237, 1987; reprinted by
permission ofScience. Copyright 1987 by the AAAS).
model systems (albeit circumstantial evidence) led to the idea that the true totipotent
stem cell that can reinitiate the entire developmental process goes through a relatively
early differentiation into a committed lymphoid versus a committed myeloid progeni-
tor cell. The former is then responsible for the development of the B and T lymphocyte
(and probably the natural killer [NK] cell) while the latter is responsible for myeloid,
erythroid, and megakaryocytic lineages. Clinical observations, however, confused this
issue in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when it was recognized that the disease, chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML), which had always been considered to derive from an
aberrant myeloid stem cell with preservation of normal lymphopoiesis, could some-
times lead to a true acute lymphoblastic leukemia during blast crisis [11,12]. More-
over, during the stable phase of the disease, it was discovered that one could sometimes
demonstrate characteristic involvement of the CML clone in the B lymphocytes and
BRIAN R. SMITH
occasionally the T lymphocytes (specifically, presence of a Philadelphia chromosome).
This interplay of knowledge gained from clinical "experiments of nature" and from
basic biological research is a constant theme in advances in the understanding of
hematopoiesis.
The same attempts at developing an in vitro model of hematopoiesis confirmed the
hypothesis of earlier investigators that growth ofa primitive stem cell into more mature
progeny was dependent, not only on factors inherent in that cell itself, but also on
humoral regulation [13]. These secreted molecules (cytokines) may act over long
distances as most hormones do (for example, production of erythropoietin by the
kidney affecting marrow erythroid activity) or may act only over relatively short and
geographically limited regions in the normal physiologic setting. As protein factors
that affected the growth and differentiation of progenitor cells were discovered, they
received a number of different names from different laboratories involved in their
investigation. This semantic excess persists somewhat to the present day. Most of the
factors, however, were named as "CSFs" for "colony-stimulating factors." Thus, the
first growth inducer that was found to stimulate both macrophage and granulocyte
colonies was called GM-CSF. It quickly became apparent that there was not only a
profusion of names but that these names can be misleading. Thus, GM-CSF may affect
proliferation not only of granulocyte-macrophage colonies but of a variety of other
progenitor cells as well. Furthermore, the sources of these regulatory proteins may, in
some cases, be legion. Although T lymphocytes are one of the principal sources,
macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells are also critical.
With the identification of humoral factors capable of regulating these in vitro
systems, it became possible to begin attempts at obtaining such factors in highly
purified form. Originally approached through classical techniques of protein chemis-
try, the rapid development of molecular cloning techniques led to an accelerated
development of these factors, allowing for their study not just in vitro but also in in vivo
animal models and subsequently in man. Once isolated in purified form, it became
apparent not only that these factors have multiple effects on multiple progenitor cells,
but they also have important effects on mature "end-stage" cells such as granulocytes.
While such end-stage cells are incapable of further division, the colony growth factors
may lead to important alterations in the functional attributes of the cells. For example,
GM-CSF affects migration and cytolytic pathways in the mature polymorphonuclear
leukocyte.
Until relatively recently, then, the remarkable advances in our understanding of
normal hematopoiesis have evolved by separating many of the individual components
(various progenitor cells and growth factors) and intensely studying them in isolated
form. In vivo, however, the hematopoietic organs (particularly the bone marrow but, in
the case of the lymphopoietic system, the spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus as well)
have an extraordinary organized and quite specific structure [14]. Progenitor cells and
mature cells are geographically organized relative to each other and to the vasculature.
Furthermore, there is an underlying framework on which hematopoiesis takes place.
This framework is often referred to as the bone marrow "stroma." The stroma consists
of endothelial cells, fibroblasts, adipocytes, macrophages, and probably other elements
as well. The stromal elements produce many of the growth factors alluded to above.
The extracellular matrix produced by these elements may also serve as an organizing
foundation of glycosaminoglycans to concentrate and orient these locally acting
hormones [15].
374
REGULATION OF HEMATOPOIESIS
In summary, continuous renewal of the hematopoietic system involves an orderly
sequence of maturation and differentiation of cells presumably from a totipotent stem
cell through stages of increasing commitment (and loss of the ability to "de-
differentiate," at least in normal physiology) to progressively more mature progeny.
Most of the early cells are capable ofeither replicating themselves or of pushing further
toward a more differentiated cell. This process occurs in an organized structure (known
as the stroma) and is influenced by a variety of geographically short-acting growth
factors produced by stromal cells and other regulatory elements and by a few
geographically distant hormones. Many ofthese growth factors have specific hierarchi-
cal effects and many influence both growth and differentiation as well as end-stage cell
function.
HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS
If examined closely, it is clear that the above statements, as outlined in Fig. 1, while
summarizing our model of hemopoiesis, are actually quite glib. The proposed schema
begs a number of very important questions. First, how many stem cells are needed to
reproduce an entire bone marrow? Second, under normal circumstances, how many
stem cells in an individual are actively participating in the production of end-stage
mature functioning cells? Third, how does a stem cell "decide" whether to produce
another stem cell of the same type when it divides or whether to produce a more mature
daughter cell that has been pushed further along in the maturation sequence? These
questions are important, not just for our understanding of the basic biology of this
remarkable process, but also because they have very important implications for the
therapeutic use of manipulations of the hematopoietic system (whether by marrow
transplantation or the administration of humoral growth factors or cellular compo-
nents to patients). Moreover, understanding the answers to these questions might lead
to a marked improvement in our understanding of pathophysiological processes; that is,
diseases of the hematopoietic system.
In order to address the question of how many stem cells are needed fully to
re-populate the lympho-hematopoietic system, it is necessary to be able to identify the
true totipotent stem cell. All such approaches are approximate, but the most successful
has been to identify cell surface membrane glycoproteins that are relatively maturation
stage-specific in their expression. Thus, there are cell surface proteins (against which
monoclonal antibodies can be developed) which appear only on mature cells in the
differentiation schema and others that appear on the more immature progenitor stem
cells. Since no single cell surface protein has been described which uniquely distin-
guishes totipotent and other stem cells, a combination of such "markers" must be used
to identify these cells. In man, the CD34 (MY10) marker combined with antibodies
recognizing HLA-Dr as well as mature lineage-specific markers (for example, CD19
and CD3) have been most useful [16]. In murine models of hematopoiesis, recent
elegant work utilizing the stem cell markers THY1 and SCA1 combined with
lineage-specific markers for B cells (B220), granulocytes (GRI), myelomonocytic cells
(MACI), and T cells (CD4, CD8) has shown that a population of cells identified as
having expression of SCA1 and low expression of THY 1 but absence of all the mature
lineage-specific markers identifies the hematopoietic stem cell capable of giving rise to
CFUS [17]. Cells ofthis surface phenotype represent approximately 0.03 percent of the
normal mouse bone marrow. Morphologically, these cells are medium-sized round cells
and are generally in the resting phase of the mitotic cell cycle (Go-GI). If a mouse is
375
BRIAN R. SMITH
given lethal bone marrow irradiation, one CFUS splenic colony is observed for every ten
intravenously transferred syngeneic stem cells. Given the estimated seeding efficiency
of the spleen, this result implies a nearly one-to-one relationship of colony-forming
units to cells injected. In further experiments designed to determine how many
totipotent stem cells need to be injected to reconstitute the murine lympho-
hematopoietic system, it was found that approximately 20 of these cells would lead to
efficient reconstitution of 50 percent of mice.
In normal physiology, hundreds of stem cells might be undergoing maturation or,
conceivably, only a few stem cells might be participating in such a process. Data from
Lemischka and colleagues [18] using retroviral markers to distinguish different stem
cells in murine reconstitution experiments, appear to indicate that, at any given time
after a transplant, the bone marrow is generating all of its mature progeny from only
one or at most two or three stem cells. Exactly which stem cell is being used may
change somewhat over time, but these experiments further confirm how remarkably
few stem cells are needed to generate the entire lympho-hematopoietic mass, which
includes nearly four liters of marrow in addition to the mass ofthe spleen, lymph nodes,
and peripheral blood circulating hematopoietic elements. Such studies also have
profound implications for attempts at treatment ofgenetic disorders by "gene transfer"
therapy.
Finally, there are two major mechanisms by which a stem cell could "decide"
whether to become another stem cell or whether to differentiate further: either an
essentially random ("stochastic") process or one carefully controlled by a variety of
other regulatory elements. The controlling regulatory elements would include the
humoral growth factors. Ogawa and colleagues have obtained elegant numerical data
to suggest statistically that this process is, in fact, a stochastic one rather than a
deterministic one. They hypothesize that random commitment takes place sequentially
during differentiation of the stem cell [19,20]. Such a model of stochastic lineage
selection remains consistent with the apparent induction of differentiation by growth
factors in vitro and in vivo since it assigns to those factors the role of supporting a given
population of progenitors that have been randomly triggered and allowing the death of
populations of progenitors that are not being actively supported by the growth factor.
This view contrasts with the alternate hypothesis that growth factors could induce
differentiation in stem cells and thus provide a "determinism" to the process.
GROWTH FACTORS IN HEMOPOIESIS
One can conceptually divide the growth factors into those that support very early
cells of hematopoietic lineage versus those that support the growth of late cells in the
hematopoietic lineage [21-26]. The early-acting factors include interleukin 3, GM-
CSF, and interleukin 4. Late-acting, and more lineage-specific, factors include erythro-
poietin, G-CSF, M-CSF, GM-CSF, interleukin 5, and interleukin 4. The fact that
some of these factors have been included in both categories is not an error. Rather, as
more information becomes available, it becomes clear that many of these factors can
act at different stages of differentiation and even with variable effects at different
stages ofdifferentiation. In addition, many ofthese factors may be synergistic, one with
another. There are also some growth factors whose existence is strongly suggested by
bench and clinical research data but which have not yet been purified and/or cloned.
Prominent among these are the megakaryocyte-specific factors [27,28].
One other aspect to the hematopoietic growth factors should be kept in mind as these
376
REGULATION OF HEMATOPOIESIS
TABLE 1
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Growth Factor Origin Function
M-CSF (CSF-1) Endothelial cells Stimulates macrophage differentiation
Fibroblasts Important for maintenance of mature mono-
Macrophages cyte function
Placenta
T cells
Erythropoietin Kidney (?endothelium) Stimulates erythropoiesis
Liver No effect on more primitive progenitors
Interleukin 5 (IL-5) T cells Stimulates production of eosinophils
Induces terminal B-cell differentiation
G-CSF Endothelial cells Stimulates production of neutrophils
Macrophages Predominantly acts late in hierarchy of de-
Epithelial cells velopment with strong maturational ef-
Fibroblasts fects
Neutrophils
GM-CSF Endothelial cells Stimulates production of neutrophils, mac-
Fibroblasts rophages, eosinophils
Macrophages Predominately induces proliferation and dif-
T cells ferentiation of early myeloid progenitors
NK cells
Interleukin 3 (IL-3) (multi-CSF) T cells Stimulates production of neutrophils, mono-
NK cells cytes, eosinophils, basophils, and platelets
Predominately induces proliferation and dif-
ferentiation of early myeloid progenitors
agents enter clinical trials and possible clinical use in the future. Although many of
these proteins were originally described and discovered because of their effect on
hematopoiesis, they may have significant effects on the growth and perhaps even the
differentiation of cells of other lineages. Indeed, some laboratories have been able to
demonstrate receptors for the hematopoietic growth factors on solid tumor cell lines
[29,30]. Moreover, as expected, these hematopoietic growth factors do not just affect
erythroid, myeloid, and megakaryocytic lineages but also may affect the lymphoid
lineages (T, B, and NK cells). From the biological point ofview, it is not surprising that
nature might remain relatively conservative in utilizing such growth-promoting fac-
tors, but this discovery may have important implications in terms of the use of these
agents in patients with various kinds of malignancies and immune disorders.
The mechanism by which growth factors stimulate cells is another important
consideration. In order for a secreted protein growth factor to affect the proliferation of
a cell, the cell to be affected must have on its surface a specific growth factor receptor.
Each of the different hematopoietic cytokines is presumed to have such a specific
receptor. For some factors, the receptor is well characterized (for example, the C-FMS
proto-oncogene product is the M-CSF receptor), while for others further work is
needed. The production of a cytokine by a cell which is also expressing the receptor for
that cytokine is known as "autocrine" stimulation. This process may be an important
mechanism for the growth of hematopoietic-derived tumors.
377
BRIAN R. SMITH
In addition to the "positive" regulatory influences of growth factors on hematopoie-
sis, there must also be a variety of "negative" regulatory elements to prevent overindul-
gent progenitor cell activity. Candidates for this function include the natural killer
lymphocyte [31], but understanding of this aspect of hematopoietic regulation is quite
incomplete. Studies on both adult hematopoiesis and fetal ontogeny and those clinical
circumstances that may mimic fetal ontogeny [321 may help to dissect this physiology.
CLINICAL POTENTIAL FOR THE REGULATION OF HEMATOPOIESIS
The potential circumstances in which alterations of abnormal hematopoiesis by
therapeutic manipulation could result in successful disease treatment are legion. First,
there are disorders in which lack of a specific bone marrow cytokine or hormone is an
intrinsic part of the pathophysiology of the disorder. One of the best examples of this
type is the anemia due to end-stage renal disease. In that case, production of
erythropoietin is markedly decreased because of the loss of renal tissue. Therefore,
replacement of erythropoietin results in reversal of the anemia. Whether there are also
disease states that involve the specific absence of a given myelopoietic, lymphopoietic,
or megakaryocytic growth factor as their prime etiology is unknown but, if so, then
replacement of that growth factor should lead to reversal of the lesion. The second
potential therapeutic use of such agents would be for disorders in which an adequate
quantity of a given hematopoietic cell is present but in which function is abnormal and
the abnormality of function occurs because of inadequate production of a specific
growth factor. Again, it remains unclear whether any normal genetic or acquired
disorder has such an abnormality as its primary lesion. Potential candidates, however,
include the myelodysplastic syndromes, congenital granulocyte dysfunction syn-
dromes, and genetic and acquired "lymphodysplastic" syndromes. The third area in
which altering hematopoiesis by the use of humoral or cellular factors might prove of
great clinical benefit is for those disorders in which the primary lesion may not be lack
of the relevant factor but in which the use of pharmacologic doses of such factors may
improve either (1) quantity ofa given cell or cells in the blood and tissues or (2) function
of a given cell in the blood or tissues. For example, it may be possible to improve one or
both of these problems in acute leukemia, myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic
disorders, aplastic anemia, lymphoproliferative disorders, the immune deficiency of
severe burns, and possibly in a variety of infectious diseases, including HIV, mycobac-
terial, and parasitic infections. Finally, cells and factors that regulate hematopoiesis
may have an extremely important use in a supportive role when combined with other
therapies. The most obvious example is combining the use of hematopoietic growth
factors with chemotherapeutic and/or radiotherapeutic treatment of cancer. Since the
major side effect of these modalities is one of marrow suppression and resultant
pancytopenia, the use of growth factors might enable either the administration of
higher doses of primary therapy (it is hoped with greater success at killing tumor cells)
or alleviation of severe side effects of currently successful therapy (for example, in
successfully "cured" tumors such as lymphoma, leukemia, small-cell carcinoma of the
lung, germ cell tumors, and all the disorders treated by marrow transplantation).
As with any new agent used in either physiologic or pharmacologic doses, attention
to side effects may be the rate-limiting step in utilization ofthe agent. These include all
the usual (often difficult to predict) potential side effects of any drug (for example,
increased hypertension with erythropoietin, vascular leakage syndrome with interleu-
kin 2, and bone pain with GM-CSF) but also side effects that are relatively unique to
378
REGULATION OF HEMATOPOIESIS 379
hematopoietic growth factors. Evidence has been alluded to earlier to suggest that
many acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) cells are dependent on normal he-
matopoietic growth factors for their continued proliferation, and in some cases these
ANLL cells may even act in an autocrine fashion by producing their own needed
growth factors [33,34]. Indeed, certain oncogenes work by inducing endogenous
production of growth factors (as postulated for the V-sis oncogene [35]) or by
representing growth factor receptors themselves (C-FMS proto-oncogene product is
the receptor for M-CSF [36]). Because of this basic science information, one of the
potential worrisome side effects of hematopoietic growth factor use is, of course, the
promotion of pre-leukemia or leukemia itself.
SUMMARY
Although the ultimate understanding of the physiology of hematopoiesis may
require a body ofknowledge comparable to that needed for understanding all ofnormal
human development, there have nevertheless been remarkable advances in our compre-
hension of the cells and humoral factors involved in this unique process. No doubt, this
new knowledge will allow us to define better a variety of primary disorders of
hematopoiesis. Moreover, some of the growth factors identified are already in clinical
practice, and others will soon enter that arena. The introduction of these agents will
have a major effect on transfusion medicine, infectious diseases, and hematology-
oncology.
REFERENCES
1. Santos GW: History of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Hematol 12:611-639, 1983
2. Jacobson LO, Simmons EL, Marks EK, Eldredge JH: Recovery from radiation injury. Science
113:510-511,1951
3. Ford CE, Hamerton JL, Barnes DWH, Loutit JF: Cytological identification of radiation chimeras.
Nature 177:452-454, 1956
4. Micklem HS, Loutit JF: Tissue grafting and radiation. New York, New York Academy of Sciences
Press, 1966
5. Van Bekkum DW, De Vries JJ: Radiation chimeras. London, Logos Press, 1967
6. Till JE, McCulloch EA: A direct measurement ofthe radiation sensitivity ofnormal mouse bone marrow
cells. Radiation Res 14:213-222, 1961
7. Abramson S, Miller RG, Phillips RA: The identification in adult bone marrow of pluripotent and
restricted stem cells of the myeloid and lymphoid systems. J Exp Med 145(6):1567-1579, 1977
8. Wu AM, Till JE, Siminoviteh L, McCulloch EA: A cytological study of the capacity for differentiation
of normal hemopoietic colony-forming cells. J Cell Physiol 69:177-184, 1967
9. Sachs L: The molecular control of blood cell development. Science 238:1374-1379, 1987
10. Bradley TR, Metcalf D: The growth ofmouse bone marrow cells in vitro. Austr J Exp Biol Med 44:287,
1966
11. Bakhshi A, Minowada J, Arnold A, Cossman J, Jensen JP, Whang-Peng J, Waldmann TA, Korsmeyer
SJ: Lymphoid blast crises of chronic myelogenous leukemia represent stages in the development of
B-cell precursors. N Eng J Med 309(14):826-831, 1983
12. Greaves MF, Verbi W, Reeves BR, Hoffbrand AV, Drysdale HC, Jones L, Sacker LS, Samaratunga I:
"Pre-B" phenotypes in blast crisis ofPhI positive CML: Evidence for a pluripotential stem cell "target."
Leukemia Res 3(4):181-191, 1979
13. Sachs L: Regulation of membrane changes, differentiation, and malignancy in carcinogenesis. Harvey
Lect 68:1-35, 1974
14. Dexter TM: Cell interactions in vivo. Clin Hematol 8:453-468, 1979
15. Gordon MY, Riley GP, Watt SM, Greaves MF: Compartmentalization of a haematopoietic growth
factor (GM-CSF) by glycosaminoglycans in the bone marrow microenvironment. Nature 326(6111):
403-405, 1987
380 BRIAN R. SMITH
16. Civin CI, Banquerigo ML, Strauss LC, Loken MR: Antigenic analysis of hematopoiesis. Exp Hematol
15:7-10,1987
17. Spangrude GJ, Heimfeld S, Weissman IL: Purification and characterization of mouse hematopoietic
stem cells. Science 241:58-62, 1988
18. Lemischka IR, Raulet DH, Mulligan RC: Development potential and dynamic behavior ofhematopoie-
tic stem cells. Cell 45(6):917-927, 1986
19. Suda T, Suda J, Ogawa M: Disparate differentiation in mouse hematopoietic colonies derived from
paired progenitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81:2520,1984
20. Ogawa M: Effects of hematopoietic growth factors on stem cells in vitro. Hematology/Oncology Clin N
Amer 3:453-464, 1989
21. Clark SC, Kamen R: The human hematopoietic colony stimulating factors. Science 236:1229-1237,
1987
22. Weisbart RH, Golde DW: Physiology ofgranulocyte and macrophage colony-stimulating factors in host
defense. Hematology/Oncology Clin N Amer 3:401-410, 1989
23. Antman KH, Griffin JD, Elias A, Socinski MA, Ryan L, Cannistra SA, Oette D, Whitley M, Frei E III,
Schnipper LE: Effect of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor on
chemotherapy induced myelosuppression. N Engl J Med 319(10):593-598,1988
24. Socinski MA, Cannistra SA, Elias A, Antman KH, Schnipper L, Griffin JD: Granulocyte-macrophage
colony stimulating factor expands the circulating haemopoietic progenitor cell compartment in man.
Lancet i(8596):1194-1198, 1988
25. Imagawa S, Smith BR, Palmer-Crocker R, Bunn HF: The effect of recombinant erythropoietin on
intracellular free calcium in erythropoietin-sensitive cells. Blood 73:1452-1457, 1989
26. Goldberg MA, Dunning SP, Bunn HF: Regulation of the erythropoietin gene. Science 242:1412, 1988
27. Hoffman R: Regulation of megakaryocytopoiesis. Blood 74:1196, 1989
28. Bruno E, Miller ME, Hoffman R: Interacting cytokines regulate in vitro human megakaryocytopoiesis.
Blood 73:671, 1989
29. Weisbart RH, Gasson JC, Golde DW: CSFs and host defense. Ann Int Med 110:297-303,1989
30. Yamashita Y, Nara N, Aoki N: Antiproliferative and differentiative effect of GM-CSF on a variant
human small cell lung cancer cell line. Cancer Res 49:5334-5338, 1989
31. Niemeyer CM, SieffCA, Smith BR, Ault KA, Nathan DG: Hematopoiesis in vivo co-exists with natural
killer lymphocytes. Blood 74:2376-2332, 1989
32. Ault KA, Antin JH, Ginsburg D, Orkin SH, Rappeport JM, Keohan ML, Martin P, Smith BR:
Phenotype of recovering lymphoid cell populations following marrow transplantation. J Exp Med
161:1483-1502, 1985
33. Demetri GD, Griffin JD: Hemopoietins and leukemia. Hematology/Oncology Clin N Amer 3:535-553,
1989
34. Sporn MB, Roberts AB: Autocrine growth factors and cancer. Nature 313:745-747, 1985
35. Keating MT, Williams LT: Autocrine stimulating ofintracellular PDGF receptors in V-sis-transformed
cells. Science 239:914-916, 1988
36. Rettennier CW, Sherr CJ: The mononuclear phagocyte colony stimulating factor. Hematology/
Oncology Clin N Amer 3:479-493, 1989
