THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 58 (1985), 195-203
Book Reviews
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY OF CONGENITAL BRAIN MALFORMATIONS. By Mohammad
Sarwar. St. Louis, MO, Warren H. Green, Inc., 1985. 169 pp. $45.00.
This volume succinctly presents a review ofcentral nervous system development and
congenital malformations and illustrates the material superbly with numerous tables,
diagrams, graphs, pathological specimens, brain sections, and, of course, CT scans.
The author has done an admirable job in combining the illustrative advantages of an
atlas with a review text's orientation to pertinent, concisely stated information.
After an introduction in which the incidence of various CNS malformations is
presented, the author devotes separate chapters to CNS embryology, corpus callosum
dysgenesis, holoprosencephaly, Arnold-Chiari and Dandy-Walker malformations,
hydrocephalus, neurocutaneous syndromes, and miscellaneous disorders. The section
on miscellaneous malformations both discusses and illustrates encephalocele/menin-
gocephalocele/meningocele, anencephaly, microcephaly, porencephaly, hypo- and
hypertelorism, lissencephaly, median cleft face syndrome, megalencephaly, fetal
alcohol syndrome, arachnoid cysts, craniofacial anomalies in the amniotic band
disruption complex, and anomalies of the septum pellucidum. The malformations
themselves as well as pertinent physiological principles, developmental factors, and
possible etiologies are discussed; the characteristic CT scan findings are described in
depth. Each chapter is well organized and comprehensively referenced, and the text is
printed on fine glossy paper.
The excellent combination of atlas and text conveys a vast amount of information
about congenital CNS malformations in a well-organized and superbly illustrated
fashion. With the recent advent and increasing use of computed tomography, the
volume is certain to become a valuable teaching tool popular among resident
physicians in neurology, neurosurgery, and radiology, and it would be a fine addition to
any medical library.
DUNCAN KINNEAR FISCHER
Medical Student
Yale University School ofMedicine
APLASTIC ANEMIA: STEM CELL BIOLOGY AND ADVANCES IN TREATMENT. Edited by
Neal S. Young, Alan S. Levine, and R. Keith Humphries. New York, Alan R. Liss,
Inc., 1984. 357 pp. $74.00.
Volume 148 ofProgress in Clinical and Biological Research is the proceedings ofthe
Third International Conference on Aplastic Anemia. The text of this symposium
focuses on the experimental research and clinical experiences that provide the
framework for the basic concepts and potential treatment of the bone marrow
dysplasia termed aplastic anemia.
The first three sections of this volume discuss in detail the development of
hematopoietic cell development, which has been shown to be dependent upon survival,
proliferation, self-renewal, and differentiation of stem cells. Additional chapters
195
Copyright o 1985 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
