196 BOOK REVIEWS
within these sections expand upon those concepts, discussing the complexity of the
marrow's involvement in hematopoietic cell differentiation by providing the extracellu-
lar matrix and the cell-cell interaction, as well as the diffusible regulatory molecules
that are necessary for normal hematopoiesis. The use of agents, both in vivo and in
vitro, such as the ,B-xylosides, which produce optimal conditions for long-term marrow
cultures, or the use of regulatory molecules such as human cell growth factor to
stimulate stem cells appear to be likely candidates for clinical trials.
The concept that the T-lymphocyte is important in influencing the regulation of
hematopoiesis is well documented in Section IV of this book. The bone-marrow
damage in aplastic anemia appears to be caused by immunological mechanisms. This
hypothesis is documented in those chapters that discuss humoral inhibitors of
erythropoiesis as well as abnormal T-cell levels and function. The experimental data
indicating the involvement of immunosuppression of hematopoiesis as one cause of
aplastic anemia are well balanced by the last section, which reports on the clinical
observations using treatments like anti-lymphocyte globulin or combinations of
irradiation and cyclophosphamide.
The role of bone-marrow transplants versus immunosuppression therapy still needs
to be evaluated for successful responses, diminished graft-versus-host disease, and
long-term survival. This volume provides an excellent review of the state of the field
and presents important laboratory and clinical findings in the treatment of aplastic
anemia.
CHRISTINA GAMBA-VITALO
Department ofPharmacology
Yale University School ofMedicine
MODERN METHODS IN PHARMACOLOGY. VOLUME 2. Edited by Sydney Spector and
Nathan Back. New York, Alan R. Liss, Inc., 1984. 132 pp. $28.00.
This is the second in a series of texts designed to disseminate advances in
biochemical pharmacology techniques. Three topics are addressed: radioligand bind-
ing assays, monoclonal antibody production, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
studies. The diversity of topics results in a diversity of approaches with which the
various authors have chosen to enlighten the reader.
The author responsible for the monoclonal antibody chapter appears to have best
understood the goals of the series. He provides a very practically oriented treatise
concerning the methods used and the problems encountered in developing hybridomas.
The topic is subdivided into seven sections: immunization schedules, myeloma types
and culture, macrophage preparation, cell fusion, clone stabilization, antibody purifi-
cation, and antibody screening. Personal biases are not evident as multiple protocols for
many procedures are detailed clearly and comprehensively. The discussion ofscreening
procedures is excellently written; different approaches are suggested for the different
classes of antigens, depending on their degree of purity, characterization, ability to be
chemically coupled, and cellular localization. The author, ever mindful of practicality,
even provides a description of how to stock a lab for antibody production and which
sources can supply reagents and equipment. There are only two minor faults. First,
there is little explanation of theory; only a few lines are included to explain why certain
procedures are performed. Theoretical bases, however, are not the primary focus of
this book and may be easily found elsewhere. Second, the author should have included
BOOK REVIEWS 197
more extensive references. These points do not detract from the utility and comprehen-
sibility of this chapter.
The novelty of utilizing NMR in biologic systems precludes its presentation in an
applied manner. The author of this section appropriately provides a rigorous, though
understandable, account of the theory and physics behind this technique. In a logical
sequence the reader is introduced to high-resolution NMR spectra in the determina-
tion of chemical structures (with carnosine as the model), the concept of nuclear
relaxation, and the workings inside an NMR spectrometer, before the complex topic of
applications to biologic systems is discussed. The author notes that NMR has many
advantages over radioligand binding assays in the field of neuropharmacology. For
instance, low-affinity binding, steric requirements for ligand binding, and the parti-
tioning of ligands into and across membrane bilayers all can be investigated with
NMR. The author concludes with several illustrative examples of NMR's applicability
to neuropharmacology. Tissue metabolism, metal ion transport and utilization, and
ligand-receptor and ligand-membrane binding are among the issues addressed.
Radioligand binding assays are discussed with labeled calcium channel blockers as
the model ligands. Although the experimental use of many ligands is described,
nitrendipine is introduced as the standard system since the tritiated form is the only
ligand currently available commercially. Unfortunately, this chapter is not as interest-
ing to read as the previous two, since there is little discussion of methods. Rather, the
authors embark upon a literature review of the available binding data, i.e., Kd, Bmax,
and association and dissociation constants concerning these drugs. While the review
format and extensive tabularized data may be a worthwhile reference for those in the
field, precious little information is provided about new techniques with radioligands.
This second volume of Modern Methods in Pharmacology, although not entirely
successful in providing practical insight, is generally succcessful in addressing novel
research techniques. The chapters concerning monoclonal antibodies and NMR are
particularly illuminating for those unfamiliar with these recent advances.
PETER C. Ho
Medical Student
Yale University School ofMedicine
BEHAVIORAL PHARMACOLOGY: THE CURRENT STATUS. Edited by Lewis S. Seiden and
Robert L. Balster. New York, Alan R. Liss, Inc., 1985. 571 pp. $78.00.
In Behavioral Pharmacology: The Current Status, Seiden and Balster, both
prominent figures in this field, compile the proceedings of six symposia from a joint
meeting of the Behavioral Pharmacology Division of the American Psychological
Association and the American Association for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics. While presenting a variety of diverse and interesting material, this
volume suffers from many problems characteristic of published conference proceed-
ings: lack of real depth in any particular topic and a superficial organization which
does not really provide a broad overview of the field.
Admittedly, as a conference proceeding, one should not expect a comprehensive
introductory text. This volume touches on a broad range of topics including environ-
mental determinants of drug action; behavioral pharmacology of opioids, anxiolytics,
neuroleptics, stimulants, and antidepressants; behavioral factors in substance abuse;
and behavioral effects of environmental toxins. However, it neither thoroughly reviews
