EVENTS
At the meeting of the Yale Medical Society held at the Sterling Hall of
Medicine on October 21, Professor A. V. Hill presented a paper on "The
Vapor Pressure of Muscle and Blood, and the State of Water in Living
Tissues".
It was pointed out that the cell is not a static substance but is the seat of
constant energy transformations. The muscle fiber, even in its resting
state, produces heat. This heat production is due to vapor pressure and is
dependent on the osmotic pressure existing between the cell and its surround-
ing media, the blood. By an extremely delicate thermopile with galvano-
meter connections the vapor pressure may be measured directly. In strenu-
ous exercise it is the rise in this pressure which causes the muscles to swell.
It is easy to demonstrate that the additional water content of muscle is due
to a withdrawal of water from the blood, since the blood concentrates dur-
ing exercise.
In fishes, with a few exceptions, a change from water of one concentra-
tion to another, and hence from one osmotic pressure to another, results in a
corresponding change in the osmotic pressure of the tissues. This change is
only accomplished by the expenditure of oxygen. When the dilution be-
comes greater than the oxygen supply necessary to establish osmotic equili-
brium, the fish dies.
In the course of his lecture, Professor Hill spoke of the source of energy
for muscle contraction. Although Lundsgaard had pointed out that iodo-
acetic acid inhibits the formation of lactic acid, nevertheless the breaking
down of phospho-creatine still furnishes energy for contraction. This,
however, is but one-sixth of the total energy source; the formation of lactic
acid from glycogen supplying the remainder. J. J. DuM.
Professor OTFRID FOERSTER addressed the Neurological Study Unit,
October 21, 1930, upon the Subject, "Cordotomy from Anatomical, Physio-
logical, and Clinical Standpoints."
In all branches of clinical medicine, but especially in neurology, one is
frequently asked to relieve patients suffering from persistent and intractable
pain. There are many cases in which the cause of the pain cannot be removed,
and in the past morphia and certain other narcotic drugs were the only satis-
factory means of giving relief. With persistent pain such measures naturally
led to dependence and addiction. Knowledge of the sensory pathways in
the spinal cord led Frazier (1912), on the recommendation of Spiller of
Philadelphia, to introduce a spinal cord operation which served to diminish
pain in conditions which would yield in no other way. Foerster had previ-
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
ously carried out the operation of posterior root section for the same purpose.
He was also a pioneer in carrying out cordotomies, and in his hands the
operation has led to very great advancement in the knowledge of the func-
tional anatomy of the spinal cord. Since 1912 his operations have been
done under local anaesthesia and his patients have been under observation
for many years.
In his lecture Dr. Foerster began by considering the origin of the spino-
thalamic tracts. By studying the cell changes occurring in monkeys after
cordotomy and after transection of one posterior root, he has been able to
show that the large cells of the posterior horn are chiefly responsible for the
fibres passing upward in the anterolateral tracts. He has also amassed a large
body of experimental and clinical evidence indicating that the fibres cross
to the opposite side of the spinal cord in the segment in which they enter
the cord, and not, as is commonly supposed, two or three segments higher
up. When a cordotomy of the anterolateral tract at the third cervical level
is carried out on one side, the level of anesthesia on the opposite side of the
body goes up sharply to that dermatome (i.e., the third cervical).
Careful study during operation of the various qualities of sensation in-
dicate that there is an elaborate mosaic of laminae corresponding to the level
at which the anterolateral tracts arise, the most sacral component being pe-
ripheral an the higher segments being represented more medially. There
is also a difference in distribution of the differing qualities of sensation, i.e.,
temperature, pain, touch, and pressure. Often when the first cut is made in
the peripheral part of the ventral quadrant of the cord, only the lower lumbar
and sacral dermatome may become anesthetic; however, as the cut is made
deeper and deeper, the level of anesthesia rises progressively. The derma-
tomes supplying the visceral organs, e.g., the stomach, may pass in as high up as
the third thoracic level.
Perhaps the most important outcome of Foerster's studies is in the elucida-
tion of the pathways conveying pain. These he discussed under the following
headings: (i) spinothalamic tracts, (2) posterior columns, (3) sympathetic
system, including the arteries.
After unilateral cordotomy of the spinothalamic tract, there is complete
anesthesia of the skin of the opposite side of the body. This appears im-
mediately and extends up to the dermatome corresponding to the level of
the cordotomy. In the course of time, imperfect pain sensibility may return
in the previously anesthetic skin area, but visceral pain never returns. Deep
joint-pain may, however, recover to a very marked extent; there is also slight
diminution in pain sensibility on the same side of the body, as is evidenced by
a 50 per cent diminution in the number of pain spots per square centimeter,
the increased threshold for elicitation of pain, and the increased chronaxie of
84
EVENTS
the pain endings. This latter fact is a new disclosure brought out by careful
study of pain sensibility.
Hitherto neurologists have denied that pain travels in the posterior col-
umns; however, when the posterior columns are touched in a conscious pa-
tient he experiences an acute twinge of pain. This is true whatever the level,
and if at the second cervical segment the outer column is touched, pain is
referred to the lumbosacral region and if the inner is touched it is referred
to the arm. If the posterior columns are incised, pain is experienced at the
time of the incision. If careful studies of sensibility are made following
unilateral section of a posterior column, the number of pain spots per cubic
centimeter is greatly diminished on the same side of the body, and there is
increased threshold and chronaxie of the pain endings. The distribution
of the pain endings passing in the posterior columns is probably entirely cuta-
neous and it certainly does not supply the viscera.
A case was decribed in which, following injury at the sixth thoracic
level, there were symptoms of a complete spinal paraplegia. A year later
the patient broke her tibia, after which she complained of severe pain in that
extremity. Believing that the paraplegia was incomplete, Professor Foerster
exposed the spinal cord, finding that it has been completely severed and that
the two ends were separated by a distance of 3 cm. The pain nevertheless
persisted until the sympathetic ganglia on the same side had been removed.
In other cases, pain in the extremities was experienced after complete tran-
section of the spinal cord in the thoracic level. Vasoconstrictor reflexes were
also transmitted from a hind limb to the fore limb and disappeared only on
transecting the sympathetic nervous system. It appears that some fibres sub-
serving pain in the extremities also pass upward along the abdominal aorta
and join the spinal cord via the sympathetic nervous system. Richter has
recently repeated these observations on cats, finding that a psychogalvanic
reflex of the fore limbs can be elicited in these animals from the hind ex-
tremities after transection of the cord; the reflex is abolished when the
sympathetic system is removed. Dr. Foerster also discussed the pathway in-
volved in sweat secretion. The efferent path appears to pass down in the
medial part of the anterolateral column.
In closing, Dr. Foerster discussed the types of case in which cordotomy
(bilateral) was to be recommended. Undoubtedly the most satisfactory are
those of gastric crises, but he also feels that the operation is indicated in
malignancy of the spinal cord or pelvic region. Many of his cases of gastric
crises have gained weight and, sometimes for the first time in 6 or 7 years,
have begun to lead useful, self-supporting lives. When the cordotomy has
been properly performed the pain in these cases never recurs. He also pointed
out that the locomotor disturbance from extensive anterolateral lesions is of
no importance so long as the pyramidal tracts are not encroached upon. In
86 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
one case of Parkinson rigidity, there was transient diminution of the hyper-
tonus following an extensive bilateral cordotomy, but the benefit was not
permanent owing presumably to the inability to sever the rubrospinal tracts
apart from the pyramidals.
Dr. Foerster has had no postoperative fatalities, though one of his cases
of malignancy died four weeks later, and this permitted him to study the
degeneration above and below his lesion by the Marchi method. He traced
the degenerated fibres through the medulla and pons into the optic thalamus.
This appears to be the first time that these fibres have been so traced by this
method in human beings after a circumscribed surgical lesion. J. F. F.
The New Haven Medical Society held its first meeting of the Fall on
Wednesday evening, October I. The program was opened with a moving
picture illustrating the effect of radium on cancer cells. Normal growth,
mitosis, and the activity of tissue cultures of the Jensen rat sarcoma were
portrayed. The immobilization, with subsequent shrinking and degenera-
tion of cells of the periosteum of chick embryos by the application of radium
was also shown.
Following the presentation of a case of scleroderma by DR. JOHN LANE,
DR. SAMUEL HARVEY discussed the "Present Status of Sympathectomy".
The similarity of scleroderma to arthritis deformans was pointed out and
it was suggested that this condition might be closely related to the vasomotor
disturbances causing arthritis deformans, and that untractable cases might
advantageously be treated by sympathectomy. In general there are two con-
ditions which may be benefitted by the operative procedure: I visceral pain
and, 2 excessive vasoconstriction. Conditions classified under angina pectoris
may be relieved by sympathectomy. Early procedures involved the removal
of the cervical sympathetics, but within the last few years it has been realized
that the central pathways of the sympathetics go as low as the II and III
thoracic rami. From this has evolved the method of injecting the sympa-
thetics in this region with alcohol, and relief in a high percentage of cases
of angina pectoris is now realized. Interruption of the lower afferent path-
ways is successful in relieving the pain in tabes dorsalis with gastric crises.
Causalgias may be relieved by division of the sympathetic ganglia. A large
group of cases, comprising arteriosclerosis of the extremities, Reynaud's dis-
ease, and Buerger's disease, which are attended with considerable pain, may be
benefitted by interruption of the sympathetic pathway. The sympathetic may
be blocked by the Leriche operation, which amounts to stripping the adventitia
of the vessels, or sympathetic ganglia may be removed. Sympathectomy
produces considerable improvement in cases of arthritis deformans. A
bronchial asthma, when not caused by a bacterium or by a foreign protein,
may also be relieved.
The closing paper of the evening was presented by DR. WILLIAM MOR-
RISS on "The Use of Calcium Chloride in Intestinal Tuberculosis". In-
testinal tuberculosis is one of the most common complications of pulmonary
tuberculosis, being encountered in from 50 to 8o per cent of the cases. The
terminal ileum, cecum, and ascending colon are most frequently involved.
It is a grave complication, and the results of ordinary treatment are poor.
Ultraviolet light is of great value in healing the intestinal lesions. Calcium
chloride was first used by Mandel in I9I7, and its effects have been striking.
It is given intravenously, 5 cc. of a five per cent solution being the usual dose.
Ringer and Minor obtained excellent results in 30 consecutive cases, and in
1924, Roberts reported 70 cases, 8o per cent of which showed marked im-
provement. There is an immediate and definite relief from pain and di-
arrhea. For some unknown cause it is highly effective in treating hemorrhage
of the bowel. A possible explanation is that calcium quiets smooth muscle,
and this permits rest of the intestinal tract, thus allowing the lesion to heal.
J. J. Du M.
At the New Haven Medical Society on October I5 the speaker of the
evening was DR. HARRISON S. MARTLAND, Medical Examiner of Essex
County, New Jersey.
Discussing "The Medical Examiner's Office and Its Relations to Modern
Medicine", he spoke first of syphilis of the aorta as a cause of sudden death.
Sixty per cent of sudden cardiac deaths are due to this disease. Thirty-seven
per cent of these are caused by aneurism of the aortic arch, 36 per cent by
aortic regurgitation, and I5 per cent by coronary sclerosis and atresia. The
speaker then considered the occasional deaths from radium poisoning. In a
watch-and-clock factory in New Jersey where luminous paint is used 17
deaths occurred from mesothorium poisoning. Of these, four died of osteo-
genic sarcoma. The early cases showed extensive necrosis of the jaw, aplastic
anemia, and a progressively cachectic course. The later cases showed radia-
tion osteitis, crippling bone lesions, and sarcoma. The radium may be de-
tected in suspected cases by means of a galvano-electroscope sensitive enough
to discover I micromilligram of this substance in the body. The lethal dose
is from io to i8o micromilligrams. Research on this problem has brought
out the close relationship of radiation to aplastic anemia and osteogenic sar-
coma. Dr. Martland then spoke of a traumatic cerebral hemorrhage and
a definite clinical-pathological entity called "punch-drunk" due to blows on
the chin, and resulting in multiple concussion hemorrhages in the brain, fol-
lowed by sclerosis. J. J. Du M.
87EVENTS
