YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 46, 324-330 (1973)
Book Reviews
ERYTHROPOIESIS. REGULATORY MECHANISMS AND DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS.
Edited by Yehuda Matoth. Academic Press, New York, 1972. 206 pp. $10.
This volume contains the proceedings of a conference on erythropoiesis held
at Tel Aviv University from July 27-29, 1970. Twenty-seven papers are listed
under six headings: "Fetal and Neonatal Erythropoiesis," "Assay of Erythro-
poietin," "Androgens and Erythropoiesis," "Mechanism of Action of Erythro-
poietin," "Regulation of Erythropoiesis," and "Production of Erythropoietin:
Renal and Extrarenal Sources and Inhibitors of Erythropoietin." The discussions
following the presentations are also recorded, a useful addition.
Much has been learned about erythropoietin and the editor expects a new surge
of progress with the imminent availability of in vitro assays. Herein described are
a hemagglutination-inhibition assay and a radioimmunoassay for erythropoietin
thought by those who described them to be sensitive and specific. At the time of
the conference neither assay had been tried in large groups of human subjects.
It is clear that these were still relatively preliminary communications since the other
papers in this volume relied on the rodent bioassay systems. The application of
erythropoietin assays to the workup of clinical problems may be possible with the
development of the newer methods. For example, we may be able to distinguish
tumor-induced erythrocytosis from polycythemia vera by serum urinary ESF levels.
Another portion of the conference recorded in this volume that is of immediate
clinical significance contains papers on the relationship between androgen and
erythropoiesis. It is certainly puzzling that androgens benefit persons with aplastic
anemia, whose erythropoietin output is usually increased, when the principal effect
of androgens seems to be to further increase erythropoietin. Clearly the relationship
between androgens, erythropoiesis, and hematological improvement in an indi-
vidual with aplastic anemia is not a simple one. That the effect of androgens on
erythropoiesis is indirect is supported by previous work and by several papers pre-
sented at this conference. It has been established that testosterone has little effect
on increasing erythroid marrow precursors in the perfused hind limb of a dog.
A contribution to this volume showed that testosterone succinate had no effect
on iron incorporation in rabbit bone marrow cells in culture. Another paper re-
viewed evidence that testosterone acts through erythropoietin-the effect of testos-
terone and other hormones (ACTH, thyroid) can be prevented by erythropoietin
antibodies. On the positive side, kidneys isolated from previously hypoxic dogs
and perfused with blood containing testosterone produced high levels of erythro-
poietin. Another author showed that several different types of testosterone had
positive erythropoietic effects, that there was a correlation between renotropic and
324
Copyright © 1973, by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
BOOK REVIEWS 325
erythropoietic effects, which supports the idea that testosterone effects the bone
marrow through the kidney. By contrast there was no correlation between the bone
marrow effect and the effect on rat seminal vesicles.
Leaving the subject of androgens, another contribution described experiments
involving electrical stimulation of the hypothalamus in rats. These experiments
were designed to elicit increased erythropoiesis, and low-level, short-term stimula-
tion did. However, higher level, longer-term stimulation produced reticuloendo-
thelial hyperplasia, increased red cell sequestration, and hemolytic anemia, a phe-
nomenon which seems not to have been previously described. A study of the
anemia of acute leukemias showed that patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
excreted abundant erythropoietin in response to anemia whereas patients with acute
myeloblastic leukemia excreted only low levels of erythropoietin levels in the pres-
ence of severe anemia. Parallel observations of a "leukopoietic factor" have been
made in these types of leukemia.
This volume will, of course, be useful to investigators primarily interested in
erythropoietin and erythropoiesis, and the tidbits offered above should suggest that
others will also be interested in many of the observations recorded. It seems regret-
table that the volume could not have been published less expensively (in paper)
and sooner after the conference.
PETER MCPHEDRAN
Department of Internal Medicine,
Yale University Medical School
New Haven
ENDOCRINES AND OSMOREGULATION: A COMPARATIVE ACCOUNT OF THE
REGULATION OF WATER AND SALT IN VERTEBRATES. By P. J. Bentley. Springer,
Berlin, 1971. xvi, 300 pp. $16.80.
This is the first volume of a new zoophysiology and ecology series and a book
that should be of special interest and value to endocrinologists and comparative
physiologists. The mechanisms responsible for maintenance of water and electrolyte
homeostasis in vertebrates covering such a wide range of ecological areas is a fasci-
nating one. It is to the credit of the author, who has made many important con-
tributions in the field of pituitary and adrenal endocrinology, not to have limited
himself solely to discussing the role of the endocrine system in vertebrate osmoregu-
lation from a comparative point of view but to also provide the reader with a thor-
ough review of those biological structures which control salt and water exchange
with the environment. Thus, the first chapter includes a section dealing with the
functional organization of such nonendocrine structures as cell membranes, capil-
laries, skin, gills, gut, bladder, salt glands, and kidney. In addition, the first chapter
also provides a useful account of the basic principles and driving forces underlying
osmotic exchanges with the environment and describes instructively, the different
mechanisms underlying fluid and salt translocation.
The second chapter provides a broad survey of comparative aspects of vertebrate
endocrine systems with emphasis on their role in the control of fluid and salt move-
