Department of Pathology
CHARLES B. CARRINGTON* Yale University School of Medicine,333 Cedar Street,
New Haven, Conn. 06510
ORGANIZING INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA. DEFINITION OF THE LESION
AND ATTEMPTS TO DEVISE AN EXPERIMENTAL MODEL**
For several years Professor Liebow and I have been studying a group of
diffuse chronic pulmonary diseases known as interstitial pneumonias.' Be-
cause of the primitive state of our knowledge, this study has until recently
been concerned primarily with the classic approach of recognizing, sorting,
naming, and fitting together the clinical, roentgenological, and morpho-
logical observations in order to obtain more nearly homogeneous categories.
This has been pursued in the hope that such classification would aid clinical
recognition and facilitate efforts to define pathogenesis, to determine etiol-
ogies, and to evaluate by empirical means the diverse approaches to therapy.
As is so often the case, the use of spontaneous human lesions imposes
distinct limitations on the endeavor to understand pathogenesis and ana-
tomical-physiological relationships because of the complete independence
of the lesions from the observers. Experimental models of such lesions
would obviously be of considerable aid to these studies. My discussion will
be concerned with a brief description of one of these interstitial pneumonias
and of our efforts to reproduce it in the laboratory.
ORGANIZING INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA-THE SPONTANEOUS LESION
Although none of the chronic interstitial pneumonias is common, one
type is seen much more frequently than any other and can thus be referred
to as the "common" or usual interstitial pneumonia, hereafter abbreviated
U.I.P. Several good descriptions of the lesion are available2" with early
reports going back at least six decades.`1' It is unnecessary to discuss the
merits of the many names that are used for this lesion. For clarity of defini-
tion, I merely point out that the following are synonyms for the lesion un-
der discussion:
Usual interstitial pneumonia (U.I.P.)
Interstitial pneumonia
Organizing interstitial pneumonia
Diffuse interstitial pneumonitis
Chronic interstitial pneumonitis
Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
* Assistant Professor of Pathology. Address after July 1, 1968: Dept. of Pathology,
University of California at San Diego, California 92037.
** Supported in part by: U. S. Public Health Service Grant #He-07277 and #5-Ti-
HE-05153.
352
Organizing interstitial pneumonia
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
Chronic interstitial fibrosis of lungs
Diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
Chronic diffuse interstitial fibrosis of lungs
Acute diffuse interstitial fibrosis of lungs
Hamman-Rich syndrome
Bronchiolar emphysema
Muscular cirrhosis
Chronic diffuse fibrosing alveolitis
Present concepts of the pathogenesis of U.I.P. are based on observations
of static points in its progress as seen in histological preparations from
biopsies and autopsies of many dozens of patients. It must be emphasized
that progression from early to late stages can be described as it applies to
any single focus in the lung but that in the lung as a whole, early, inter-
mnediate, and late stages are usually observed simultaneously in different
foci. Therefore clinical progression, except in the few instances when a
sudden massive injury to the lung can be identified, is best considered the
result of gradual accumulation of affected foci in contrast to the progression
observed anatomically in a given focus.
The anatomical changes, as best they can be assembled from current data,
begin with damage to the alveoli resulting in interstitial edema and pro-
teinaceous exudates. This is often but not invariably accompanied by hya-
line membranes and an exudate in the air spaces. In some instances edema
in the alveoli is very severe for a brief period, but even then it is less con-
spicuous than that in the interstitium after the first few days. There is
some experimental evidence' that the hyaline membranes are composed of
a mixture of acellular exudate with necrotic debris from the epithelial lining
of the alveoli, but this has not been studied adequately in human material.
This initial reaction is rapidly supplemented and gradually replaced by an
infiltration of cells, primarily lymphocytes and macrophages, into the in-
terstitium and, again to a much less conspicuous degree, into the small air
spaces. The cellular and acellular exudates produce a marked thickening of
the alveolar septa; and in some foci these thickened septa coalesce and
obliterate the air spaces, a process in part enhanced by simultaneous or-
ganization of exudates in the airways as described below. Proliferating
fibroblasts are soon identifiable among the infiltrated cells. Gradually reti-
culin and collagen are deposited and the process of organization continues
to hyalinized scar but with persistence of some round cell infiltrates. This
cellular infiltration, fibroblastic proliferation, and collagen deposition is
analogous to repair and healing by granulation tissue, but in U.I.P. the
process of healing is relatively avascular as compared to ordinary granula-
tion tissue. It is likely that necrosis of entire septa and possibly of the pro-
353
CARRINGTON
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 40, April, June,1968
liferating fibroblasts and cellular infiltrates contribute to destruction of the
normal architecture, but if present this is of such subtlety that frank necrosis
is infrequently observed by light microscopy.
Whereas the interstitial components are the most prominent part of the
lesion, the small air spaces also are involved, as indicated above. Organiza-
tion of exudate within the air spaces occurs simultaneously with organization
in the interstitium; by overgrowth of the regenerating epithelium, this air-
way exudate becomes incorporated into the interstitial tissue as described
below.
Epithelial proliferation is invariably a prominent component of U.I.P.
From observations on cases of acute interstitial pneumonia with rapid
death, epithelial proliferation of epithelium is known to be well underway
within a few days of the initial alveolar damage. This rapid regeneration of
epithelium has been noted in various experimental lesions as well. The
regenerating epithelial cells provide a lining much thicker than the deli-
cately thin cytoplasmic lining of normal alveoli, and they are readily seen
with the light microscope. Evidence of active cell division is provided by
the frequency with which mitoses can be identified histologically. The rapid
proliferation of epithelium is interpreted as further evidence that epithelial
necrosis is an important feature of the initial tissue injury. An additional
stimulus for epithelial proliferation and particularly for the persistent meta-
plasia observed is the thickened and stiff condition of the scarred alveolar
walls. This alteration in the septa is usually accompanied by epithelial
metaplasia long after any form of injury to the lung has healed and the in-
jurious agent or process vanished. In U.I.P. the epithelial proliferation is
remarkable in that it covers over the small masses of organizing exudate
lying in the air spaces. Such material thereby becomes incorporated into the
interstitium along with that which was interstitial from the beginning. The
result is that scar tissue seen between air spaces in the late stage is in fact
the end product of interstitial and airway exudates.
Finally it must be noted that various secondary changes are seen in the
late stages of U.I.P. Thus in addition to abundant fibrous tissue, abnormally
large amounts of smooth muscle are often seen in the lungs of such patients.
Although this is sometimes so abundant as to have led some observers to
suggest special names for the lesion in such cases, the differences from
case to case are better described as quantitative rather than qualitative.'
The late stage of U.I.P. is certainly not unique in this regard, as hyper-
trophied and hyperplastic smooth muscle is often noted in lung tissue
subjected to abnormal tension and stretch, e.g. as in some bullae. Because
of the focal traction produced by the scar tissue in the lung with U.I.P.,
"traction emphysema" contributes in some part to the abnormal size and
334
Organizing interstitial pneumonia
shape of the residual air spaces. Obstruction of some of the small airways
also can result from their being surrounded by the organizing reaction
which, as with any ordinary granulation tissue, shrinks as it reaches the
final stage of scarring. Obstruction is not of a degree as to be apparent as
such in pulmonary function tests, however. Secondary bacterial infection
often complicates the clinical course of patients with U.I.P. Despite the
fact that many such infections are controlled by antibiotic therapy, they
are often important in the terminal illness. Both the infections that are
overcome and those that result in widespread pulmonary sepsis and death
contribute significantly to the abnormal structure of the lung as seen at
necropsy. There is no evidence at present, however, that bacterial infection
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of the primary process of
U.I.P., and cultures and antibiotic therapy are both unrewarding during
the chronic course of the illness.
The end result of U.I.P. is honeycombing, the lung being composed of air
spaces of less than normal alveolar size to more than a centimeter in di-
ameter. These air spaces, which are randomly interconnected in labyrinthine
fashion without regard for the normal manner of airway branching, are
separated by thick walls richly supplied with fibrous tissue and varied
amounts of smooth muscle. The abnormal air spaces are lined by metaplastic
epithelium of several types. Even at necropsy, such a lung has normal
regions interspersed with the honeycombed portions, the distribution hav-
ing no constant relationship to pre-existing structures such as blood vessels
or bronchioles. In addition, such a lung frequently has foci in which the
process seems to be in the very earliest stage with edema and hyaline mem-
branes but little other change. Intermediate stages are found in still other
foci. It should be noted that honeycombing itself is the final stage of a num-
ber of other pulmonary lesions in addition to U.I.P.
In a few instances, as in the accidental inhalation of certain toxic sub-
stances or when ionizing radiation is administered for treatment of another
disease, the onset of U.I.P. can be determined precisely and symptoms re-
lated accordingly. More often the clinical course is one of insidious onset,
the patient becoming gradually aware of dyspnea or even cyanosis and
clubbing without being able to date the beginning more accurately than
within a few months. Characteristically there is evidence of arterial hy-
poxemia at rest or at least with exercise; but carbon dioxide retention, if
ever noted at all, is not appreciable until the terminal phase of the illness.
The hypoxemia can often be improved by having the patient breathe 100
per cent oxygen, but a complete return to normal values may not be pro-
duced by this maneuver. The residual volume of the lung is either normal
or slightly reduced. Pulmonary compliance is markedly reduced, but evi-
355
I CARRINGTON
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 40,April, June,1968
dence of airways obstruction is absent. "Diffusion capacity" is frequently
lower than normal when measured by standard techniques. The chest
roentgenogram typically reveals reticular and finely granular opacities
throughout the upper and lower lung fields, and these become increasingly
numerous as the course progresses. Rarefactions are apparent when coarse
honeycombing develops. Although U.I.P. may result in death within a few
weeks or progress slowly for more than a decade, two to four years is the
ordinary duration. Death usually results from respiratory insufficiency,
bacterial infection, cor pulmonale, or a combination of these.
The etiology of U.I.P. in many patients eludes detection despite the most
intensive search for clues. A number of interesting observations have been
made in other case studies, however. U.I.P. has thus been noted after in-
halation of fumes or dusts of metals such as mercury,"'178 cadmium, and
beryllium.19 Additional cases have been associated with administration of
certain drugs such as hexamethonium,` bulsulfan,2" and hydantoin.z
Nearly one quarter of the cases published before 1961 were encountered
in patients simultaneously suffering from a "collagen disease" such as rheu-
matoid arthritis or progressive systemic sclerosis.' Both the sporadic oc-
currence of U.I.P. in patients treated with drugs usually harmless to
pulmonary tissue irrespective of dosage and the association with collagen
diseases have led to hypotheses that abnormal immune mechanisms (hyper-
sensitivity, autoimmunity) are etiologically important. To date there is
little additional evidence to substantiate or refute these hypotheses. A re-
markable incidence of U.I.P. has been noted in a few carefully studied
families. By examining many near and not-so-near relatives some investi-
gators have found the number of cases with a familial history to account
for nearly one quarter of their patients. Because of these studies, a genetic
factor has been suggested to be important to the development of U.I.P. The
pulmonary lesion induced by ionizing radiation also falls into the category
of U.I.P. Although such examples can sometimes be identified specifically
by subtle changes in fibroblast nuclei, blood vessels, and bronchial glands,
all other morphological features of radiation pneumonia are typical of those
described above. The majority of these cases cannot be differentiated from
other examples of U.I.P. except by history.
The problem of the relationship between viral infections and U.I.P. de-
serves special mention. The acute pulmonary reaction in several viral in-
fections is typical of the early changes in U.I.P. Clinically, most viral
pneumonias resolve with little or no residual pulmonary damage. Whether
or not such pneumonias occasionally progress to organization and hence
become typical organizing interstitial pneumonias is an intriguing but still
unsolved problem. Much as is the case with many patients with diffuse
356
Organizing interstitial pneumonia
myocardial fibrosis, the patients with U.I.P. are recognized at a stage when
viral particles are unlikely to be found even if they had initiated the lesion.
The situation is further complicated by the many differences in growth
requirements of different viruses. It is difficult as well as expensive to at-
tempt viral isolation in a given instance unless one has a reasonably good
idea of what virus he expects to find. Doubtless our knowledge of the
spectrum of pathogenic viruses is still far from complete, and negative cul-
tures are therefore insufficient proof of absence of such infectious agents
even when the cultures are performed at the onset of the disease. To a large
degree the same problems encountered in trying to relate viruses to U.I.P.
also apply to efforts to similarly relate mycoplasma organisms.
In reviewing the various factors associated with some cases of U.I.P.,
it would appear necessary that we consider this lesion to be a rather non-
specific type of pulmonary reaction which can follow pulmonary injury
initiated by several different agents or processes. In the sense of having
a single specific etiology it is not a sharply defined disease. Seen in this
light, U.I.P. is somewhat analogous to aplastic anemia or lymph node
hyperplasia.
The above described progression in U.I.P. from edema and hyaline
membranes through organization to honeycombing is not always seen after
diffuse alveolar damage. Already mentioned is the fact that acute viral pneu-
monias that have lesions morphologically similar to early U.I.P. usually
resolve. The same is true of exposure to mercury fumes. In the accidental
exposure of several workers described by Teng and Brennan'7 and by
Tennant, et al."8 only a small number of those who developed an acute re-
action went on to develop a chronic progressive lesion. Some patients
treated with busulfan also have had resolution, or at least arrest of progres-
sion, after cessation of the drug therapy."' Thus we are faced with the fact
that seemingly identical pulmonary injuries sometimes organize and some-
times resolve. Is this due to differences in severity or extent of injury in-
apparent in the relatively late stage that we examine or inapparent to light
microscopy at any stage? Is it due to a persistent abnormality such as tissue-
fixed metals, an abnormal immune mechanism, or permanent nuclear
damage induced by ionizing radiation or incorporation of viral genetic
information? Is it related to subtle differences in reaction controlled by
inherent genetic factors? Of great clinical importance is the question of how
to interfere with the process so as to induce resolution rather than organiza-
tion and to prevent progression in that majority of patients in whom some
organization and honeycombing are already present when first identified
clinically. In addition, clinically observed physiological defects are as yet
imperfectly correlated with the anatomical observations. All of these prob-
357
CARRINGTON
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 40,April, June,1968
lems are difficult to study with spontaneous human material. The investiga-
tion of some, at least, might be aided by an experimental model.
AN ATTEMPT TO DEVELOP A LABORATORY MODEL
In order to evaluate the attempts to experimentally reproduce U.I.P. in
laboratory animals, I have abstracted from our observations a few criteria
that I believe important. These have been combined with certain experi-
mental considerations in Table 1, to represent, in the context of our present
knowledge, the features of an ideal model. While these provide useful
guidelines, it is probably too much to expect that all of these features will
be immediately realized.
In our experimental model there must be a mixed cellular exudate in the
interstices. This should be mostly mononuclear cells and lymphocytes.
TABLE 1. FEATURES OF AN IDEAL MODEL OF U.I.P.
ESSENTIAL
Mixed cellular exudate in interstitium
Protein exudates in air spaces, + leukocytes
Proliferation of lining epithelium
Gradual progression to fibrosis and honeycombing-slow enough for serial
physiological studies
Continuing "activity" even when partly fibrotic
Diffuse distribution, but may have "skip zones"
FAVORABLE
Hyaline membranes
Interstitial muscle proliferation
Multiple species for the same agent
Multiple agents for the same species-especially useful if some organize
and some do not
MUST NOT HAVE
Abundant polys, at least after first few days
Prolonged state of extensive edema
Localization by bronchioles
Respiratory failure too soon for serial function studies or definite organization
Contamination by ordinary bacterial disease
(? L forms, mycoplasma, virus)
PHYSIOLOGICAL FEATURES
Decreased or normal total lung volume
Significant hypoxemia before CO2 retention, partly or wholly corrected
by 100% 02
Minimal airways obstruction
353
Organizing interstitial pneumonia
There should be some proteinaceous exudate in the airways, usually with
a negligible number of leukocytes. If there are any cells in the exudate in
this location, they should be primarily macrophages and especially prolif-
erated epithelium since the latter is so prominent in the human cases. There
should be gradual progression to fibrosis and honeycombing, preferably
progressing sufficiently slowly for serial physiological studies to be per-
formed. Whether progression is slow or fast is not important as far as the
lesion is concerned, but for laboratory study a slowly progressive lesion
would be much better.
To reproduce the human lesion accurately there must be continuing
"activity" even when the lung is partly fibrotic. In other words, this must
not be a pulmonary reaction that goes through a rapid organization with
scarring and then stops. The lesion must be distributed diffusely through
the lung-diffuse in that it is not constantly related to any particular struc-
ture; but there may be "skip" regions where some alveoli are destroyed,
some nearby spared. It would be nice if such a model also produced hyaline
membranes and significant interstitial muscle proliferation, but neither of
these is universal in human cases. For manipulating the model and trying
to study various factors, it would be convenient if several agents could be
used for any given species and if several species would react similarly with
any given agent. Multiple agents in one species would be particularly useful
if some resulted in organization while others resulted in an acute lesion fol-
lowed by resolution.
Doctors Liebow, Cottrell, Glusman, and I have performed a number of
preliminary experiments in an attempt to achieve a lesion that fulfills at
least some of these criteria. From practical considerations it seems best at
present to concentrate on exposure to a toxic material for inciting a U.I.P.
reaction while ignoring for the present possible genetic and immunologic
predispositions. Lacking any clear guides, we have also chosen to eliminate
infectious agents from these preliminary experiments. Mercury and cad-
mium were selected as toxic agents because they have been associated with
some human cases. Ozone was also chosen because of data reported by
Gross' and others which suggested that it might be suitable for our pur-
poses. It should be emphasized that in this model we are attempting to
reproduce in controlled fashion the pulmonary reaction as it is observed in
humans without necessarily providing a definite etiological link with the
many human cases that are still idiopathic.
In instances where man has inadvertently inhaled significant amounts of
cadmium or mercury salts or fumes, pulmonary edema in the acute phase
has sometimes been so severe as to result in rapid death simply from
asphyxiation. In order to prevent such a premature end to an experiment,
359
CARRINGTON
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 40,April, June,1968
it was decided to use a unilateral exposure. Another advantage of unilateral
pulmonary damage is that the other lung can be used as a control (of sorts),
not only for morphological studies but for physiological studies in which
the two lungs can be simultaneously observed under identical conditions of
cardiac function.
We chose the dog as our experimental animal because its size facilitates
physiological observations and because of our own familiarity with this
species' pulmonary structure and function. A differential bronchoscope
proved to be a reasonably convenient instrument for administering the toxic
agent unilaterally. Inasmuch as the animal must be anesthetized for inser-
tion of the bronchoscope, short exposures are a necessity in this system.
Our first efforts employed mercury fumes. Acute pulmonary edema was
noted within two to four hours after exposure was started, and the tidal
volume and oxygen uptake of the exposed lung were greatly decreased by
the end of the five-hour exposure used. Three days after the exposure there
was a little interstitial infiltrate, although it was not very impressive. There
was abundant proliferation of epithelium in the small bronchioles. By this
time the edema had largely cleared, although a few macrophages and small
amounts of proteinaceous material were sometimes present in a few foci.
After seven days the structure of the lung was again normal. Indeed, after
as many as three exposures at weekly intervals, and despite the fact that
each time pulmonary edema (and presumably epithelial damage and re-
generation) developed, the lung was always normal morphologically and
in terms of oxygen uptake by seven days after the last exposure. Thus in
this situation mercury fumes caused a mild form of the acute lesion that
we presume to be the first stage of U.I.P., but resolution rather than or-
ganization always followed.
We next tried an aqueous solution of cadmium sulfate administered as
a coarse aerosol. Many of the problems related to this part of our experi-
ment were the result of our primitive methods of producing an aerosol,
which could be described more appropriately as a mist. The material was
not very evenly distributed in the lung but tended to be concentrated and
indeed to pool in several foci because of condensation within the broncho-
scope and bronchi. Within these focal regions, however, the reaction was
promising. At three days after exposure the lung was similar to that of the
animals exposed to mercury but the interstitial infiltrate was more abun-
dant. Unlike the mercury lesion, this reaction was still active after 14 days,
at which time an extensive interstitial infiltrate of lymphocytes and macro-
phages was noted along with some bronchiolar infiltrate and abundant pro-
liferating epithelium in the respiratory bronchioles and in many alveoli.
After four months epithelial proliferation still appeared active and the
360
Organizing interstitial pneum-onia
round cell infiltrates were still prominent. By nine months, however, only
scar and honeycombing were observed, the leukocytic infiltrate and epithelial
proliferation having subsided. The tissue from one animal sacrificed ap-
proximately one year after exposure was analyzed chemically by Dr. David
Groth, and at this time there was still a remarkably large amount of cad-
mium in the exposed lung. The reaction to cadmium sulfate was therefore
much closer to that described as "ideal"; but because of the type of aerosol
used the lesion was inadequately diffuse to permit meaningful physiological
studies.
Next we turned to ozone, and this study has just begun. We have ex-
amined tissue only from the first two animals, so obviously the results are
quite tentative. Ozone has the advantages of being a gas, thus easy to ad-
minister through the bronchoscope, and of decomposing into oxygen, thus
eliminating problems of carry-over to the other lung via the blood stream.
The first animal was exposed to 500 ppm for 15 minutes. At the end of
this short interval tidal volume and oxygen uptake were unmeasureable on
the exposed side. This is a little fast even for the development of pulmonary
edema, and I suspect that bronchospasm accounted for these functional
changes. After three days there was some oxygen uptake from the damaged
lung, but it was not yet normal. Morphologically the lesion in this animal
was most severe in the terminal and respiratory bronchioles. There was
still some pulmonary edema and interstitial mononuclear cell infiltrates
were noted in alveolar septa. Once again regenerating bronchiolar epithel-
ium was prominent. Regenerating epithelium in more distal air spaces was
confined to para-bronchiolar alveoli, however.
In the second animal a 60-minute exposure to 25-50 ppm ozone was used.
In this animal, decrease in tidal volume and oxygen uptake was not so
complete or so rapid. The lungs were examined three days after the ex-
posure. The lesion in this instance is much more promising. Although there
is still some bronchiolar reaction, there is also extensive thickening of
alveolar septa by interstitial proteinaceous exudate in which rare fibroblasts
can be recognized. In addition, the epithelial regeneration is extensive in
alveoli as well as in respiratory bronchioles. Obviously many additional
studies are needed before we can adequately evaluate the potential of ozone
in our system.
SUMMARY
In summary, our efforts to produce an experimental model of U.I.P.
have thus far yielded results that are far from satisfactory. Nevertheless
they show enough promise to justify further endeavor along the same gen-
eral line. If, indeed, ozone in the concentration of 50 to 100 ppm proves
361
I CARRINGTON
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 40, April, June, 1968
effective in inducing an organizing lesion, then with it and mercury fumes
we will have the means of investigating factors relevant to organization and
resolution after diffuse pulmonary damage. In addition, we will then have
a model that can be further manipulated with the addition of infectious
agents, that can be used for serial physiological studies, and that might
provide material for investigating immunological changes concurrent with
or secondary to this type of pulmonary lesion.
REFERENCES
1. Liebow, A. A. and Carrington, C. B.: The interstitial pneumonias. Chapter in
Festschrift in honor of Felix Fleischner, M.D. Grune & Stratton.
2. Hamman, L. and Rich, A. R.: Fulminating diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the
lungs. Trans. Amer. clin. climat. Ass., 1935, 51, 154.
3. Hamman, L. and Rich, A. R.: Acute diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the lungs. Bull.
Johns Hopk. Hosp., 1944, 74, 177.
4. Rubin, E. H., Kahn, B. S., and Pecker, D.: Diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the
lungs. Ann. intern. Med., 1952, 36, 827.
5. Rubin, E. H. and Lubliner, R.: The Hamman-Rich syndrome. Medicine, 1957,
36, 397.
6. Scadding, J. G.: Chronic diffuse interstitial fibrosis. Brit. med. J., 1957, 1, 443.
7. Wright, R. R.: Interstitial pneumonia. Calif. Med., 1959, 90, 14.
8. Larsen, K. A.: Diffuse progressive interstitial fibrosis of the lungs. Acta path.
microbiol. scand., 1959, 45, 167.
9. Sheridan, L. A., Harrison, E. G., and Divertie, M. B.: The current status of
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (Hamman-Rich syndrome). Med. clin. N.
Amer., 1964, 48, 993.
10. Spencer, H. S.: Chronic interstitial pneumonia. In, The Lung, edited by A. A.
Liebow. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins Co., 1968.
11. Frankel, A.: Spezielle Pathologie und Therapie der Lungenkrankheiten, Vol. 2.
Berlin, Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1904, pp. 471-490.
12. Kaufmann, E.: Lehrbuch der Speziellen Pathologischen Anatomie, Vol. 1. Berlin,
G. Reimer, 1909, pp. 260-263.
13. Hansemann, D.: Die Lymphangitis reticularis der Lungen als selbstandige
Erkrankung. Virchows Arch. path. Anat., 1915, 220, 311.
14. Lauche, A.: Die Entzundungen der Lunge und des Brustfells. II. Die prolifera-
tiven interstitiellen Lungenentziindungen. In, Handbuch der Speziellen Path-
ologischen Anatomie und Histologie. III/1. Almungswege und Lungen, pp.
839-843. Edited by F. Henke and 0. Lubarsch. Berlin, J. Springer, 1928.
15. Schaefer, K. E., Avery, M. E., and Bensch, K.: Time course of changes in sur-
face tension and morphology of alveolar epithelial cells in C0rinduced hya-
line membrane disease. J. clin. Invest., 1964, 43, 2080.
16. Davies, D., MacFarlane, A., Darke, C. S., and Dodge, 0. G.: Muscular hyper-
plasia ('cirrhosis') of the lung and bronchial dilatations as features of chronic
diffuse fibrosing alveolitis. Thorax, 1966, 21, 272.
17. Teng, C. T. and Brennan, J. C.: Acute mercury vapor poisoning. A report of
four cases with radiographic and pathologic correlation. Radiology, 1959, 73,
354-361.
18. Tennant, R., Johnston, H. J., and Wells, J. B.: Acute bilateral pneumonitis as-
sociated with the inhalation of mercury vapor. Conn. Med., 1961, 25, 106-109.
19. Schepers, G. W. H., Durkan, T. M., Delahant, A. B., and Creedon, F. T.: The
biological action of inhaled beryllium sulfate. Arch. environm. Hlth, 1957,
15, 58.
362
Organizing interstitial pneumonia I CARRINGTON
20. Morrow, J. D., Schroeder, H. A., and Perry, H. M., Jr.: Studies on the control
of hypertension by hyphex. Circulation, 1953, 8, 829.
21. Robillard, R., Riopelle, J. L., Adamkiewicz, L., Tremblay, G., and Geuest, J.:
Pulmonary complication during treatment with hexamethonium. Canad. med.
Ass. J., 1955, 72, 448.
22. Peterson, A. G., Dodge, M., and Helwig, F.: Pulmonary changes associated with
hexamethonium therapy. Arch. intern. Med., 1959, 103, 285.
23. Oliner, H., Schwartz, R., Rubio, F., Jr., and Dameshek, W.: Interstitial pul-
monary fibrosis following busulfan therapy. Amer. J. Med., 1961, 31, 134.
24. Leake, E., Smith, W. G., and Woodliff, H. J.: Diffuse interstitial pulmonary
fibrosis after busulphan therapy. Lancet, 1963, I, 432.
25. Moore, M. T.: Pulmonary changes in hydantoin therapy. J. Amer. med. Ass.,
1959, 171, 1328.
26. Doctor, L. and Snider, G. L.: Diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosis associated
with arthritis. Amer. Rev. resp. Dis., 1962, 85,413.
27. Gross, P., Scheel, L. D., and Stokinger, H. E.: Ozone toxicity studies; destruc-
tion of alveolar septa-a precursor of emphysema? Med. Thorac., 1965, 22,
376-381.
a3'
