THE TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED
HYDROCARBONS*
ALICE HAMILTON
Because of their non-inflammability and their strong solvent
properties the chlor compounds of the petroleum series have a wide
and increasing use as degreasers of metal, cleansers of textiles, dry
cleansers, solvents for rubber, tar, and gums, thinners for cellulose
lacquers, and in treatment of garbage, tankage, and bones. Other
uses are the production of high-grade lubricating oils from inferior
stock, the production of edible and non-edible vegetable oils, the
purification of explosives, and for refrigeration.
The chlor compounds may be divided into three groups, namely,
the saturated (paraffin) group, methane, ethane, etc.; the olefins,
unsaturated, ethylene, propylene, etc.; and the naphthalenes. The
following list includes those compounds which are of more or less
importance in industry:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Common name
Methyl chloride
Chloroform
Carbon tetrachloride
Ethyl chloride
Ethylene dichloride
Ethylene trichloride
Acetylene tetrachloride
Acetylene dichloride
Acetylene trichloride
Tetrachlorethylene
Of these, Nos. 1, 3,
important.
It is essential that the
Chemical name
Monochlormethane
Trichlormethane
Tetrachlormethane
Monochlorethane
Dichlorethane
Trichlorethane
Tetrachlorethane
Dichlorethylene
Trichlorethylene
Tetrachlorethylene
Formula
CH3Cl
CHC13
CC14
C2H5CI
C2H4C12
C2H3C13
C2H2C14
C2H2C12
C2HC13
C2C14
5, 7, and 9 are industrially the most
common as well as the chemical names
* This paper by Dr. Hamilton, Medical Consultant to the United States Depart-
ment of Labor, complements the paper The Toxicity and Potential Dangers of
Aliphatic and Aromatic Hydrocarbons by Dr. von Oettingen which appeared in the
December issue of the current volume of the Journal. The present paper was
presented before the Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medi-
cine, on 28 October, 1942.
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
be known, for the former are often very misleading. The unsatu-
rated group is less toxic than is the saturated group and if we should
go by the names commonly used in industry we should class certain
highly toxic compounds of the saturated group among the compara-
tively harmless unsaturated ones, as, for instance, tetrachlorethane
which is known as acetylene tetrachloride or dichlorethane, known
as ethylene dichloride.
Much elaborate experimentation has been carried out to deter-
mine the minimum narcotic dose and these compounds are often
classified according to their comparative toxicity, based on their
narcotic action. Henderson and Haggard2' list them in the follow-
ing order, Nos. 1, 9, 10, 2, 3, and 7. If, however, we consider
what is much more important in industry, the systemic effects of
chronic exposure or more often the sequelae of a single severe expo-
sure, a different order results, with tetrachlorethane leading the list
followed by the other members of the saturated group, and the
unsaturated bringing up the rear. Henderson and Haggard lay
stress on the great difference between the anesthetic action and the
more subtle toxic action which may be produced from concentrations
too small to cause anesthesia and therefore insufficient to give warn-
ing of danger. The personal equation plays a large part in cases
of intoxication by this group of solvents. It is not rare to have a
large number of workers using carbon tetrachloride or trichlorethy-
lene with no apparent discomfort and suddenly one of them will
develop symptoms of intoxication without any increase of exposure.
Pagniez" reported three cases, all exposed to the same fumes of
CC14 for the same length of time, one of them mild, one severe,
one fatal.
Carbon tetrachloride, or tetrachlormethane, is industrially the
most important member of this class. It is familiar to the pulblic
as a chemical fire extinguisher and as a non-inflammable dry
cleanser, and, to the medical world, as an anthelmintic. A great
deal of experimental work has been done on this compound both
in connection with its therapeutic use and its use in industry, but
the cases of intoxication have come chiefly from its industrial use.
It is a narcotic with an action very like though not so strong as
that of chloroform. On the other hand the after-effects of severe
narcosis seem to be more severe than are those of delayed chloroform
poisoning and they occur more often.
788
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
A typical picture of industrial poisoning is one of acute intoxica-
tion from an unusually severe exposure to the fumes. Much rarer
and less characteristic is a chronic form, following long exposure
with no acute episodes or only those of a mild character. In the
early days of anthelmintic therapy there were a number of accidents
because certain persons proved to be very susceptible to the action
of CC14.28 These were chronic alcoholics, people with damaged
hearts and kidneys, and those with malnutrition especially from a
low-calcium diet.85 Animal experiments showed that the attack is
especially on the intestinal tract and the liver, much less on the
kidneys; that a negative calcium balance increases the susceptibility;
and that alcohol increases its action, as does also a fatty diet just
before the dose.28 In man, when CC14 is given by mouth much
the same results are produced, but in industrial cases which follow
inhalation the symptoms of renal damage over-shadow those of
hepatic injury. The history is usually the following: nausea, vomit-
ing, abdominal pains, diarrhea, headache, dizziness, then dark-
colored urine (often the first thing that sends the man to his doctor)
and later. on jaundice, then increasing oliguria, with the urine loaded
with casts and albumin. Complete anuria may last for some days
(ten in Dudley's case8) and then clear up or it may persist until
death with symptoms of uremic poisoning.
A few typical cases may be cited. Franco12 in 1927 described
two cases of industrial poisoning from CC14 under the heading of
"Nephritic syndromes," two forms of which were presented by these
patients. The first was a necrotizing nephrosis similiar to that
caused by bichloride of mercury with the urinary sediment showing
only a little albumin and a few casts, along with nitrogen retention;
the second was an acute nephritis with red blood cells, casts, and
albumin in the urine, nitrogen retention and high blood pressure.
Both followed an acute intoxication with complete narcosis after a
single severe exposure. A case very similar to Franco's second
case was reported by Richet and Couder.42
Of the seven cases described by McGuire33 four had symptoms
of kidney irritation, one of them a frank nephritis with oliguria.
Also in the very severe case reported by McNally34 the kidney
damage dominated the scene.
Much rarer and less characteristic are the instances of chronic
poisoning. Wirtschafter's58 cases of visual disturbances belong here,
789
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
also Butsch's5 case with symptoms simulating portal cirrhosis, a con-
dition which Bollman and Mann had produced in dogs. Poindexter
and Greene4' found at autopsy on a workman who had experienced
long exposure to carbon tetrachloride, cirrhosis of the liver with
ascites, and infarction of the right kidney and compensatory hyper-
trophy of the left. The usual symptoms of chronic industrial
poisoning are described by Rutherford Johnstone22 and by P. A.
Davis7 as headache, vertigo, loss of appetite, gastric distress, loss of
strength, increased fatigue, and perhaps some jaundice.
A recent article by Hammes"8 describes a case of chronic poisoning
in a man who, for 15 years, worked in a plant where the contamina-
tion of the air with CC14 was estimated to run as high as 600 p.p.m.
His liver was enlarged (below the umbilicus), there was jaundice
(icteric index 30), moderate edema, possible ascites, but normal
urine. Hammes gives also the history of an acute, severe intoxica-
tion developing suddenly after one day's work with CC14 in a man
who had used trichlorethylene on the same job for three years
without any trouble. In this case there was only slight involvement
of the liver, but marked involvement of the kidneys.
The literature of CC14 poisoning contains some unusual clinical
pictures. Dudley's patient had an exposure of only five minutes
to heavy fumes from a fire extinguisher, but nine days later he
developed epileptiform convulsions, a blood pressure of 220/90,
and an acute uremia of severe character. He finally recovered.
McBirney, of New York reported to me a case in which the symp-
toms were pulmonary, as well as hepatic, renal, and vascular, there
were bronchitis, mental confusion lasting for three weeks, purpuric
spots, epistaxis, thrombopenia, oliguria, and jaundice. In another
of his cases there was an almost fatal nephritis and progressive
mental symptoms passing into a maniacal condition which required
hospital care for seven months.
Wirtschafter53 first described visual changes following intoxica-
tion of a fairly minor character. Five men, dry-cleaners, who
complained of headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, etc., showed
bilateral peripheral constriction of the color fields but no central
scotomata. Two of them had not noticed any change in their vision,
the other three complained of spots before the eyes, blurring, and
"everything looked small." Wirtschafter, acting on Lamson's28
experimental finding that a fall in blood sugar occurs in animals
790
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
treated with CCl4, made blood sugar tolerance analyses and found
the amount in all five men to be at the lower border of the normal
variation and sometimes below this. There were small amounts of
sugar in the urine after fasting, which were increased after the giving
of glucose, and both the blood and the urine returned to normal
when the men left work and were put on Minot's diet35 of calcium
and dextrose. He suggests that a routine examination of the periph-
eral visual field may be useful in revealing intoxication at a very
early stage. H. F. Smyth46 agrees with this. Among 93 men
whom he examined he found ten with the visual field restricted as
much as 30 per cent toward the bottom and outer edge and 16 with
less certain evidence.
For a long time fairly high concentrations, even up to 1000
p.p.m. or higher, of carbon tetrachloride were considered as allow-
able in industrial establishments. But P. A. Davis,7 who has had a
long and extensive experience with the use of this solvent by the
Goodyear Rubber Company, decided more than ten years ago that
anything over 100 p.p.m. is dangerous for continued exposure and
that figure has been tentatively approved by several State Codes
as the maximum allowable concentration. Even though this
standard is adhered to, Davis advises a careful selection of workers
with rejection of the obese and the undernourished, nephritics, dia-
betics, those with lung or liver pathology, and those having an
enlarged thymus or thyroid. He warns of the possibility that free
chlorine or hydrochloric acid may be present in commercial CClI
and cause bronchitis or bronchopneumonia. Elkins,"0 of Bowditch's
staff in Massachusetts, and Heimann and Ford,20 of Greenburg's in
New York, have found mild symptoms of narcosis in workers where
the concentration of CCl4 was lower than 100 p.p.m. Elkins thinks
that this level is too high, that the limit should not be over 50 p.p.m.
Carbon tetrachloride, in spite of its unpleasant odor, has on some
men a pleasantly intoxicating effect and cases of addiction have
occurred in Germany and in this country.
Trichlorethylene has assumed in recent years a very important
place in the list of solvents of oils, fats, and gums. At first it was
considered fairly harmless; indeed, it was recommended as an ideal
non-inflammable and non-poisonous degreaser and lacquer thinner,
but evidence from England and Germany soon proved that it is a
strong narcotic and even pointed to serious systemic damage. In
791
7YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
England 38 cases of severe acute poisoning with three deaths had
been reported4 to the Home Office by 1935. From Denmark came
five cases.4 But much the most important publication in this field
came from Germany, the monograph by Katharina StUber48 which
appeared in 1931 and recorded 284 cases with 25 deaths.* These
were cases not only of acute narcotic intoxication but of chronic
poisoning, with marked damage to the central nervous system espe-
cially, but also to the vascular system, and to the liver, spleen, lungs,
and kidneys. Her report aroused much interest and started a con-
troversy that still goes on.
The most striking characteristic of trichlorethylene is its acute
narcotic action. Lehmann30 says it is to chloroform as 1.7 is to 1.0.
By far the larger number of cases in man are acute in character. In
Stiu.ber's list of 19 fatal cases whose history was known, 12 were
acutely narcotized and died without regaining consciousness. Three
fatal cases in the German factory inspectors' reports of 1935 belong
in this class. Of the 39 English cases all but 2 were severely
narcotized; three died, the others recovered completely. That
recovery without lasting injury is to be expected is shown in the study
made by Striker47 and his colleagues of the histories of 304 patients
on whom "tri" was used as an anesthetic.
As to the pathological changes found in fatal cases of acute
poisoning Vallee and Leclerq50 describe congestion and acute edema
of the lungs and an enlarged liver with cellular changes which,
however, they believe to have been of long standing and not
attributable to "tri." In one of StUber's cases death was caused by
suffocation from aspirated vomitus. One of the English fatal cases
showed at autopsy nothing except congestion of lungs, liver, and
kidneys.
Animal experiments tend to confirm dinical evidence that organic
lesions are rare, although McCord"2 found in his experiments very
severe lesions in all important structures. But the great majority
of workers find no characteristic changes in liver or kidneys. Bar-
rett, MacLean, and Cunninghame exposed animals to 1200 p.p.m.
for over 1100 hours and found no pathological change in any organ
except the liver and here it was so slight as to be probably of no
significance. Certainly injury to the liver and kidneys, both in
* Von Oettingen37 collected from the literature 7 additional fatalities between
1931 (Stilber's date) and 1937, and 8 non-fatal cases.
792
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
experimental animals and in man, has been seen far more rarely
after "tri" than after tetra.* Willcox,"2 however, did report a case
of toxic jaundice following exposure to trichlorethylene, and Brown-
ing4 recorded one of jaundice with enlarged liver occurring in a boy
after six months' exposure.
The study made by Barrett and his colleagues3 was for the pur-
pose of comparing the toxicity of trichlorethylene and carbon tetra-
chloride, a point of great practical importance since one can be
substituted for the other in many industrial processes. They found
that guinea-pigs were very susceptible to organic damage from CC14.
Exposure to 1200 p.p.m. resulted in hemorrhage and in degenerative
changes in the liver and kidneys, although the same exposure to
"tri" had had negative results. They agree with Lehmann, how-
ever, that trichlorethylene is the more powerful narcotic of the two.
There are still two highly controversial points in connection with
industrial poisoning from "tri"; first, what evidence is there of
chronic poisoning, second, what evidence is there of serious sequelae
of acute poisoning. In Stiuber's report 182 out of 284 cases are
listed as chronic and the symptoms cover a wide range; functional
neuroses, paralysis of cranial nerves, epileptoid seizures with psychic
disturbances, anemia, gastro-intestinal disorders. On the other
hand, according to Browning,4 John Bridge, the Chief Medical
Officer of Factories and Workshops, finds little proof of chronic
poisoning. Only one case of the 39 reported seems to belong in
that class,-a woman who for some weeks complained of pain in
the chest, dyspnea, anorexia, and loss of weight. She was slightly
anemic. Three persons who had been exposed for a year or more
under poor conditions were carefully examined by Bridge for evi-
dence of organic damage but none was found, although all three
complained of subjective symptoms attributable to a narcotic poison.
On the other hand, two reports of severe chronic intoxication came
from Germany; Kunz and Isenschmidt27 describe a case of poly-
neuritis of all four limbs, paralysis of the hypoglossal nerve, and
retrobulbar neuritis in a man of 56 who had worked with trichlor-
ethylene for a year, while Persson's39 two patients, degreasers, devel-
oped symptoms of spinal cord injury (spastic ataxia, strongly positive
Romberg, disturbed sensation in feet, hands, and forearms).
* Lehmann,30 in 1911, declared that recovery from sublethal narcosis was rapid
and complete, without a profound effect on any organ.
793
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
As to the second point, it has been widely believed ever since
Plessner40 published his artide in 1916, that trichlorethylene has a
specific action on the sensory branch of the trigeminal nerve. Indeed,
so well proven was this supposed to be that trichlorethylene, under
the name of Chlorylen, has been extensively used especially in
Germany in the treatment of facial neuralgia. Much scepticism has,
however, developed of late concerning this theory. Plessner's cases
(four men with complete sensory but not motor paralysis of the
fifth nerve) occurred during the first World War when German
factories were obliged to use all sorts of ersatz material and in a
factory where no such form of sickness had ever occurred before.
All four sickened at the same time. Some twelve years later
Kalinowsky23 saw two men with practically identical symptoms but
they had been exposed, not to trichlorethylene, but to a mixture
containing some unidentified chlorinated hydrocarbons. In Stuber's
ten cases of trigeminal paralysis, all industrial, there is no proof that
"tri" was the only compound present. Moreover, the therapeutic
use of pure "tri" seems to show that its effect is not paralyzing but
only narcotic. Eichert' reviewed the literature covering this form
of treatment of trigeminal neuralgia and could find no evidence that
the prolonged use of this drug was followed-by injury to the fifth
nerve, even in cases of addiction.
Eichert makes the same statement with regard to optic nerve
injury which also has been described as characteristic of poisoning
from trichlorethylene. In StUber's collection there are 9 cases of
visual disturbance, ranging from alteration of the color sense to
optic nerve atrophy. Baader' saw two cases following long exposure.
Retrobulbar neuritis following 14 months' exposure occurred in a
case that was reported to me a few years ago. But in none of these
can we be sure that trichlorethylene alone was the active agent.
The same doubt arises as to the two cases of angina pectoris reported
by Gerbis"4 and to the cases of cerebral hemorrhage (Plessner,
Stilber, Kalinowsky). Stuber assumes as the cause of these cases
a vascular injury such as sometimes follows acute carbon monoxide
intoxication and results in thrombosis or hemorrhage.
Koch25 made an autopsy on the body of a workman who died
from breathing fumes from a hot degreasing kettle in a basement,
and he found extensive lesions in the respiratory tract, beginning in
the lower third of the trachea where the epithelial lining was com-
794
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
pletely desquamated. The alveoli were filled with blood cells and
fatty epithelial cells. Hansen's'9 case had a similar origin, but here
there was an extensive tuberculosis. In Christiansen's case,6 which
he regards as a confirmation of Koch's, there was an extensive patho-
logical process in the lungs resembling, in the X-ray picture, a
miliary tuberculosis. This man recovered after five months. In
both of these cases one must remember the possible presence of Cl,
HC1, COC12, and, according to von Oettingen,37 of dichlorethane in
the fumes.
Trichlorethylene is, according to Barrett et al.,3 more likely to
give rise to addiction than is carbon tetrachloride because the fumes
are less nauseating. The maximum allowable concentration has
been tentatively placed at 200 p.p.m. because the margin of safety
is distinctly wider than is that for CC14.
Tetrachlorethane is, by common consent, the most toxic of the
chlorinated hydrocarbons that have been used in industry. (Penta
may be more so, but we know little about it.) It came into promi-
nence during the first World War when the wings of war planes
were covered with a dope of cellulose acetate, and tetrachlorethane
is its best solvent. The Germans had discovered its dangerous
nature before the war broke out, for there had been in airplane plants
a number of cases of acute yellow atrophy of the liver, and the
pharmacologists Grimm, Heffter, and Joachimoglu"7 had identified
this constituent as the one responsible. But none of that informa-
tion reached England and the English had to go through the same
experience, toxic jaundice in airplane dopers, the cause to be dis-
covered by Willcox,51 and a resultant discontinuance of its use. We
were warned in time by the English and escaped that particular
danger. The first reported case in American industry came from
the manufacture of acetate rayon, but the solvent is no longer used
in that industry.
For many years we heard nothing about this solvent beyond
occasional rumors that it was being used in coatings, in laundry
"mix," and in non-inflammable film production, but no cases of
poisoning were reported. Now, however, we are told that it is
coming back into use, a fact to be deplored if true, for it is highly
toxic, although fortunately its volatility is low (it is six times as
heavy as air).
Characteristically, tetrachlorethane is slowly absorbed and its
795
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
action is prolonged. One does not read reports of acute narcosis,
but rather of vague symptoms, nervous and digestive, which slowly
progress to serious illness. The form most often described is acute
yellow atrophy of the liver which appears in British factory inspec-
tion reports under the head of toxic jaundice, along with arsine
poisoning. Less numerous are the cases of aplastic anemia, for
tetrachlorethane is a hemolytic poison and also exerts a destructive
action on the bone marrow. The immediate cause of death in both
these classes may be hemorrhage from stomach or intestines or from
the nose. Finally, the Germans report cases26 with a predominance
of nervous symptoms and no apparent injury to the liver.
Minot and Smith36 were able to detect in men and women
exposed to mild concentrations, a characteristic change in the leu-
kocytes which may serve as a warning that absorption and damage
are taking place. This is the appearance of a relatively large num-
ber of leukocytes of the endothelial type which may run as high
as 40 per cent, the cells showing degenerative changes more and
more as their number increases.
Methyl chloride or monochlormethane is used as a refrigerant
and most of the instances of intoxication, whose histories have been
published, have been caused by the escape of fumes into dwellings,
only a minority were of industrial origin in makers or repairers of
refrigerators. Most of the cases of industrial intoxication which
have come to light are the result not of acute narcosis, but of repeated
exposures to small doses which gradually cause injury to the central
nervous system. The earliest industrial cases were characterized by
increasing fatigue, lassitude, anorexia, muscular weakness, and finally
somnolence and dimness of vision. To this picture nausea, vomiting,
restlessness, and insomnia were sometimes added, also ptosis, fine
tremors, and staggering gait."3 Baker2 found formic acid in the
urine. No fatality from the industrial use of methyl chloride has
been reported, unless one accepts a case, described by Schwarz,45
in a man who was very nervous for three weeks after an acute
poisoning and then lost consciousness and died in convulsions. From
the animal experiments of Sayers and his colleagues43and from the
autopsies on the victims of the mass poisoning24 in Chicago in 1929,
it is evident that methyl chloride causes an acute nephritis with
degenerative changes in liver and spleen, hemorrhages in lungs,
intestinal tract, and dura, and,-in the Chicago cases-a primary
796
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
anemia with leukocytosis. Of those that survived, some had sequelae
pointing to degenerative changes in the central nervous system.
Ethylene dichloride, sometimes called ethylene chloride, but
which is really dichlorethane, has recently come into prominence as
an excellent solvent and a dangerous poison. It is used in the
separation of wax from petroleum, in oil extraction, in dry cleaning,
in the production of photographic films, and as a thinner in lacquers,
especially for coating the interior of beer vats. The last was the
source of two severe cases reported to me by State inspectors. In
1937 von Oettingen could find no industrial case reported in the
literature, but two years later Wirtschafter and Schwarz' saw three
cases in men who used this solvent for cleaning yarn, working over
an open vat in a hot room (750 F.), lifting out the yarn and wring-
ing it by hand. The effect was characteristic of a narcotic poison,
but, in addition, there were severe dermatitis of the hands, leukocy-
tosis (12,400 to 18,250), and liver disturbance, as shown by
extremely low blood sugar levels, but no evidence of kidney involve-
ment. Recovery followed removal from the fumes and treatment
with calcium and a high carbohydrate diet. They conclude that it
is less toxic than CC14.
Sayers and his colleagues44 tested ethylene dichloride on animals
and found that inhalation of air containing one per cent for 20
minutes caused the animals, after a day or two, to die with conges-
tion and edema of the lungs and secondary degenerative changes in
the kidneys. The narcotic action is about equal to that of CHCI3
and CC14 but there are less serious sequelae.
Tetrachlorethylene is, according to Lamson, Robbins, and
Ward29 much safer than is CC14 when given by mouth. In their
animal tests they found it was absorbed from the gastro-intestinal
tract only if a large amount of fatty food had been eaten just before.
Autopsy on animals which had received it by inhalation showed no
fatty degeneration in the organs. These authors believed it to be
the safest member of this group for therapeutic use. Apparently
it is coming into industrial use now, but no report of the effect on
workers who inhale the fumes has appeared as yet.
Chlorinated naphthalenes and diphenyls. During the last six
or seven years we have heard a good deal about a group of chlori-
nated hydrocarbons which are very valuable industrially and whose
use is increasing greatly in connection with the demands of the war.
797
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
These are the chlorinated naphthalenes and diphenyls, with a chlo-
rine content which runs from about 20 to 65 per cent. We know
them under the name of halowax and for many years we have known
that contact with this wax and similar waxes would cause acne, some-
times of a severe type. (See Mayers and Silverberg.3") There are
many descriptions in German of this "chloracne" which follows
the use of "Perna," a mixture of these compounds.
These waxes are fire-resistant and water-resistant. They main-
tain their solidity under normal temperature changes and have high
di-electric strength. They are, therefore, used for electrical insula-
tion of wire, condensers, small transformers, and for the impregna-
tion of coils. Perna was used in Germany in the first World War to
make impregnable gas masks and dothing. In industry, as is almost
always the case, the halowax used is a mixture of naphthalenes and
diphenyls of different degrees of chlorination.
For many years the only recognized industrial injury from the
use of halowax was a form of acne which differed from the ordinary
form because itching was present. The men called it "blackhead
itch" and it appeared on the exposed skin especially. It was often
severe in type and secondary infections sometimes caused permanent
scars. Vapors condensing on the skin act more quickly than does
direct contact and the melting temperature is around 2400 to 2600 F.
at which point vapors are given off.
After halowax had been used for over twenty years with appar-
ently no serious damage to the workers, industry began to change
from the lower chlorinated members of the group to the higher.
Then, in 1936, three fatal cases of jaundice-acute yellow atrophy
of the liver-two of them confirmed by autopsy, were recognized
in this country and linked up with exposure to fumes of chlorinated
naphthalenes. The men had been using halowax, either melted or
dissolved in carbon tetrachloride and ethylene didhloride, to insulate
electric wires. These cases led to experimental studies by Flinn and
Jarvik11 of Columbia, who succeeded in producing fatal liver damage
in animals by subcutaneous injection of chlornaphthalenes, from tri
up to hexa. A careful search of English and European literature
failed to reveal any cases of this sort in man. It seems, however,
that liver injury does not follow exposure to the lower members of
the group; it occurs only after exposure to higher ones.
Just how many cases of acute yellow atrophy of the liver from
798
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
this source occurred between 1932, the date of Greenburg's first case,
and 1936, I have never been able to discover, but by 1936 four
states-Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, and Pennsylvania-
were deeply concerned over this new form of poisoning and it was
then that the purveyors of halowax, the Halowax Corporation,
asked C. K. Drinker and his colleagues of the Harvard School of
Public Health to make a thorough study of the problem. These
investigators succeeded in producing severe lesions in the liver by
means of penta and hexachlornaphthalene (but not with tri), the
more readily when the action of CCl4 was added to that of the
chlornaphthalenes.49
The next report of clinical poisoning came from Green-burg and
his group."6 They gave the histories of three fatal cases of acute
yellow atrophy of the liver following exposure to the higher mem-
bers of this group. It is from Greenburg* also that we hear of an
outbreak, which has occurred just recently in Westchester County,
New York, in two plants producing insulated wire and other elec-
trical apparatus. In one of the factories, two fatal cases of acute
disease of the liver occurred in the spring of 1942. In the other
plant there had been at least four deaths during the past year and
several cases of systemic poisoning requiring hospital care, as well
as many of acne, some 100 of which are under treatment now.
Drinker's studies49 show that the allowable concentration for the
lower members of the group, such as trichlornaphthalene, and for
the chlorinated diphenyls, is 10 mg. per cubic meter of air, but for
the higher members, such as penta and hexa-and also for the
chlorinated diphenyl oxides-it should not go over 0.5 mg. They
also warn against the use of carbon tetrachloride as a solvent, for
that greatly increases the danger. Preventive measures should be
based on the fact that the vapors are much heavier than is air.
The examining physician should be careful to reject men who might
already have liver damage, e.g., syphilitics under arsphenamine
treatment. Greenburg warns against allowing a worker who has
shown any evidence of even mild liver damage to go back to work,
for the result may be fatal.
Diphenyls in general have a lower melting point than have the
chlorinated naphthalenes and are used at a lower temperature.
Most of the experimental work has been done on the naphthalenes
*
Personal communication.
799
800 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
but the diphenyls, from mono to deca, are very similar in action to
the naphthalenes.
One practical point with regard to these solvents should be
stressed and that is the increasing use of heat in connection with
their industrial employment. That degreasing with vapors of
trichlorethylene or carbon tetrachloride is far more dangerous than
was the earlier method of dipping the material in the cold fluid is
too obvious to need discussion. But, in addition, it has been shown
repeatedly that if such vapors come in contact with a naked flame
or with hot metal pipes, decomposition may take place and the
highly toxic gas phosgene (COC12) may be formed. It is note-
worthy that cases of very rapid development and great severity after
a brief exposure have most often come from the use of carbon
tetrachloride fire extinguishers in a confined place.
REFERENCES
1 Baader, E. W.: Zentralbl. f. Gewerbehyg., 1927, 4, 385.
2 Baker, H. M.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1927, 88, 1137.
3 Barrett, H. M., MacLean, D. L., and Cunningham, J. G.: J. Indust. Hyg.,
1938, 20, 360.
4 Browning, Ethel: Toxicity of Industrial Organic Solvents. London, 1937.
5 Butsch, W. L.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1932, 99, 728.
6 Christiansen, T.: Quoted by von Oettingen.
7 Davis, P. A.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1934, 103, 962.
8 Dudley, S. F.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1935, 17, 93.
9 Eichert, H.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1936, 106, 1652.
10 Elkins, H. B.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1942, 24, 233.
11 Flinn, F. B., and Jarvik, D. E.: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med., 1936, 35, 118.
12 Franco, S.: New York State J. Med., 1936, 36, 847.
13 Gerbis, H.: Miinchen. med. Wchnschr., 1914, 61, 897.
14 Gerbis, H.: Arch. f. Gewerbepath. u. Gewerbehyg., 1936, 7, 421.
15 Glaser, M. A.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1931, 96, 916.
16 Greenburg, L., Mayers, M. R., and Smith, A. R.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1939,
21, 29.
17 Grimm, V., Heffter, A., and Joachimoglu, G.: Vrtljhrschrft. f. gericht. Med.,
1914, 48, Suppl. 2, 149.
18 Hammes, E. M., Jr.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1941, 23, 112.
19 Hansen, E. H.: Samml. Vergft., 1936, 7, 134.
20 Heimann, H., and Ford, C. A.: Indust. Hyg. Bull., Albany, 1941, 20, Nos.
7-8.
21 Henderson, Y., and Haggard, H. W.: Noxious Gases. Reinhold Publ. Corp.,
1943.
22 Johnstone, R. T.: Occupational Diseases. Philadelphia, 1941.
TOXICITY OF THE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS 801
23 Kalinowsky, L.: Zentralbl. f. Neurol., 1927, 110, 245.
24 Kegel, A. H., McNally, W. D., and Pope, A. S.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1929,
93, 353.
25 Koch, W.: Veroffentl. a. d. Gewerbs. u. Konstitutionspath., 1931, 7, 18.
26 Koelsch, F.: Miunchen. med. Wchnschr., 1915, 62, 1567.
27 Kunz, E., and Isenschmidt, R.: Klin. Monatsbl. f. Augenheilk., 1935, 94, 577.
28 Lamson, P. D., Gardner, G. H., Gustafson, R. K., Maire, E. D., McLean,
A. J., and Wells, H. S.: J. Pharmacol., 1923, 90, 215.
29 Lamson, P. D., Robbins, B. H., and Ward, C. B.: Am. J. Hyg., 1929, 9, 430.
30 Lehmann, K. B.: Arch. f. Hyg., 1911, 74, 1.
31 Mayers, M. R., and Silverberg, M. S.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1938, 20, 244.
32 McCord, C. P.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1932, 99, 409.
33 McGuire, L. W.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1932, 99, 988.
34 McNally, W. P.: Toxicology. Chicago, 1937, p. 694.
35 Minot, A. S.: Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med., 1927, 26, 617.
36 Minot, G. R., and Smith, L. W.: Arch. Int. Med., 1921, 28, 687.
37 Von Oettingen, W. F.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1937, 19, 350.
38 Pagniez, P., Plichet, A., and Koang, N. K.: Presse med., 1932, 40, 1146.
39 Persson, H.: [Abstr. in] J. Indust. Hyg., 1935, 17, 97.
40 Plessner: Berlin klin. Wchnschr., 1916, 53, 25.
41 Poindexter, C. A., and Greene, C. H.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1934, 102, 2015.
42 Richet, C., and Couder, R.: Bull. et mem. Soc. med. d. hop. Paris, 3rd Ser.,
1932, 56, 1247.
43 Sayers, R. R., Yant, W. P., Thomas, B. G. H., and Berger, L. B.: Publ. Health
Bull. No. 185, 1929.
44 Sayers, R. R., Yant, W. P., Waite, C. P., and Patty, A.: Publ. Health Rep.,
1930, 45, 225.
45 Schwarz, F.: Deutsche Ztschr. f. d. ges. gerichtl. Med., 1926, 7, 278.
46 Smyth, H. F., and Smyth, H. F. Jr.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1936, 18, 277.
47 Striker, C., Goldblatt, S., Warn, H. S., and Jackson, D. E.: Current Researches
Anaesth., 1935, 14, 68.
48 Stiuber, K.: Arch. f. Gewerbepath. u. Gewerbehyg., 1931, 2, 398.
49 Symposium on Certain Chlorinated Hydrocarbons. C. K. Drinker, Madeleine
Field Warren, G. A. Bennett, C. P. Yaglou, and Philip Drinker. Har-
vard School of Public Health, June 30, 1937 (also in J. Indust. Hyg.,
1937, 19, 283).
50 Vallee, C., and Leclerq, J.: Ann. de med. leg., 1935, 15, 10.
51 Willcox, W.: Lancet, 1915, i, 544.
52 Willcox, W.: Lancet, 1931, ii, 57, 111.
53 Wirtschafter, Z. T.: Am. J. Pub. Health, 1933, 23, 1035.
54 Wirtschafter, Z. T., and Schwarz, W.: J. Indust. Hyg., 1939, 21, 126.
