ARTERIOGRAPHY IN CASES OF ANEURYSM AND
ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA: WITH A REVIEW OF THE
LITERATURE CONCERNING THE CHOICE OF SOLUTION*
HARRIS B. SHUMACKER, JR. AND ANNE F. GODLEY
Roentgenographic demonstration of arteries by the intra-arterial
injection of radio-opaque solution was first applied in man by Sicard
and Forestier58 in France, by Berberich and Hirsch5 in Germany, and by
Brooks7 in the United States. We owe much of the present clinical use-
fulness of this method to the pioneer investigations of dos Santos and
his associates., 13, 14 With the passage of time, angiography has been
utilized in the delineation of venous abnormalities, arterial lesions,
defects of the heart and great vessels, and for the demonstration of
certain diseases of the abdominal viscera. This report has as its objective
two purposes: first, to discuss the applicability and usefulness of this
procedure in the diagnosis, localization, and treatment of aneurysms and
arteriovenous fistulas of the peripheral arteries; second, to discuss the
choice of the best solution for arteriography as revealed by a review of
the literature. Our own experience is derived from arteriographic
studies performed in selected cases during the course of the study and
treatment of approximately 300 aneurysms and fistulas.t Other
aspects of the management of such cases have been reported else-
where.51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56
Technique
With few exceptions the solution used in the present study was 70 per cent
diodrast. Before each injection the patient was tested for drug sensitivity by
observation of the conjunctival reaction to instillation of a drop of the solution.
Five to 10 cc. were injected into the internal carotid artery and from 15 to 25 cc.
into the major arteries of the extremities. In the case of arterial lesions of the
limbs it is ordinarily possible to perform arterial puncture proximal to the
affected level of the vessel without operative exposure. For lesions of the hand
the injection can conveniently be made in the radial artery at the wrist, and for
lesions of the forearm in the brachial artery in the antecubital space. Injection
of the brachial artery proximally in the upper portion of the arm, the axillary
*
From the Department of Surgery, the Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Conn. Aided by a grant from the Office of Naval Research, the United States Navy.
t Most of these cases were cared for at the Vascular Center, the Mayo General
Hospital, Galesburg, Ill., others at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md., and at
the New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Conn.
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
artery in the axilla, or the subclavian artery above the davicle is often satisfactory
for demonstrating the arteries of the arm and shoulder area. In order to delineate
lesions in the lower extremity, the injection is best made into the common
femoral artery just below the inguinal ligament. When it is necessary to inject
into the internal carotid artery this is best accomplished under local anesthesia,
by operative exposure of the vessel just beyond the bifurcation of the common
carotid. Under such circumstances the injection is carried out during transient
proximal occlusion of the artery by means of a rubber-shod serrafine damp or
by traction upon an umbilical tape placed around the vessel. Similarly, injection
into the arteries of the extremities can sometimes be made during proximal
digital occlusion, provided such compression does not interfere with accurate
maintenance of the needle tip within the lumen. Proximal occlusion during the
injection tends to result in greater radio-opacity of the vessels; it is not, however,
necessary. We have not compressed the artery proximally during femoral in-
jections and have obtained satisfactory delineation of the arterial tree.
Before the injection is made a scout film should be exposed and developed
in order to make certain that the technique used is satisfactory and in order
to have a control film for comparison with the arteriogram. If the injection is
made with the artery occluded proximally the second roentgenogram is taken
as the last of the solution is delivered into the artery. The compression of the
artery is then released and a third film is exposed immediately. A fourth ex-
posure is often made a few seconds later. When the injection is carried out
without proximal occlusion the second roentgenogram is taken as the injection
is being completed; several other exposures are then made in rapid succession.
Roentgenograms taken after the injection is completed are valuable because the
opaque medium sometimes remains in an aneurysmal sac for a few moments
after it has disappeared from the arterial tree (Fig. 1B).
One must take every precaution to make certain that the needle tip is
free in the lumen of the artery during the injection in order to avoid extrava-
sation of the dye in or outside of the artery wall. Such extravasation might
conceivably lead to arterial injury or might make difficult subsequent operative
dissection. The injection is made as rapidly as possible. We have used an ordinary
syringe and have not found a pressure system necessary. A number 19 needle
is sufficiendy large. The arterial puncture is relatively painless; it is preceded
by procaine infiltration of the skin, subcutaneous, and periarterial tissues. The
patient generally has a momentary sensation of burning in the extremity distal
to the point of injection. A few have transient nausea or vomiting. No
circulatory collapse has occurred in our experience and no other serious com-
plications, with one questionable exception.
This was the case of a 24-year-old soldier who, without preceding injury or
illness, had begun to complain of steady right retro-orbital pain and diplopia 6
weeks before admission. Examination was not remarkable except for dilatation
of the right pupil and external, and incipient internal, ophthalmoplegia. An
arteriogram was made in order to confirm the impression of intracranial
aneurysm of the internal carotid artery, 8 cc. of diodrast being injected under
local anesthesia. The roentgenograms demonstrated the arterial lesion (Fig. 1);
hence, the internal carotid artery was occluded by a gently applied umbilical tape
ligature. The patient had no signs of cerebral ischemia during the first 8 hours,
274
ARTERIOGRAPHY
but sometime during the night developed signs of an incomplete left hemiplegia
from which he has fortunately made a fairly good recovery. In speculating upon
the cause of the extension of the thrombus past the area of the aneurysm, the
process which undoubtedly accounted for the delayed hemiplegia, it is possible
to imagine that some intimal damage from the diodrast may have been a con-
tributing factor. To be sure, others have reported delayed hemiplegia following
carotid ligation without preliminary arteriogram. Nevertheless, it may be wise
to defer ligation after diodrast injection rather than to carry out both procedures
at the same time.
Diagnosis
There can be no question that arteriograms ordinarily demonstrate
beyond question the presence of an aneurysm (Fig. 2) or arteriovenous
fistula (Fig. 3). Our experience, however, would suggest that this
procedure is rarely, if ever, necessary to establish the diagnosis of such
lesions, with the single exception of intracranial aneurysms. Intracranial
aneurysms are, indeed, generally recognized with ease from the char-
acteristic headache and ophthalmic signs. Since a similar syndrome can
result from other causes, however, it is the part of wisdom to establish
the diagnosis beyond doubt by arteriography before ligation of the
internal carotid artery or by intracranial exploration. The diagnosis
of aneurysms or arteriovenous fistulas of the peripheral vessels is
ordinarily made without difficulty, the former by the presence of an
abnormal pulsation overlying the lesion, a systolic bruit, and often a
systolic thrill, and a visible and palpable pulsating mass, the latter by a
continuous thrill and bruit and generally by the characteristic bradycardia
and elevation of blood pressure during digital compression of the fistula.
Only twice in our experience has a diagnosis of peripheral aneurysm
been made erroneously, and in neither instance, unfortunately, were
arteriograms obtained. One was an unusual instance of costoclavicular
compression of the subclavian artery;50 the other was a case of carotid
body tumor thought to be a carotid aneurysm because of the presence of
a pulsating mass, systolic bruit, and apparent compressibility of the
mass. On one occasion we have felt it advisable to obtain arteriograms
in order to make certain that no aneurysm was present. This was the
case of a patient who had complained for 7 months, of pain in the
thenar region of her hand and in the thumb, following trauma re-
peatedly incurred in this area. Although the impression seemed well
sustained that the difficulty constituted a minor causalgia, the full
pulsation in the thenar eminence, not palpable in the same area of the
contralateral hand, and the frequent episodes of local ecchymosis made
it appear worth while to rule out the possibility of an arterial lesion.
275
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
To be sure, there was no positive evidence of an aneurysm, no palpable
pulsating mass, and no bruit or thrill. Arteriograms revealed a per-
fectly normal vascular pattern (Fig. 4).
In contrast to the relative ease with which the diagnosis of peripheral
aneurysms is made by simple observations, the diagnosis of aneurysms
of the aorta and of the great vessels in the mediastinum is sometimes
difficult to establish by ordinary means. Usually no thrill is felt and often
no bruit is heard, especially in the case of intrathoracic aneurysms.
Generally the mass is inaccessible so that its pulsatile character cannot
be confirmed by palpation. Not infrequently both fluoroscopic and
kymographic examination fail to demonstrate conclusively intrinsic
pulsation in the mass. We have explored several aneurysms of the first
part of the innominate artery or of the arch of the aorta either by
mediastinotomy or by the closed introduction of a needle for wiring,
and have confirmed the clinical impression of aneurysm when roentgen-
ological examination had suggested that the lesion was a solid tumor.
On the other hand we have explored with a needle an intrathoracic
mass which appeared clinically and by roentgenographic study to be a
typical aortic aneurysm only to find it a solid tumor which was sub-
sequently resected and proved to be a large aberrant thyroid adenoma.
Similarly solid or cystic tumors overlying the abdominal aorta may be
confused with abdominal aortic aneurysms because of their transmitted
pulsation and the bruit which results from partial compression of the
underlying aorta. Generally, however, the diagnosis is not difficult to
establish. Sometimes ordinary roentgenograms are of help in demon-
strating calcification of the aorta and of the sac wall. It may sometimes
be advisable to investigate by angiography possible aneurysms of the
innominate artery or of the aorta. With lesions of the arch one would
apply the technique of angiocardiography described by Robb and
Steinberg,45' 46, 47 and with lesions of the descending thoracic or ab-
dominal aorta the technique of aortography described by dos Santos
and others. It is our feeling, however, that the nature of the lesion will
generally be evident from ordinary clinical and radiological examination,
or will be established beyond question by procedures such as closed
needle exploration or operative exposure which may be required, in any
case, in order to determine the possibility of satisfactory treatment.
Localization
Aneurysms and arteriovenous fistulas can generally be localized with
accuracy. In a small percentage of cases proper localization of the lesion
276
ARTERIOGRAPHY
is not possible by ordinary diagnostic means. When inaccurate localiza-
tion of an aneurysm or fistula is made before operation the mistake
may prove to be of no consequence with regard to operative exposure
and correct treatment of the lesion; mistakes may, on the other hand,
be a source of intense worry to the surgeon and of danger or needless
delay to the patient. An example of the first sort is the case of a soldier
who had evidence of an arteriovenous fistula in the axillary region.
Because of the anatomical location of the point at which digital com-
pression brought about cessation of the bruit and thrill, and because of
the fact that the brachial artery pulsated vigorously during such com-
pression, a diagnosis of arteriovenous fistula of the anterior circumflex
humeral vessels was made. In order to be safe, however, it was made
certain that the collateral circulation was adequate when the axillary
artery was occluded at this site. At operation the fistula between the
circumflex humeral vessels was confirmed. The artery and vein com-
municated, however, through a small saccular aneurysm which arose
from the axillary artery. The axillary artery was so extensively damaged
in this area that repair was considered impractical and ligation was per-
formed after excision of the aneurysm and fistula. The circulation was
adequate and the failure to recognize the axillary involvement before-
hand resulted in no harm. As examples of the second sort we should like
to quote experiences reported by one of us5' with regard to the use of
sympathectomy as an adjuvant in the treatment of aneurysms and
fistulas. A number of cases were recorded in which needless worry and
delay and an unnecessary sympathectomy resulted from improper
localization of arteriovenous fistulas in cases in which tests indicated
inadequate collateral circulation. The commonest mistake made was the
diagnosis of a profunda femoral aneurysm or fistula for a lesion of the
overlying femoral artery which is often necessarily compressed by pres-
sure sufficient to still the underlying aneurysm or fistula. In one patient a
fistula between the geniculate artery and femoral vein was thought to
involve the popliteal artery and vein; in one, a high posterior tibial fistula
was thought to be a popliteal lesion; in another, a posterior tibial fistula
was felt to involve the anterior tibial vessels as well; and in still another,
a transverse cervical fistula was diagnosed before operation as a sub-
clavian fistula. Unfortunately in these cases arteriograms were not made.
It may be that in some instances arteriography would not have per-
mitted a correct localization, but it seems likely that in the majority it
would have been possible. Certainly arteriography should be carried out
in cases with inadequate collateral circulation in which the clinical signs
277
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
point to involvement of a major artery and in which there is a possibility
that the lesion actually involves a neighboring vessel of relatively little
importance in the nutrition of the extremity.
"Cure" of aneurysm by thrombosis
Occasionally aneurysms undergo a spontaneous "cure" by throm-
bosis57 and progressive clotting of the sac sometimes follows sym-
pathectomy.5' Altogether we have observed 13 instances of such "cures."
Generally the course of events under these circumstances is evident
enough. In some instances, however, the progress is not entirely clear;
in these cases arteriography may be of considerable help in determining
proper treatment and disposition. In Fig. 5 an arteriogram is shown of
a case of traumatic anterior tibial aneurysm which became progressively
smaller and firmer during the course of observation and eventually lost
its systolic bruit. There remained only a small, firm, barely palpable
mass with only a faint pulsation. It was thought that the aneurysm had
become completely obliterated by thrombosis and that the residual faint
pulsation was transmitted rather than expansile. The normal arterial
shadow and the absence of any sac by arteriography confirmed the
impression of complete cure and lent security to the reassurance and
discharge of the patient. In this particular case the result was relatively
certain from clinical observation. In other instances, however, more
doubt existed. One patient with a large femoral aneurysm was noted to
have a progressive decrease in the size and pulsation of the mass after
lumbar sympathectomy, which was carried out in an effort to increase the
efficacy of the collateral circulation. A small, firm, almond-sized mass
remained. Arteriograms revealed a sac only a centimeter in diameter.
Under further observation the mass finally diminished to a very small,
solid mass and it became obvious that the sac was completely closed.
In still another patient a large pulsating profunda femoral aneurysm
about the size of a large grapefruit gradually diminished in size and
lost its palpable expansile pulsation and its bruit. Only a sensation of a
deep firm solid mass of moderate size remained and it was thought
clinically that the sac was completely clotted. Arteriograms revealed a
sac about 5 cm. in diameter, however, and since no regression had
taken place for a considerable time it was felt wise to proceed with
aneurysmorrhaphy. Blakemore' has recently pointed out similar aid
from arteriography in checking the degree of clotting within aneurysms
during the course of treatment by wiring and electrothermal coagulation.
278
ARTERIOGRAPHY
Other considerations
Rarely may other considerations provide a real indication for the
use of arteriograms in cases of aneurysm or fistula. The patient whose
arteriogram is shown in Fig. 2 was a young man with evidence of an
arteriovenous fistula involving the distal end of the femoral vessels.
His tests for collateral circulation were good, and no true indication for
arteriography existed. Had his collateral circulation been inadequate,
however, and had it remained so in spite of efforts to increase its
efficacy, one might have profitably performed arteriograms in order to
judge the possibility of ligating and transfixing the fistula with preserva-
tion of the continuity of the artery. Although, in general, one should
not operate upon a fistula until one has good indication that the collateral
circulation is adequate because of the possible necessity of ligating the
artery, it may occasionally be permissible to explore such lesions cau-
tiously with a view to ligating the fistula and maintaining the artery
intact. Such procedures are not possible if, in addition to the fistula,
there is an aneurysm of the artery; in such cases the continuity of the
artery can be restored only by end-to-end suture or vein transplantation
-procedures which are fairly reliable but which, however, carry enough
risk of thrombosis to make them inadvisable in cases with inadequate
collateral circulation. In the case being discussed the arteriogram showed
such an aneurysm arising from the artery and would have made ex-
ploration unwarranted under the conditions postulated. At operation a
small arterial saccular aneurysm was found through which the artery
and vein communicated. I
We have thus far discussed indications for arteriography from the
view-point of safe and proper treatment. In addition, this procedure
may be advisable for properly conceived clinical investigation. For
example, one might desire to check end-to-end suture (Fig. 6) in order
to study the line of anastomosis and to rule out the occurrence of such
complications as partial stenosis or aneurysmal dilatation. One might
also desire to demonstrate radiographically the relative size of the artery
and the vein transplant (Fig. 7) in order to study the question of sub-
sequent dilatation or constriction of the venous insert after vein grafting
operations.
Choice of solution
The first radio-opaque solutions used for arteriography in man were
lipiodol,58 strontium bromide,5 and 100 per cent sodium iodide.7 In
1927, Egas15 used 25 per cent sodium iodide for cerebral arteriography,
279
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
and in 1929 dos Santos'2 began to use varying dilutions of sodium iodide
for aortagrams and arteriograms of the extremities. Dos Santos found
a 100 per cent solution unsatisfactory because of the intense pain it
caused and because of aggravation of gangrene in patients who already
had impaired circulation. He found a 30 per cent solution more satis-
factory and reported 300 instances of its use without accident. More
recently Wagner65 has used 80 per cent sodium iodide for arteriograms.
From time to time various other solutions have been tried, including
bromides of sodium, potassium, and calcium, iodides of potassium,
calcium, and strontium, iodized and emulsified oil, and proteinated silver
salts.38 In Europe particularly, the iodine compounds, skiodan or tenebryl
and neo-iopax or uroselectan, have been used.
All too frequently, the injection of iodine compounds was found
to cause such intense arterial spasm that ischemia resulted, with paralysis
of the limb, anesthesia, or aggravation of gangrene. Numerous instances
of such serious ischemic accidents have been reported, especially in the
European literature.4' 28, 29, 30, 34, 49, 64 It has been suggested that the
vessels of patients in both extremes of life appear to be more sensitive
to spasm resulting from mechanical or chemical factors.", 64 There can
be no question that the presence of obliterative arterial disease con-
tributes to the risk of such accidents following the intra-arterial in-
jection of contrast media.'9
Of all the radio-opaque materials which have been employed in
arteriography it would appear that diodrast and thorotrast have proved to
be the most satisfactory. In attempting to compare their relative worth
it is important to take into consideration those features which would
be characteristic of the ideal agent. This agent should give excellent
opacification of the injected vascular tree, should result in no im-
mediate or delayed reaction, and should either be eliminated rapidly
from the body, or be completely innocuous if retained. Diodrast has
two obvious advantages over thorotrast; it is not radioactive, and it is
quickly excreted in the urine. It, therefore, carries no risk of long-
delayed ill effects. Diodrast has, however, several disadvantages. Al-
though its use in arteriography is generally attended by sufficient
opacification of the arteries, the delineation of the vessels is not so
clear-cut as with thorotrast. One exception to this statement must be
pointed out. In aortagrams better visualization is obtained with iodine
compounds than with thorotrast since the latter mixes with the blood
less readily in the aorta.'2' 14 It is also undoubtedly true that diodrast
results in greater opacity of the chambers of the heart; the technique of
280
FIG. 1. Arteriograms of aneurysm of internal carotid artery.
A. Roentgenogram taken immediately after injection of 8 cc. of 70 per cent diodrast. A small saccular
aneurysm is seen.
B. Roentgenogram made a few seconds after release of proximal occlusion. The diodrast is no longer visible in
the carotid tree but is evident in the sac itself.
FIG. 2. Arteriogram of mycotic aneurysm arising from distal position of popliteal artery. The exposure was
made after injection of 20 cc. of 70 per cent diodrast into the common femoral artery. A few tiny collateral channels
are visualized but the main branches beyond to the aneurysm are not filled.
FIG. 3. Arteriogram of traumatic arteriovenous fistula and saccular aneurysm of distal portion of femoral
vessels. Twenty cc. of 70 per cent diodrast were injected into the common femnoral artery. There is imnmediate andi
good filling of the femoral vein. The artery shows considerable proximal dilatation. The vein is enlarged, especially
in the region of the fistula. The sac appears to arise from the artery. At operation the artery and vein were found
to be in communication through the sac.
FIG. 4. Arteriogram of the hand in a case of minor causalgia in which marked pulsation in the thenar area
and recurrent ecchymosis made it advisable to rule out the possibility of a small aneurysm. The exposure was made
after the injection of 4 cc. of thorotrast into the radial artery during proximal arterial occlusion. The normal
arterial tree is well delineated. The next exposure revealed a normal venous pattern.
FIG. 5. Arteriogram made after "spontaneous cure" of traumatic posterior tibial aneurysm. Exposure was
made after injection of 20 cc. of 70 per cent diodrast into the common femoral artery. The arrow marks the point
at which the aneurysm had been present. No deformity of the posterior tibial artery is noted and no sac is
demonstrated, confirming the clinical evidence of cure.
FIG. 6. Arteriogram made 10 weeks after excision of arteriovenous fistula between the femoral artery, the
profunda femoral artery, and the femoral vein. Twenty cc. of 70 per cent diodrast were injected into the common
femoral artery. The proximal end of the divided profunda artery was sutured end-to-end to the distal segment of the
divided femoral artery. No stenosis or dilatation is seen at the site of the anastomosis.
FIG. 7. Arteriograms in cases of vein transplantation. In each case 20 cc. of 70 per cent diodrast were in-
jected into the common femoral artery.
A. Arteriogram made 7 weeks after a segment of a large branch of the femoral vein was used on a graft to
bridge a defect in the femoral artery, resulting from excision of a large arteriovenous fistula. The relative sizes of
the insert and the artery are about the same as was noted upon completion of operation.
B. Arteriogram made 1(1 weeks after a segment of saphenouLs vein was used as a graft to the femoral artery
following excision of an arteriovenous fistula. The venous insert and the artery were about equal in size at the com-
pletion of the operation and no dilatation appears to have taken place.
l
ARTERIOGRAPHY
Robb and Steinberg45 46, 47 using 70 per cent diodrast has proved very
satisfactory. For ordinary peripheral arteriograms thorotrast unques-
tionably results in a more opaque delineation of the arterial tree.
Another potential disadvantage of diodrast is the tendency for
immediate vasoconstriction following its injection. Experimental studies
in dogs have been reported which indicate that a diphasic vasomotor
~reaction follows the intra-arterial injection of diodrast, an initial
vasoconstriction and subsequent vasodilatation.8 To be sure, the reaction
was much less marked than with skiodan. Thorotrast, on the other
hand, caused only vasodilatation. It is of interest that these vasomotor
accidents, to which we have previously referred, have been reported
much more frequently with the use of iodine compounds than with
thorotrast. For example, dos Santos"3 encountered 6 such accidents in
129 arteriograms performed with iodine compounds and none in 300
performed with thorotrast. Leriche29 had 2 similar accidents in 5
arteriograms with iodine compounds and only one instance of arterial
spasm without sequelae in 146 arteriograms with thorotrast. It must be
pointed out, however, that the accidents due to arterial spasm reported
following the intra-arterial injection of iodine compounds have all been
with preparations other than diodrast. At the same time it must be
recognized that diodrast causes similar, if less marked, vasomotor
responses and conceivably might lead to disastrous spasm. Indeed, at
least one example of profound ischemia has been reported following
the intravenous use of diodrast.38 If it is used in cases of existing or
threatened gangrene or in other instances of severe obliterative disease
only when arteriograms are deemed really essential, and if any resulting
spasm of more than momentary duration is treated promptly by
anesthesia or sympathetic block, there should be little or no hazard in
this regard.
Diodrast is far from ideal in respect to immediate reactions which
follow its use. There may occur unpleasant but harmless transient re-
actions such as metallic taste, an intense subjective sensation of heat, a
brief fall in blood pressure, and rise in pulse rate. Less often there may
be nausea or vomiting and, rarely, collapse. Respiratory distress with
cyanosis has been noted.64 Transient allergic reactions have been ob-
served, such as urticaria, angioneurotic edema, chills and fever, and
dermatitis.45 46 Such reactions have been reported in patients with nega-
tive skin or conjunctival tests. Unfortunately, fatal reactions have also
occurred. In reviewing these fatalities Pendergrass and his associates38
collected 10 cases of immediate death following injection of diodrast,
281
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
due, they believed, to hypersensitivity or "colloidal shock." In 9 of
them the drug had been given for pyelography and in one for arteriog-
raphy. There were 9 delayed deaths which occurred at from 24 hours
to several weeks after injection of diodrast; in some cases there was
advanced renal disease. One death which occurred one week after the
intravenous administration of 35 per cent diodrast was believed due to
emboli from the upper extremity which became almost completely
avascular shortly after the injection. Diodrast had been given in 19 of the
26 fatal cases they reported from the use of contrast media, and this was
the case in 6 of the 11 similar fatalities previously reported. It is per-
fectly clear, then, that fatal reactions may occur. They should occur
with extreme rarity, however, if all patients are subjected before hand
to skin or conjunctival tests and particularly to the intravascular in-
jection of a minute amount of the solution before the remainder of the
solution is injected, and if the drug is not used in cases of severe liver
and kidney disease.
Thorotrast is a solution of 19 to 20 per cent by weight of thorium
dioxide. The original solution used by Oka36 was found to be toxic
because of flocculation. Radt4' prepared a stabilized solution. Ccioke'
has reported that the thorium dioxide granules are removed from the
bloodstream within 5 minutes by cells of the reticulo-endothelial
system, chiefly in the liver and spleen and, to a lesser extent, in the
bone-marrow. Large amounts of the drug are required for hepatosplenog-
raphy, but smaller doses are satisfactory for arteriography.2' '
l3, 63, 68
As we have mentioned previously, thorotrast gives greater opacification
of the vessels than does diodrast; its injection is attended by little or no
pain, and there are rarely any immediate reactions. Such reactions do
occur, however, on occasions. The precipitation of an attack of asthma
in an asthmatic patient and a transient anemia with mononuclear
leukocytosis have been reported.26 43 Severe chills and fever44 and vomit-
ing" may occur. Two cases of transient edema and urticaria of the
face have been described.1 Hemorrhage has been reported in 2 patients
with advanced gastric carcinoma and in one patient with cirrhosis.'7' 60
Dos Santos reported a case of hematemesis and anemia occurring 24
hours after the injection of 20 cc. of thorotrast.'3 Generally no significant
vascular spasm has been observed after intra-arterial injection of the
drug. Dos Santos stated that he had occasionally noted transient
vasospasm when some of the solution had been injected into the
adventitia, but in over 300 arteriograms with thorotrast he had no case
of aggravation of existing gangrene. Lambret, however, had a case of
282
ARTERIOGRAPHY
aggravation of gangrene with paralysis of the extremity following the
intra-arterial injection of 20 cc. of thorotrast; death occurred 10 days
later.27 In several patients extravasation of the solution into the tissues
has caused only swelling and pain lasting for several days with subse-
quent formation of a firm subcutaneous nodule.1' 10, 18, 68 In one instance
the solution passed along the course of the femoral artery into the iliac
fossa, causing a suppurative arteritis.'3 There are reports of 2 deaths
following thorotrast arteriography of an extremity. One was due to
respiratory arrest of an anaphylactoid type in a child with a Volkmann's
contracture.66 The other death was the case of Lambret referred to
previously.
The chief reasons for concern in the use of thorotrast are its very
slow elimination from the body and the possible harmful effects of its
radioactivity. It is well known that thorium dioxide granules remain
in the reticulo-endothelial system for years.9 It has been reported that in
one case 83 per cent of the material injected was still present in the
liver almost 4 years after its administration.42 It is stated that the
granules are first scattered diffusely throughout the liver and that they
are subsequently concentrated chiefly around the central veins and
portal areas.24 70 Reports concerning the tissue reaction in the liver
vary. In one case there was cloudy swelling of the hepatic cells
and slight necrosis 4 weeks after injection of 75 cc. of thorotrast.67
In another case there was evidence of a productive hepatitis with
accumulation of fibroblasts and mononuclear cells in the periportal
areas 5 months after administration of 50 cc.18 Slight fibrosis around
granules of thorium dioxide was noted in one case 5 years after injection
of 75cc.25 Others have reported no cellular reaction.17' 24 70 Fatty degen-
eration of liver cells has been observed in white rats given moderately
large doses.23 In one study with rabbits 0.8 cc. per kilogram caused
no reaction, while larger doses caused reactions of varying intensity.62
One instance of acute splenitis has been observed after use of thorotrast,60
and in another individual suffering from reticulo-endotheliosis there was
a fatal rupture of the very large spleen, apparently from splenic vein
occlusion.60 Others have found evidence of only moderate fibrosis of
the spleen and lymph nodes or no reaction at all.18' 24, 25 The presence
of granules of thorium dioxide, without reaction, in large spherical cells
in the capillaries of the pulmonary alveolar walls has been noted several
months after injections of thorotrast.24 Others have reported evidence
of bone-marrow exhaustion in rabbits given thorotrast in doses of from
0.5 to 1.0 cc. per kilogram.39 Following subcutaneous injection of
283
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
thorotrast one investigator found simple hyaline fibrosis'8 and another
found masses of foreign body giant cells laden with granules.22 After
perivascular injection granules were found in the lymph nodes draining
the area with fibrosis and loss of lymphoid structure.22 The question has
been raised concerning possible lowering of the body's defense
mechanism against infection through blockade of the reticulo-endothelial
system. One patient's stormy postoperative course was attributed to
previous administration of thorotrast.7 Others have felt that, with the
dosage used, relatively few of the reticulo-endothelial cells engulf
thorotrast particles and that this is not a significant factor in lowering
resistance.17' 69
Thorium has a long half-life, 1.31 x 1010 years, as compared with
1690 years for radium. Thorium dioxide, however, breaks down into
mesothorium, radiothorium, thorium X, thoron, thorium A, thorium B,
and thorium C; the half-lives of these elements range from a few seconds
up to 7 years. Mesothorium is thought to be of chief concern because its
radioactivity increases over a 25-year period, while that of thorium and
radiothorium decreases. The total radioactivity of thorotrast, therefore,
decreases for the first 5 years, reaching a low of 50 per cent, and then
increases.'7 3" Of the rays emitted, the alpha rays are the most active
biologically; 25 cc. of thorotrast give off an amount of alpha rays
equivalent to that given off by from 0.5 to 1 microgram of radium.43
The same quantity of thorotrast gives off an amount of gamma rays
equivalent to that from 0.3 to 0.4 micrograms of radium.43 In studying
the incidence of malignancy in radium dial workers, Martland33 con-
cluded that exposure to 0.5 micrograms was hazardous. He noted such
effects as aplastic anemia and necrosis of bone in patients exposed to as
much as 2 micrograms. It is well established that the radioactivity of
thorotrast persists in patients. From 13 to 27 per cent of the original
activity has been found present in the liver.25' ,
61 Thorium X has
been found in the feces of a patient 6 or 7 years after the injection of
75 cc. of thorotrast, and thoron has been detected in his exhaled air.59
Post-mortem studies have revealed almost half of the original radio-
activity still present in the liver, while radioactivity was also evident
in the spleen and long bones.6' The possible sensitization to subsequent
roentgen rays of tissues surrounding deposits of thorium dioxide has
been suggested by several authors"' "
and denied by others.69 The
possible carcinogenic effect of such deposits has been feared by many.
Experimentally as little as 0.6 cc. of thorotrast injected subcutaneously
has been reported to have caused sarcomas in 85 per cent of rats and in
284
ARTERIOGRAPHY
26 per cent of mice.48 Others have failed to demonstrate a carcinogenic
effect in experimental animals."8 69 We have encountered in the litera-
ture only one case of a malignant tumor possibly dependent upon a
preceding injection of thorotrast. MacMahon, Murphy, and Bates re-
ported the case of a patient who, at death 12 years after having received
75 cc. of thorotrast, had an endothelial-cell sarcoma of the liver occurring
at the border of a large accumulation of thorotrast.32
In comparing the results of diodrast and thorotrast for cerebral
arteriography, it may be mentioned that accidents have been reported
with both solutions. Gross observed Jacksonian seizures in 3 to 12
patients in whom 70 per cent diodrast was used.20 Transient hemiplegia
and thrombosis of the carotid artery have also been noted. It is said that
diodrast in concentrations of from 35 to 50 per cent causes no re-
action.21' 40 Fifty per cent diodrast has, therefore, been recommended
since it also gives adequate opacification.3' Thorium dioxide granules
have been found in extravascular tissues of the brain with occlusion of
small vessels and perivascular hemorrhage.'6 3 In several cases aggrava-
tion of central nervous system symptoms has been attributed to the
passage of thorium dioxide granules into the tissues of the brain.35
Leriche has reported the death of one elderly patient following injection
of thorotrast into the carotid artery.29
It is, then, evident that neither thorotrast nor diodrast is without
potential danger. Reactions have been few and most of them of little
consequence. Fatal reactions have, however, followed the use of both
solutions. In evaluating the larger number of fatal cases recorded after
use of diodrast it must be recalled that this drug, being employed ex-
tensively for pyelography, has undoubtedly been used many more times
than has thorotrast. It must also be remembered that not a few of the
deaths have occurred in patients with advanced renal or hepatic disease.
Potentially the danger of severe reactions to diodrast should be greater
in arteriography than in pyelography, since a more concentrated solution
is required. There can be no doubt that thorotrast is preferable with
regard to the opacification of the arteries, the relative lack of pain follow-
ing injection, and the general absence of any vasoconstrictor reaction in
the limb. To be sure, such reactions are not likely to be of any con-
siderable hazard in the absence of severe obliterative disease, provided
one is alert in actively treating such complications by sympathetic block
or by other means of eliminating vasoconstrictor impulses. Whether
the continued presence of radioactive material in the body after use of
small amounts of thorotrast constitutes a real danger is still a matter
285
286 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
of speculation. Evidence of resultant pathological alterations has been
largely obtained in patients who have been given large amounts for
hepatosplenography.
Summary and conclusions
Arteriography is not without danger though reactions are few
and are generally of little consequence. Fatal reactions have, however,
occurred with both diodrast and thorotrast. Tragic ischemic difficulties
in the injected limb have also been noted. They have generally occurred
in cases of severe obliterative arterial disease. Because of these attendant
dangers, arteriography should be employed only when indicated and
not as a routine in cases of arterial disorders. There is a definite, but
limited, applicability of arteriography in patients with aneurysm or
arteriovenous fistula.
Arteriography is rarely needed in order to establish or rule out the
diagnosis of peripheral aneurysms or fistulas. It has an important role
in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms and is perhaps occasionally
necessary for intrathoracic or intra-abdominal aneurysms. The procedure
is generally not necessary for the accurate localization of aneurysms or
fistulas of the peripheral vessels, but is occasionally of great usefulness,
especially in cases with seemingly inadequate collateral circulation in
which the lesion apparently involves a main arterial stem. From the
data available it is difficult to decide which solution is preferable for
peripheral arteriography. Until further information is at hand we prefer
to use 70 per cent diodrast except in those instances in which a satis-
factory arteriogram will require only a few cubic centimeters of solution
and in those cases in which there appears to be particular hazard of
ischemic difficulty from vasoconstriction.
REFERENCES
1 Allen, E. V.: Roentgenography of the arteries of the extremities with thorotrast. Proc.
Staff Meet., Mayo Clinic, 1933, 8, 61-63.
2 Allen, E. V., and J. D. Camp: The value of arteriography. Radiology, 1934, 22,
678-83.
3 Allen, E. V., and J. D. Camp: Arteriography. A roentgenographic study of the
peripheral arteries of the living subject following their injection with radio-
opaque substance. J. Am. Med. Asso., 1935, 104, 618-24.
4 Bazy, L., and H. Reboul: etude critique sur 1'art6riographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat.
de Chir., 1935, 61, 18-21.
5 Berberich, J., and S. Hirsch: Die rontgenographische Darstellung der Arterien und
Venen am lebenden Menschen. Klin. Wchnschr., 1923, 2, 2226-28.
6 Blakemore, A. H.: Angiography-An evaluation of its usefulness. Surg. Clin. N.
Am., 1946, 26, 326-42.
7 Brooks, B.: Intra-arterial injection of sodium iodide. Preliminary report. J. Am.
Med. Asso., 1924, 82, 1016-19.
ARTERIOGRAPHY 287
8 Contiades, X. J., J. Naulleau, and G. Ungar: Sur I'action vasomotrice et les dangers
des produits de contraste utilise en arteriographie. Reserches experimentales, et
resultats cliniques. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935, 61, 187-98.
9 Cooke, H. H.: Hepatolienography: Experimental study of elimination of contrast
medium. Arch. Surg., 1934, 29, 29-41.
10 Desplas, B., and H. Reboul: Accidents de l'arteriographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat.
de Chir., 1935, 61, 10-16.
11 Dickson, W. H.: Thorotrast. New contrast medium for radiological diagnosis. Canad.
Med. Asso. J., 1932, 27, 125-29.
12 Dos Santos, R., A. C. Lamas, and J. P. Caldes: Arte'riographie des membres et de
I'aorte abdominale. Masson et Cie., Paris, 1931.
13 Dos Santos, R.: Sur l'art6riographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935, 61, 585-90.
14 Dos Santos, R.: Arteriographie et phlebographie. J. internat. de Chir., 1947, 7, 206-10.
15 Egas, Moniz: La radioarteriographie cerebrale. Bull. Acad. de med., 1927, 98,. 40-45.
16 Ekstrom, G., and A. G. H. Lindgren: Cerebral injuries after arteriography of the
brain with thorotrast. Acta chir. Scandinav., 1939, 82, 291-301.
17 Erickson, L. G., and L. G. Rigler: Roentgen visualization of liver and spleen with
thorium dioxide sol. J. Am. Med. Asso., 1933, 100, 1758-64.
18 Fleming, A. J., and W. H. Chase: Effects of administration of thorium dioxide.
Surg., Gynec., & Obst., 1936, 63, 145-48.
19 Garraud, R.: Les accidents de l'art6rio-contrastographie (etude clinique). Paris Med.,
1937, 105, 114-20.
20 Gross, S. W.: Cerebral arteriography with diodrast 50 per cent. Radiology, 1941,
37, 487-88.
21 Gross, S. W.: Central arteriography. J. Indiana Med. Asso., 1944, 37, 109-12.
22 Harris, W. H.: Histo-pathological effects of thorium dioxide on lymphatic glands of
animals visualized by the Menville-Ane method. Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med.,
1932, 29, 1049-51.
23 Harris, W. H., and A. V. Fredericks: Microscopic changes produced in tissues of
animals injected with thorium dioxide for spleno-hepatography. Proc. Soc. Exper.
Biol. & Med., 1932, 29, 1047-49.
24 Irwin, D. A.: The experimental intravenous administration of colloidal thorium
dioxide. Canad. Med. Asso. J., 1932, 27, 130-35.
25 Jacobson, L. E., and D. Rosenbaum: Post-mortem findings and radioactivity determina-
tions five years after injection of thorotrast. Radiology, 1938, 31, 601-07.
26 Kadruka, S.: Hepatosplenography. Radiology, 1932, 18, 371-77.
27 Lambret, O.: Accidents de l'arteriographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935,
61, 173-75.
28 Leclerc, G.: Accidents de l'arteriographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935,
61, 180-83.
29 Leriche, R.: Sur le benignit6 des arteriographies au thorotrast. Bull. et mem. Soc.
nat. de Chir., 1935, 61, 175-80.
30 Leveuf, J.: Les dangers de l'arteriographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935,
61, 6-10.
31 Lowman, R. M., and S. D. Doff: Arteriography for the demonstration of intracranial
aneurysms. Am. J. Roentgenol., 1945, 53, 341-47.
32 MacMahon, H. E., A. S. Murphy, and M. I. Bates: Endothelioid-cell sarcoma of
liver following thorotrast injections. Am. J. Path., 1947, 23, 585-611.
33 Martland, H. S.: The occurence of malignancy in radioactive persons. Am. J. Cancer,
1931, 15, 2435-2516.
34 Monod, R., M. Iselin, Racine, and H. Reboul: A propos des accidents de l'art6rio-
graphie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de Chir., 1935, 61, 183-87.
35 Northfield, D. W. C., and D. S. Russel: The fate of thorium dioxide (thorotrast) in
central arteriography. Lancet, 1937, i. 377-81.
36 Oka, M.: Klinische anwendung der "lienographie," eine neue Methode zur
rontgenologischen Darstellung von Milz und Leber. Fortschr. a. d. Geb. d.
Roentgenstrahlen, 1930, 41, 892-98.
37 Orr, C. R., G. D. Popoff, R. S. Rosedale, and B. R. Stephenson: A study of the
effect of thorium dioxide solution injected in rabbits. Radiology, 1938, 30, 370-81.
288 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
38 Pendergrass, E. P., G. W. Chamberlin, E. W. Godfrey, and E. D. Burdick: A survey
of deaths and unfavorable sequelae following administration of contrast media.
Am. J. Roentgenol., 1942, 48, 741-62.
39 Pohle, E. A., and G. Ritchie: Histological studies of the liver, spleen, and bone
marrow in rabbbits following the intravenous injection of thorium dioxide. Am.
J. Roentgenol., 1934, 31, 512-19.
40 Pool, J. L., and S. Alexander: Intracranial arteriography with rapidly excreted iodine
compound (diodrast). New York State Med. J., 1943, 43, 1429-30.
41 Radt, P.: Eine neue Methode zur rontgenologischen Sichtbarmachung von Leber und
Milz durch Injektion eines Kontrastmittels (Hepato- Lienographie). Med. Klin.,
1930,26, 1888-91.
42 Reeves, R. J., and J. E. Morgan: Retention of thorium dioxide by reticulo-endothelial
system. Radiology, 1937, 29, 612-14.
43 Report of Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry of the American Medical Association:
Thorotrast. J. Am. Med. Asso., 1932, 99, 2183-85.
44 Rigler, L. G., R. F. Kurcky, and A. L. Abraham: Effects of thorium dioxide sol
(Thorotrast) on human liver. Radiology, 1935, 25, 521-32.
45 Robb, G. P., and I. Steinberg: A practical method of visualization of the chambers
of the heart, the pulmonary circulation, and the great blood vessels in man.
J. Clin. Invest. Proc., 1938, 17, 507.
46 Robb, G. P., and I. Steinberg: Visualization of the chambers of the heart, the
pulmonary circulation, and the great blood vessels in man. Am. J. Roentgenol.,
1939, 41, 1-17.
47 Robb, G. P., and I. Steinberg: Visualization of the chambers of the pulmonary circula-
tion, and the great blood vessels in man. Summary of method and results. J.
Am. Med. Asso., 1940, 114,474-80.
48 Selbie, F. R.: Tumors in rats and mice following the injection of thorotrast. Brit. J.
Exper. Path., 1938, 19, 100-107.
49 Seneque, J., and Benoit: Sur les accidents de l'art6riographie. Bull. et mem. Soc. nat. de
Chir., 1935, 61, 16-18.
50 Shumacker, H. B., Jr.: A case of costoclavicular compression of the subclavian artery,
simulating arterial aneurysm. Surgery, 1946, 20, 478-81.
51 Shumacker, H. B., Jr., Sympathectomy as an adjuvant in the operative treatment of
aneurysms and arteriovenous fistulas. I. Sympathectomy performed before or at
time of operation. Surgery, 1947, 22, 571-96.
52 Schumacker, H. B., Jr.: Sympathectomy as an adjuvant in the operative treatment of
aneurysms and arteriovenous fistulas. II. Sympathectomy performed after opera-
tion. Surgery. 1947, 22, 597-610.
53 Shumacker, H. B., Jr.: The problem of maintaining the continuity of the artery in
the surgery of aneurysms and arteriovenous fistulas, with some notes on the
development and clinical application of methods of arterial suture. Ann. Surg.,
In press.
54 Shumacker, H. B., Jr., D. L. Abramson, and H. H. Lampert: The use of anti-
coagulants in the surgery of aneurysms and arteriovenous fistulas, with particular
reference to dicumarol. Surgery, 1947, 22, 910-18.
55 Shumacker, H. B., Jr., and K. L. Carter: Arteriovenous fistulas and arterial aneurysms
in military personnel. Surgery, 1946, 20, 9-25.
56 Shumacker, H. B., Jr., and K. L. Carter: Tests for collateral circulation in the ex-
tremities. Arch. Surg., 1946, 53, 359-77.
57 Shumacker, H. B., Jr., and E. E. Wayson: Spontaneous "cure" of aneurysms and
arteriovenous fistulas. To be published.
58 Sicard, J. A., and G. Forestier: Injections intra-vasculaires d'huile iodee sous contr6le
radiologique. Compt. rend. Soc. de Biol., 1923, 88, 1200-02.
59 Stenstrom, W.: Elimination of radioactive elements by patients and rabbits after
injection of thorotrast. Radiology, 1941, 37, 697-704.
60 Stewart, W. H., M. Einhorn, and H. E. llick: Hepatography and lienography follow-
ing the injection of thorium dioxide sol (Thorotrast). Am. J. Roentgenol.,
1932, 27, 53-58.
ARTERIOGRAPHY 289
61 Taft, R. B.: The radioactivity of thorium dioxide sol. Preliminary report. J. Am. Med.
Asso., 1937,108, 1779-81.
62 Tripoli, C. J.: Histology after thorium dioxide (thorotrast) in hepatolienography.
Am. J. Clin. Path., 1934, 4, 212-34.
63 Veal, J. R.: Adequate circulation in the extremities. J. Am. Med. Asso., 1935, 104,
542-45.
64 Wagner, F. B., Jr.: Complications following arteriography of peripheral vessels. J.
Am. Med. Asso., 1944, 125, 958-61.
65 Wagner, F. B., Jr.: Arteriography in renal diagnosis. Preliminary report and critical
evaluation. J. Urol., 1946, 56, 625-35.
66 Wertheimer, P., and P. Frieh: A propos de 77 arteriographies. Bull. et mem. Soc.
nat. de Chir., 1935, 61, 361-63.
67 Whitaker, P. H., T. B. Davie, and F. Murgatroyd: Hepato-lienography by the aid
of thorotrast-Its uses and dangers. Quart. J. Med., 1933, 2, 49-58.
68 Yater, W. M.: Thorotrast arteriography of the extremities, with report of illustrative
and unusual cases. Am. Heart J., 1936, 12, 383-405.
69 Yater, W. M., and F. 0. Coe: Ten years experience with thorotrast hepatosplenography.
Ann. Int. Med., 1943, 18, 350-66.
70 Yater, W. M., and E. R. Whitemore: Histopathologic study of fissures of 65
patients injected with thorium dioxide sol for hepatosplenography. Am. J. Med.
Sci., 1938, 195, 198-205.
