0
0
P4~
.C S
C's
V
O >o 0
U a
t_ 4
0
O a:
C)d
09
C-,
o -
o0
C)
v)
C) C'
+YC)0 3
0- C
0 N
-
0 0_
Ut
FOREWORD
Although Japanese medical investigating teams had been at work in
Hiroshima within three days of the atomic bombing, and although a brief
survey had been made between September 8 and 19, 1945 by a team under
Colonel Stafford L. Warren representing the "Manhattan District," the
responsibility for a comprehensive medical study was placed on the Joint
Commission for the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in
Japan. The timely organization of the Commission was the work of Colonel
Ashley W. Oughterson, surgical consultant in the Pacific Theatre of
Operations. It was accomplished in the field, since no thoroughgoing prep-
arations had been made in Washington. It was of necessity impromptu,
the personnel assigned were not specially prepared, and there was no equip-
ment in hand.
This diary provides a record of how the joint Commission was formed,
of the establishment of the essential working relationship with Japanese
medical investigators immediately after the cessation of hostilities, and of
the trials and rewards of daily activities during stressful times from
September 18 to December 6, 1945. There is also a short account of the
preparation of the report at the Army Institute of Pathology, to the time of
its completion on September 7, 1946. At the hazard of disturbing con-
tinuity, explanatory notes have been put into the text. These provide back-
ground without which the bare daily record might be less than fully
comprehensible.
Illustrative material was drawn in large part from the original report of
the Joint Commission. The writer wishes to express his appreciation to
Brigadier General Joe M. Blumberg, the Director of the Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, for making this material available. Most of it has
never been published. All of the early photographs that were incorporated
into this report were made by Japanese investigators or news agencies.
One of the first on the scene and among the most observant of the investi-
gators was Professor Nishina, the famous physicist. Personnel of the
Tokyo Dai-Ichi Military Hospital supplied graphic illustrations of patients
at the height of the aplastic anemia. Photographs by the Bunka-sha Agency
of medical activities at Hiroshima prior to the arrival of the Commission
are noteworthy for their technical excellence. Particular credit is due to
Captain Charles Brownell and his staff, members of the Joint Commission,
who were highly skilled, sensitive to the medical and human problems, and
tireless workers. Last and least are personal photographs made by the
writer during the time covered by the diary, and again in 1949 on another
visit to Hiroshima. These provided an opportunity to see the city in
renascence. Two of the color plates were first published in Medical Radiog-
raphy and Photography (Eastman Kodak Company), Volume 24, No. 2,
1948. These were prepared in part from personal 35 mm. transparencies
and in part from larger transparencies made by Captain Brownell. Permis-
sion to use these was graciously given by the Editor, Mr. William Cornwell.
The McGraw-Hill Book Company also permitted the use of several dia-
grams and sketches reproduced from the original report of the Joint
61
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Commi111issioI in M4ledical Effects of thle Atomiiic Bomib itt Japani (A. W.
Oughterson anid S. \Varren, Eds., 1956).
MIen of the Yale Medical School wrere closely associated with the studies
at Hiroshimlla fromii the beginning and have remained so to the present timle.
Colonel Oughterson, himself was an Associate Professor of Surgery on
leave, and three others of the seven medical officers assigned to Hiroshimia
had been Yale miedical students and twN-o wN-ere on leave froml the faculty.
After the Atomic Bomiib Casualty Commllission (ABCC) was established in
1948. one of the first pathologists assigned was Dr. \Villiam J. \Vedemeyer.
A miiajor contribution was made by another former Yale medical student,
Dr. Thomiias Francis, Jr., now Professor of Public Health at the University
of 'Michigan, who designed the closed population sampling study that is
now the core of the operation at ABCC. Since 1957 the ABCC has been
tinder the distinguished Directorship of Dr. George B. Darling, Professor
of Humian Ecology at Yale. Finally, both able personnel and an importanit
degree of conitiniuity have been assured by)X the assunmption of responsibility
for the miedical service at Hiroshimia since 1958 by the Department ot
Internial Medicine at Yale. For these reasons it is appropriate that thi-L
diary be first published in The Yale Joitrna(il of Biology anld Jledicinle.
1. WHY AND HOW
For twenty years, while the seven rivers that mleanider into Hiroshimiia
Bay have lapped upon the shores of a reviving city, this diary has remiainied
in the shorthand in which it wvas set dow-n. The writing was done at the end
of each arduous day before and durinig the nmedical investigation in that
stricken city, often in exhaustion. Somiie who have known of it have tirged
that it would be wrong that such a record, work-a-day as it is, should be
permitted to dissolve with the flesh. Let us hope that the experience wllicl
it reports w-ill remiiain unique! It is true that feNw Nwho took part are left to
tell lhow the challenige was met and w-hat took place. Indeed it is as though
somiie curse, like that wlich the superstitious say fell upoIn Lord Carinarvoll
and hiis meni whlen they violated the tomb of Pharaoh Tut-ankh-ameni, has
beeni visited upon those who pried into the ravaged lheart of Hiroshimia.
Only three of the seven Amiericaln ml-edical officers live. Doctors Oughterson
and Tsuzuki, the chief organizers for the two counitries have died; so too,
while still young, have gone Drs. Calvrin Koch, Jack D. Rosenbaum, and
MIilton R. Kramer. May this record do honor to these able and devoted meni.
It wvas not throughl a horror scribenidi that these notes have languislhed.
Rather it was through fear that somne insignificant phrase might be miliscoIn-
strued in a way that could disturb the amity that has grown between Japan
anid Amlerica anid specifically the contintiing cooperation in the Atomiiic
Bomb Casualty Coimmission. Too many of the wicked have been all too
eager to distort in order to disrupt!
62
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshtittia AMedical Diarv, 1945 LIEBOW
Those of us wlho came to Hiroshima in September 1945 sooi1 acquired
a profounid admiration and respect for our Japanese counterparts. \Vre knexv
that the miiedical study could not be accomplished without knowledge of the
language, people, and custonms. \Vre knew also that many skilled menl would
l)e needed since the few of us who had been sent represented only a smiat-
tering of the specialties. It is a tribute to the vision and hunmanity of
Coloniel Ashley NVT. Oughterson, truly a mian without malice, that the col-
laboration of Japanese science and mi-edicine was invited at that critical
timle. WVe called ourselves the "Joint Commission for the Investigation of
the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in Japan." As soon as the Japanese dis-
covered that the wvord "Joint" miieant that both inations were to labor
shoulder to shoulder to meet the formidable task of the miiedical study, and
that they would l)e treated not as enemies vanquished, but rather as col-
leagues and equals, they gave unstintingly of their thought and labor. The
friendships that began then have grown to a firmiiness that wNill resist
calunyv.
Mv own involvement was a matter of being at hand -vhen the circumii-
stance created the need. I wvas servinig on the island of Saipan in thle
Marianas, in mny third year as Pathologist to the 39th General Hospital,
the Yale lUnit. In early 1945 peaks of effort were required to care for
casualties of the OkinaNa and IwNo Jima campaigns. but there wv-ere quiet
intervals w,hen scientific hobbies such as the study of cutaneous diphtheria
couild be indulged amiiong the interesting, in-telligeint, anld tractable native
population. The contemplation of nature in the lush green jungle or even in
the sugar caine Nas dangerous. Although the island Na- declared "secure,"
these wsere the hidinig places of Japanese soldiers wsishing to l)e left alonIe
but likely to ambush intruders. Each evening we watched fleets of B-29
bombers mlakiing a rendezvous with their kind froimi neiglhboring Tinialn
aind Guamii to carry death and destruction to IN-o anid Japani. As Nith full
loads they lumbered straininlg to the end of the runway, mnany would
acttually drop below the level of the cliff that overhunog the reef at land's
end. A few did crash into the sea and some would jettison tlheir bombs and
circle back to the landing strip. As we lounged on the terrace overlooking
the cobalt of Magicienne Bay, we felt the guilt of insuifficieint involvement.
This grew wx-lhein the plaines returned in the miiorning, some limilping anld
with a cargo of injured or dead, or Nhen we learned of those that never
came back.
Of the existence of an atolmiic bomb wre had no inkling. It is true that in
the Spring of 1945 wagers that the war would eind by August 15 were
b)eiig freely imiade by airmen N-ho, wvith enigmiiatic simiiles, even offered
63
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
substantial odds. Yet the actual secret was well kept. Enormous casings
shaped like bombs were being dragged on multi-wheeled flat carriers over
the hot, white, dusty, coral roads of Saipan, but these were undoubtedly
decoys, and none of the bettors knew more than that something great and
terrible was in the wind. Only a few had knowledge of the awesonme power
that lay in a low, closely guarded, concrete, windowless building on the
Island of Tinian only three miles from us across the water.
Even as Iwo Jima, the last stepping-stone to Japan, was being seized,
and before Tinian received its fateful burden, we were busily expanding
our unit to 2,000 beds. We were not alone. Vast new hospitals were rising
on Tinian and Guam. Together we were to serve as a great center to
receive casualties from the expected assault on the Japanese homeland.
When, at 8:14 on the morning of August 6, 1945, on command fronm
Washington, the hand aboard the Enola Gay loosed beyond recall a new
evil in the world, we had no knowledge of how our lives, in fact the lives
of all men, would be changed. Only three days later came the second dev-
astating blow, against Nagasaki, before we on Saipan knew of the first. No
further conviction was required.
I can well remember how the news of peace came to us. It was on the
evening of August 11, 1945. My wife to be and I were at cribbage in the
Officer's Club. Two befuddled marines were consoling themselves by idly
twirling the dials of a short-xvave radio when Carolyn suddenly exclaimed:
"Did you hear that? They want peace." I had not heard. We rushed to the
set, but by then the station had been lost and we spent the next half hour
searching. Finally it came. Personal bottles were rescued from the bar,
since the Commanding Officer's orders required that it be closed at 11:00
p.m. Then followed a snake-dance to announce the news to all and sundry
in the barracks; it continued past the startled sentries to the fenced-off
nurses' compound. All was uproar and gaiety throughout the night, assisted
by a supply of Scotch with which the chief nurse had been entrusted by
one of the generals. On the next day Destroyer-Escorts equipped with
blaring loud speakers cruised along the coast and shouted the news in
Japanese into every inlet. They were believed, or else confirmed by more
direct sources from Tokyo, since within the week no fewer than 400 of
the erstwhile enemy turned themselves in. They had successfully managed
to elude several mopping-up operations. Most were neither sick nor thin.
Many had continued to feast, as had we when we first arrived, on tinned
crab meat made in Japan which bore the label "Approved by Good House-
keeping." This had been cached in caves before the battle for the island.
64
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
Now came the time to discharge our few patients either back to duty,
or to hospitals near home and to release those of our staff who had sufficient
"points." The necessary quota applied to most of us who had been with
the unit from the time it was organized. Since facilities for transportation
were obviously limited I elected to remain for two reasons. First, others
had wives and young families at home; second, as historian to the Yale
Unit, I wished to record the last events in the closing, and particularly the
destruction of the equipment, the return of which to the homeland had
been proscribed. Had permission not been granted to remain, I would
probably have been ordered back from some point on the long journey
home. As it was, the orders caught me unaware and unprepared, but not
physically on the homing path, and therefore ready, in fact eager, to set
forth on the final step to Japan that we had begun more than three years
before.
2. HIROSHIMA RETROSPECT
Hiroshima, "broad island," is really a delta cut into six islands by the
branches of the River Ota. Here lived some 250,000 people, a number that
does not include the soldiers of the Chugoku Army in their encampment
near the center. On two sides of the delta, which points its apex to the
north, the hills rise sharply. It is as if a great flatiron had been pressed
from the direction of the sea into the mountains. Only the truncated cone
of Hijiyama rising to 225 feet interrupts the flatness.
For the most part the houses were of traditional Japanese construction.
Most were of one or two stories, built of wooden lathwork and clay. A cen-
tral heavy tree beam runs longitudinally supporting arch-like ties. These
in turn support a lattice of struts that brace the heavy roof of overlapping
pantiles. Most of the modern buildings were of the heavy construction neces-
sitated in this land of earthquakes. These were situated along the main
street at the southern boundary of the military encampment and also along
the broad thoroughfare which ran at right angles directly south from the
main entrance of the reservation. These buildings were not in a cluster, but
separated by rows of the wooden shops and dwellings. Buildings of weight-
bearing brick were few, since these are most subject to damage by earth-
quake. Typical Japanese cities built thus tend to be swept by disastrous fires
at an average interval of eight years, but the ordinary houses, quick to
burn, can be as quickly rebuilt. The open charcoal braziers (hibachi) useful
for warmth and for cooking are a constant hazard. In this city of islands
the branches of the Ota made natural fire breaks, but the separate islands
were themselves large and densely crowded. In recognition of the danger of
65
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Ca -,
H
FJo - _ <_
*- <:L) - - tZ
- V - - ;-<
t . r. '- *-J
l r,
t ^ b _.._Cn W - _
_ _ ,
J C)
_ CJ t_
_ _ _ X _
CJ _ t / _
_ t - _ . _
_ _ - 'J
_
> aS e
r. : ;_ _
t_ 2 _ _ . _
__; W CS D t_>CJ_.r.,__/ _ _ s
b _ _ r,
._ _ _ - _
W ; t_ D r,
_tvzr@ sv n >;Csb__ .R / _
_ _ _
C -< 8 _s.-;X_4St_._oo _ ;R t t
-
V C)
_f._> * _ ' _
_to___CoeR__< t C>_ ^
F 'J. tJ 9
t . .__
/ r. '
66
l'ollillic -38, (ctobcr, iQ6,5
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
fire, especially under air attack, the citizens even before April 1945 had
organized patriotic work parties (Giyutai) to create additional fire breaks
by leveling blocks of homes. Work parties for this purpose were recruited
also from outlying villages such as Otake.
Hiroshima was not an important center of industry. On the outskirts
were a branch of Toyo Industries, Mitsubishi shipyards, and a machine-
tool factory. The Japan Steel Company was to the northeast. There were
also two large rayon plants, one located at Ujina on the far end of the
easternmost island near the harbor. It was here that patients were later
brought under care of the Tokyo First (Dai Ichi) Military Hospital and
where we were to establish the headquarters for our work. Industry was
also scattered in innumerable home workshops in accordance with the
Japanese concept of total war.
In Hiroshima, in a roughly pentagonal area near the center of the city,
was concentrated the military power of central Japan. The headquarters of
the Second Grand Army and of the Chugoku Military district were located
near an ornate castle, a relic of the Tokugawas, on an artificial island
surrounded by a moat. Near the southwestern part of the pentagon were
divisional headquarters and barracks, row on row. Near the entrance of the
encampment, facing the boulevard at its southern border was the impressive
Gokoku shrine. The Hiroshima encampment had served as the springboard
for the conquest of Manchuria in 1937-45 and before that for the successful
attack on Port Arthur. Of late, the military importance of this center had
waned and it was serving largely the function of a quartermaster depot.
Ordnance and munitions were stored in caves along the road leading to the
naval bases of Kure to the north and Iwakuni to the south.
In a military sense, at least the army base might be considered a legitimate
target, yet it was strange that before August 1945 Hiroshima had escaped
almost unharmed. Desultory raids between the middle of March and tlle
30th of April 1945 had inflicted almost no damage. During the early summer
our propaganda had broadcast threats that a number of cities, including
Hiroshima, would be destroyed. The population was tense in expectation.
Yet on August 6, the element of surprise was complete. Four B-29 bombers
were sighted over Hiroshima early in the morning but shortly after 7:00
a.m. they withdrew to the northwest. Just after 8 :00 three planes returned,
but the all-clear had sounded 45 minutes before. Since there was no large
concentration of hostile aircraft, the people went about their business as
they had been told. At that moment Hiroshima was a city going to work.
Farmers were already in the fields on the outskirts of the city. The streets
were filled. Children had already reported to the schools or for service in
67
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
clearing fire breaks. Customers had arrived in the banks, but had not as
yet been admitted to the floor. It was a time when the hazard of direct
exposure in the open was close to its peak. One of the planes was seen to
release several objects by parachute and then at 8:14, despite the brightness
of the morning survivors were startled by a prolonged and brilliant flash
like that of a gigantic magnesium flare. Accompanying the flash of light
was an instantaneous flash of heat traveling with the speed of light and
perceptible as far away as Ninoshima, the beautiful conical island five miles
across Hiroshima Bay. The heat affected exposed objects with an intensity
inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the epicenter. Its
duration was probably less than one tenth of a second and its intensity was
sufficient to cause nearby flammable objects, particularly when dark, to
burst into flame and to char poles as far as 4,000 yards away from the
hypocenter (point directly beneath the center of the explosion). At 600-
700 yards it was sufficient to chip and roughen granite by unequal expan-
sion of its components. The heat also produced bubbling of tile to about
1,300 yards. It has been found by experiment that to produce this effect
a temperature of 1,800° C. acting for four seconds is necessary, but under
these conditions the effect is deeper, which indicates that the temperature
was higher and the duration less during the Hiroshima explosion. Only
surfaces directly exposed sustained flash burns, since the rays of heat, like
light, travel in straight lines. Intervening objects prevented the charring
or other alteration in the directly exposed surfaces and thereby cast
"shadows." The sharpness of shadows cast by constantly moving objects
like leaves also suggests the brief duration of the flash. Thousands of
persons in the open within a radius of 212 miles sustained more or less
severe flash burns depending on distance and the protective effect of
clothing.
After an interval evident to those at a distance, came a violent shock wave
that flattened the fragile wooden buildings. As seen from the hills the houses
fell as under a scythe. People were hurled from where they were standing.
Those closest-by heard almost no sound except for that of falling buildings,
but at a distance there was a rumbling roar like that of thunder. The blast
wave shot outwards at approximately two miles per second for a relatively
short distance, but then after several hundred yards reached the speed of
sound (approximately 1,100 feet/second). It rose to a sharp peak, and then
the pressure fell below atmospheric for a period perhaps three times that of
the positive phase. Objects at a distance were deflected away from the
center of the blast, but such objects as trees immediately beneath remained
standing upright although stripped of branches. The magnitude of the
68
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 |. LIEBOW
Top. Flash burn in acute stage; the upper portion of the body was unclothed and
suffered a sharply outlined "profile burn." Patient probably within 1,000 meters. The
buttocks and thighs were burned through clothing, but the abdomen was protected by
a multilayered cummerbund.,
Bottom. Keloids of skin in 21-year-old woman at 1,600 meters. Seen in early
Niovember 1945. Some protection by means of blouse' and straps -of undergarments.
69
:.,
''ll
p
Top left. Patient showing dermatitis and epilation. First MIilitary Hospital file.
Distance not recorded but probably within 1,000 nmeters. Patielnt was a soldier in the
military compound.
Top righlt. Epilation aind petechiae in patient exposed wvithin the military compouild
at 1,000 meters. Patient (S-, H. -6176-U) died on 31 August 1945, when the white
count had fallen to 45.
Lowcer lcft. Epilation, wh-iclh had begun on 20 August, as seen on October 25, 1945.
Patient (M-) at Ujina Hospital. He was a soldier who had been indoors on the
second story of a two-story Japanese building at 600-700 meters. Slight dowiny re-
growth of hair has already begun.
Lowver righlt. Epilation in middle-aged onoman. Patient at Ujina out-patient clinic.
Regrowth of hair has begun in late October.
70
Hirosliimiia Mlledical Diary, 1915 L
downward pressuire was showvn by the 'dishing" of the reinlforced concrete
roofs of buildings. Glass andI other debris were shot through the air like
l)ullets, ofteni became imlpacte(l in wood, and inflicted multiple serious
inijturies. Simultaneously a. roilinig cloud, pink or black according to various
observers, rose fromilthe l)oint of the explosion; thiis, tog,ethier with imlmllense
quaiitities of duist fromil the ground and fromii the collapsilig buildings, threw
those beneath it illtO almlost total darkniess. This lastedI for somile twenty
iniutes. Thousands were trapped in the wreckage. Alimiost all of those who
cotild not escape tuinder their ownii pow-er perished. Fires beginning every-
where both by direct igition anid by the upsetting of thotisalids of the ol)en
hibachi, many still in uise for cookinig l)reakfast, at onice swept the city.
A highi xxinid stickedI toward the rising atomilc cloudI fanine(d the flamiles 1hich
then created their owin fire storml. The huimiiani victims suiffered burns both
by flash alnd by flamiie.
As soonl as the atomiiic natuire of the explosion was aninotince(l a new fear
made itself felt the terror of the invisible. The existenice of radiationi
effects was known alimiost at onlce. People who had been close to the hypo-
center lut who had stiffered neithier burns nor traulila, sickene(d and dlied.
They felt w-eak anid natiseatedl, couild not eat, developed a severe (liarrhea
aind fever and somile died w-ithinl ten days. Those N-ho survived loniger lost
their halir helimorrhiages anid ulcers appeared in the skin anid miuitcotis imiemil-
branes and(I deathi resuiltedl fromii pulmonary or initestinial inifections. Tlle
marrow had beeni destroyed and all elemilents of the blood were deplete(l.
If the intent of the bombing was demiloralizationi, this was unquestionably
achieved. False rtimors spread-that all w-ho had been in Hiroshimia and
Nagasaki would die, anidl that the cities would be uninhabitable for 75 years.
But there w-as yet anothier effect. Those in power in Japan w-ho were wise
liad clearly seen that the war liad been lost when Okinawa andl IwN-o Ji1m1a
fell. The Em1peror had personally soughit to influielice his war couticilors to
sue for peace. Now, in the face of unianiticipated and uniiprecedenited power
that couild overwhlelmii eve\n the milost valorous there was a wvay to conclide
the war wN-ithiout losing face and the fighting wvas brouighit to ani end.
Only glimipses can be obtained from accounts of survivors of thle inimenise
medical problemils created by an atomic explosion in a densely populated city.
Those who lived were (lazed not merely by the immediate force of the
explosion but by its vast extent. Many lost consciousness for a few seconds
or iinutes even though they had not suffered traumila to the head. Darkness
interrupted by onrushinig fires added to the confusion and terror. No one
knew which way to escape. The river banks and their waters Nere natural
71
LIEBOWf
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
havens and were soon teeming. Boats were mobilized to carry survivors
upstream. Only a few could be brought out on litters or carts, and almost
all who could not rescue themselves were overwhelmed by the flames. Both
administrative authority and organized activity had ceased to exist. What
was done was on individual initiative. Only three of 45 hospitals in the
city remained standing. The two largest and most modern, the Red Cross
Hospital and the Communications Department ("Post Office") Hospital,
were so severely damaged by blast, as was their equipment, that they could
function only as first-aid stations. Less than 10 per cent of the city's 300
physicians were uninjured and nursing strength had been equally depleted.
As the fires cooled relief work was begun. The first relief station from
outside was set up on the afternoon of August 6 at Tamon in the shelter
of Hijiyama. Thousands streamed back into the city in search of relatives
and friends. Messages were scrawled on the walls of the aid stations.
Police control, by tradition an enveloping power in Japan, was resumed
with the help of officers from neighboring towns. The Armed Forces gave
substantial aid. Two relief parties were dispatched from the Naval base at
nearby Kure and the hospital on the base at Iwakuni received 51 patients,
many of whom were naval personnel who had been quartered at the
Banker's Club, a large building only 200 yards from the hypocenter. Some
of these persons died in the first few days purely of radiation effect. The
Army assumed responsibility for the care of civilian as well as military
casualties although the two large Army Hospitals on the military reserva-
tion had been destroyed. Military hospital detachments were brought in
from elsewhere. Accessory aid stations were established in certain buildings
on the outskirts that had survived complete destruction, and in adjacent
communities as at Oshiba. One of the most active in the city itself was at
the Fukuramachi school. The Red Cross Hospital, despite severe damage
to its fine building, took care of 1,000 persons as in-patients, and in addition
conducted out-patient clinics. According to the Director, Doctor Hachiya,
the Post-Office Hospital began to receive patients by 9:00 a.m. of August
7, and by the end of that day 400 had been given immediate care. A major
installation was established on August 25 by the Tokyo Dai Ichi Military
Hospital (the Walter Reed of Japan) at the living quarters of the Daiwa
rayon mill at Ujina-later to be the base of operations of the Joint
Commission.
The investigation of the effects of the atomic bomb was begun by the
Japanese as early as the first day following the explosion when Professor
Nishina, a quantum physicist, came to Hiroshima. On August 14, Doctor
72
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
F,0 -
Upper. Street shortly after the explosion on August 6, 1945. The injured seeking
aid-probably in the shadow of Hijiyama. The city is burning in the background.
Lower. Temporary tentage. Shelters at Hiroshima No. 2 Army Hospital,
Motomachi, August 9, 1945. An officer marches by at the left. (Nishina photograph.)
73
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Upper. A nurse ministerinig to burned and injured patients, August 9, 1945. The
scene is under tentage at the Hiroshima No. 2 Army Hospital at Motomachi. This
was staffed by the Second Provisioinal Fukuoka Army Hospital. (Nishina photo-
graph.)
Lower. Burned and injured patienlts. (Nishina photograph.)
74
T'olitine 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hi)roshiillAedical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
U-
Upper. The Fukuraniachi Aid Station. This was formerly a high school. (Bunka-
Sha photograph.)
Lower. Clinic in session in early October 1945 before arrival of the Joint Commis-
sionI. (Bunka-Sha photograph.)
75
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Uppcr. Bulletiins regardinig the whereabouts anid coniditionis of various persons rit--
ten on1 an initerior wall at the Fukuraniacli Aid Stationi. ( Bunka-Sha photograph.)
Lozwer. Nurse in Red Cross Hospital admiinlisterinig treatmlenit 'Lo atiellt. (Bunika-
Sha photograph.)
76
l'oliiiiie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
Murachi* and Doctor Kimura came and stayed approximately a week, and
then returned later in the month accompanied by Doctor Miyazaki. With
the help of the Neher cosmic ray counter they found a zone of gamma ray
activity approximately ten times background in a region 50 yards across
at the hypocenter. This was interpreted to be the result of activation by
neutrons of components on the ground. The radioactivity was far below
hazardous levels. It is interesting to note that a part of this instrument had
been made and tested before the war by Professor Neher himself in the
United States. At Takasu to the south and west there was radioactivity of
three times background level. It was interpreted to represent the effect
of fallout directed by the wind that had blown from the east and by the
rains that fell in this region just after the explosion. This activity was
extremely low and certainly did not justify the fear of the rumor mongers.
The physicists also noted the "shadows" cast on various objects as a
result of the heat flash. By sighting along these shadows they were able to
establish through a process of triangulation the position of the explosioll.
It is amusing that this datum, widely known among scientists in Japan in
the second week of August, was considered a secret in the United States
for many months.
Medical investigations were begun at once and some of the earliest
autopsies were performed at the Iwakuni Naval Hospital. At the Commulli-
cations Department Hospital careful records were kept of approximately
150 patients, and autopsies were performed by Professor Tamagawa of
Okayama University in a makeshift autopsy room on the grounds of the
institution. The Prefectural Hospital at Kusatsu was active until November
1945. Autopsies were performed there by Professor Araki of the Kyoto
Prefectural University. Patients were transferred to military hospitals at
Okayama and elsewhere and to civilian institutions and hospitals as far
away as Osaka and even Tokyo. In these settings investigative work and
necropsies were also performed.
One of the most important investigative units was that maintained by
the Tokyo Dai Ichi Military Hospital at Ujina. This was superbly staffed.
It had been customary for many of the best young Japanese physicians
from the major universities to be recruited into the military soon after
receiving their medical degrees. Of this group, Majors Motohashi, Misono,
and Hata later made valuable contributions to the work of the Joint Com-
* Dr. Koichi Muracdi, a senior biophysicist of the Institute of Physical and Chemi-
cal Research of Tokyo, later became a valuable member of the Joint Commission,
especially in the investigation of factors in protection from radiation. He died on
March 31, 1964 of leukemia.
77
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
mllissiOn. Ini addition, they lhad collaborated with physicians of tlle Tokyo
Imiiperial -University who lhad sent investigating groups iilto Hiroshlilmca and(I
lhad also received miiaterials for stund at the University in Tokyo. A report
concerning 712 of these patienits w-as completed by personnel of the Tokyo
Dai Icli 'Military Hospital anid represenits ani imiiportanit originial doctnmiienit.
A miiajor trage(ld wcas suffered by the highly comiipetenit grotup of inv,esti-
gators lheadled 1bw Professor Alashita of the Kv-oto Imlperial Universit-.
They took til) residenice at the Onio Armyv Hospital in the village of that
namiie on the coast a few miiiles sotitl of Hiroshilmiia. Durillg the great
typhoon of September 17, a lanidslide roared downoi fromii the steel) lills
behind the hospital to the sea, crushing several btuildings in its patth and
carrying to tlheir deatlhs teni of the finiest miiedical scienitists in Jaapan1,
inclundin the famiiotis hematopathologist, Professor Sutiiyama.
AmloinO some of these gronps of investigators there existed a certaill
jealotusv of what might be called intellectual property, and commlllitinlicatiolns
amllonlgthelm were niot free. Snch attittudes are lnot uniiicqtue to Japan but tend(l
to prevail amilonlg scienitific commiiiluntities thronghont the world. \With a few
major exceltions, these teamiis conisidered l)artictular aspects of the prolblemlls
in lhanid. Under the diffictult circtimiistalnces, the generally lighl(lqnalitv of the
sttidies l)erforlmed is remarkable.
In retrosl)ect. it seemiis strano-e thlat a w-ell-staffed and well-e(tuipped
miie(lical team lhad not been orgaynizedl by the Snroeon General of the U.S.
Army for the specific ftinctioni of performincg an intensive investi-ation of
biological effects of the atomlic bomb. It was saidl that the Snrgeon General
had lnot been iniformiied of the plannied employment of this w-eaponi against
the cities. Fntrtlhermiiore General Kirk's personal relationshipswx-itlh General
M\acArthur were reported to be strained. WNe knew that lhe lhad, luring his
totur of the Western Pacific in 1945. been reftused l)ermissionl to lanid ill
the Philippines. Rtumiior lhad it that vears earlier when Kirk was ill commiiiianlel
of a mlilitary hospital in the Philipipines he had declined to a(lllit AMacArthnlr
as a patienit becatuse the latter was then serving in a civilian capacity.
The needl for a thoroughgoing medlical stuidy was clearly perceived by
Colonel Ashley WV. Otiglterson. then serving as surgical consnltalit to
General AMacArthur. Since he knew of no preparations that had been miadle
fromn \VNashlinlgton he conceived a plan of action while still on shipboard
w-ith GHO on route to Japan. This was presented as a letter anid immedi-
ately approved by Brigaclier General Guy B. Denit, Chief Surgeon, GHQ,
U.S. Armled Forces in the Pacific. Colonel Oughterson laid down the major
directions that Nere actually pursued by the investigating team and his
memorandumii to General Denit is therefore reproduced in full:
78
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshliimla AMedical Diary, 1915 LIEBOW
Upper. The Oshiba Aid Station. Patietnt brought in by cart receives treatment.
(Bunka-Sha photograph.)
Lozcer. Families of patients assistinig in the care of their sick relatives. One of the
two patients has suffered epilation. (Bunka-Sha photograph.)
79
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Upper. The Conimunicationis Departmnent Hospital seeni from the rear (1,400(
meters). The low building behind the central portion of the "vall at the rear of the
hospital was used as anl autopsy room by Professo:r Tamagava.
Lowcr. Professor Tamagawa of Okayama lUniversity in autopsy roomii of Commnilit-
nications Departmenit Hospital at Hiroshima. (Bunka-Sha photograph.)
80
t"oluttie 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hirosliuta Mledical Diar), 1915 L
Two views of damage by landslide at the OIno Hospital, near Hiroshima which
occurred shortly after 10 p.m..on Septemiiber 17, 1945 during, a typhoon. Here were
lost ten scientists from the Kyoto Imperial University, includinig Professors Mashita
anid Sugiyama. The survivors wrote: "WNith much regret, we, therefore, had to stop
our work in Hiroshima and return with the ashes of our friends."
81
LIEBOWC)5
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
ON BOARD
SS GENERAL STURGIS
28 August 1945
MIEMIORANDUMI:
TO: Brigadier General Guy Denit
SUBJECT: Study of Casualty Producing Effects of Atomlic Bonmbs.
1. A stu(ly of the effects of the two atomiiic bombs usecl in Japlan is of vital
imliortance to our country. This uniqlue oplortunity may not again be offeredI until
anotlher worl(d X-ar. Plans for recordling all of the available data therefore shlouldk
receive first priority. A study of the casualty producing effects of thcse bombs is
a funiction of the Medical Department and(l this imiemorand(luml is prepare(l as .a
brief outlinie for such a study.
2. The nieecl for study at the earliest (late possible.
The casualty producing effects of these bomibs shoul(d be stu(lie(l at the
earliest possible mioment for the following reasonis:
a. Much of the dlata Imlust be obtaine(d froml the interrogatioll of the
survivors anl(i the soonler this is accomplished the imlore accurate w\ill be thIe
results.
b. l'ost-miortemii examiiniationi of the deald may provide valuable informlia-
tion as to the cause of (leatlh. Three weeks or more will have elapsed anld
opportunity for post-iolrtemn examiniation will be limite(d to late (leatlhs
amonig the survivors. It is hoped that soImle post-ImlorteIml exaiminiatioins Imlay
have been dlone by the Japanese andl that these recor(ds may be amplified by
early interrogation of the Japanese pathologists.
c. Accurate case histories by interrogations of the injure( mayvprovide
the mlost reliable data. These should also le correlated with th ]physical
findinigs anid the necessary laboratory examiniationls.
d. Residual radiation effects have been suggeste(d as a possible source of
daniger and while this appears to be remlote, suclh a possihility should lie
investigated at the earliest possible date.
3. The scope of the study.
The total number of casualties reportedI at Hiroshlimila is al)l)roximately
160,000 of whoim 8,000 are dead. Even though (lue allowance is mla(le for in-
accuracies in these estiimates the scope of the problem is suclh as to re(uire the
organizationi of teamiis with intterpreters in ordler to complete an adequate study
withinl a reasonable time limiit. These tcaimis slhould include pathologists anid
cliniciains wxorking under the direction of trained investigators.
4. The data \vhiclh should be obtaine(l.
It is recogniizedl that any plan for the collectioni of data slhould be mo(lified
according to the circumstainces. The following suggestionls are intell(led to in(licate
the miniimuIm rathier thani the maximilunm data required to properly evaluate the
casualty producing effects of these bombs.
a. The location of all casualties living and dead should be (leteriiliied in
relation to the bomb anlIplotted oII a contour map.
b. All living casualties should be identified by number for location on the
map) and an exact description of the case kept in a cross index file. Stanidard
82
f'oliiiiie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshliima Medical Diary, 1945 L
diagniostic nomeniclature should be used. Such a procedure is necessary in
order to determinle the differenit casualty producinig zonies.
c. The positioin or protectioni of all casualties should be determinied
sinice this may be a determiniing factor in blast effects aind burns. (Standinlg,
sitting, prone, inidoors, outdoors, in shelters, trenches or behind(I walls etc.)
d. Consideration should also be given to such factors as conitour, tem-
lerature, w7ind and humidity in relation to casualties. It is unlikely that the
latter factors will be of much inifluenice but contour may be of conlsiderable
imp)ortance.
e. Evidence of blast effect should be searched for in both the pathology
ali(d in the clinical history. X-ray evidenice of lunig pathology may be helpful.
f. Burins slhould be carefully observed as to degree and clharacter, part of
the body inivolved, rate of healinig, cause of death, etc.
g. All casualties should be recorded as to whether they were due to
primary effects of the bomb or were seconidary to burninig buildinigs, flyrinig
debris or falling walls etc.
h. Evidence of residual radiatioin effects. WVhile there is little ilndication
that such inijury will be found it should nevertheless receive serious coni-
sideration.
i. Complete post-mortem examiniatioin should be performed oIn all inijured
in whom the cause of death is not clearly established.
j. It is hoped that the Japainese may have already organized anl iilvesti-
gationi of the casualties but this is unlikely under the circumstanices. How-
ever much valuable data may be obtained from interrogationi of Japanese
doctors and pathologists. Also data valuable from a niegative standpoint
may be obtainied from uniinjured survivors who were within the daniger zonIe.
5. It should be emplhasized that since the cffects of atomic bombs are unikniowni,
the data should be collected by investigators who are alert to the possibility of
death and injury due to as yet unknown causes.
6. It is recommeinded:
a. That in view of the importanice of the data to be obtainied anid in view
of the magniitude of the problem that a committee be appoinited by the Chief
Surgeoni to survey the possibilities of obtainiing data and to direct the
collectioin of the data needed to properly evaluate the casualty producinig
effect of the atomic bombs.
b. That the various aspects of the investigation of the casualty producing
effects of the atomic bomb be correlated through the Office of the Chief
Surgeoni.
A. WV. OUGHTERSON
Colonel, 'Medical Corps
After the GHQ group landed in Japan on September 1, 1945, it was
learned that various groups of Japanese scientists had already conducted
medical investigations on the patients in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Contact
was established with the Japanese government on September 3, and there-
after reports were received and liaison maintained through the GHQ
Surgeon's Office.
83
LIEB3OW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
At about this timle a groulp frolm the 'Manhattan District," the organiza-
tion that carried the responsibility for developing the atomiiic bomb, arrived
in Japani. Its Imlission1 was to coInduict a b)ricf p)relinmiinary study of the effects
for ai inmmediate report to Washillngtoll. Tihe miiajor funlctioni was to deter-
m1inie \vhctlher there wsas resi(duial radioactivity in ordler to safegtuard our
Professor Tsuzuki's card.
troops. This group, unlder commliianid of Brigadier General Thomiias Farrell,
was self-containied, with its own air transportation andl equipment. In
charge of the medical section was Colonel Stafford L. \V;arren, wlhose
civilian positiol was that of Professor of Radiology at the University of
Rochester, well-knowyn to Doctor Oughterson from civilian life. On Sep--
ten1ber 4, 1945 a conferenice was held with General Farrell and the senior-
medical officers, and it was agreed that it was desirable to unify the
informiiation to be obtained and to produce a joint medical report. General
Farrell's group landed on Iwakuni airfield near Hiroshima and made a
prelim-ninary survey of physical damage and of casualties in various lhospitals
and clinics. After the physicists had confirmed that only mninimlal radio-
84
Voluitie 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
activity, well within the limits of safety, was present, the group returned
to Tokyo some ten days later. Parenthetically, it is of interest that one
localized but intense focus of radioactivity was found in the ashes of one
of the crematories but this was traced to a radium source that had been
used for treating a uterine tumor.
It was obvious that for an intensive medical study the cooperation of the
Japanese, who had already made all of the clinical and laboratory obser-
vations during the height of the early phase, was essential. Professor Masao
Tsuzuki, the Head of the Department of Surgery of the Tokyo Imperial
University and Director of the Medical Division of the Japanese Research
Council, was contacted. He agreed to enlist the full cooperation of Japanese
medical scientists. As a result, the Supreme Commander directed the forma-
tion of a "Joint Commission for the Investigation of the Medical Effects
of the Atomic Bomb in Japan." This was to include the Mantattan District
group while still in Japan; a GHQ study group, still to be organized, which
was to perform a more definitive medical study; and the Japanese Govern-
ment Group under Professor Tsuzuki. Later, on September 25, there
arrived a medical investigating team of U.S. Navy personnel (Nav Tech
Jap, Team 11) under Commander Shields Warren, M.C. This was com-
posed of 15 officers and enlisted men who were assigned to Nagasaki. With
their arrival, it was obvious that duplication or conflict of effort would be
ridiculous and the Navy group then worked as part of the Joint Commission
in fuil cooperation with the U.S. Army and Japanese componenlts in
Nagasaki. Doctor Oughterson proceeded at once to organize the GHQ
group and to issue orders for designated personnel. It was on September
18, 1945, when the orders reached Saipan, that this daily record was begun.
3. PREPARATIONS
Tuesday, September 18, 1945: At 08:05 on this steaming hot Tuesday
morning received news verbally from the Adjutant that I might be leaving
"all over the Pacific." The somewhat garbled message had also stated that
either Rosenbaum or Rosenberg were to be alerted to go along at once on
the same expedition. Rumors were flying. We thought that most likely we
would be sent to Japan-maybe to participate in medical work on the
atomic bomb-but we hardly dared to think of it. Tension was high. Late in
the morning a radio message was received by Jack Bumstead that con-
firmed our conjecture. Japan was to be the destination. It was Rosenbaum
who was to go. Instructions were to take along two experienced laboratory
technicians. Orders would be cut as soon as they were named. Picked
Archambault and Reed who seemed delighted. Called on C.G. and said,
85
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
"Guess wlhere I'm going." "To Japani I suppose." "That's right." There
was disappointmiienit but also excitement in her voice. I immediately began
to coml)lete the few autopsy protocols and other laboratory business
remiiaininig and started to pack.
Orders for imimiediate dleparttire arrive(d about 3:30 p.m. It wvas necessary
to transfer all of the laboratory property to Captain Bornstein, wlho had
been assignecI as an addlitional pathologist some weeks before. He signed
for $90,000 worth, with uncderstandable reluctance. Hastily packed belong-
ings were thrown into a stationi wagon. Quick, and painiful, leave takinigs
were accomlplished but the arrival at the airport at 7 :00 p.m. proved useless,
silnce the last I)lane for Gutaml had left at 3:00 p.m. \We had hoped to go oln
somiie uinscheduiledI flight. The nlext planle was (lue to depart at 08:30 the
next nmorninog. \e retturneid to the 39th General Hospital, leaving all of ouir
belongings in the stationi wagon for early departure. At abouit 2:00 a.m11.
came a call fromli AMajor TarlnowN-er on Guam wN-ho ha(l gotteni conflusintg
orders which w-ere soon1 pUt arighlt since his name was unmllistakably
inscribee(l witlh iiine oni the orders.
* * *
Jack I). Rosenbaum lhad comiie overseas w-itlh the Yale U-nit, leaving hlis
position as Instruictor in Medicine. He was a brilliant stuidenlt of Dr. john
P'. 1'eters wvith special interest in mletabolismii, and hlaLd servedI as officer
in charge of the chemical laboratorv. Arthuir H. Rosenberg, who was inI
charge of serology, had worked at the U.S. Public Healtlh Service V-enereal
Disease Researclh Laboratory on Staten- Island. The original ra(lio mlessa(ge
was unclear as to hlo wNas to be assigned. Sgts. J-ohli Archambault andl
Jack Reed were both stuperb teclhlnicianis anld bears for x-ork. Archambatih
had been a pharmacist in Fairfield, Conniectictut aln(d Ree(d lhad been worlkin1g
toward ani advanced(lderee in enitomlology at Rtitoers. I was inot suire that
they wouldI be happy witlh ani extensioni of duty- at a timie when a returl-ni
lhomiie was immiiiinlenit. Coinfidenice in these meni l)rox-ed miiore tlhani justified,
since both performed far beyond the call of (ltity throuighout tllcir touir in
capan.
* * *
.Scptcu;ibcr 19: Arrived( at airl)ort at 8 :00 a.m. and was told( that all sesats
oln the l)lanle were taken. Outr orclers clearly indicate(l tirgencv how\-e\ver,
and places w-ere tlherefore miia(le available. Landled at 9 :20 a.m-. oni Guami.
Immedliately miiadle arrangements witl the Nav-al Air Transport Service
for (ld)arture to Japani oni the first available flight, sclhe(duiled to leave at
10:00 p.m. that night. ?lhi.s left ani enitire day free. Conitacte(d Dr. Harry
Zimimiilerimlin, my form11er teacher in pathology at Yale, who was statiolne(
86
Volzittie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshliima Medical Diary, 1945 L
with the Rockefeller Institute unit wlhiclh I had visited several Neeks before
during the penicillin crisis. It was a well-spent day. Case records and cul-
tures fromii our paratyphoid epidemic were turned over to Dr. J. T.
Syverton. Saw Dr. Norman Stoll and demonstrated our Isosporea hionlisis
pictures in which he had expressed an interest durinig my previous visit.
After lunclh wevet to the native hospital at Agana Nith Dr. (Conlimanider)
Sulzberger who had become interested in cutaneotus diphtheria after I had
described otur lonig experienice with it, botlh in our troops aind amiiong thle
natives, dturing our previotus visit. At the hospital we smiieared and cultured
what to me looked like diphtheritic ulcers in a number of natives. The
(leimionstratioin of bacilli in the smears proved completely successful, much
to Dr. Sulzberger anid Syverton's surprise. I then wvas brought to a nleetilg
at the 204th General Hospital that was beinlg condtucted by the patlhology
service. Dr. Humilplhries very kindly took me under his w-ing. After the
miieeting and a good stupper, was driven to the airport where a C54 NATS
aircraft No. 56494 w\as waiting for us. \We reported to the desk at 9 :00 p.m.
and boarde(d the planie at 9:40. The take-off was exactly as sclheduile(d at
10:00 p.m.
* * *
The Rockefeller Ulnit, unider the comlmlilanid of Dr. ( Captain) Tlhollmas M.
Rivers, 1MI.C., U.S.N.R., served a research and conistultative ftunction, and(i
Was superbly staffed. Dr. Zimmiiermnan had been an Associate Professor in
the pathology departmient at Yale while I was in ny residency. Dr. Normclan
Stoll Nas a parasitologist of the Rockefeller Inlstituite at Princetoni, anid
Dr. AMarion B. Sulzberger a renowned dermatologist fromll New York.
A prev\iotus visit, miiade on August 23 and for the next few days, was
precipitated byT ca progblem involving penicillin therapy. \We becamiie aw\are
of the dliffictulty at onice, miiore or less by accident. I had been doingc a stud(yN-
with Dr. Max Taffel of the penetration of peniicillini inito spinal fltidl in
craniocerelbral injurv. One day we found that the apparent blood anld spinal
fluidI levels had fallen to approximately one eighth of what they had been
before on the samiie scheduile of treatmelnt. At thlat timiie wX-e thoughllt that the
streptococcuis that had been carefully trcansported fromii otur previous station
in Newv Zealand as a standard for testillg penicillin levels had aone awry,
altlhotugh wNe hadl kept standard cultures in storage. Oni investigcatioll wse
foundicl that a new batch of penicillin had been put into tuse in the lhospital
oni the clay the old miiaterial became otutdated, as or(lered. When wxe
tested the ouitdatedI penicillinl it was fotind to be fully potent while the
"fresh' batclhes were not. We therefore received permission at olnce from
the islanid sturgeoni to use the otitdatedI mlaterial, after it had been tested for
37
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 38, October, 1965
Col. Verne R. Mason
Maj. Milton L. Kramer
Prof. Kanshi Sassa
:f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cap. Jac ,,.,,,,,,,.,Ros...Enbau
88
Hitoshtitmia Medical Diarv, 19-15 LIEBOAV
...~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~
Col). 'Geor-e \reaclh LeRoy
Sgt.iJcP.Re
Pro Maah Mak
-g Joh * chmbu
--:* : ~ ~ 8
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 38, October, 1965
A-
Col. Elbert De Coursey
Rki-
l.
faj. Samuel Berg
Commander Shields B'arren
3B....-
*s> t - wosa::;
.. :o
::. ..: ::.. .::.
...:.....}-::::s:o $
-
--
-Ma;. Hermall Tarnourer
90
Hiroshimla Medical Diaryj, 1945 | LIEBOW
potency. This local decision was against general policy, but it was surely
wise and it miay have been lifesaving. \We at .hlis timiie also asked for
tranisportationl to the Rockefeller nnit on1 Guaml to test both our standard
streptococcus and the various batches of lellicillin. The laboratory there
quickly confirmed our results.
The paratyphoid epidemic which interested Dr. Syverton had occurred
iii an engineering unit on Saipan amiiong 65 miien, somiie of wlhomlihad shot
onie of the w-ild pigs on the island and barbecued it in a pit. Those hlo ate
the pork on the first day remained w-ell, but most of those who had eaten
the unrefrigerated imieat on the second day became ill, and two died. Many
miore undoubtedly would have succumbed had lnot all available plhysicianls
beeni imiobilized at the 369th Station Hospital to care for the patieints (luriong
the acute emergency. The problem was largely one of fluid replacemiient
therapy. After the critical first 36 hours the survivors began to recover,
but had a court miiartial awNaiting themii on discharge, sinice eating native
food had been strictly proscribed by the Commlllandinig Gelneral. Doctor
Syverton had reqtuested the cultures for study anid they w-ere thenl delixered
im perso1i.
* * *
S.eptcJilbcr- 20: The l)lane, although stripped for freiglht tranisport, had
tlhree ceintral reclinincg seats witlh canvas backs, one of which I was inivited
to use. After a smootlh flight we landed at Iwo jilima at 2 :00 a.m. A three-
qluarter mlooi was shinilng and the night wx-as wonderfully wsarm and clear.
WNre had a spectacular view of iMount Suribachi as we came in. The flattened
top loomied over the enid of the air field. The island is a dtusty desert covered
witlh ratlher heavy browni cinders. There are a few gniarledlanid twx-isted
trees. The impression is qtuite like that of a disheveled Camiip Stoniemanl.
Orion, which w-e had not seen for almost tlhree years, again clearly rides
the sky near the horizoni. W\e soughlt a middle-of-tlhe-night snack and( founld
it after mtuclh wanidering about the airport. Then boarded the plane for
anotlher snatch of sleep and anwoke on take-off at 6 :30 a.m. The w-eatlher was
xvondlerfullv clear all the w\ay ul). Photographed Iwo receding ilnto tlle
distanice anid also somle of the Volcano Islanids to the nortlh.
* * *
The w-eather on our trip to Tokyo had been perfection itself all the way.
Yet w-e x-ere to the south and east of a typhoon that was devastating
Okinawa and lashlinig central Japani. This wxas to have some repercussions
for otur miissoion, since we learned later that color film N-hich was sent to us
had been damuaged in that stormi on Okinawa. Also Hiroshimila itself suffered
91
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
severely. The city was flooded and numerous landslides interrupted rail
traffic. Most tragic of all was the landslide that killed the scientists from
the University of Kyoto at the Ono Hospital.
ITEM:
NIPPON TIMES
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1945
TYPHOON HITS FOOD CROPS
Kyushu, Shikoku Rice Affected Vegetable Farms Inundated
The typhoon which swept over the western part of Japan late Monday after-
noon, caused considerable damage in Kyushu and Shikoku districts. After raging
over Chugoku district and areas along the Japan Sea, the storm, said to be the
most violent this year, was expected to pass over the northern districts and
into the Pacific late Tuesday night.
Most hard hit were various districts in Kyushu and Shikoku where rice blos-
soms were just in bloom, and it is feared in these areas that this will have had
effects on this year's rice crop. Inundations, it is also reported, caused damage
to the growth of various vegetables.
Hitting Kagoshima in Kyushu about 2 P.M. Monday, the typhoon swept over
the neighborhood of Hiroshima at 10 P.M. the same day and passed into the
Japan Sea via the Sanin district. At 10 A.M. Tuesday, the typhoon landed in the
vicinity of Niigata, prevoiusly crossing over Noto Peninsula, and then headed for
the north.
In the Tokyo area a strong wind began to blow at dawn Tuesday with a
velocity of 18.3 meters a second which at its height registered 29.8 meters and
an atmospheric pressure of 743.7 millimeters. As a result, damage done was very
slight. For a time the tramcar service in the suburbs was suspended but was
restored to normal during Tuesday.
* * *
We had our first sight of the mainland of Japan at about 9:30 Tokyo
time. There was an electrical almost crackling thrill of excitement as we
stood against the windows on the port side of the aircraft to regard and
photograph the land that had so disordered our lives. We could see the
white line of the breakers pounding a promontory and the dark hills beyond.
Many of the villages were intact and looked peaceful enough nestling in the
valleys with the terraced rice paddies rising above them, tier on tier. But
many of the coastal towns were devastated and the shells of houses and
often merely their outlines, were visible. Masses of rubble appeared to have
been tidily piled to clear the roads. The countryside looked clean, green,
and inviting. In harbors along the coast there were some land based mock-
ups of battle ships obviously designed to deceive. Our course took us over
Yokohama. As we flew over Tokyo Bay we sighted ships of the U.S. fleet,
92
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
Upper. Iwo Jima, Mt. Suribachi shortly after dawn, September 19, 1945.
Middle. Iwo Jima receding, on the way to Japan.
Lower. Landfall, Japan, 9:30 a.m., September 19, 1945.
93
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Uppci-. Approachlitig Kiserazu Airfield.
lliddlc. 'U.S. ships of the liine in Tokyo Bay seeni from TBMI oni the vay to
Yokosuka.
Lowcr. Approachi ng N_okosuka.
94
J'ollittie 38, October, 1965
H-iroshliima Medical Diary, 1945 L
flags flving. At 10:15 a.m. wN-e touched down at Kiserazu Airfield. We had
lhoped to arrive at Atsugi but were told that MacArthtur wotuld permit only
Armny planes to laInd there and that Kiseraztu w-as the termiinal for NATS.
\Ne were miiet by a YounIg Navy lieuteinant wN-ho helped Uts with arrangements
to call GHQ in Tokyo. The effort was entirely in vain. \Ve knew that we
were across the bay fromii Tokvo. The lieutenianit told us that the distance by
land was about 90 miles and that he had no miiotor transportationi to get us
there. \Ve could get to Tokyo by train btit the traiins wvere still under
Japaniese conitrol aId were said to be crowded beyond capacity witlh the
citizenry whose animilus towsard us we could not jtudge. I had no stomaclh
for takinig this plunge, wrhat with the initerrtupted sleel) of the niglht before
anid the additionial burden of our luggage. \Ve tlheni decided that ve would
make anotlher attempt to call Army headquarters later and(l busied ourselves
with inspecting Kiseraztu. Jack Rosenbauim said the lplace was aptly namiied.
The field had been lbol)bed and remniiianits of Japanese lplalles were still
scattere(l al)out in (lisorder. japanese gtll emiiplacellmenits and dtlgotits ha(l
leen left exactly as tlhey were. At wxater's edge we saw l)eople gathering
utssels peacefll}v fromii the foul-smiielling water. Oln the field there wsere
tlhree hlite plalnes of the DC-3 type miiarked withlgreeln crosses. These wN-ere
said to have flown the Japanese peace envoys. The ilnteriors wvere well
fitted-out w-itl)plish seats, but in comiplete disarray. 'Many printed and
lhand-written (locumiiienits wvere scattered about in the aisles. I saved a fews as
souivenirs. Tlheni retturnied to makce another atteml)t to ring Tokyo agailn
without stuccess. After somiie coffee anid fturther talk with the sympathetic
flight officer, le stiggested that he could have tus flown in TBM's to
Xokostika Airfiekl onl the great islanid naval base off Yokohama now
tuiider occupation 1y otur Navy anid 'Marines. This wotild at least bring us
to the proper si(le of the bay and 60 miles closer to Tokyo. I hald no clear
idea of what a TMAI was, but agreed wsith enthusiasm. These tturned out
to l)e sin,gle-enginied torpedo bomibers (Martin) which, whlile not designed
for tranisport duty, (1o very Nell in a pinch. Luggage is put into the bomb
l)ay. One passeniger rides in the gunner's seat behind the pilot and the other
in the seconid otiliner's blister below. Two planies were assigned. Col. LeRoy
aiicl I rode in the first anid iMaj. Tarnower andl Sogt. Reed in the seconld.
A party consisting of Capt. Rosenbatim an(l Sgt. Archamlbauilt was left
behind, to be dlelivere(l to Yokosuka as sooni as onie of the first plaines
retturnied.
The flight to Yokosuka occupied only a few miiiinuttes and wve w-ere soon
retunited in a hutge hanigar that was a miiadlhotuse of activity. At flight coni-
trol, which Nas uniider commlnlalnd of Marine Aviation, mlet Marine MIajor
95
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
White who said he didn't like the Army but would nevertheless fly us to
Tachikawa airfield in TBM's if we didn't mind riding pick-a-back. He said
that although MacArthur had closed Atsugi to the Navy, Tachikawa might
still be open to "the enemy"-at least he had no orders to the contrary.
We then quickly flung our luggage into the bomb bays with admonitions
to the jovial pilots to keep them closed until we were at least over land.
I rode behind the pilot in the gunner's seat and Capt. Rosenbaum rode in
the blister below. I'he view was magnificent. The ride was rather a thrill
since our pilot suggested that we might like to see the Japanese fleet close-
up on the way. He swooped low over the ships, many of which appeared
to be dummies with wooden superstructure and mocked-up guns. Others
looked to be of the first-line fleet but seemed largely deserted. We touched
down at about 3:15 p.m. and the pilots hastily roared off to Yokohama
before too many explanations of their possibly illegal presence could be
demanded. Tachikawa was apparently a secondary airport. Many of the
hangars had been blasted but others were still quite intact. Innumerable
of our C47 and C46 planes were all over the field.
Our efforts to telephone the Chief Surgeon at Tokyo again were com-
pletely unsuccessful as the lines were still not in continuous working order.
After explaining our mission we were very kindly assisted by Lieut. Flook
and Sgt. Bowen. They assigned us a station wagon and we were on our
way to Tokyo, only 20 miles away. Tachikawa itself showed very little
damage except for what we were told was the Mitsubishi airplane factory,
which had been badly smashed. The countryside on the way to the capital
itself was lush and beautiful. The road had long straight stretches with
very few crossings.
Along the streets in the villages and even on the main road people can be
seen dragging carts hugely piled with all sorts of goods and belongings
including some apparently newly made boxes. Trade is obviously already
beginning to revive. There are also many trucks with smoking, smelly,
vertical wood burners mounted at the rear in substitution for the gasoline
tank. Many are stalled since we are told that they require cooling, stoking,
and cleaning at frequent intervals. Along the way are innumerable children
who smile and give the V-for-victory sign. The grown women smile wanly;
adult men are impassive but show no sign of hostility. As we entered the
outskirts of Tokyo itself the horrible residues of fire and destruction were
everywhere. Block after block had been flattened and only tall chimneys
and a few concrete structures were standing. The streets had been cleared
and rubble had been piled as neatly as possible out of the way of traffic.
Only in the central portion of the city and the immediate vicinity of the
96
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
Emperor's Palace was there a concentration of relatively intact buildings.
One of the most imposing of these was the headquarters of the U.S. Armed
Forces. It was a many-columned marble structure, formerly a life insurance
center called the Dai Ichi building. General MacArthur's five-star black
limousine stood parked in front. Tall white-helmeted military police were
on guard at the entrance. Shortly before 5:00 p.m. we met the Surgeon,
GHQ, Advanced, Colonel Bruce Webster, on leave from Cornell, who said
that he had been expecting us, seemed not too surprised at the difficulties of
communication with Tachikawa and was in every way cordial. At his
suggestion we presented our orders at the NYK building. Our enlisted men
were assigned to quarters in the "Finance Building," a huge hollow square
of massive gray stone where they were registered at the Headquarters of
the Second Battalion First Cavalry Division. I was assigned a room at the
Dai Ichi Hotel, roughly a mile from headquarters. This was a massive
white-brick cubical structure with a tall chimney from which issued quan-
tities of black smoke suggesting warmth and comfort. It stood in the midst
of a devastated area stark against the elevated railway tracks and we noted
that trains were running, all overflowing with people. I silently gave thanks
that I had not chosen this method of entering Tokyo. Colonels and ranks to
major were assigned to this hotel. I called Lieut. Kaiser at the Com-
mandant's office and was able by special dispensation to obtain quarters
with the rest of us for Capt. Rosenbaum.
Elevators at the Dai Ichi were running perfectly and the atmosphere was
that of a comfortable commercial hotel. The rooms were more than ade-
quate, many supplied with private baths. Each had a very short and narrow
bath tub lined by clean, small, rough yellow tiles. On each floor was an
open office filled with affable but evidently poorly nourished young Japanese
men eager to take laundry and perform all services. The first supper at the
Dai Ichi could hardly be believed, after almost two years on Saipan. Food
was actually served by charming Japanese ladies in colorful kimonos-the
womenfolk of the men who would gladly have killed us little over a month
before.
just at the end of supper who should appear but Col. (Scotty) Oughter-
son in complete battle dress, looking healthy and happy to see us. He told
us he had just come from Hiroshima and had seen that city as well as
Nagasaki with members of the Manhattan District survey team that had
been sent from Washington. They had made a preliminary survey of
damage, residual radiation, and medical effects. Scotty's old friend, Stafford
Warren, was with the group. He had been in charge of the medical depart-
97
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
orF[RFv
hi~~giI I ...
Uppcr. The Dai Ichi Hotel in Tokyo, September 1945. \V:elcomiiig smoke belchies
fronm the chiliiminey. Although imiainy of the surrounidiing buildinigs are rubble, this
structure is intact.
Lozwcr. View from room in the Dai Ichi Hotel, at dusk. On a clear evening tile
silihouette of Fujiyama 80 miles away can be clearly seen.
98
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshlimsla Mledical Diary, 1945 L
miient of the Manhattan District through the Nvar. \Vrarren s grotup would
brief us at the earliest opportunity.
After dinner had a long talk with Scotty. Now for the first time we
heard what our own mission was to be: the definitive study of the casualties,
the collection of old data and mnaterials, the determiniation of factors of
distance and protection, and the preparation of a report on the medical
effects of the atomic bomb). Bothi cities were to be investigated. I asked what
help and equipment we would have. The reply was that we would be
divided inlto two teams and that Col. Verne Mason would be senior miedical
officer at Hiroshlimna and Col. Elbert DeCoursey at Nagasaki. MIy assign-
ment would be at Hiroshimna and George LeRoy would be with DeCoursey.
\V;e theni decided that Rosenbaumn would stay with me as he lhad throughout
the war and that TarnowN-er w-ould be with LeRoy. A few more American
miiedical officers were on the wvay, but mllost of our associates would be
Japanese investigators aand physicians wlhose help Scotty had enlisted
tlhrouglh the Jalpanese government. Dr. Tsuzuki would make the arrange-
menits. He was Professor of Surgery at the Tokyo Imperial Unixversity and
lhad beenl ani Admiral in the IMedical Corps of the Japanese Navy. Scotty
said that Dr. Tsuzuki was also a dlirector of the medical divisioii of the
Japaanese Researclh Council ancd had the best possible contacts throughout
the country. In reply to mny question, Scotty said that despite the formnalities
of "purging' of formier Japanese military personnel Dr. Tstuzuki was of
suclh stature that he expected no difficulties.
As for equipmiient, the answ-er was simple-there just was nonle and we
would have to get it ourselves from Americaln hospitals and sllips and on
loan from the Japanese institutions. \We were at once to mlake up a list of
what would be needed for the study. Scotty then showed me a copy of his
memorandutm to General Denit which outlined his plans as he first con-
ceive(l themii. Tlhen to bed full of w-orries, but lulled by Neariness an(l the
sound of whlIistling trainis, and for the first time in malny years the ruimble
of a city.
* * *
Colonel V"erne R. Mason had been one of the senior medical consultants
in the Pacific theatre. He w-as a graduate of Johlls Hopkins who had prac-
ticed in Hollywvood for many years aud had had a nutmber of famnous movie
stars and other HollywoodI personalities amonig his patients. Colonel Elbert
DeCoursey, M.C., anl outstaniding pathologist later to become a Major
General and Director of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, was the
only regular officer to be assigned to the group. He hiad been laboratory
constultant in the Pacific theatre. I hlad met both men on Saipan in the early
99
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
spring of 1945 and was greatly pleased at the opportunity of being
associated with them.
* * *
Septemiiber 21: To the Chief Surgeon's office at the Headquarters Build-
iug early in the imorning where we miiet Captain Nolan of the Manhattan
District, a tall and very affable young miian Nho gave us some preliminary
details concerninig Hiroshimlla. MIost interesting was the fact that now at
Tokyo convalescing from an illness was a 'Major Motohashi who knew the
fate of troops that had been stationed at certain definite places in Hiroshimna
at the timle of the explosion. Obviously he was a miian with wh-Ilomn to become
acquainited. According to Captain Nolan, the Americans had been using
Geiger counters and other detection equipmiient and had found no significant
residual radiationi. Apparently almiiost all of the radioactive miiaterials were
blown highl into the stratosphere and were replaced by air fromii the sides.
However, it had rainied twice after the catastrophe. Most of the patients thlat
had been withiln 1,000 yards had died. \Iany had multiple petechial hemor-
rhages and injury to the bowNel.
While in the Surgeon's office, I was given a mimeographed report fromii
one of the Japaniese commllllissionls that had been to Hiroshima to study the
bomb effects. This report was entitled "Physiological Effects of Atomic
Bombing of Hiroshimiia" and had been translated by G2 (Intelligence
Service). The subscript described the report as "Full Translation of Hand-
w-ritten Carbon-Copied 'Reports 1 and 2 by Squad Investigating Atomic
Bombing of Hiroshima,' Issuing activity not stated, dated 1-2 Sept. 1945."
This report w-as a systematic accounit nine pages long of patients treated in
the Ujina Branch Hospital, which had been opened on August 25 wlheln 500
patienits were received. It classified patients as those who had suffered burns
and those wX-ho had not. The former, when inlthe zone of radiation injury,
lhad a inmuclh worse prognosis than unburned patients. 'IThe latter had devel-
oped alopecia at the tentli day and then after August 20, fourteen days
after the explosion, fever, hemorrhages, and diarrhea. Leukopenia was also
dlocumilenited. The clinical descriptions were by -Major -Motohashi. Surgical
notes w-ere by Professor Tsuztuki and Ishikawa. Tlhere w-as also a descrip-
tioni of autopsied patients by Dr. AM. 'Miyake, listed as Assistant Instructor
in Pathology at the Tokyo Imperial University. Amoong the treatments
listed w-as autotransfusion of 20 parts of blood and two parts of citrate
injected intramituscularly into the thigh. The report also contained a map
show-ing the center of the explosion and the location of a number of the
patienits included in this study. The translation lhad been wN-ell dlone by
laymnien but contailned a few bizarre sentences such as, "The red corptuscles
100
T'ollittie 38, October, 1965
1lit-osliitnza Medical Dia ry, 1915 L
slhowed sio-ns of multiple dyes'" whliclh, tranislated from Englisli inito mnedical
terininolliogy. 1 presumed to ml-eain "polvchromiatophilia."
* * *
ILater informiiationi disclosed that this j apanese mle(lical report was the
first version of a very muticli loniger report p)roduced by personniel of the
Tok-yo First -Military Hospital and the Tokyo Imperial tlniversity, whicl
was issned mnltclh later. The finial report comibined not only these early
observations, w-hiclh were sutbsequently commnniitiicate(d to the Amiiericai
mllembllgers of the joilnt Commlission, but also observations miiade (ltrin(g the
operation of the Joint Commllllission in Hiroshlilmla. This final report first was
issued in mimileograplhed formii and by several years after my retnrn was
undergoing deteriorationi. One copy was tlherefore lamiiiniated for preserva-
tionl in the Yale i\Iedical LibrarY.
* * *
Later that morniing in the Surgeon's office at Headquarters mlet Professor
Tsuzuki, the Professor of Surgery at the Tokyo Imperial tUniversity whoml
Scotty had mienitionied previously. He was a tall, impressive, digniified gentle-
man, obviously a commlilaniding presence. His use of English was perfect
and it wN-as soonl revealed that he had studied oncology and radiation therapy
at thle University of Pennsylvania in the 20's. Doctor Tsuzuki was fully
al)prised of the purposes of our mllissionl and was in complete symupathy wvith
the necessity of performinig a complete medical study. He stated that both
superior mledical personnel and skilled students would be supplied as teaims
to lhelp in the wsork. The University of Kyushu near Nagasaki was to pro-
'ide similar help to the group that was to be quartered there. I mentioned
the need of equipment and materials. W\Ve agreed that a list must be made up
at once and that w-e should meet the Japanese who would be working with
us on the next morning to discuss what would be needed for the actual
mission. Colonel Oughterson invited Professor Tsuzuki to supper with us
that evening. In the meantime we were to make an expedition to tap
Amiierican sources for as mlluch of the necessary equipment and materials
as we could obtain.
Spent the rest of the mlorning at work with George LeRoy and Jack
Rosenbatimi preparing an equipmlent list. In the early afternoon drove with
Oughterson and LeRoy the thirty miles to Yokohama and the Eighth Army
Headquarters where the office of the Eleventh Corps Surgeon was located.
A broad highway connects Tokyo and Yokohama. It is still rough and
pock-marked with poorly repaired bomb craters. Traffic is heavy anid
slow. Along the side are the inevitable hand-drawn carts. Numiierous of the
101
LIEBONVY
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
lumbering wood-burning Japanese vehicles weave in and out and frequently
become stalled. There is much impatient military traffic, chiefly of heavy
trucks. What must have been numerous houses and factories and banks
have been thoroughly pulverized and there is now a stark plain from which
rise the chimneys of houses and factories. Often these are intact, suggesting
that fire rather than blast had destroyed the buildings. Most grotesque
are rusted bank vaults still standing stolidly on heavy foundations. Yoko-
hama itself has also suffered much, but some of the major buildings are
still standing.
At the Surgeon's office every help was promised us. However, we were
informed that medical supplies were extremely scarce and that they were
not due to arrive for quite a long time. We then talked with Major Partridge
to whom we supplied a complete list of the most important materials that
were desired. He at once brought this over to the warehouse of the 29th
Medical Depot Company for search. Then "home" to the Dai Ichi Hotel.
Professor Tsuzuki arrived promptly at 6:00 for supper, which was
had, after a little whiskey, in Colonel Oughterson's room. Colonel George
LeRoy was there. At this time various gifts were received by Scotty in-
cluding a wonderful cypress wood Daruma statue. This represents a
priest belonging to the sect of Zen whose chief occupation was thinking. I
thought the gift appropriate. The talk is largely on the cooperative nature
of the venture and the types of studies to be undertaken. Doctor Tsuzuki
said that there were still many patients in the hospitals representing the
more serious cases of aplastic anemia from radiation injury and that these
required detailed study. Japanese investigations were still proceeding. Many
of these had been begun weeks previously. We would try to consolidate
all of the information from these various groups as well as ourselves
carry on a direct study of survivors, both in the hospitals and clinics.
Doctor Tsuzuki promised to have prepared listings of all hospitals and
investigating teams that had records and materials, and assured us that
everything would be made available to us for a joint report. As for our own
work, systematic records would have to be kept. We would need to design
a standard record form which would include not only clinical and laboratory
data but also information on factors in protection such as shielding, cloth-
ing, etc. We agreed that duplicate records would be kept and the forms
prepared both in English and Japanese. Doctors Oughterson and Tsuzuki
promised to design a record form and submit it to us and others of the
group before it was finally duplicated. For record keeping a map would
also be needed, circled to indicate various distances from the hypocenter
and also divided into sectors. These would assure that patients from all
parts of the city were represented. A properly designed survey would
102
Voluine 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
rS
Upper. Tokyo Imperial University in 1945.
Lower. The Institute of Pathology at the Tokyo Imperial University.
indicate whether the effects were symmetrically distributed. Doctor Tsuzuki
said he could find some good maps and Scotty thought that our map
service could make the overprints and reproduce as many copies as were
required. Doctor Tsuzuki stated that the "Japanese young doctors" who
were to work with us had already been selected and were on call. We
agreed that we would meet with them at Tokyo University in the office
of the Dean of the Medical School tomorrow morning at 9:30.
The evening was a pleasant one, and I received the impression that we
were dealing with a highly able and intelligent man of honor.
* * *
This impression was abundantly confirmed in all of our relationships
subsequently. Professor Tsuzuki was also a man of spirit and was quietly
103
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Uppcr. Left to right: Dr. Ishii, who was of the greatest help in the pathology
studies in Japian, with assistants Ebato and Shimamiinie. The latter performed much
of the histological work in Hiroshima.
Lower. Members of the Joint Commission. Fronit row, Drs. Hatano, Murachi and
Nakao; rear, Drs. Kato and Kakliehi. The late Dr. Murachi was a brillianlt biophysicist
to whom is owed miluchi of the w-ork on the shieldinig studies.
104
l'oliiiiie 338, Oclober., 1965
Hiroshlimfla Medical Diarv, 1945 1 LIEBOWV
confident that his country would regain its stattns. One evening. mlvany eeks
after we had arrived at Hiroshimila, in a lecture on burns attended by somle
of the Americans and therefore given in English, he said: "Unfortunately
my studies oni burns were interrupted by the end of the war, but my son
will carry themii on." Twenty years later his sonl, Dr. Masakazu Tsuizutki
was indeed studying cardiovascular surgery at the Tokyo University undeler
Prof. Seiji Kimoto.
* * *
Septeniber 22, 1945: On this, a Satturdlay mlorning, we miiet for the first
time the groupl) of lapaniese physicians andl investigators who had been
sumiimoned by Professor Tsuzuiki, the meni to assist tus in the atomlic bombl)
investigationi. I was amlazedl that they couldl be gathered withil the brief
span of timle since our (lisctussioln of the previous evening. It left little
dooubt regarding his power an(l influence.
The scene in the large conference rooml at the University was unlfor-
gettable. At the large T-shaped table coverel with a dark-green cloth were
places for the senior Americans and Japaniese. Against the back of the
oak-paneled chamber, rigid and expressionless, almost immobile, there sat
in rows on straight-backed chairs the flow-er of the younger mledical talent
in Japan. Tea was served. Introdcuctionls were formal, andl somewhat
strained. Few of the Japaniese could speak English w\ith the polished
accuracy anid fluency of Doctor Tsuztuki ancd somiie knew only a fexv
words, but could commuiinicate well x-ith those of us who spoke German
or French. Amiiong the mlost imlpressive of the senior mlen was Pro-
fessor Sassa, the head of one of the university medical (lepartments, a
mlanl well-trained in physiology who had worked in London with Starling,
and Dean Tamiya of the Medical School, a bacteriologist. Imlpressive also
were Doctor Yoshikawa, a chemiiist and Professor -Miyake who had just
been miade Professor of Pathology, a towering, graceful, man with a
grave, aristocratic manner whose second language vas French.
Colonel Oughterson made a little speech in which he emuphasized that
the war was over, and that in any event science was nonipolitical. He
sai(l that physicians and inivestigators ha(l a loyalty to science, and that
the needs of mlankind wotuld be wvell-served by a thorough and informe(d
study of radiation effects; that the study could obviously not be performed
by us without help, not only because of the language barrier, but because
we needed the highly skilled medical scientists for which Japan was
famous. Finally he stressed that the work would be truly a joint effort,
that we would expect the full cooperation of the Japanese in obtaining
complete infornmation, but that it would never be our intent to rob them
105
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
RESTRICTED
GENERAL HEAD;ARTERS
UNITED STATES ARMY FORCES, PACIFIC
AG 210.455 AGPD
119
AGPD-A
Advance Eohelon
APO 500
22'Sop 1945
SUBJECT: Order.
TO Off & EM concerned, orgns indicated.
Fol-named offrr EM now on DS Advance Ech, this hq, w
Hiroshima, Nagasr,?k and such eth. r .-.;aces adjaoont thereto as
may be necessary on TI;Y for the p.:c):ue ofcrrying out
instructions. Off & 'ii are aut.h te between Hiroshima and
Nagasaki at such times as may be rnec6ncary in the acoomplish-
ment of their mission. Upon cr.mplA.L. ret tiis sta. Tvl by
mil acft is dir for accomplishment o:C an emarg war mission.
Govt mtr and water transportation au'..-. Personal baggage not
to exceed 50 pcunde auth each of,i'c Ei.I whi.l traveling by air,
Provisions of par 26, AR 35-4820, 19 Apr 45 apply. Per diem
auth each EMI while arayvling by .Lcft in accordance with Sea I,
AR 35-4810, 19 Apr 45, Use o- Tzvt qc and messing faoilities
enroute by EL is mandatory. G.C-< * P'452-0O2 A 212/60425.
'JLT COL
LT COL
MAJOR
ICAPT
/ T Sgt
Teo 3
AVERILL A. LIEBOW
GECRGE V. LeROY
HERMAN TARNOWER
JACK D. ROSENBAUM
John P. Reed
John J. Arclaambault
046'zr=9 MC
04l1336 MC
0482b55 M
04031X' i.;
310O)'j8,q%'
7.1- -P5220
Z.9th c
374th
39t>t0.0
ttL
C
30th C
By command of General MacARTHUR:
ME
Asst I
DISTRIBUTION
:Off & EM concerned (5 eal
Chief Surgeon, Adv Ech (1)
00 39th Gen Hospital, APO 244 (1)
CO 304th Gen Hospital, hPO 1058 (1)
Fisoal off, AFWESPAC, APO 707 (1)
Dir LR Div, AGO (1)
Dir Contl Br (2)
AG GH4 (8)
AG Rear !ch (1)
AG-Records (7)
AG-PE (1)
Hq Cordt, Adv Ech (1)
Gen Hospital, APO 244
Gen Hospital, APO 1O5
Gen Hospital, APO 247
Gen Hospital, APO 2"
Gea Hospital, APO 244
Gen Hospital, liPO 244
. W. BOLL
ajor, A.G.D.
Adjutant General
RESTRICTED
Orders to carry out imiissionI at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
106
Tloltittie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
of the fruits of their thought and work in publication. Dr. Tsuzuki trans-
lated these remarks as they were spoken. He then replied in like spirit in
English and Japanese and gave assurance that the best men would be
available, that they would work and help unstintingly and that they would
withhold nothing-in accordance with the expressed wishes of the Emperor.
He expressed the hope also that this effort would be a first step in re-
storing to normalcy scientific relationships between our nations.
As we later mingled with our colleagues-to-be they seemed very intel-
ligent, alert, active, and eager to begin. If there were fears and reservations,
these were not difficult to understand, and were in any event well-hidden
by the quiet formality and reserve of the meeting.
We then went to the Pathology Department which had a large building
of its own. Here cups of Japanese tea were again served. This was,
although unsweetened, sweetish with medicinal overtones, of a pale yellow-
green color, altogether warming and cheering. It definitely helped to
introduce and smooth conversation. At this time the plans for dividing
available young men into Hiroshima and Nagasaki groups for the path-
ological aspects of the study were discussed and a tentative arrangement
was arrived at. We discussed what equipment would be needed. Professor
Miyake also told us of what pathological materials had already been brought
to Tokyo and said that he would give full cooperation in their further
study.
Immediately after luncheon Colonel LeRoy and I made another arduous
trip on the crowded road through the devastated landscape to Yokohama
where we found, much to our terrible dismay, that almost none of the
equipment or materials that we had requested through Major Partridge
were available, except for some nonspecialized bulk items in classes 7 and 9.
We made a list of these for requisitioning by Colonel Webster. Then, by
accident, we heard that an abandoned Japanese laboratory was housed in
the very building where Lieutenant General Eichelberger had his head-
quarters, and that there was another several houses away on the same
street. We went at once to the building and found a remarkable picture
of wanton destruction. The laboratory had apparently been used for an-
alyzing fish meal and similar materials and contained large quantities of
bottled chemicals. Many of the labels were in Japanese and unintelligible
to us. An abundance of glassware was present, which was of enormous help
to our spirits. Then home after an extremely rough ride over the crater-
pocked roads. Stopped in Colonel Webster's office and obtained from him
a requisition for the items in stock at the 29th Depot.
In the evening had a hot bath, a good supper, and then made a search
for Sgts. Reed and Archambault. However, neither was to be found. I left
107
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
a note for themii informiinig themii of progress. The w-alk back across the
long dark alleys was ghostly w-ith the skeletal hulks of buildings lining
darkened streets and hundreds of burned-out cars lying about in confusion.
Founld Col. Oughtersoin and told him of our discouragemiient in locating
equipment. I showed him the long list of things that we required wlhiclh
wtere listed as nonavailable at the medlical supply depot. There were only a
few glilmmiiiers of hope in that according to 'Major Partridge mlaterials
vere dailv comiiing off the ships at Yokohama. LeRoy and I were plalnning
to retuirn there tomorrow and would( check further on this poilnt. Scotty
adlmitted that he was suprised that medical material w-as in suclh short
supply, although after all, Ne had been in the country in force for not more
thani two weeks. He had alreadly incquired about equipmiient at the 42ndI
General Hospital which had opened a short timle ago in Tokyo. They
couldl spare nothinig and were able only to beg a few items themiiselves
fromii the hospital ship "AMarigold" w-hich was in the area. He w-ould(
obtain a list of other hospitals and their locations fronm the Surgeon's
office anid would senid various members of our group to forage. He sail
also that we coul( always be sent what we neededI after we aot (lown to
our laboratories anid that hospitals w-ould undoubtedly be opening up in
southern Honshu near us. MAly reply w-as that it w-ould be muclh better
to have everything in hand so that we could start work at once on what
would probably be a dNindling patient populationi.
One bright spot after a (lishearteninig day was the arrival of Colonels
DeCoursey and Mason wsho were bubbling with enthusiasmii. They said
that they had been worried about us since several military planles hadl been
lost in the typhoon- of 17-19 September. \We assure(l theml that wve wvere
in the clear smiling sunshine to the sotutlh and east. DeCoursey was re-
assuring about our supply troubles, saying that he knew that plenty of
everything was on the way.
Septemilbcr 23: Set out again for Yokohamiia bright ancd early by truck
with George LeRoy. W\Ve first went to the warehouse with our official
requisition to obtain the supplies that were said to be in stock. These
included: 50 gallons of DDT; 10 hand sprayers; 48 Freon aerosol insec-
ticide bombs; 24 mosquito bed nets; 10,000 multivitamin capsules; a milass
of housekeeping supplies such as soap, Brillo, etc.
* * *
We had every intention of keeping well w-hile in Japan. \Ve had no
clear idea of the circumstances under which we might be living and
therefore determined to come well-prepared. WNe were concerned about
Japanese type B encephalitis, but acttually found mosquitoes as well as flies
108
f'oltitiie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshimtia Medical Diary, 1945 W
A -A
Si rc;o m r w drc t
Scribblings listing possible sources of materiel, with directions.
109
LIF.BOW
I
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
to be scarce hy the timle N-e arrived in Hiroshimlla. The multivitamin pills
were to be used as "treatment" for patients in the clinics, since we had
been advised by our Japanese colleagues that custom required the physician
to give every patient some type of treatlmient after examining him. Actually
the fee is considered paymlent for the treatment, not for the diagnosis.
The vitamin pills w-ere good-looking, would be entirely acceptable to the
patients, and could certainly do them no harm-i. WVe found, however, that
they caused us one problem since somiie patients thought they Nere endowed
with miiagical properties anid therefore camiie to the clinics mlore than once,
thereby introducing a slight bias into our survey procedtures.
* * *
Theni on advice of Maj. Partridge to the warehouse of the 268th Qtiarter-
miiaster Battalion w-hich w-as located after a little difficulty. No officers ill
authority w-ere present. Crates of supplies were continually arriving by
truck fromii the docks. \We founld a tractable sergeant who w-as directilng
the work. We told himii of our mllissionl and of our desperate need. He
said that mllost of the crates contained mixed goods and that the only
way to tell what was in themii w-as to read the manifests. MIost of the
material destined for the hospital conisisted of sponiges, urinals, and the
like. Somiie of the crates, however, amiiong other things, containied some
laboratory supplies. Those that w-e designated wx-ere cheerfully opened
on the spot and the required materials identified and laid aside. The
procedure w-as somiiewhat irregular, but everything was considered ex-
pendable and our sergeant seemiied not to have a wN-orry in the Norld as
long as we signed for what wN-e took. We told the sergeant to keep a
sharp eve out for mlicroscopes, centrifuges, and other miiajor itemiis and
we would be back in a few days. We wNere graciously invited to lunch at
the wsarehouse-a lunich which conisisted of a large square of Nell-prepared
"luncheon meat" in a blanket of scrambled eggs. This was a illuch tastier
meal thani the "Spain" that had been our lot in many of our island exper-
iences previously.
Then off to raid the laboratory that we had inspected on the previous
day after obtaining a large quantity of packing miiaterial fromii the quarter-
mlaster. Things were then rapidly loaded onto a truck wsith the aid of our
very cooperative driver. A Nonderful spirit of helpfulness Nas displayed by
all with wlhomii w-e cainie in contact and there was practically no red tape.
A disturbing ex)erience wx-as the hunit for a balance that wN-e had noted
on the preceding day in the headquarters buildinig. After a thorough search,
this Nas discovered in anotlher roomiwhere it had been moved since the
preceding (lay. \Ve considered ours to be the prior claimii and in the absence
110
T'oluttie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima illedical Diariv, 1915 | LIEBONV
of dissension made off with it. Then a long, cold, and bumapy ride back to
Tokyo and on to the University, which we found after much difficulty in
the dark. Here, in the Pathology Department, wve dumped all of the
miiaterial that wse had acquired. There wN-as considerable excitement at our
haul. The Japanese wvere especially interested in the DDT and the aerosol
cans.
After a hot bath, an additional wsarminig wsas had over some Canadian
Club and everybody wA-as in high fettle. Later there Nas a meeting in Col.
Oughlterson's room all hands present including Capt. Nolan. There was
niltclh winid and little turning of the mill was accomplished until Ne got
dow-n to the serious business of discussing details of the record formls
N-hiclh Dr. Oughterson had roughed out. His considerable experience with
abbreviated records in the Connecticut Tumor Registry, of which he w-as
one of the founders, had stood us in good stead. It Nas well-designed and
occupied only two sides of a single sheet. Names were to be recorded in
botlh Japanese and English. All locations were to be by zone number of
the mllaps that had been designated and were in preparation. Some am-
biguities were clarified after argumnent. \Ve agreed finally that in the short
formii certain rules of thuml)b wrould have to be followed; for example, dates
of onset and cessation of sigIns anid symptoms w-ould have to be inserted
wherever possible. The fornm stressed radiation injury and factors in
protection. WTe realized that there miglht be some difficulty in distinguishinig
flash burns fromn flamne burns. Presumably Dr. Tsuzuki's group N-as making
a simlilar critique. Scotty also reported that the miaps were to be ready in
a day or twso and presented us witlh the list that wTe needed of hospitals
in the area. \Ve agreed with enthusiasmi- to mlake excursions to these in
search of additional supplies. Since I w-as plainining another trip to Yoko-
hamiia in a few days, I picked the M\1arine General Hospital at the Yokosuka
Naval base and the 161st Station Hospital.
* * *
\V;'hein these records wsere designed, we did not sufficiently realize the
diffictllties of identifying persons by their recorded names in Japanese.
Siince alternatives are available, transcription is especially difficult. We
erred also in Inot recording the original home address of the persons as an
additional means of identification. As the records were being analyzed,
some imiisunderstandings came to light with respect to "epilation," since
in soImie instances no distinction was made between epilation resulting from
radiation effect and that resulting from burns. This in large part was
more a difficulty of the examining physician in comImIunicating with the
patients than it was a fault in the design of the records. Similar problems
111
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
.sTCV>- B2.B 27:.I'- -- ;2'..; C.'
1. iae ~,ge r 2'uat`:on or rank
2. T ocation. I. en in r-'cd c"ct . by z nuanzb 2r)
3. ?Dri7ar, Injury b3-p B3r.b u rn 3? aSt RaJ, aton
,. 2ec_rndary Injur,, h: Burning, Buildinf,g ICIyfnr Debris rallinC -7alls etc.
5. ro,-ct4on C &(a tIkC-)
a. -DS,t C.n: ,f,t i;l.w,rr
b. lndc'ors: I; Br- cl; h ldnE, .-aneesa -auiliing
2-ve-_d ab .r _o2cro ,e A. t.ri
c ('utdoors: in ^,TjO''l 3al.iilc ;.all Ir trench"I jehind trce,post etc.
d. Clothing 1ILph,a r
e. Any other nr-'tccti-n , *
. 'ere oth,-r. nreso nt- re t n r-l
7. Burns: Dogroc-l.t 2nc; 3rd . ea,rpccnt .,art
0. (,adLat-or.n ffects: ';
Sy. rtBic OcanJr.ds . .. inf ,
.--.d
i_u ota
, ca 2! LOO ?(s
Cr_______________ ~.-. 2r .orc rrhaee
SPEcs 4ilaticrn 9"* YI" jg -r'bros: B.ard
si"'o:tea '?.+cdDark-Brown.
:ed CitoitaliaE
/ .~b'3ruutc ir . a- ,- Chortimst otor cWIL
,~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~g a_<-
~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~ _Y
/ "hIre. indicotocd mal,e sno-)cial ncr.tion. of 31hiold:inj from ga-.T-'a rays:
9. 3last ffacts: *i Le
ee
4e,~~O
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 1
Front face of record form used by joint Commission. \Vritten in are original notes
used as basis for discussion wxith Japaniese miembers.
112
f'olume 38, October, 1965
JUSF!I? TSKIHI
ath1zI
&SHO(ATEM)
IDSNI BAUDMA 3AIGAI 7&A JIK
TT'TAT, HO n ! S7I 3!rJKTGYf "TAra KATKIff
'AING'.!SiA KO:OqW
C TZU NINTCW TAIBATGO
1. BAsKUGEKI TOJI NO IDOKCTRO
2. SAIGAIIN. IGHIJISEI; P t.C31 A, N&.J'JA,FF-A.
PIJ SI; RA.SMi. GA r ici.
3. B'&IJTrAT
b. sVKj ,T ^ iI ,I, 'T.DI '.r;'I:0 .-IGI ,US1IRO HIIARI)
a. OIKUNAlt(NA'Nt!r D..;T' NO N.RE:'J)XON:RIT1E2EtIL MOKUZ3 CIOUSAn
'V&T'...'. K:-GE.
d. OKUGAI:AsITHO,.T.:. V1. K;,G?I.
e. -BAKUPJ.WO 8-iC.''.K'(xo RIT0,vTO,OIUZ,RBGA SO NO T..)
f.',Bt.O:-CTTIJ5 W2.Ti CtIli'.,OI,T.-,UuPI,riDi.U2TTO,Ki .)
g. 1WNO(SRuTRUI,TAsIT, IRO)
h. BONOTA mElI(B6S!II ,TTSrU V.KO,TfMXtRO)
KTNPM T'.NIN NO UWI
N3SSH'sThIDO I
HN NI"I
7. GUSTO.ST1ITI TlIDO
8. TOJI NO J&AI,B.B"0I
MNOM KI&;.U(TOS-FI OYO?I BTEI)
9. SONO GO NO S0IOflI,wI,TST
o.l.TSa
e. MO
g. GU1I
i. SN0Tr,b >ERI3
J, SHO.'CUS!I
1. M ;wTjL'rU8r
SCo lo ICEIX.
T3UTCUM QYOPI SUIX.&.,
b. nlT&I
d. E: Y IK
f. HI.!'LITAIM
h. KMIR3N
k. .Y'l'Au
YI'SU.: BUI T3IlO(fI.'3TO) SA:RUI(T'N, ..N, D'l)
HIMRt IAXl;I o II"=MJII'IV.;',I
SUzm-O , T=S-PEX,'3TSUNO,SONOA.
m. KUI.IEN IGIN3N.Er!GMTSIT.
Japanese record form used by Joint Commission.
4.
S.
6.
SONO HIGI.J
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
were encountered with reference to hemorrhages, since some of these
were traumatic or associated with disease unrelated to radiation. Human
frailties involved in filling out questionnaires and records were revealed
when some 35 instances were discovered of what were thought to be
duplications in over 6,000 cases. The congruence of recorded facts, even
as to dress, was far from perfect. Yet in general most of the major facts,
although recorded by different observers, seemed to have been accurately
stated and furnished a basis for confidence.
* * *
It was already considerably into the next day when the meeting broke
up. In my room, I opened an "acipak," the soldiers' comforter, and found
some cigarettes, fine for small gifts and tipping, some hard chocolate,
which was the object of my hungry search, and some shaving equipment.
September 24: On the way out to the University, went in search of
our sergeants, since we wanted their help in packing our plunder. Found
them and learned that they had been visiting the Nikko shrine some
90 miles away! They were among the first Americans to be there since
the war. During the morning, major decisions on the disposition of the
Japanese physicians were made. Drs. Tsuzuki and Nakao and our senior
people considered the list of 25 whom we had met several days before in
terms of specialties so that we would have a reasonably good distribution
of talent for the two cities. On advice of the Japanese, who thought the
load of work would be greater in Hiroshima and said that Nagasaki had
a well-established group of Japanese physicians at the Navy Hospital, 14
were tentatively assigned to Hiroshima and 11 to Nagasaki. I marked the
names of those assigned to Hiroshima with an "H" on my list. Dr. Nakao
also wanted to be part of the Hiroshima group since he had been studying
a collection of bone-marrow slides and peripheral blood from patients there
collected by the team from the Tokyo First Military Hospital and Medical
School and the Tokyo Imperial University. The Hiroshima group also
was to include Dr. Murachi, a biophysicist who had done some of the
earliest measurements of residual radiation and other physical effects.
* * *
Dr. Kiku Nakao was a charming young Assistant Professor in Dr.
Sassa's clinic who proved to be a brilliant hematologist. He made numerous
major contributions to the work and to our happy collaboration during
our stay in Japan. After the war he held an investigatorship at the
Argonne National Laboratory in Chicago and spent a pleasant few days
with us in New Haven. Later he became Professor of Medicine at the
Tokyo National University.
114
Volume 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
a. w.r'oubls Pelo1qXtto. ur. hsuM fttholog
3. r. TIhii PSthltW7
so or .
6. Dr. .aftra W flobt
7. Lt. KMabo.a Xintmo LeIns,d SpLvehaeis
i. Dre. KitatoH Intoal odlolnj, 'ebbVU1
Pe Dr. TlUImd In trnal od eIns#
CllnlOal twlog
10. Dr. ..Isk&loto Intornal e4d1*1ne,
11. a. o Internal -odLe1no,
U. Lt. Thm.lo, .WPtDtl_4 1M3 1rmTor&;w
Me Dr. YY a
14 1. J r
D6. %i. a
11. 1W. Jws16. Dr. Jaj1tanl '1
19. U. 0taae NIla20. I*. Usma1 DrtdlowE. Dr. Oqsh N 9Ml , ebtetrl
30. -r. _ dltiatrLes
33. Di. u_diwo Ot.uh_ _wyg1
54. Dr. 0h1
35. Dr. ti Sotwu
X: ~ ~ ~ Xdg
First list of "Japanese younig doctors" supplied to Joiint Comillissioni. Those desig-
nated by H were assigined to Hiroshima. A few chainges were madle later.
The remainder of the morniing was spent in identifying materials that
Nere still needed for our work with our Japanese colleagues. They were
quite willing to designate centrifuges, ovens, staining jars, and other
glassware, chemical solutions and stains fronm the various laboratories
of the University. Also suggested that each unit take along some of the
useful reference books. These were gathered together from various personal
libraries. Many are pirated U.S. texts reproduced photographically. There
wvere both volumes of Peters and Van Slyke. Made a mental note to bring
a pirated edition back to Jack Peters. Especially admired is the German
hematology by Rohr. This wvill be an interesting companion to my WNlintrobe
which I had carried in my luggage from Saipan. These were gathered
together and the remainder of the morning was spent in packing, using
the materials that we had brought up from Yokohama.
115
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
I1-omiie for luniclh alndI then returnied to the University in the afternloonl
to continuiie the work. For the first timiie found timle to go oIn a shoppilng
tour. \We had passed what looke(1 like a print shop on our trips to the
University. I went on foot and founld some strikinig prints in the Sakai
slhol). Thlere were somue fine o0( l)rints on rice paper amiiong dozens that
were availclable. Selected some aminiig Utamaros and others.
Late in the evening Scotty appeared anid anniiouniced that he had arrainged
for airp)lanie tralnsportation for equipmiienit anid personniel, incluidinig the
Japaniese. Aln estimiiate of the weight of the miaterials was to be miiade
and the personnel were to be specified. The necessary number of planes
would le assigine(d as sooni as wse had the informiationi. WVe are apparently
fortunlate that the Air Force has very little to do at this juncture with its
hluge nutmber of mleni and ships and they promise to cooperate fully wN-ithi Us.
SCptciiub)cr 25: \Valked to the Surgeoni's office after breakfast but founld
no furtlher crvstallization of plans. \Was delighted to find that the mlaps
were ready. The Hiroshimla map was Japanese and had all of the important
features mlarked both in Japaniese and in the Latin alphabet. The circles
around the hVpocenter were made at intervals corresponding to 500 meters
for the first 3,000 and at 1,000 for two more rings beyond. These w-ere
intercepted by radii drawni fromi the hvpocenter. In this way 25 zones were
delineated. Thousanids of the record forms had also been mimileograplhed
anld were brought w\ith the miaps to the University where the packing
was beinig coml)leted. Since the preceding afternoon and during the morn-
ing various little prizes were brought in by members of the team Nho had
visited the various hospitals. Tlhese, together with the Japanese contri-
btution, gave us the rtidimiients of two laboratories and equipped us also
for a little clinical work. Practically all of the major items of laboratory
equipmeint were from the Tokyo University. Packing of what was there Nas
completed toward the end of the morning. Spirits had clearly risen
when the work was done.
After 'unch again took the opportunity wvith Jack Rosenbaum of
explorinig Tokyo on foot. The city was very crowded and our soldiers were
everywhere. WValked much of the length of the Ginza in the central district.
Althouglh there had been bomb damage, many of the buildings seemed
intact and some were already under repair. Some of the rubble in the
central district was being cleared by our engineers with bulldozers and
other heavy equipml-ent. Great crowds were standing by, gazing in amaze-
mient at monsters such as they had never seen. Our men seemed to be
enjoying being the center of attention and gave some virtuoso perform-
ances. Shops along the Ginza were filled with all sorts of goods. WVe
116
Volume 3S, October, I965
Hiroshimta Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
I I IIIMap of Hiroshima supplied by Prof. Tsuzuki with overprinit by U.S. Army map
service to designate ring zones and sectors. This was used by the Joint Commission
for the survey work. The darker rings are drawn at 1,COO-meter intervals about the
hypocenter. The military encampmetnt is the pale area wvithin the ininermost ring.
117
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
fotundl the Mikimoto jewelry store was groaning with the l)eautiful artificial
pearls. The mlost interesting sight however were the carts which lined
the curbs. These vere ftull of all sorts of interesting mass-produced cheap
trinkets stuch as cigarette lighters, but also produce and a few handcrafted
things. Bookstores were full of recently printed magazines, pamphlets, and
books. They Nere crowded and the crowds included some curious G.I.'s
browsing. The better stores are particularly jammed with soldiers and
Japanese minigled in friendly confusion. We found a large department
store, conmparable to ouir best, Takashimaya, where I bought a lovely
painted silk screen and lacquier plate.
Oin returninlg to the Dai Ichi was told that a Navy commilainder had flown
a seaplane to Hiroshimlla. He landed in the harbor, which was hazardotus
since it was still mined, but was able to taxi in and explore the city.
He reported that there was extensive damiiage fromii the typhoon of Sep-
temiiber 17 andl 18 and that the airfield was flooded and would make landing
there impossible for somiie timiie. Also rail traffic was blocked by land-
slides. On this discouraging note went to bed.
Septemiiber 26: Called first at the Surgeon's office to see about develop-
ments but found nothing exciting. There met Lieut. Col. James Frenclh,
a pathologist from Dr. \Weller's Department at Ann Arbor. He had been
given the assignment of miiaking a survey of Japanese laboratories and
had done considerable traveling about the country. He joined Ime in the
drive to Yokohama in the truck which I had ordered in order to coln-
tinue the next stage of the foraging expe(litionl. and partictularly to check
oIn our good sergeant anil any equipmieint that he might have sequesteredI
for tus. Oni the way down, French told mle about sonme priests who hadl
been in Hiroshimlla and who were in the Catholic Hospital in Tokyo.
Their condition was said to be poor. Thouglht it wsould be interesting to
visit themii if timle alloNed, anid obtained directions to the hospital froml
Frelnclh. I liote(d that a strong centrifugal movenment of our troops
appearecl to be taking place from Yokohamiia and that even the Quarter-
miiaster I)epot was about to be miioved. No really tuseful laboratory itemiis
had turnie(d up in the nlew consignmenits. I did, hoNever, pick up 45 cases
of Ten-inl-I rations and 13 cases of K field rations. This was authlorize(d
by MIajor Prentice oni the basis of "30 miien for 20 days." \Ve w-ouldl at
least have a good foodI supply to start with. Also, to my pleasure, foundel
Ninter fieldl clothinlg available and bouglht a new pair of field shoes and a
fine Eisenhower jacket whiclh I had not seen before in the Pacific. Drove
oni to the Marine General Hospital at the Yokosuka Base but came away
empty-han(le(l, despite a pleasant receptioni. The 161st Station Hospital,
118
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshlimna Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
however, was able to spare us syringes and needles, and to nmy surprise, an
autopsy kit.
On the way back in the open cab of the truck, I was rather chilled and
in the afternoon took a miiuch-needed nap. \VNTas awakened by Col.
Oughterson in mid-afternoon who said that the Nagasaki group was to
leave tomorrow. I was charged with the responsibility of attending to the
loading to take place at the University in the morning. \VNas also inforulle(d
that during Prof. Tsuzuki's absence, Prof. Sassa would be the cliief
liaison officer with the Japanese group, and that Dr. Nakao of his depart-
Imieint would be his aide.
Septemnber 27: At a very early hotur went directly to the University.
The trucks lumbered up shortly thereafter. The equipnment which had been
designated for Nagasaki was checked off as it was loaded into the trucks.
Iilnuilnerable Japanese physicians and younger students, together with their
anxiotus fanlilies, were Illilling about. To add to the difficulty, Sgt. Archanl-
bault, who wvas to go to the airport with the Japanese and to coiltilue on
to Nagasaki, was not to be found for some time. Finally lie arrived. He
ha(i been delayed in what he called a "bread line" in the Finance Build-
ing in Iiis efforts to check out and could not get away. All of the personnel
was finally gotten aboard the trucks with firm instructions froill the senior
meillmbers of their party inot to move until the roll wvas called. This was
finially acilieved and the caravan was safely off.
Checked in at lheadquarters and received nothing but discouraging words
on prospects for getting the Hiroshima section off and away. Then returlled
to the Ulniversity to find Dr. Ishii, the pathologist sclieduled to go Nith
us to Hiroshima. He appeared tired, sad-faced, anld unislilaveni and was
dressed in the remnants of a thinl niilitary uniforill alcd sandals. We
discussed ill halting Germian and Englishl further plans for tile pathology
study. Conversation was especially difficult because of the japainese custonm
of replying affirmatively to all questions even thougih the sense of the
answer is intended to be negative, for examllple "Yes,-it is inot so." He
told, ille, to nmy great pleasure, that he liad some protocols alid iliaterials
already in liand. I replied that I would look forward to reviewN-ing the
illaterials witi himil and to translatilig the protocols. I expressed especially
1lly desire to liave a cotIllpeteIltly staffed aild equipped histology laboratory
so that we could cut and staiin any old blocks, and prepare the new cases
as they becaille available at Hirosllillla. After a diffictult anld lengthy dis-
ctlssionl, I was not quite certain that I hlad been fully understood, alld I
was especially disturbed by the fact that hle nevrer sIlliled, inor did lie have
the affability of ilmost of Ihis colleagues.
119
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Dear Mr. Liebow.
I am very sorry tu say,but there is one matter I want to
;ask you.
I have lost my posts, a- y;u know,Institute of Jap.Cancer
:Reserch was burnt,St.Lukes Hospital,where I was working as
a director of laboratory,is now used by Allied Force,so I
can get incomes from nowhere. I am now looking for my jab
as a doctor everyday,but its rather difficult to find it soon.
',:y father ana my wife of my bosom were died at the bigining
of this year und my two young children are left behind,so
I must support them.. Unfortunately I have suffered from
bombdamage two times,all my havings were burnt out and now
I aa confronted by' crisis if everydayliving under such a
terrible inflation nowadays.
is there any way to find suitable workplace such as L'ccupatian-
armyhospital,ir if Anot,usual orffice:
I am indifferent about the sort ;f works, but I hope Job of
laboratorywork at hospital an technician or translation.
..ould you call at every likely place,if you please,though
my vocabulary is very poor,and I am afraid I could not be
employede
I want 500 or 6C0 Yen monthly if possible.
Yours Sincerely
Letter from Doctor Zeniichiro Ishii, delivered December 15, 1945, after returninlg to
Tokyo from his service with the Joint Commission at Hiroshima, which explains
his situation.
120
Voluitte 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima MlIedical Diary, 1915 LIEBOXV
* * *
The reason for Dr. Ishii's apparent reluictance to becomle friendly with
Amlericanis became evident dutrinig the next few days w-henl I gingerly
iniquire(l of others about his apparen1t depression. The best answ-er camlle
imutich later froml himllself in a letter that he wrote in December after we lhad
completed the Nork in Hiroshlilmla and retturned to Tokyo.
Despite his personal tragedy, Dr. Ishii gradually became a firml friend,
and miy later experienices x-ith himi in traveling and working together remlain
amlonig the mlost cherisedI memelories of my assignment in Japan.
* * *
Later, in conversatioin w-ith Dr. Nakao in the hematology laboratory,
there was nmuch miiore rapport alnd a preliminary review of well-staine(d
and well-interpreted henmatology slides was enjoyed. This was the first
contact wvith actuial material fromii patients at Hiroshima and I foundl
it most exciting. The mlarrows, mostly obtained fronm patienits three to fouir
weeks after the bombing, shoNwed essenitially the findings of aplastic anemiiia.
\Ve discussed the interpretationi of certain cells and( agreed that they were
atypical derivatives of reticuloendothelial cells resenmbling plasmiia cells and
that the designation "plasmacytoid" w-as appropriate. Dr. Nakao promlised
to organize this material and to make the clinical records available. This
would keep us well-occupied and wN-ould also represent an actual start
on the work of transcription onto the Joint Comnmission forms that were
now ready.
In the early afternoon back to the hotel. Was asked to translate a re-
markable document at the requiest of Col. Stafford \Varren. This was an
eye-witness account of the explosion and of the city and people in the
days immediately following, written in German by a Father Siemes wlho
had been a Jesuit priest living in the hills of Nagatstuka, some three miles
from1 Hiroshima. It told in detail of the rescue of four of his brethren
who had been injure(d in the city during the explosion. I read the story
spellbound and horrified. By late afternoon mlost of the translating had
been done. It was (lictated to a remarkably skillful sergeant of General
Farrell's Manhattan D)istrict Group wlho typed the tranislationi directly
as it was spoken.
* * *
This stirring, beautifully ad(I modlestly written description records Father
Siemes' impressionis as he w-itnessed the tragedy from his room1 at the
Novitiate of the Society of Jesus. This group of Jesuits had been evacuated
to Nagatsuka from Tokyo some six months previously. It is a detailed
account of the flight of survivors from the city and of the involvemlent of the
121
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
priests, onie of Nhomll lhad sttudied inwedicinie, in the work of rescue. Father
Superior LaSalle and three other brothers had been in the central miiission
and parish house in the city at the miiomenit of the explosion. They were
brought to Asano Park along with miianiy others. Twvo of the brothers had
only miiinor injuries but were comiipletely exlhausted. One of these was
Father Kleinsorge, w-ho lhad been miientioned by Col. Frenclh, and wholl
I met later in Tokyo. Father Kleinsorge was lnot able to walk and was
left behinld to be brotught out oIn the following day. The priests miinisteredl
to imiany other people anid brought 50 of themii to the monastery for care.
As Father Siemiies put it: "Ouir wN-ork Nas, in the eyes of the people, a
greater boost for Christianity thani all otur efforts dturinig the preceding
long years." Onie of the mllost fascitnating aspects of this accounlit is the
philosoplhical conisiderationi of all warfare, anid specifically of the tuse of
this wveapon: "It seemiis logical to uis that lhe ho stupports total war in
principle canniiot complain of a wsar against civilians." Remllarkable also is
hiis statemiienit of the attittude of the p)eople: "None of uts in those days
lheard a single outburst again-st the Amiiericanis on the part of the Japanese,
nior was there any} evidence of a v-enigeftul spirit. Tlle japanlese suiffered
this terrible blow as plart of the forttunies of war somethin-g to be borne
without coml)laint."
Fatlher Siemiies' accotunit became a imiajor soturce of material for J]olhn
Hersey's imiasterftul ]Hiroshlimua, anid it wvas pnlulished in ftll, ini my
impromptu tranislatiol, in Tlle Satiorday Revicz several years later. This
I fear dlid less thani ftull jtustice to the style, excitemiient, anid(I literary
merit of the orliginal Germani.
* * *
A delightful talk and drinik before supper in the chambers of Col.
Oughltersoni. In the late evening took occasioni to write letters homiie anid
to C.G. an-id to read descriptionis of the initricacies of the Iapalnese drama:
Nob, Kabuki. etc. Theni tired, but happy, to bed.
Scptcm1bcr 28, 1945: First thinig in the mlorninig wve wvere greeted by
newv arrivals, including- Philil) Loge, formerly a Yale mledlical studelnt
whliolmi I hadl tauglht. HAe is eager to transfer inlto the Hiroshimlla group
and this is finally arranged. M\ajor Milton Kranmer of New York has
also beeni assignied, as has a laboratory mani, iIajor Samiiuel Berg, a
wvorried bachelor muLiclh concernied about who is to take responsibility,
especially in working with the Japaniese. He ruslhes about tryillg to obtain
additional supp)lies, but by the end of the day his success tunfortuniately
is inimiliial. Captain Calvin Koch. a pleasanit keen-lookinig youngster, joins
uIs later. These are our long-awaited reinforcemiients.
122
Volume 38, Octobet-, 1965
Hiroshima AMedical Diarn, 1945 LIEBOW
Later in the miiorning also miiet Captain Paul 0. Hageman, a formier col-
league on the House Staff at the New Haveni Hospital, and Lieutenant
Col. Hymer Friedell fromii Western Reserve and the Manhattan Project.
Col. Friedell gave us a lecture on radiatioln plhenomena. This dealt with
elemen-tary princil)les anid definiitions. This wN-as a w-ell-presenited and useful
review for all lhanids since none of tus could qualify as ani expert in
radiationi biology. Of partictular imiiportanice wsas his implicationi that radia-
tioni injury in these cities cotuld be conisidered essentially gammlla ray
effect like that of lhard X-rays. There may have been miinior exceptiolls.
Neuttronis traveled far eniotuglh to reaclh the grotunid, but only in a smiiall area
benieatlh the explosioni. Indulticed radioactivity x-as therefore niot a miiajor
lhazardl. The samiie seemiied to be trtie for fallotit, insofar as the investiga-
tiolns ere carrie(l. Specific iniformiiationi, if know;n, w-as consi(leredlclassifie(l.
Later in the miiorning w\ent to see Dr. Nakao again anid lhe ini(leedl l)rov'e(l
to be ini possession of a veritable gold miinle. This con1sists of peripheral
blood and marrow\ smiiears of nio less tlhani 44 cases that have b)een worked
til) in 1-iroshima fromii late ini August to 15 September. Amiionig tllese wN-ere
15 fatalities of w-hom sevenl w\ere atitopsie(l. Agreed w\ith Nakao to begin
tl1e work-up of these with him tomorrow.
After ltiniclh fotin(d Genieral Farrell's expert stenographer anid finiisled(l
(lictating the tranislation of Father Siemles' accouint to him. I was now all
the mlore anixiouis to findcl the Germlani jesuit lpriests at the Interniationial
Catholic Hospital. Calt. Rosenibauim is eager to comiie alonig anI we miiake
first for the St. Like's lMedical Center which is said to be not far fromi
the Catholic Hospital. On the way xv-e pass the astonishing sigllt of a lhge
nioscqtei inltact and(lglitterillg, comiiplete with domie anid miiniarets. St.
Luke's is anl impressive inio(lern sxkyscraper sittiated in aii on)ly' moderately
(lamage(l resi(lential zonle. It is Inow designiated as the 42nd(l Gelneral
Hospital. N\e w-ere mlet b1 MAajor Vollmer who proxidedla brief touIr.
Thlere is a beautiful chapel. The laboratory is alrea(dy, functioning.
I)nring the WYar it was use(d by the Japanese who were reltictant to returni
it. It escale(l signlificanit dlamage, but tin(ler press of war it went inlto
ph-ysical (leclilne fromii w\hich it is noxW beii1g rehabilitated. Genieral -Mac-
Arthltr lhas favored tlis lplace. It is ctirrently in the charge of Col. Yeager.
A Plilippine banner has been presented to the hospital togetlher with a
portrait of the General by 'Mrs. MacArthur.
Obtained miiore precise directions to the Catlholic Hospital at St. Ltike's
anild we miiake otir wsay throtilgh a largely burned-out portion of the city.
Finallv w-e fincd the hospital with the aid of tw-o small Japallese boys. The
hospital itself is intact anid spotless. \We mieet -Mother Harse, a most
123
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
gracious Elngishwomian wN-ho is in. charge. After tea wN-e are lushered in to
imieet Fatlher Kleinlsorge. This is ouir first (lirect contact with an actual
patienit. We hlave a loin conversation in Germiiai., which he obviously likes
to speak althotugh his Eniglislh also is qeuite good. He tells inl his own words
of his experiences so graphically described in Father Siemiies' account. He
is amiiaze(l at our kniowle(dge of the story tiiutil I tell him of the translation
of the Siemiies documileint and thein he has a good lauglh. He is a keein
kinidly man, thill and l)ale l)ut showinlg remarkably little other effects,
except that his wounds have failed to heal, now somile seven wNeeks after
injury. Partial healilng ha(l begun, hut at three w-eeks the wotunids began to
SEIBO BYOIN
INTERNA TIONAL
CATHOLIC HOSPITAL
7Thy5 Yodobashiku, Shimocichiai,
2 chime 670.
Vr
rw.jWe-4 -r1 -
ILetterhead of hosl)ital where Father Kleiinsorge was a patient.
suppurate. He developedI a leukopenia. Then homiie through the dusk after
a fascinating day.
Sepeniber 29, 1945: Col. 'Mason and I are joined by Lieut. Loge and
Capt. Koch on a visit to the University. There Nakao nmet us and the
first part of the work of reviewting the records began. These appeared to
be excellent except that many of the actual marrow couiits have not as
yet been done. \Ve therefore subdivided ourselves, Japanese and Americans,
into teams of counters and record translators. There was a master sumll-
mlarizing chart. Col. AMason busied himllself with a transcription. The chart
obviously Nas the result of a great deal of extremely painstaking effort.
After lunch we returned, bringing also MIaj. Kramer, andl continued the
work. Theln a long walk home.
In the evening met M\Iajor Sylvan Moolten. He is assigned to the
Surgeoni's staff. He has had extensive experience in pathology gained at
the MUount Sinai Hospital in New York, although he is primarily a
clinician. He is a very keen and thoroughly delightful nman who discusses
knowledgeably many of the things \-e have seen in the Pacific, including
cutaneous diphtheria.
124
T'oluttic 38, Octobet-, 1965
Hiroshlimaoo Aledicol Dia ry, 1915 LIEBOWV
Top. The Jesuit Monastery at Nagatsuka from which Father Sienmes wxitnessed the
atomic bombing of Hiroshima.
Middle. St. Luke's Hospital in Tokyo used as the 42nd General Hospital by the
U.S. Army Occupation Forces.
Bottomii. The Tokyo First (Dai Ichi) MIilitary Hospital, the \Vralter Reed of Japanl.
Here wAas located also the Japanlese Army MIedical School.
125
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Septemtiber 30, 1945: At breakfast on this pleasant Sunday found that
Col. iMason was leaving for Nikko Shrine. Decided to spend the morning
closeted in my chambers reading and writing letters home, to C.G. and
to Paul MIacLean.
In the afternoon took the opportunity to explore the city wvith Jack
Rosenbaumii and MIilton Kramer. Jack had told me that he had seen
people actually starving or ill to the point of unconsciousness at the rail-
road station. Although the economic state of the country was at a low
ebb and rationinlg was strict, I found this difficult to believe. But there
were indeed frail, dull-eyed people begging, and some, even children,
lying huddledI with their parents-a pitiful sight. Passers-by seemed to
pay themii little heed.
\Ve wsent by Japanese taxi, a smiioker driven by an intrepid man wrho
muist have been trained on a juggernaut, to Ueno Park, a famous beatuty
spot. This w\cas crowNcded on the brisk afternooni with strollers, both Japanese
and Amnericani soldiers. One of the loveliest sights was a five-tiered pagoda
witlh its graceftul roof and its glow-ing red-ochre sides. In the city belowN
the park tlillngs Were quiite as busy as oni the weekday. We were amnazed
at the imm1ilenise crowds fillinlg and overflowN-ing to the outside of lUeno
railroad station. There was nio pushinlg. anld everything w-as patience and
coturtesv. \We walked back, bemutsed, the long distance througlh the
darkeninig but buistling streets.
October 1, 1945: To work againi early in the miorniing. Counted in-
numerable cells. but in the hvpoplastic marrows these are widely scattered
anid often difficuilt to classify, andl the work is progressing slowly. Dr.
Nakao is mlost helpful, most sinicere, anid clearly expert in hematology.
Capt. Koclh aiid Lietut. Loge devote thlemiselves mostly to the periplleral
bloods.
Constultedl witlh Col. Friedell regarding the possibility of sotmie of the
MI.lanhattan District Team cominiig to Hiroshimna with us, buit his group
has decided to continue back to the U.S. Later met Col. M\ason wlho
had returnied from Nikko that nooni. Althouglh our expedition is now
poise(l. we mUst aw-ait the rettlrni of Col. Otughterson fromll Nagasaki for
finial arranigements.
Today acquired iniformiiation concerninig twxo new recruits. Our request
for clerical assistance Nas met by the assignment of Staff Sgt. Hial D.
Huffaker anid Pvt. MIichas Ohnstad from the 12th Cavalry and 1st Cavalry
Artillery respectively who are to go with us. God grant they can type!
October?2 1945: W\orked all day at the Ulniversity with Col. MIason and
all of the junior officers and our Japanese colleagues. Got w-ell in sight
of the encd of the blood counting.
126
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 j LIEBOW
I...... ...
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. ...
Top. The pagoda in Ueno Park.
Bottom. The Ueno railroad station. Immense crowds patiently await transportation.
127
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Theni I lhadl anotlher (lifficult working session with Dr. Ishii. Despite our
language problemls, it is quite clear that he is a very well-educated
pathologist. He showed mle somle 26 necropsv protocols. These seemle(d
very wN-ell workedt-up and(l illustrated with sketclhes. Althouiglh the bulk of
the description is in lapanese, many of the technical words are in
Germani or Latini. WXeights of organs are in Arabic numilerals. There are
many sketches. It is possible to understanid in reasonable detail the sub-
stance of the description. This w-e test by going over one or two protocols.
For the first timle I have seen Dr. Ishii smile as somle comlical mlisinlterpre-
tation on miy part is nia(le. It w-as agreed that 18 of these cases w-ould
be cut here in Tokyo and that the rest ouldl be brouglht along with
us and cut after we arrived in Hiroshima. N\Ve could then comlplete the
mlicroscopic descriptionis for this prime group in (lirect personal colntact
while carrying on our other work. Dr. Ishii also has a large numiiber of
marrow contact preparatioiis which he will bring along that come from
the autopsy material. Actual preserved organs of the sanme patients froml
whom we have blocks in Dr. Ishii's group are said to be in 'enlarged
pieces" in Hiroshimila at the Ujina Hospital. Aniong other imlportalnt
information obtained this afternoon is that Mlajor Yamlashilna in the
Japanese Army Mledical School has some well-preserved material fromll the
very earliest cases. MIost of those in Dr. Isliii's possessioni are in a group
that succumilbedI froiii three to five wN-eeks after the bomlbing. WVe take
note that iMajor Yamiiashina by all iiieans niust be found.
\We decidle also to bring wvith Us to Hiroshimla -Mr. Shiniiianiiie, a
niedical student, who is said to be an expert in cutting sections. He is a
charminig, sliglht, genitly smlliling youig maiin of studious appearance who
comes froiii one of the faiiiilies iiiiportant in the professorial ranks of
the Tokyo Iiiiperial University.
While waitinig for a seat at the supper table, iiiet up with Capt. Nolaii
and Col. Stafforcl WNTarren. The latter was an elongated, spare, grayI-lhaired
mustached figure, looking the picture of a pukka sahib, but Nith a iiild
and gracious mlannier. He expressed his pleasure at the Siemes translation.
Scottv, w-ho had also retturned froiii Nagasaki, was very happy- to see us
and pleasedl witlh the work that we had got in hiaiid. In the evenlilng had
a long conference witlh Cols. Mason acdl Ougliterson, anid Nas told that
Drs. Tsuzuki and( Sassa aiud four of the younger Japanese, including
Drs. Kitanioto and(I Okoshi could get off to Hiroshimila by plane on the
following nmorninig.
\Ve hear now that the Nagasaki group is in excellenit quarters at
the Omura Japanese Naval Hospital anid has no less than 150 cases of
radiation sickness in hand.
128
l'oliiiiie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshimzla Aledical Diaryv, 1945 | LIEBOWV
October 3, 1945: In the early morning Dr. Tsuzuki brought to the
front of the Dai Ichi Hotel Dr. Sassa and the "Japanese young doctors."
Finally shortly after 8 :00 a.m. all are ready to board the trucks to
take them to Tachikawa Airfield. The present plan is to have a shuttle
plane in readiness for the work of taking all of us down. In the morning
in consultation with the Japanese at the University prepared a list of the
doctors in order of preparedness to go dowvn. Among those ready is Dr.
Kato, a debonair bachelor, Who is to assist the men at Hiroshima in
getting the early records of the 44 cases up to sluff.
In the afternoon went to pick up the rations for the Hiroshima group.
We found the Red Gate open. These cases were then placed into the hands
of the Japaniese at the Medical School who seemiied reluctant to accept
the responsibility. W\e assured them that they would not be prosecuted by
our M.P.'s. I found Dr. Ishii wvho said that Dr. Tsuzuki was angry with
me for not having discussed the Shimamiinle miatter "through channlels"!
He had not mentionied his displeasure to me that morniing, however.
After supper was informiied that the plane bearing Dr. Tstuzuki and
his companions had been forced to turn back from Hiroshima by heavy
overcast and that on the way back its radio commiluniications had broken-
downi. The pilot had to fly the unpressurized airplane at over 14,000 feet
to be sure to clear Fujiyamiia, which he could not see. Near Tokyo he
founid a hole in the clouds and was able to buzz Atsugi at dark. Flight
control guessed that somiiethinig was wN-rong. Cars and trucks were lined
up to illuminate the airstrip. He landed safely after seven hours of
conltilnuous hazardous flyinig without certainty of where he was.
In the evening met none other than Col. Joseph Sadusk Nho had arrived
at the head of a typhus commnnissioni. There had b)een some outbreaks of
what Nas considered to be true typhus fever in Japan and somle of our
soldiers had comiie down with the disease.
* * *
Col. Sadusk had taken his residency in medicine at New Haven with
Dr. Francis Blake and had started with the Yale ULnit as a captain,
but had been reassigned. He had donle mlluch distinguished Nork in epidemi-
ology in Hawaii and with the UT.S. Ty-phus Comimission and was ultimately
promoted to full colonel and decorated Nith the Legion of MWerit. After
a post-war career as an outstandinig practitioner in Oakland, California,
anid then as a Professor of Conmmunity iMedicine at George WNashinlgton
University, he became Chief Food and Drug Admuinistrator.
* * *
129
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
About 9:10 p.m., while I was playilng cribbage with Major Kramler,
Col. Oughtersoln camie and said that we were in fact ready to leave in the
mlorninig. This meant that we had to get ourselves and the enlisted miien
packed. Sgt. Reed was put in charge of the latter detail. In the meantillle
I begged a ride to the NYK building to which Capt. Rosenbaum had
just beeni moved, and gave the junior officers the good news. Then a
hasty job of packing miiy ow-n belongings and to bed at 12 :30 a.m.
Octobcr 4, 1945: Arose at 05:15 and after picking up Koch, Rosenbaum,
and Loge rushed to the Uniersity. Then rapid loading of all our equipmiienit
and men with the help of numilerous willing Japanese who got the whole
job done in time to return to the hotel by 6:55. Breakfast had been
arranged and we left the hotel at 7:30 a.m. Col. 'Mason claimned to know
PA3J'GH LI3T YMOR 1 CmIMIA
Gal Una=
Lt Cal Li.bow
capt Roa
Capt Koa
~sSgt rak
LtK.lc
TbC 4 I'AkU
Dr Ta-md
or okosd4
5 1r Nakao *
6 Dr KI b
-i Dr Sa ..
1et -Dr -jtn
5- XW OOt*
f6 1 Itie
'Dr
si)1W 5kdn&s 9r _sol
Lt OlBriox, Char2us
Lt mrin
3ma±gu !Wildu, '. f.
1oh SLt.L
Teaksn Green
Thohn ig A
Tah B3m
Lin a_uK&
,txtorphw K&w
List of passenigers for projected flight to Hiroshiimla, October 4, 1945, which lhad
to be abandonied.
130
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
the way to the airport and seem-ied to be doing reasonably well at first.
It was pouring-a real cloudburst. Finally, however, we became more and
more lost and then the good Colonel ultimately admitted complete failure
of knowing our whereabouts. Then we strike out more or less cross
country. with the help of our inquiring Japanese companions, passing
through towns such as Koraida and Yozakawa, but at long last make the
correct turn and enter Tachikawa. Although we were very late, we were
welcomed by our pleasant acquaintance, Lieut. Flook. Col. Oughterson's
party also had been late but was there when we arrived. I find a pilot
talking excitedly witlh Col. Oughterson. He had flown the Tsuzuki party
to Hiroshima and was exhausted by the harrowing experience. Dr. Tsuzuki
himiiself was at the airport looking none the worse for it and ready to
take off again. WVe were at first rather hopeful of taking off but at
last the flight was declared closed. Disgustedly we struck out for home and
found that the rain has in fact worsened. Deep puddles are everywhere
and many vehicles have become stalled in large lakes. Then back to the
hotel to a fine dinner of Spain and cold cuts in the hot and sultry room.
In the afternoon slept the sleep of the extremely weary. Later in the
evening again met Col. Sadusk and we had a long talk about the good
old days at Yale and our various war-time experiences. Bed timne was
delayed by another conference with Col. Oughterson. Col. Stafford Warren
camle in. He was his delightful self and showed uis the destruction and
radioactivity maps of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki areas. WVe discussed
also the delayed effects of radiation on the bone marrow in the patients.
He stated that these occur after relatively low doses. Col. Warren said
that Yawata was originally scheduled for the atomic bombing but that the
plans had been changed because of meteorological conditions. Then, finally
and wearily to bed with a bad prognosis for tomorrow's weather ringing
in mly ears.
October 5, 1945: Heavy rains continue and no air transportation can
be authorized. In mid-nmorninlg, a visit from Dr. Tsuzuki wvho has apparently
done miuch smoothing of the way for our work in Hiroshima. He says
that the people are in fear of our troops and that this may inhibit our
nmission greatly. Dr. Tsuzuki then agreed to introduce nme to General Hirai
who is chief of the Pathological Institute of the Japanese Arm)y Medical
School. This wsas accomplished after a long trip through the downpour.
The General is a small man with a cast in his left eye and a friendly
mianner. The insignia on his collar resembles that of a U.S. Navy coIll-
muander except that there is a small red star in the lower front corner
of the collar. The proiinise is given to us that the slides of the earliest cases
131
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
in possessioni of the Army AMedical School would be delivered to us with
remaining tissties at Hiroshimlla by two miedical studeints who will followv
in about tw-o wN-eeks.
On returninig, the questioni of food supply for the Japanese componlent
of the investigative group is discussed at length by Dr. Tsuzuki and our
group and we agree that all of the doctors and possibly the students
as well will l)e fecl by Us. Scotty emphasizes that this wxill have to be
cleared by Headquarters since it is at this timle forbidden to distribute
Amiierican food supplies to civilians in Japan.
* *
October 6-11: These days were spent in disgust at the downpour and
wind, but there were somiie bright spots, particularly October 6 when I
had the privilege of signinlg for six jeeps for our unit on transfer from
Gen. Farrell's group wxhich was returning to the continental U.S. Now
wve had our owin l)rivate means of getting about. There wN-as also the
pleasure of working at the lUniversity wx-ith Drs. Nakao and Ishii and
exploring Tokyo on foot, w-rapped in a raincoat. The population was
still drably and poorly dressed, the mien often in remiinants of military
uniformiis or thin (lark suits. \Vonmen were wearing the baggy trousers
(iiiomipe) that had been wartime wear by Imnperial decree. It was amusiing
to see the little Japanese police in dark blue, carrying small swords and
directing traffic si(de by side with the strapping M.P.'s of the First Cavalry
Div-ision. The latter, who seemiied to have been selecte(l for their size,
also stood guard at parade rest before the various gates of the palace
and at the doors of radio Tokyo-station JOAK-xwhence had come the
Tokyo-Rose broadcast that we had enjoyed in the islands during the
\Var. The Kabuki players reopened on October 3 in their own theater
and their popularity amonig the Japanese w-as attested by the difficulty,
of getting tickets and by the plentiful speculators. Jack Rosenbaum was
able to get tickets and we enjoyed a dazzlingly colorftil stylized perform-
ance and the traditiolnal Imlusic. I had learned a little al)out the symbolism
of the action fromii reading, and kindly English-speakinlg Japanese were
eager to explain the niuances. The audience was almost entirely Japanese.
The performances are long and it is customary to bring food.
Parts of mlany- days and evenings N-ere also spent in planning our
approach to the work at Hiroshima. The shieldinig and protection studies
would be miost difficult. Scotty emiiphasized the need for a mortality and
morbidity curve in relation to distance. \Ve hoped that w-e could identify
certain buildinigs and shelters at known distanices fromii the hypocenter
wN-here people occupiedl precisely kn-own positionls at the miiomlent of the
132
T'olutiie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LLEBOW
detonation, and whose fate was known. Drs. Tsuzuki and Murachi said
this was definitely possible and that in fact they already had a number
of these buildings in mind. It was evident that if we considered only gamma
radiation, as seemed reasonable, we could assume straight-line travel of
the rays which would intercept the buildings at angles determined by their
distance from the hypocenter. If we could then establish the structure of
the buildings from building plans, the thickness of steel, concrete, etc.
could be calculated through which the radiation would have to penetrate
to produce a certain effect or to be completely absorbed with no biological
effect. One could assume that the LD-50 dose (i.e. the dose that would
be fatal to half of those exposed) would be in the range of 500 roentgens
if delivered to the body as a whole. This datum could then give us at
least a rough idea of radiation dosage under various conditions. There
would be some error in the calculation from scattering of radiation. We
hoped also ultimately to learn from the physicists who had designed the
bomb both the spectrum and intensity of the radiation at the source. This,
insofar as it was known, was still considered secret, according to Stafford
Warren, who would provide no information except that there was a
mixture of hard and soft gamma radiations. The hard rays have a shorter
wave length and penetrate more deeply than the soft. Effects on tissues,
however, would depend on the quantity of radiation absorbed.
In the meantime three C-46 aircraft that had been assigned to transport
us were lying idle and our patience was severely under test.
* * *
4. THE ENCOUNTER
October 12: Finally the dawn is beautifully clear. Consequently called
Tachikawa airfield at 6:15 a.m. and was advised that the trip would be
cleared for take-off. Called the "Japanese young doctors." On arrival at the
University found that they were not at the appointed place at the Institute
of Pathology. I was horrified for a moment but soon thought to look for
them in front of the main medical building. There they were-all except
Dr. Ishii. He had gone into the country again. Shimamine was there,
however, dressed in his dark-blue student's uniform and wrinkled cap. Then
off we went. Everything went smoothly this time except that the manifests
had somehow become lost in the shuffle. However, after a little cajoling
of the pilots we quickly prepared a new passenger list. They for one
thing seemed pleased that we were at the rendezvous on time. This time
Dr. Tsuzuki was not on the list as he had been on Oct. 4, and there
were no personnel who were not of our group. The three C-46's were loaded
one bv one, heavy laboratory equipment and jeeps strapped to the metal
133
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
floors and passengers to ride in bucket seats at the side. Finally we got
X-392 loaded and it took off. Similarly the second plane, X-372, was loaded,
the passengers boarded, and a smooth take-off accomplished. All of the
Japanese that were present had been assigned to these two airplanes and
I thought at first had been loaded aboard. Shortly afterward I went back
to attend to plane number X-131 which had not yet been loaded. A manifest
was prepared and the load was put aboard, jeeps and all. just as I wvas
about to get the crewv together there was a sudden loud tearing sound
followed by an explosioin. A large shining silvery C-47 on take-off had
suddenly veered to the right and gone off the main runeway which was
at a somlewhat higher level than the parking field. It skidded ilnto the rear
ends of a number of parked planes wvlhiclh were in a neat row, tails
to the strip on the field below. As it came crashing off the runway, it
turned completely around and came to rest facing in the direction in which
it had started. Its left Wiing had been shorn off and it was burning fiercely
w-here it had torn at the fuselage. The pilot's compartment in front of
the wing had fallen forward and was lying on the field in front of the
body of the plane. A soldier, his uniform and hair aflame, came running
mladly toward us as we dashed onto the field. WVe made quickly for the
plane on the windward side as the fire trucks came screaming up and
quickly extinguished the fire. We first attempted to take care of the two
boys who had been pinned in the pilot's compartment and were strapped
inlto their seats against the instrumient panel. They were obviously dead
althlough seemingly uninjuired. I gave first aid to a third boy who had been
rescued fronm the body of the plaine. I splinted another badly fractured left
foot and arm with boards and strips of cloth and bandages that had been
brought from the warehouse in anl ambulance. There w-as no hospital near
the field nor were physiciains other than ourselves immiediately available.
Others w-ere similarly handled. As I w-as splinting one boy's arml wshose
elbowx hadl been fractured, and who was among the less severely injured
I looked up to see an air surgeon Lieutenant Colonel leaning over nme.
I said "Thank God yotu're here," and he replied, "You're doing fine, Averill.
I know even less orthopedics than vou do." It was Dr. Thomas \Warthin
w-ho had been on the resident staff of the New Haven Hospital with me
somle ten years previotusly. He had arrived with supplies, finally, from the
Air Force Hospital some miles away. \We finished with the others and
sent thelmi all to his hospital. All had been taken safely out of the planes
except one boy who had been burnedc to death and the pilot and co-pilot
w-ho had been killed in the forward compartment.
We then cleanedl up and as I Nwent to my own plane, wIhich fortunately
had escaped damage, mlet Dr. Kubo on the way. He hadl not been checked
134
Voluitie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
aboard the other planes as I thought, and had just walked to the airport
from his home which was near by. Before take-off there arrived copies of
letters from General MacArthur's Headquarters explaining the Joint Com-
mission and requesting cooperation from the Commanding Generals of the
Sixth and Eighth Armies. Since we were about to enter the Sixth Army
command the letter was especially welcome.
We left at 11:10 a.m. in the third plane and had a smooth and pleasant
flight except for the fact that much of the land below was obscured by
billowy and milky white clouds. Finally we saw the shocking and breath-
taking sight of Hiroshima below, devastated, cold-an ash. Our two C-46
predecessors were sitting like great olive-drab moths on the sandy yellow-
gray field below. We flew over the harbor sighting the beautiful islands,
and then made a rough landing with our tail too far up and not touching
down quite soon enough. We taxied too far with our over-great momentum
and landed in the mud but skirted around the worst parts, raising a
great spray in the puddles, but able to come about to join our friends
who were waiting. There was really no airport, no tower, no landing
lights-only a wind sock. On the field also were some horribly scarred
children including a boy who told us in understandable English of his
experience. He seemed to know how far he had been from the center of the
explosion. In the meantime Major Kramer had made arrangements with
the 186th Infantry Regiment to borrow a truck. The unloading was done
without incident. They took a large wooden platform and placed it on a
2'2-ton truck which was backed to the airplanes. The jeeps were then
driven on and carried to a grassy revetment at the side of the airfield.
Each jeep was finally bounced off with a jolt, and then allowed to roll
off the steep bank of the revetment. There seemed not to be too much
immediate serious damage. We then rode through the bleakest scene that
could be imagined-past a gray prison with blue-clad prisoners herded
by blue-uniformed policemen. The entire city was completely flat except
for some concrete buildings that looked reasonably well-preserved as
we were landing and from a distance but which are burned out and
sometimes twisted and buckled masses upon closer view. The roads are
still littered with wreckage of every description. There are many burned-
out trucks and cars. Charred poles have collapsed and jumbled wires criss-
cross the path. Most remarkable is the fact that through this scene of
desolation street cars are running through the middle of the devastated
and almost empty city. Everywhere there is evidence of a conflagration.
As we reach the margin of the city, many houses, although unburned, have
been flattened, as if by wind, all in the same direction away from the
center of the explosion.
135
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
UPI'ICD" Q'F ""It il'Pi. _t '; C. 't 6)..',
AiUkc TI ALLL.D IkCV1i;'
aCC skA-. 50G
12 (6otober 1945
SUBJSCT: Atomic Bomb InvestigatIon.
TO : Co=-r-ndinf General, Sixth Army, Ad1 442.
1. This headquarters has direeted that a "Joint Corn-
jssion for the Investigation of the .ffoots or the Atcmto
Bomb In Japan" eonduot Uuh Invest i>stticus as ar..neesesary.
The ommission is oopoesd of the followinr three major
groups.
a. The 3.anhattaw Projet Group wder "rlFndier
General arwell.
b. 'The Gli4 twroup maer the Chief mwoemase orfice,
represented by Colonel A. w. ougbrteron,"'.
*. The Japanese Uovernment Group under the diree-
tion of .r.rTuzukci of the imperial University.
Tokyo.
2. it Is desired that this ommission bo furnished
whatevrOI &aistance Is neossary sad praeticable In order
to acooLplish-their isailon. Colonel A. W. Oughterson ia
the plenary rerwesentbtlye of the Joint Commission In Japan.
A,proprinte passes should be isxued at his request to enable
the parties to enter restricted arets of your oownrand.
Fi. Y. M.1.n .
Colonol, A.G.f.,
A TUUiS COPY Ast Adjutant !'neral.
Colonel, :edioal Corps.
Order from General MIacArthur establishinlg the Joint Commissiotn. Although lnot
included in this order, personinel of a unit serving with the U.S. Navy (Naval Tech-
nical Missioni to Japan, Team 11) under Commander Shields \Varren worked in
comnplete integrationvwith the Armly Unit at Nagasaki.
136
J'oluttie 38, October, 196-5
Hiroshliima Aledical Diary, 1945 |
Upper. Hiroshima. Aerial view on lanciing October 12, 1945. Onlv the heavily
reinforced conlcrete buildinigs remain standinig. To the right is seen the military area.
The hypocenter is just to the left of the broad roadwav x-hich borders this area at its
southern (left) margin. The two bank buildings, approximatelv 250 meters from the
hypoceniter, can be seen standing closely together. The tall buildiing niear the lower
left margin is the Fukuya department store.
Lowecr. In the middle portion of the photograph is the burned zonle of the city
whereas beyond the broad highway which acted as a firebreak, there is only scattered
evidence of mechlainical dlamage to buildings. Aerial viewx at time of arrival, October
12, 1945.
137
LI'EBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Upper. View across hypoceniter from Sanwa banik. In the ceniter is the Challmber oi
Comnierce BuildIinig witb its domiied tower. To the right is the Businiessmeni's Club
(Koreani buildinig). The low wall niear the ceniter irepresents the onily portion of the
Shima private hospital left standing.
Middle. Ana adjacenit view lookinig fartber niorth. The -Korean Buildlilng" is inow in
the ceniter. To the righlt are the great white torni of the Gokoku slhrinie 250 meters
from the hypoceniter aiidl close by is the military encaml)ment.
Lozeer. Genieral view of city looking toward the harbor. Thire is almost total
destructioni with onily a,. few walls of x-eight-bearing brick or conicrete stanidilng.
138
Volutiie 38, Octobet-, 1965
Hiroshlim)la MIedical Diarv, 1915 LIEBOW
Our destiiation wNas _Ujina. Here were the relatively iintact liviing quarters
of employees of the Daiwva rayon mill somiie 4'2 kilomiieters fromii the ceiiter
whllich had been used as a hospital for care of the inijured by personiel
of the Tokvo First AMilitary Hospital wh-lo were still in control. It was nowv
alimiost dark. I wN-ent to the headquarters building aind there in a simiall,
dimly liglhted roomii miiet 'Major ]Mison1o wxho was in charge of the hospital.
He was tall, ratlher (lark, and lhad the look of a miiainiland Mongol. He
was obviously weary anid had a rough scraggly black beard. He was curt
aiid seemed almlost surly often saying "Wot ?" in a rather gruiff wvay
7'op. Clhamiber of Commerce Building before anid (bottom), after the bombin-g
(30() meters).
139
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
wslhein he did lnot qtuite uinderstanid, but soon introduced tis to Capt. Sasano
who was mlluclh imiore suave. He then guide(d tus to a buildinlg w\-here we
took three large well-lighted roomis, stipplie(I with electric currenit. The
btuildinigs wxere long, two-storied, remiiiniscenit of barracks in ouir own
army, and arranged in cantoniemiienit style. They w-ere, however, typically
Japanese highl-roofed structuires supported hb a heavy tree beam and
with the typical Japaniese slidinig walls and (loors. Ouir equtiipi)meilt was
all stored after unlloadIinig fromii the trtuck and( placed with somlleattempt
at separation of the categories of supplies in a large roomii at the enid
of our buildinig. The buildings branche(d off long, straight, covered walks.
\We were now hungry. Sergeanit Buckles was appointed miiess officer anid
didl the cooking- over a gasolinie stove. We hadl plenty of 10-in-I rationis,
whliclh mlake simple but tasty anid a(leluiate meals. At supper Jack Roseln-
baumii told the rest of uIs a blood-chilling tale of his experienice onl the
flighlt down. When hlis plane reache(d altittide., one of the passellgers,
Dr. Yasulda, became extremely short of breath anid cvanotic. Jack thoiluTht
he might have had a coronary occluision, until he foundi(I that I)r. Yasuida
had a therapeuitic pnetiumiothorax wlhich had expanded sufficienitly to cauise
respiratory embarrassment as the planie ascend(le(d above 9,000 feet. Oxygen
was a(lministere(l ald the flight down was along the coast a few\ lhund(lred
feet above sea level.
The roomiis had straw mlats but there were, of couirse, no beds. WNe
procee(le(l first to spray floor and wl-alls liberally with DDT. A nullimber
of Japaiinese military blanikets were obtainied through C(apt. Sasano. These
were clean, heavy, of a drabl) yellow-brown color, niade of cottoi1, and
singlll;arlv devoil of warmth. I hadl a sleeping bag with miie wxhicl had
traaveled the lonig way fromii Camp Edwards to New Zealalnd to Saipan
anci now to Hiroshilmla. As soon1 as lights w-ere oUt w\e hear(d a scurryin1g
along the tree beams and(I hoped, even as we dozed off in exhauistioni
that nlonIe of the rats, which sounide(d large, would become too in(quisitive.
The sleeping bag provide(l nore comlfort thani was available for the rest
wlho were qtiite cold.
October 13, 1945: Early in the morninig we inspecte(l the establishlmenlt,
found three large rooms in one of the buildings to be supplied with pover
and water, an(d these we designated as the laboratory. Equipmiielnt and food
were placed under the guard of our enlisted men, and Drs. Rosenbaum aild
Nakao were dlesignatedI to unpack the laboratory equipment, to lay out a
plan, and to gather what furniture cotild be found for the laboratorv.
I drove to Kure with Col. Mlason to establish the necessary admimis-
trative framework with appropriate representatives of the SixthlArmyiv.
140
Voluitte 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshlia Medical Diary, 1945 L
T'op left. Aerial view of Daiwa Rayoln 'Mill used as a hospital by the Tokyo First
NMilitary Hospital and( later by the Joint Commission. The dormitory buildings of the
factory which were used for this purpose are in the upper cenlter of the photograph.
Bottomii. Entrance to the tjina Hospital. Patients, and military personnel still on
duty.
141
LIEBOW
iL
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
The drive was through only partly repaired roads, rough and nerve-
wracking. Considerable traffic, slowly moving trucks, and some military
vehicles on the highway made progress very slow. On the way we picked up
a young man named Yamashita who was working as an interpreter. He
is one of the Los Angeles "double citizens" who had returned to Japan
before 1941 and had apparently felt that Japan would be winning the
war. He had gotten himself well-fixed for a post-war job, had Japan in
fact been victorious. In the harbor of devastated Kure, which sloped steeply
to the shore, there were many ships apparently unloading. We presented
our orders to the Adjutant General in the Tenth Corps Headquarters,
who introduced us to the Provost Marshall, Lieut. Col. Pence. He was a
stern looking but kindly, graying gentleman who quickly supplied us with
the necessary passes, but said that they would be valid only until the
end of the month when they could be renewed at ASCOM. This head-
quarters had not as yet been fully established. The Hiroshima area
had been made "off limits" because of careless behavior and looting by
souvenir hunters. These were men of the merchant marine who would
come into the harbor in boats, keeping a sharp look-out for mines, and then
quickly depart. Only supervised groups were permitted to enter to view
the city, and of course those on official business.
Then tried to call upon Col. Hall, the Surgeon. We found him on an
inspection tour out of his office. Here we met Major Cummings, who
had been the executive officer to Col. Carton whom I had met on Espiritu
Santo in the New Hebrides. Major Cummings was now serving as
executive officer to Col. Mudgett, the Base Surgeon. For old times' sake
he said that he had a whole case of VO whiskey which he was willing
to share. This offer was accepted with alacrity. We paid our respects to
Major Hamlin, Col. Hall's executive officer, and then visited the 361st
Station Hospital near Kure. Unfortunately the site selected for this
hospital was waterless and this had caused understandable dismay among
the personnel. Later in the afternoon we went to the Japanese prefectural
office to see whether better lodgings could be obtained for our operation
at Hiroshima, but it was clear that adequate facilities were not available.
We therefore set about to find civilian assistance for cooking and laundry,
which was quickly accomplished with the help of Dr. Murachi. Before
returning, we visited also the 186th Infantry Regiment where Lieut.
Farrell agreed to service our jeeps. Since these had newly arrived directly
from the hot and dusty Philippines without attention, they were in
obvious need.
On our return we found that the laboratory was already getting into
shape under the ministrations of Drs. Rosenbaum and Nakao, who had been
142
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
busy all day. I found also, to my relief, that Dr. Ishii had arrived by
train. It was now decided that we would no longer keep guards on our
food supply. Our Japanese colleagues told us that absolutely nothing would
be touched even though there were many people in dire need. This released
both Ohnstadt and Huffaker who with Sgts. Reed and Buckles set to work
with a will. Dr. Ishii's arrival now made our group complete as finally
planned just before departing Tokyo:
Amtericans Japanese
Col. Verne R. Mason Dr. Kanshi Sassa
Lieut. Col. Averill A. Liebow Dr. Kiku Nakao
Maj. Milton R. Kramer Dr. Koichi Murachi
Capt. Calvin 0. Koch Dr. Shuichi Kato
Capt. Jack D. Rosenbaum Dr. Toru Tsukada
1st Lieut. J. Philip Loge Dr. Ikuya Kubo
T/Sgt. John P. Reed Dr. Tamaki Kajitani
S/Sgt. Hial D. Huffaker Dr. Koichi Ishikawa
T/4 James E. Buckles Dr. Takeshi Gotoh
Pvt. Michas Ohnstadt Dr. Shigeru Hatano
Dr. Moto Kawanoura
Dr. Toshiaki Yasuda
Dr. Hirotake Kakehi
Dr. Masaaki Okoshi
Dr. Zenichiro Ishii
There were also 21 medical students including Mr. Shimamine who came
at the request of Dr. Ishii. Major Misono was in charge of the hospital
and Maj. Motohashi was also assigned there, although we had not yet
met him. Dr. Tsuzuki and Col. Oughterson had not arrived but expected
to divide their time between Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Tokyo.
To bed, with some of Major Cummings' VO to soothe us.
October 14: Arose on a very cold Sunday morning after a quite com-
fortable night in my sleeping bag-rubber mattress arrangement. At 9:00
o'clock conferred with the Japanese physicians. It was decided that Dr.
Sassa as the senior among the Japanese and Col. Mason as our senior
officer should undertake a good-will mission to meet the doctors of the
various hospitals and of the Prefecture. It was decided to postpone this
undertaking since Sundays are taken quite seriously in these parts. We
used most of the day in completing the laboratory into a quite functional
state. During the day copper sulfate solutions for plasma and blood specific-
gravity determinations were prepared by Capt. Rosenbaum. I spent a
143
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
good dleal of miiy time with assistance of our sergeants and some of the
Japanese preparing oxalate tubes for collecting blood and dehydrating
solutions for histology. Fortunately there Nas pow-er of the proper voltage
for our centrifuges and waterbaths. W7e had not been sure of this when
the equipimienit was brouglht dlow..
Late in the ev-ening we lad a seconid constiltationi to crystallize plails
for actual wxork. It seemiied expedlienit to w-ork up the _Ujina patients first
41st Div PM UhNITE :TATrS LRiD FORCES
836
PROVOST MARSHAL PASS NO-
(Tp.mpr$)
x Corps
Locct1.on_
Col B. R. Iason Atomic Bomb Survey
rlease Pe-"it & driver or member of
Name atomic bomb Address or Organization
commission,
entrance to H h
Art Im&.L11.aton or Arca
£ Study of the et2ects of the atomic bomb.
for purpose - ._
State exact uLssjoL &' unit or person coLnCerned
12 November 1945 12 December 1945
From ___to ____ a..vt r~4teosAr fts Ae{Y
hour d-te to(atebcL oRtAA.eo rt
A-oproved 12 November 1945
Clared by Provost
__G_CIC Dot x Cor__p___ODep
Orgaaization or Area
Military lass re(quiredI for entry inito Hiroshliim;a area.
an(l theni to proceed to hospitalized patienits elsewx-here. Survey work on
the non-hospitalized populationi w-ould be conducted in clinics later. A
laboratory teamii was organiized consistinig of Drs. Nakao and Okoshi anld
myself, to be assisted by a numlber of junior mein and students. Clinical
teamiis were organized in five units. This w-as greeted with enthusiasmll by
all concerned. Our record forms w,ere considered again in great detail in an
effort to be certain that there woul( be no mistakes in interpretation. It was
decided that the data from the clinical examinations would be recorded
on the Japanese forms and then transcribed so that both the Eniglish and
Japanese records would be complete. Laboratory data xvhen available
were to be entered on each. This principle of duplication and sharing
the material was to allay any suspicioIn that w-e would sinmply use the
144
Volume 38, Octobey', 1965
Hiroshima Aledical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
material for our own purposes and that the Japanese would be kept froml
inaking a study and from publishing on their own'tl. All appeared mlost
eager to begin the actual wtork onl the morrow.
October 15: In the early morninig again had a mieeting w-ith the teamiis
who arranged thetmselves according to plan for the work writh the Ujina
Hospital in-patients. The clinical teamiis w-ent to work questioning anid
examininiig the patients. An assigned case numiber was left at the bedside
for the laboratory teanm so that specimiiens would be properly marked.
The laboratory collecting team, consisting of Drs. Okoshi, Nakao and
Sgts. Reed and Buckles, followed along obtaining blood and other speci-
mens. This systemn worked out well although the laboratory group tended
to lag somlewvlhat belhind. It was remiiarkable to see the patients lying
or sitting about on the straw miats of the smiiall rooms. There were no
beds. Numerous fires were burning in the charcoal stoves everywhere.
MIany- women wNere presenlt, apparently relatives of patients to whom they
iministered, but there were also nurses, wN-earing iioniitpt', white blouses
and pancake-shaped hats imiarked in fronIt by a little red cross. \Ve learned
that it wN-as Japaniese custoimi for kinfolk to serve patients and even to cook
for tlhemii wNhile in hospital. Many of the patienits Nere horribly burned and
others had various crude but effective orthopedic appliances. They seemed
entirely docile and showed Ino evidence of hostility but rather a submissive
courteotusniess. There was a remlarkable absence of odor despite the open
infected wounds and burns and pitiful condition of somie of the patients.
To us the treatment seemed deficient in that little attention to electrolyte
balance and adequate fluid therapy had been paid. Tranisfusioins in our
sense were almiiost nonexisteint. The closest approach was the use of blood
in quantities of 50 cc. injected into the muscle of the btittocks and the
blood was ustually derived fromi the patient himself. German field mediciine
was said to have exhibited the same deficiencies. The Japanese pharma-
cetitical industry had successfully reached the sulfapyridine production
stage. but even this material was apparently not used in large quantities.
The earliest stages of penicillini production also had been attained in
Jap)an. but wN-e were told that this material wxas available only in smlall
(Itaiitities and wsas rarely used, anid theni only in very smlall doses. This
was probably fortunate since the product theni was still qtuite toxic. By
late afterinooni all of the lUjina patieiits ha(l been seeni and the teamiis
rettirinedl trituimlplhantly to the laboratory roomls. which served as a meetinlg
place.
On retturninig from the wN-ards we have dinnier prepared froimi the excel-
lenit 10-in-1 rationis by an accommiiiiodatiing Japanese cook variouisly calledl
145
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Top left. Onc of the workers' dormitory buildinigs at the Daiwa Rayon 'Mill in
Ujinia usedl as a laboratory by the Joinit Commissioni.
Top rigitlt. Prof. Tsuzuki in onie of the corridors at the Ujinia Hospital.
Bottomii. A group from tlle laboratory of the Joinit Comimnission at Ujina. Four of thle
niurses who assisted iii the prel)aration of the glassware are 5shown. The physicians
are fromii left to right, Dr. Kato, Dr. Kajitani (at rear), I)r. Nakao, 1Licut. J. Philip
ILoge, Dr. Tsukadla and( D)r. Okoslhi. Prof. Tsuzuki's conifi(lelnce in thcse milenl is indli-
cated by the positions that they have attained since the end(I of the war: )r. Nakao-
Professor of Initernial Aledicine at Tokyo Uniiversity; Dr. Kajitani Chief of Surgery
at the Cancer Inistitute. Two otlhers, Dr. Ishikawa and(I Dr. Hatanio are now also both
Professors of Surgery at Tokyo University.
146
T'oluttic 38, Octobcr, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
Perlmutter or Rochester. He is efficient, quick to learn, and obviously
enjoys his job since he is the recipient of what to others seems like manna,
which he obviously takes home to share with his family. All of us are now
free of the chores of housekeeping and can devote ourselves fully to the
job in hand. On this first evening we all gather together, transcribe the
records completed, and enter laboratory data that have been obtained in
the meantime. All seem quite satisfied with the operation and with an
opportunity to do systematic and creative work.
For numbering and identifying the records I devised a system whereby
the prefix H was to indicate the hospitalized cases, 0 for outpatients, and
S for persons to be used in a survey. A block of numbers beginning with
6,000 was reserved for the individual Hiroshima patients, and a suffix was
added to indicate the source of the record. For the Ujina patients we used
the suffix "U." The old Ujina cases in the group from which Dr. Nakao
had bone marrow and peripheral blood were given the first block of num-
bers, H-6,OOOU to H-6,044U. The records of these patients were available
at the Ujina Hospital. In fact among those examined today were identified
patients who had had previous marrow punctures in the Nakao series.
These were especially valuable in terms of follow-up and there was general
agreement regarding the desirability of second marrow punctures, which
were therefore planned. These might provide evidence of recovery in mar-
rows where there had been leukopenia previously.
Col. Mason and Dr. Sassa had been establishing liaison with other
hospitals in and near Hiroshima as they had planned. It seemed best to
send teams next to the Prefectural Hospital and to the out-patient clinic
at the Post Office Hospital, where Dr. Hachiya, the gracious director,
welcomed them. Drs. Rosenbaum and Koch were to go to the former in
the morning to be followed by Phil Loge and the laboratory team in the
afternoon. Col. Mason and Major Kramer, with a group of the Japanese
students, were to go to the Post Office Hospital.
In discussion with Col. Mason, we concluded my own function for
now would be to remain at home base for a time, to maintain the laboratory
and to bring it into a functional state for preparing histological sections,
to systematize and keep the records, to establish a flow chart of work
to be done, to schedule the work for the clinical teams, and in free time to
continue the translations of autopsy protocols and records from the hospital-
ized patients seen earlier at various institutions. Col. Mason said that he
preferred to continue with the work of establishing contacts with the
Japanese medical institutions, to maintain liaison with Headquarters at
Kure, and to function as supply officer. He would obtain from the chief
medical officers in the Japanese institutions accounts of the numbers
147
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
and kinds of patients and their findings and experience with them. He
was also particularly interested in effects on the eyes and would make a
special effort to obtain accurate data. He would rely on us to carry onl
with the rest of the labor.
Doctor Hachiya's card anid signiature.
Octobcr 16: The teamiis departed by jeep for their destinations im-
mlediately after breakfast.
At 09:00, soon after they had gone, Dr. 'Miyazaki, one of a group of
Japalnese scientists who had been studying radiation effects in the city,
came anid presented data concerninig how the center point of the explosion
wsas determiniiied to be 547 meters above the ground. He gave a graphic
description of the shadowNs, somie of which had both an umibra and a
penumubra, anid also the process of triangulation. He also suggested that
the Koimiiaclhi district miglht be the source of secondary radiation, perhaps
on account of the water having acquired radioactive properties. He told
also of a secondary focus of radiation resultinig fromll the fall of radio-
active dust in the Takasu area.
I then began to work on the first batch of the now comiipleted records
of the patients in the group collected by Dr. Nakao. These were translated
wvord-for-wN-ord for entry inlto the general series. About noontimiie I was
148
)X4L /45*24%v
Voluttie 38, October, 1965
Notes made by Col. Mason at interview with Dr. M. Hachiya, Director of the
Communicationis Department (Post-Office) Hospital. Doctor Hachiya later published
his detailed "Hiroshima Diary."
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
pleased to find that Col. Oughterson and Dr. Tsuzuki had arrived from
Tokyo with a little mail for us. It was a delight to hear from parents
and from C.G., now in Maine. It was a peculiar pleasure also to have a
newspaper in hand. We then informed him about our work to date which
seemed to be progressing smoothly and our attempts to locate as much
of the material as possible. He promised to attempt to get us more trans-
portation, which is our chief deficiency at the present time.
Our Japanese chef, Perlmutter, was preparing lunch as Col. Oughterson
arrived, much to the latter's pleasure.
During the afternoon Dr. Kato and I went to the wards and I observed
the Japanese technique of vertebral spinous-process marrow puncture.
It was most impressive. A #19 plain needle was used. In two motions
the skin was penetrated to the bone and the needle tapped through the
thin- cortical shell into the marrow cavity. In another, suction was
applied and a small quantity of what looked like blood drawn into the
syringe. We later stained the smears and found them to be remarkably rich
in marrow cells, as was the case with the material that I had seen previously
in Tokyo in the patients without aplastic anemia.
For the first time also I was able to view some of the postmortem
material that had been promised by Dr. Ishii. The slides were well-
prepared and were well-selected from all significant organs. There was
also considerable gross material. Unfortunately much of this was fixed
in rather small quantities of formalin and may be not as useful for study
as the small blocks that have already been prepared. We planned to attempt
to restore some of the color and to photograph the specimens on 35 mm.
color film.
I had noted that Dr. Ishii had worn only sandals despite cold and
wet. On impulse I asked whether he would like an extra pair of shoes
that I had along if they would fit. I was able to gather that he would and
presented them to him privately.
October 17: In the morning, very early, met Dr. Hayashi, a Professor
Emeritus of Pharmacology at the Imperial University of Tokyo. He was
a most impressive, dignified, white-haired man, alert and keen despite his
71 years. He had been a teacher both of Dr. Tsuzuki and Dr. Sassa. I
explained to him how the work was progressing, discussed plans, and
asked for his suggestions. He was most gracious.
The team working at the Prefectural Hospital now has almost finished
the work. There have been several important developments. An ambulance
and a driver, Spears, has been added to our staff. Col. Mason has been
foraging and a number of additional sleeping bags have been somehow
150
Voluine 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
provided-but there are only three and some of the less senior officers
are unhappy.
Dr. Murachi, our biophysicist, gave an interesting hint of secondary
radiation effects. A man who had returned several days after the bombing
to a concrete building had had a transient leukopenia. We said that much
more evidence would have to be gathered before any cause and effect
relationship would be established. Dr. Murachi agreed and stressed that
neutrons might have induced sufficient secondary radioactivity to have
given the observed result.
* * *
Observations of this sort at Hiroshima were isolated and the leukopenia
may have had some other cause. Members of a military unit, the Ishizuka
Regiment, had camped from August 6-11 in the near vicinity of the hypo-
center, at Kamiya-cho. Blood counts done by the Japanese before the
end of August showed no evidence of leukopenia. This well-established
observation and physical measurements indicated that there was no bio-
logically significant neutron-induced secondary radiation at Hiroshima.
* * *
During the afternoon several of the autopsy cases were translated by
Dr. Ishii from the Japanese. I transcribed them and later in the evening
dictated the transcripts to Pvt. Ohnstadt.
October 18: Teams with Maj. Kramer and Dr. Rosenbaum assigned to
Red Cross Hospital. Joined them there about mid-morning. Met the
Vice Director, Dr. Shigeto, who is understandably sad and discouraged.
Had an extensive tour of what must have been a fine modern hospital.
Rooms and equipment have been unbelievably damaged and there are
many patients, again attended by their families, amid shattered sur-
roundings. Buckled metal window-frames and broken plaster exposing
lathwork are everywhere, although an attempt has been made to clear
the debris.
On returning, continued translation of protocols with Dr. Ishii. Later
in the morning two photographers, Ware and Circus, appeared. These
men were on loan from local Headquarters until our own photography
unit was asigned. Also Lieut. Vance, Sanitary Corps, a parasitologist has
been attached. He seems a very nice sort and brings along a welcome item
-another microscope. To my amazement and pleasure, two more micro-
scopes arrived with Col. Mason, who had obtained them on loan from
the 29th Malaria Survey Detachment. He also brought a radio from
the I & E section of Tenth Corps Headquarters (now we would again
be in immediate contact with the outside world!) and, best of all, said
151
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
that a refrigerator, six cubic feet, Frigidaire 11o less, was waiting to be
picked up at the 411th Medical Collecting Company. The 361st Station
Hospital had furnislhed a uterine curette and an ophthalmoscope. He
accepted our enthusiastic comnplimienits without blushing and said it was
all the result of his eagles screaming.
Doctor Slhigeto's card and siginature.
In the afterinoon Col. Ouglhterson brought in aii X-ray film Nwhich had
beell exposed during the burst of radioactivity and whose location wvas
known. This lhad also been seeni previously by members of the Mlanhattan
District Group, and(l by the highly competent radiologist, MIajor M\iisono
(who had been in command of the hospital when we arrived). \Ve dis-
cussed again at length the shielding and protection problem with Dr.
Murachi and Maj. Mlisono who had been interested from the beginning and
had given these matters muclh tlhought. In fact this was one of Dr. Murachi's
priimle interests. \We planned a thorough tour of the city tomlorrow in order
that I might have the benefit of his previous observations and thinking.
In the evenling there Nas a lecture by Dr. Kitaoka of Okayanma attended
by all. He said that the tuberctulill reactions and Schick skill tests were
152
T'oluttie 38, October, 1965
Upper: View across hypocenter
toward the domed Chamber of
Commerce building (center dis-
tance). In the right distance is the
Businessmen's Club (Korean build-
ing). In the foreground are the
Bankers' Club (left), and a bank
building (right).
Middle: A part of the north
wing of the Chamber of Commerce
building showing "dishing" of the
flat roof as a result of the blast.
Lower left: Shadows of railing
anid of a human being on the
asphalt of the Bantai Bridge, ap-
proximately 1,000 meters from the
hypocenter. The directly exposed
asphalt has been darkened. Sight-
ing along the shadows, in line with
the objects which cast them, en-
abled Japanese scientists to locate
the hypocenter by triangulation
within a few days of the explosion.
Lower right: Effects of heat
flash at 1,300 meters. Sharp sha-
dows of leaves of castor plant on
blackened telephone pole near the
Meiji Bridge (1,300 meters). The
plant at one time was taller but the
leaves which cast the shadow
wilted where directly exposed to
the heat rays. The rays were
directed downwards from a point
approximately 625 meters above
the hypocenter. Photograph made
on October 31, 1945.
Hi) os/iiwoa le(lical Ditrv, 1945 B
dimiinished amloing exposed patients in whomii there had been letukopenic
reaction.
October- 19, 1945: In the morniing took a trip with Dr. MuIurachi to
the city in the region of the hypocenter. Dr. MIurachi had a detailed
knowledge of the noteworthy and most revealing physical features. Ascended
the stairs of the burned-out Sanwa Bank to the roof. The reinforced con-
crete w-alls w-ere solid but many of the partitions had been fragmented
and the wood supporting the plaster had burned, as had the furnishings.
In one rooml salk,e cups were still on the floor amid the rubble. The roof
of the Sanwa, only 500 meters from the lhvpocenter, is one of the best
places froml w-hich to view the city, as one can see over the hypocenter
itself toward the remarkable domed building which the Japanese call the
Commlnlercial Museum (Clhamber of Commerce). 'We mlleasured the thick-
ness of the walls of the Sanwa. As we Nvent to the formiier iMitsui (Teihoku)
Banik, there was still the smell of death and the burned bones of a dead
miiani were visible trapped deep within the rubble. Remiiarkably, the walls
of the strtuctture itself showed Ino evidence of burning. On the groutld
were miany tiles and in the small cemneteries, of whiclh there were mnany.
were the vases miade of setomono. At the hypocenter itself trees w-ere
tupright but leafless and charred. Nearby were the ruins of a brick
building which Dr. Murachi identified as the Shimiia Hospital. This had
beeni of weight-bearinig brick wN-hich had completely collapsed. The day
was ideal for a photograph which I took fromii in front of the hospital
across the hypocenter toward the tw-o impressive bank buildings and tlle
ruin of the Banker's Clutb. As we w-ere walking about, 'Major Hamiilill
drove up in a commlanid car to tell uIs that a photographic teaml wN-as ex-
pected at the Hiroshimlla airfield later in the day. They were to be assignled
to us for the durationi anid had been asked to bring their equipment 'with
themii. \We watched the vicinity of the airfield while examininig the various
btildinigs btlt sawlno aircraft.
\We then drove the short distanice to the broad road betwseeni the maill
cit- anid the border of the military reservation. On the wvest side w-as
the Gokokti shrinie wN-here the most remiiarkable shadow-s on the granite
were demiionstrated, and also the interval between the heat w-ave and blast
w\axve. Nearby was a higll modern building, again with a sotund outer
strtucture but l)lasted and burned within. People had taken roollms in this
btuilding for living quarters; now completely windowN-less it lhad been
screened with rotugh wMoven mnats. Dr. MuIurachi told mle that they -were
Koreans wN-ho had always felt dowsntroddeni but now considered thelmiselves
victors over the Japaniese and therefore entitled to the best qtuarters. OIn
155
L,IEBOUI
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Uppcr. Face of monument at Gokoku shrinie, 300 mcters from hvpocenter. The
directly exposed portions of the graniite have become roughened and( flaked, while the
portion of the base slhade(d by the upright e(Ige retains the original polish producing
a "shadow.'
Lowucr. Similar effect on base of gratite rail. The blast vave knocked down the
uprights at a time whenl the heat of the flash ha(l become reduced to the exteint where
the original appearance of the monunuent is retainied. This demonstrates the difference
between the rate of propagationi of the heat wave and of the blast wave.
156
f'ollittic 38, October, 1965
Ilfirosliiiiia MI(ed(ical I)iary, 194-5
_s
.].. .._-
:r,
sF; e ^z_
*, ....t :j; 0s
*^ 91-: -': 'f ;
"Profile burnis' of legs. Only the directly exposed skill hias beei burned. There is
evidence of keloidlformationi. The patient was a soldier in the militarv coimipound,
approximately 900 meters froimi the hypocenter. ( Enilargemelnt of 35 mIllm. transparency.)
157
IIEBO NN's
.... , ..
s.:,=s.
--^
jjjj.....
:IV
V.l
I
. 'A
g ..,:..:.
-!
HiroSliii(l Aledical Diarv, 1915 LIEBOWV
tlle topmlost landinig Dr. 'Murachi show-ed me some remarkable shadows of
the mletal railing and upright edge of the building on the horizontal
cemient slab w-hich supported the former. The shadoNs consisted of dark,
grey-brown streaks corresponding to the horizontals and verticals, sur-
rounded by a vaguely defined rusty-brown band. The darker portions
represent the umbra, which still had the grimy appearance closer to that
of the original cemenit, while the part that had been directly exposed to
the hleat had a clean white appearance. The part between, which was
rusty brown, represented the penumbra and therefore the effect of a lesser
degree of heat. Murachi complained that the shadows were fading and that
good photographic records imust be made at once. From the same landing
we could look across to the dome of the "Commlercial MIuseum." Here
the unbelievable effect of the blast was evident since a concrete wall
lhad beeni made concave and a roof converted into a saucer by the down-
ward and lateral force. The most remarkable shadows were on the Bantai
Bridge at 1,000 meters fromi the hypoceniter, w-here not only the railing
of the bridge but also outlines of people were plainily visible on the asphalt.
Farther fronm the center of the city, near the middle of the bridge, was
the clear outline of a hand cart and of the person who had apparently
been pulliing it. These "shadows" were of a liglhter color than the re-
miainder of the asphalt Nhich had been dlarkened by the heat flash. During
this remiarkable tour w-e discussed possibilities for the protection studies.
Dr. AMurachi said that there were official reports on survivors in the
Citv Hall, and of employees in the large utility buildings whiclh would give
crude data for comlparison with survival of persons in certain wooden
bLildinigs, but that imuclh very careful wN-ork wN-ould have to be dcone to
establish the exact positioni of individuals.
* * *
It is astonishlilng anid a tribute to the resiliency of the people, that even
at this early time the city was showing sigIns of revival. \When we first
arrived there wNas almliost no one to be seen. The trolley cars that rumbled
through the streets amlid the ruinis were almlost empty. A few crude shelters
had been put together from the rubble but these w-ere utnoccupied. There
wXas dread of the imminient arrival of the unknon conqueror, occasioned
by inconisiderate treatment on the part of a few who had entered the area
before. But now not only were people movinig back from the villages
where they had been staving w-ith relatives anid friends, but bamboo
scaffoldinig was beginning to appear on somiie of the larger buildings. Life
in the croNded surrounldinig towns wsas active. Clothing and other goods
made locally seemiied abunldanit, and even cheaply miianufactured articles
159
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Upper lcft. Shadow on the prison Nxall a.t Hiroshima. 2,300 meters.
Upper right. Shadow of rail on concrete at Businessmen's Club (Korean building).
There is a darker central portion, representing the umbra and a more vaguely defined
periphery representing the penumblra. (350 meters.)
Lo-wer lcft. Light colored shadows of window- framiie. The wood has been charred
w.rhere directly exposed, even througlh glass. The "shadow" represents the original
color of the material.
Lowcr rigjht. "Shadow" of laddler on gas tanik at 2,200 meters. The "shadow"
represents the original color of the tank wThiclh has been lightened by direct exposure
to the rays. Other shadows also are seeni on the tank.
160
Voluttie 38, October,, 1965
Hrloshittia Mledical Diarv, 194-5 LIEBOW
were oi dlisl)lay. Food was scarce, less so in the miore distant villages,
and rationiing wsas still in force. The rice crop was ripeniing even in the
close environs of Hiroshinma. The attitu(le was definitely no longer onle of
paralysis hut one of enicouragemiienit anid hope despite privatioll.
* * *
Upon returniiig to the laboratory imiet Maj. 'Motohashi. He wxas a very
smiiall, bright-eyed, sharp-jawved, active vouing imlan who gave the appear-
ance of higlh intelligence. He had a fluenit comminlanid of English which lie
spoke in a hiigh-pitclhed voice. He said that there might he patients at
the Nilho Hospital. whereupon I (lispatclhedl him and Capt. Rosenbaum
to insvestigate. \With lshii and the two photographers who had been
assigned l)reviously on loan photographed a great many specimllenls that
mliglht be used to illustrate our report. They used a Graphic news camlera
and I made the photographs in parallel with color filmii and a 35 mim.
ILeica. \Ve photographed lunlgs, initestines, helrt, hones, kidneys, and other
organs. It had beenl possible to refresh the color of the organs somewhat
wxrith 80 per cent alcohol sinlce they h1ad faded d(urinig their lonlg fixation
in formiialill.
Late in the afternooni discovered that it was bath day and promptly
repaired to the comnlitilal pool at the far end of the Ujina living quarters.
This is perhaps a quarter of a miiile down the long covered arcades where
there is a large building that itself looks like a factory unit. It has a
smokestack fromi which gray and black smoke belches. Inside all is
latuglhter anid good cheer. The 1)ool itself can accommiiiiodate p)erhaps 75
at one timiie at an arm's length apart. The customll is to have a complete
scrub before entering the pool. This is donie by filling a small wooden tub
with the hot water, wettling anid soaping oneself down, rinsing, and when
clean, enterinig the wvater at the cooler encd. "Cooler" means just barely
tolerable to Caucasian skin. At the far corner live steam bubbles through
the water. I was amiiazed to see habitutes standing almost at that very
point. To the uninitiated the approach mllust be very gradual. In the
pool conversation is animated. Everyone is relaxed. Gossip and jokes are
exchanged. Both the atmiiosphere and the temperature thaw reserve anid
onie emiierges with friendly feelings for everyone and everything including
cold, gray weather. We had heard tales of how in the villages people walk
naked fromii such a bath through wintr) streets without harm. Actually
the warmi- pleasant glow remiiainis for somiie hours after suchl a bath. At
Ujiia it is available twice a week. I resolxe theni niever to miliss an op-
portunity. After a goocl supper from Unicle Samii's 10-in-i supply it is
acttually pleasant to get back to work in the evening. \Vork is now in full
161
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
swing and no one can get to bed before midnight, and we must rise
before 6:30 to embark on the day's activities. We now have four Japanese
nurses who clean glassware and prepare everything for the next day after
we get to bed and who always are in the laboratory when we arrive.
Since our coming there has not been a moment to spare as we feel the
opportunities of observing patients still at the height of illness is quickly
disappearing. The last event in the day for me is always to complete this
diary.
* * *
At this time our Japanese hosts favored us with an act of great kindness.
The usual facility for elimination, the benjo, consists of a graceful but
narrow bowl built close to the ground, designed not to touch the skin
but to be squatted over. The more modern devices are provided with
facilities for flushing, but this convenience had not yet been provided the
workers' barracks in the Daiwa Rayon Mill. Having heard of Western
custom, the officers ordered the construction of what they thought were
appropriate settees. This task was efficiently and handsomely accomplished
-with a single major difficulty. Although the orifice was of reasonable
dimensions, the seat, rather than being built like a bench had been made
like a saddle, at right angles to the proper direction! The matter was
duly rectified with considerable hilarity on both sides.
* * *
October 20: In the morning as I was working away at translations
in came a Caucasian woman, Mrs. Yamatoda, with a Mr. Suga, an
English-speaking friend. She told a long story of how her husband had
died during the war after marrying her in 1926. At that time she was left
with her relatives who were hostile, especially a former Japanese Naval
man. All I could do was to promise that I would have her brought to
the Red Cross at Headquarters, where she could present her case.
The problem of food for our Japanese colleagues again came up in a
lengthy discussion with Dr. Sassa. They had been supplied from our
stock of military rations (Headquarters had given a hesitant blessing),
but complained that they found the diet too rich to be agreeable and that
they required adequate quantities of their staple, rice. As Prof. Sassa
put it in no uncertain terms: "Japanese people must have rice !" Knowing
that rice was still strictly rationed in Japan I inquired what had become
of their ration cards. He was somewhat evasive but gradually it came out,
more from his colleagues than himself, that many of the cards had been
left with the families in the Tokyo area. They had evidently thought that
their own problems would be solved, and that their families might have
162
Volutize 38, October, 1965
Top. Shadow of person on Bantai bridge at 1,000 meters outlined in chalk. The
asphalt has been darkened by exposure to the flash. Farther down the bridge can
be seen the outlines of a cart and the person drawing it.
Middle. Capt. Brownell standing in position of person at the moment of explosion
over the shadow shown in the upper figure.
Bottom. Outline of cart and of person drawing it seen from above. Further to the
right are the outlines of other persons on the bridge.
163
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
the benefit of their own cards. After discussing the mlatter wN-ith Col.
Oughtersoni wN-e decided that the best solution under the circumilstanices
would be simiiply to demiiand the rice fromii the local authorities. I therefore
xwent to the Prefectural Office near Kaitaichi and, stern-faced but polite,
simiply requested the rice. Conversation with the somiiewN-hat bewildered
officer Nas difficult anid conducted througlh an interpreter. He finallv agreed
that Ne could have the rice if I wxere to signl for it. This I of course agreed
to (lo anad we miade off wN-ith several hunidredl pounds of the graini quickly
hoping that niothing untoward would happeni.
After the day's xvork our Japanese colleagues suggested that we spendl
tomorrow ( Sunday) on Miyajima. a famiious shrine islanid in the Inland
Sea nearby. \Ve agreed that a (lay- of relaxationi was highly indicated.
Sionidav, October 21: After a hearty breakfast on this crisp clear day
w\-e crowded everyonie into all of our available vehicles, including the
ambulance, anid headed south along the coast toward Hatsukaichi. All
then boarded the ferry to the beautiful deep-green hilly island across the
sparkling water. As we approached the islanid we glimipsed just off shore
the great torni standinig high in the water. Beautiful temiiples lilled the shore
and miany of these were over the wN-ater, reached by cat-wsalks. After in-
specting these we wxalked througlh the fall wsoods. The colors Nwere beautiful
btut miiore subdued thani those of New Eniglaind, wxith ilmany dark bronze-
or purple-red cut-leafed mlaples. Fromii the heights there wsere occasional
views of the sea and of other islands. Mlany people brouglht their camlleras
anid photography of everything in sight wx-as in progress. Olle of our
friends pointed to a sign and laughed. It said that this was a restrictedl
militarv area and photography was forbiddein-a message now obsolete.
Our colleagues chose a restaurant deep in the hills for a mid-afternoon
meal. The restaurant was located in a lovely ramblinig Japanese country
house. Shoes were left outside amiiong a forest of others. The tatanii
(miiats) were spotless and one sat or squatted on themi at low tables.
The mentu Nas carefully chosen by our friends. \Vith a little wvarmll sake,
reserve wvas cast aside, faces flushed, conversationi became animilated and
personal. The sake surely is only a formality to make this possible since
the effect caninot be from the small quantity of alcohol. Everything was
gracefully served by charming kimono-clad ladies. The dinnler lasted
several hoturs and there seemed to be plenty of food froml raw fish to
mutislhroomii and mieat dishes served with imiotuntains of rice, anid with plenty
of sake and tea. I was uncertaini whether the abundanice indicated somiie-
thinig illicit about the establishlmlenit in those days of stringencv. \Vre re-
164
l'oluitie 38, Octobet-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
turned home through the sunset and dusk with a much better acquaintance
with persons and a better feel of the country.
At a meeting in the evening we discussed with the Japanese members
methods for performing the survey study in order to obtain some idea of
the distribution of effects about the hypocenter in relation to distance. Since
there had been complete dislocation of the population and large numbers
of people had died or had moved, or were otherwise unavailable, it was
obviously not possible to obtain a representative sample. Still, a survey
of survivors would disclose those with minor injuries and would give
some idea of the distribution and severity of burns under various con-
ditions of protection, and to an extent even of radiation effects. Some of
us are particularly interested in amenorrhea. Dr. Mitani of the obstetrical
department has made a study of this in Tokyo and states that there was
clearly such a thing as "war amenorrhea" and that the study would have to
be carefully controlled. The distance from the hypocenter would represent
a determining factor. Standard record forms were to be prepared for
each person in the survey, as for the hospitalized patients, and every fifth
person was to have a complete blood count. The Japanese told us that
the best way would be to approach the police officers and ask them to
have people brought into the clinics and aid stations which were located
in outlying parts of the city and in the nearby communities. The point
was to obtain for examination numbers of persons who had been in all
sectors and who had survived with minor injuries. I would keep a central
record on one of the sector maps to be sure that ultimately roughly
equal numbers were obtained from all sectors. Col. Mason, Majors
Motohashi and Misono and other senior members of the group would make
the contacts with the police officers and explain what was required.
October 22: Teams were dispatched to the smaller hospitals at Eba
and Oshiba and to the out-patient clinics at the Red Cross and Post
Office Hospitals. The 20 students who have arrived were sent with the
teams to the out-patient departments to receive indoctrination, especially in
questioning the patients and in filling out the record forms properly.
At the request of Drs. Nakao and Kato discussed the follow-up work on
former patients in the early Ujina (Nakao) series. They had been delving
into the records and found that several of the discharged soldiers in that
group were living in small communities near Hiroshima. We decided to
attempt to locate them tomorrow. Both Nakao and Kato were confident that
these people could be found. They would prepare for hematological work-
up and spinous-process puncture.
165
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Later wvent with Col. MIason aind ani initerpreter to the Hiroslimna W\est
Police Stationi where we imiet Chief Suizawa in his rather imiipressive office.
He w-as cordial anid gave the imiipressioni of brisk efficiency. \Ve explained
that we wanted a good cross-section of the population of both sexes and
all ages wlho had been in variouis parts of the city at the nmoment of the
explosion and(l who lhad beeni displaced and were now living in the area
uinder his jurisdictioni. He offered ftull cooperation, stating that it wotild not
be difficult sinice all persons were registered. \\e arrange(l for a visit by
ouir tealmis oni the 26th at 9:30 a.m. Dtiring the day we visited se-eral other
stations anid miiade similar arranigemiients to see fromii 150 to 200 persons.
Retuirnied to continutie translationis and to work in the laboratory.
October 23: The ouit-patient work was continue(l in the miiajor hospitals
an(l a teami was sent to the Ajina Aid Station. Conltinued wNith the
protocol translationis. Section cuitting and staining N-as now progressing
superbly tunder the miiinistrationis of Drs. Ishii and Shimlamiiine. I noticed
that the formiier somiietimes now wore the shoes, but lnothing was said.
I could niot resist going over some of the slides as they were finished.
When one of the jeeps returned, drove into the country with the Japanese
physicials andl Phil Loge. It was fascinating to see the rice dry, brown,
fuill of graini, and readv for the harvest. After considerable searching,
and inqutiry of miien in the fields and paddies, w'e fouind two of the patieiits.
We were graciously received anid served tea oni the miiatted back platfornm
of the farm houlses. Mr. Hiroslhi Okita was actually at w-ork oni hiis
farm. He was onie of the survivors who had had ratlher extensive clinical
anid hemiiatological sttudies twice previouslyr while a patienlt at the LTjina
Hospital (Case H-6011-U) anid hald beeni investigated( 1)IphysiciMns of
the Tokyo Dai Jchi MAIilitary Hospital. We lhad studied two previouIs
marrow speciiiiens with Dr. Nakao. AIr. Okita, theni a soldier, hal been
in the uipper floor of a two-story [apaniese building in the barracks of the
104th Garrison Force at approximlately 1,000 m-ieters fromii the hvpocenlter.
He w-as only slightl- injured bv flying glass and debris anid w-as able to
Nork anid to mlarclh for the first ten days after the explosioni. Beginnilng on
Auigust 20 he began to lose his hair. A week later he developed fever,
petechiae anid swellinig of the gumils w-hich becamiie painful anld heillorrhagic
and(I tultimately ulcerated. He also developed sore throat anld dlifficultv in
swallowing. He was admiiitted to Ujinia on Auigust 30. His w-hite blood
couint hadl been 900 on Septemlber 4, btut rose to 1,400 bV September 8
au(I to 4,600 by September 27 hlile he was a patient at the Ujinia Hospital.
He also hadl a mzarke(d anelmiia. The cell couint of his bone marrowlhad beein
only 4,000 oln Septemher 4, with approximately half of the cells in the
166
Volume 38, Octobet-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
3._
ctbI)
-
V-C£
CZU
It,V
Q
t-4
-C.
167
I r---s . --La
Ot-*N R! 6--Iii,
,i'.6 1
lwx c
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
marrow being lymphocytes or plasma cells. In the second specimen obtained
on September 27 there was evidence of almost total recovery, except that
there was now a relative hyperplasia of normoblasts. Today he appears
well and states that he is able to work, although he becomes tired easily.
His hair has largely grown back. There are still dark red-brown dis-
colorations of his gums but the ulcers have healed and are no longer
painful. He submitted to the marrow puncture with alacrity. We found
that his white blood-cell count was 10,400 and that his marrow cell
count was 75,000/mm3. The cellular constitution of the marrow was now
normal. Despite his healthy appearance the blood proteins measured by
the copper sulfate method were only 4.6 gm/100cc.
We had a most interesting time and obtained valuable data. Returned
late to assist after dinner with the records. During the evening we sub-
divided the students and junior members into teams, each under a senior
Japanese physician, so that the survey work which is to start tomorrow
hopefully will go smoothly. Attention was paid to known evidences of
compatibility.
October 24: Three survey groups were arranged as follows: to Yoko-
gowa, team 1 (Dr. Ishikawa) and team 2 (Dr. Kitamoto) with Capt.
Rosenbaum; to Onaga, team 3 (Dr. Yasuda) with Dr. Koch; to Kannon,
team 4 (Dr. Ito) and team 5 (Dr. Hatano) with Maj. Kramer. The plan
was for the younger doctors and students to be checked by the senior
physicians in charge of the teams and by the Americans who also par-
ticipated actively in the work. Each team took its laboratory equipment
for performing blood counts on every fifth patient. Our sergeants acted
as drivers and performed laboratory work as required. On returning
all teams reported remarkable cooperation from the police and the people.
All records were completed and checked by 11:00 p.m.
* * *
October 26-30: During these days the survey work progressed apace
and the teams seemed congenial, but the work was hard and of a routine
nature. Fortunately the weather, although cold, was clear most of the time
and there was no undue hardship for the waiting patients. Attempts to
stagger the clinic visits met with only modest success, and most of the
patients were on hand in the morning when the group arrived. Some
stood patiently for several hours before they could be questioned and
examined and "treated" with the vitamin pills.
At the same time old records of discharged patients from the major
hospitals such as the Ujina, Red Cross, Prefectural, and Niho and autopsy
protocols were being transcribed at Ujina or in the several institutions.
168
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshliimiia Iledical Diar), 1945 L
Top. Lieut. J. Philip Loge enljoying a conversationi with one of the patients during
a follox-up visit at the patient's farm on1 October 23, 1945. The patient was a soldier
who had suffered severe radiation effect. He is now regaining his hair and able
to work.
Bottowii left. Anothier patient, O-, visited on October 23. He had been hospitalized
at Ujina for severe radiation illness. His hair has now growni back almost completely.
Bottoml rig/lit. Same patient. Almiiost healed hemorrhagic and ulcerated lesions of
the gums. He permitted a spinlous process puncture to be performed at this time.
169
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
All nmemibers were rotated througlh this w-ork so that there would be a
clhanige from the daily grinid of the survey. A remarkable body of inifor-
iinatioIi was beinig accuImlulated. Patienlts dyinlg with only imiinor injuries,
presumiably from radiation effect, however, were not well-represented.
Some records of stuclh patienits were said to be at Iwsakuni Naval Hospital.
WNre therefore plannled to visit this institutioni. Also, the persons dVing
in the first few day)s wN-ho had been autopsied by MIaj. Yamllashinia, or
Dr. Sugiyamia of Kyoto University, (there were conflicting reports) were
also to be obtained. Durinig the past several weeks Dr. Tsuzuki and the
Japanese miiajors wN-ere preparing a consolidated list of institutionis outside
of Hiroshimlia to whiclh people had beeni evacuated and that are to be
visited before concludinig the work in Japani.
Our nmaster distributioni clhart of the patient survey was growing.
Specificationis as to source of the subjects for the sturvey were altered
to provide good representation from the various sectors by appropriate
inistructionis to the police officers. These were amazingly successful. The
list of suffixes to indicate the source of the patients also was growing.
By the enid of the work the niumiiber was large and they are reproduced here
to provide somiie idea of the scope of the investigation:
Aj - Ajina
C - City Hall
E - Eba Branch of 1st Army Hospital
F - Funakoshi
Fk - Fukuyama Army Hospital
G - Gion-Nagatsuka
H - Hiroshima High School
Hr - Hiroshima Railroad Station
I - Iwakuni
J - Prefectural Hospital (at Kusatsu)
Kg - Kramer Girls
Ki - Kaitaichi
Ko - Koimachi
Ku - Kaijin-Kai (Kure)
M - Mitsubishi Hospital
N - Niho
OI - Onaga
Ot - Otake
Ou - Ouzu
P - Post Office Hospital
Pe - Early IPost Office Cases
Pr - Prison
R - Red Cross Hospital (Hiroshliimia)
S - Saijyo
Sa - Seconid Army Hospital
170
l'olume 38, Octobet-, /965
Hiroshiimla Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
U - Ujinia Hospital
Uh - Ushida
Uj - Ujinia Public School No. 1
Us - Ujinia Public School No. 2
Ya - Yaga
Yo - Yokoga%Na
Ono - Ono Hospital
Ush Ushida Hospital (Kyoto Research Commiiittee patienits)
Kps - Kyoto Prefectural Medical School (Cases studied at Kyoto)
Kps-H Kyoto Prefectural Medical School (Cases studied at Hiroshima)
Tot Tottori Army Hospital
Takatsuke-- Takatsuke Branch of the Osaka Medical Faculty
Osk - Osaka Medical School
Kyoto - Kyoto University
Kobe - Kobe University
Okayama - Okayama Medical School
Om - Okayama Military Hospital
* * *
October 30, 1945: In the afternoon Commander Shields Warren arrived
together with his party and Col. DeCoursey. Commander \Warren was an
old friend from pre-war days and a fellow member of the Interurban
Pathology Society. He told me that he had naturally joined in the in-
vestigation with Col. Oughterson, as a friend from Scotty's Boston days,
since his own team was small and consisted of a translator and of several
Navy officers and enlisted men. They were now living and working as one
with the Nagasaki unit. It had been decided to include the Navy group
in the "Joint Commission" and to produce a commoni report.
* * *
Dr. Warren was well-prepared for the atomic bomb casualty study,
since he was author of a number of articles in the Archives of Pathology
on radiation effect. These had been collected into a monograph. After the
war, Dr. WVarren was Director of the Division of Biology and Medicine
of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission from 1947 to 1952.
* * *
Today occurred the only unpleasant incident with the Japanese until
now. Major Sinclair, the language officer for the Nagasaki group, was
wandering through the buildings and in going through the kitchen he
had addressed some remarks to one of the men working there. The man
apparently failed to understand Sinclair's Japanese. Sinclair thought him
rude and slapped him across the face in a manner that he thought appro-
priate to Japanese custom. This caused a minor furor and great embar-
rassment. Things are currently tense but we have asked our people to
smooth things over.
171
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
October- 31: Took Col. Oughltersoni and Nagasaki guests ou what we
have now laidI out as the "grand tour." This includes all of the fascinating
evidences of blast and heat damiiage in the shrine area at the Chugoku Army
headqtuarters, the "Korean Building" with the shadowing on the concrete
there, andl the remarkable view of the "Commercial MAuseuim" and the area
of the hvpocenter. All were fascinated by the outlines of mllen and vehicles
on the Bantai Bridge. At another bridge farther fromii the hvpoceniter,
Scotty foundel a charred pole with the light shadow of leaves of a castor
bean plant. The plant had growN-n anew.
In the evening we disctuss the total magnitude of the work. Scotty
suggests that "more than 5,000 cases must be studied." This seems a
staggering load to those who are laboring daily at the task of seeing the
patients, doing the laboratory work, and transcribing the detailed records
often until mlidnight or later. Our teams have, however, admittedly become
highly efficient and we can survey as many as 300 patients each day, the
students doing most of the history taking and requiring less and less
supervision. I stress the desire of everyone to comiplete the job and to get
home wvithout delay and point out that morale will be difficult to mlaintaill
under the load if a definite goal is not set. Scottv has to hurrrv off by
train to Tokyo. Later rliscussion with the junior nmembers does indeed
elicit grumbling. Remarks are made about "AWVOL Oughtersoni" and
Jack Rosenbautml spendls the rest of the evening comilposinig a song to
the tune of "Get Mle One Thousanid Roses":
Get mle tell thousanid cases,
\Vripe tllose smiles off your faces
And stay out here another year,
While Doctor Tsuzuki
\Vlho's my favorite cookie
Gives vou all a loud Bronx clheer.
There may be other surveys later,
Kinda thiink they'd be funl!
Tsuzuk' anid I will plani themii-
At the Club 21.
So get me teni thousanid cases,
Forget other places.
Hiroshinma is now your home!
To bed very late and very tired.
N'ovemiber 1: In the early imiorning w-ith Dr. Nakao received patients
from the Ujina out-patient clinic itself. One of the miost striking was
patient Shigemori, a formiier soldier in the Nakao group who had imiany
172
T'olivne 38, Octobei-, VI'65
Hiroshima Mledical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
signls of radiation effect. There was miiarked epilation. Hemorrlhages and
gum lesions were fading but the latter were not quite healed and
peridontal ulcerations were still present. A second bone marrow was
obtained by Dr. Nakao using the spinous-process technique.
Drove to Gion with Dr. M\itani in the afternoon where arrangemllents
were easily made with the senior police officer. It is remarkable that the
police control of the population is still firmii. To obtaini any giveni number of
persons from any particular locality it has only been necessary to speak to
the police chief, who obtainis precisely what is requested at precisely the
right time. The people who appear have been entirely docile, submit
readily to questioniing andI examiiniation, and seemii grateful for the vitamin
pills which are doled out after the examination.
The chief showed us a very handlsome sword that had been turned in
in accordance with a U.S. occupation order. It had been previously viewed
by Col. Mason and vas reserved for him. A charming Nisei interpreter,
Jean Ito, assisted in the demonstration. Later in the afternoon proceeded
similarly to Koi to arrange work for the coming Saturday morning.
Late in the evening discussed -with Col. Mason our food problem. The
30 cases of 10-in-1 rations that had been obtained Nere supposed to be
sufficient for 60 men for 40 days. Numerous gtiests, both American and
Japanese, had made considerable inroads and our supply was running
low. Col. Mason had cheerfully assumed the role of supply and senior
contact officer and promised to relieve our looming shortage with addi-
tional supplies from the Kure depot.
Thlrsday, Novemiibcr 2: This was a lovely bright and clear morning.
Col. DeCoursey and Coimmander WVarren were ready to return to Naga-
saki. XAVe bade them a fond good-by. Dr. Ishii in the last few days had been
busily translating the Japanese protocols by himself inlto German since I
was thoroughly occupied with visitors and with trips into the surrounding
communities to facilitate survey work through the police. The protocols
wNere then ready for dictation in English to Sgt. Huffaker. WNTe completed
the identification and separation of all of the old protocols, and prepared
a consolidated list by transcribing all of the essential information on the
front sheets. The (lay Nas ideal for photography. In the afternoon rode
with Col. MIason to the city and photographed maniy of the buildings in
the region of the hypocenter and obtained also panoramic views from the
top of the "Korean Building."
In the evening continued with the transcription of the records. Everyone
was in better spirits in keeping with the weather.
173
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Novemilber 3: Beautiful weather persists. Dr. Ishii and I took advantage
to photograph the remiiaining gross mlaterial. The alcohol was successftl
in restoring a semiiblance of the previous color. Our clinical teamiis in the
field witlh Ishii then plunged inlto the task of completiing the translation
of the autopsy l)rotocols. In the early eveniing we continued wvith the
l)rotocols of three of the earliest patients who had died wvithin the first
fen days at Iwakuni. The stress under which these patients were treated
and the lhaste with which the atitopsies had to be performiied was reflected
in the sketchiniess of the records. The tissues of these patients, however,
w-ere Inot yet available for study. but imiust represenit somiie of the miiost
importanit imiaterial. Ishii's quality and wvorth are daily becoming miiore
apparenlt. He lhas become a firm anid lhelpful frienid. His education in
pathology is superb. He is imiodest, eager to learn, and williing to listein.
He is also, like Imiost of his countrymen who are with us, absolutely tire-
less. He voices actual enthusiasm for completing the work and Ne continiue
into the smiiall hours until all protocols in hand are finished.
Noveiiiber 3: The strain is beginning to tell and everyoine now is tired.
Major Kramer came back late from Gion with his group and was full
of disgust and complaints because of difficulties in dealinig with the huge
mass of patients.
\Ve had been collecting clothing that had been damiiaged during the
explosion and the brilliant sunshine was ideal for photography. Many
garnments had been brought in that showed the effects of differential heat
absorption during the flash. The darker portions of the pattern were
completely burned out, and the lighter portions spared. Whliere the heat
had struck mlore directly, burning was more complete, but where the
incidence of the rays was oblique there was only partial scorching re-
stulting from smiiall differences in color and other factors determining
Upper: View across the hypocenter, October 19, 1945. The tree standilng upright
indicates the vertical direction of the blast from the bomb that exploded almost
directly overhead. The heavy reinforced bank buildings in the distance beyond the
hypocenter appear relatively intact, but are burnt-out hulks whose interior partitions
have been shattered. In the left foreground are ruins of the Shima Private Hospital,
a weight-bearing brick building which has completely collapsed. (Enlargement of
35 mm. transparency.)
Lozcer: Sleeve of flowered cottoin blouse showing effects of heat rays (approximately
1,800 meters). Dark paper has been put into the sleeve. Where the heat rays impinge
most directly, the darker flowered pattern has been completely burned through, and
there has even been some singeing of the whiter cloth which reflected most of the rays.
Where the rays impinged more obliquely, there has been more absorption by the dark
red rose petal componenits of the pattern. This effect is best seen at the right center.
The green shows less evidence of heat absorption, and the light backgrould cloth is
quite intact.
174
Volume 38, Octobe)-, 1965
Hiroshliim7a Aledical Diarv, 19/5 L
175
LIE BONV
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 i
absorption of heat. We used color film and obtained many close-ups with
a portrait lens.
Discussed with Japanese colleagues the possibility of a holiday for
tomorrow, which is Sunday. Major Motohashi came forward with a pro-
posal for a picnic and mushroom hunt which was joyfully accepted by
all. The actual occasion of the meeting was the report just completed by
Major Motohashi of a most valuable casualty survey that had been con-
ducted by him and Maj. Misono and Drs. Miyazaki and Nakatoni. This
was based on the principle that we had earlier discussed of identifying
groups of persons at known distances from the hypocenter and under
known conditions of protection. The school children were an excellent
group for this investigation since their fate had later been determined
by responsible authorities as the municipal offices of the city were re-
established. Some of the data had been collected by the principals. The
headmaster of a private school, Rio Yasuda, had submitted a detailed
separate report. He presented a table of mortality and injuries that could
be correlated with the actual distance of the school buildings. Most of
these were of a standard two-story Japanese wood-and-tile construction
rather similar to the barracks buildings in which we were living and
working at Ujina. Some of the children had not been in the schools, but
were in the open firebreaks. They were exposed to flash burns, and, if close
enough, to radiation, while those in school were exposed only to the
latter. The table classified the groups according to position and whether
known dead, missing (presumed dead), untraced (no information avail-
able), injured, or alive and well. I congratulated Major Motohashi since
this is the most important accomplishment in obtaining protection data
to the present time.
Everybody's spirits are lifted as we work late into the night tran-
scribing the records of the day's surveys.
Sunday, November 4: A beautiful day dawned for the picnic and mush-
room (niatsutake) hunt which is traditional at this time of year. Col.
Mason and I and as many as could fit rode in a jeep through the
lovely clear morning to the hillside that had been selected. This was on
Ushidayama to the northeast. All of the land was owned by three men.
Permission was obtained by Maj. Motohashi who led the party up the
hill winding through the elevated pathways on the ridges alongside the
rice paddies now ready for harvesting. \Ve ascended to the tall pines
above the terraced paddies. At one level all of the trees facing the city
were scorched brown but their protected sides still retained traces of
greenery. This represented the flash burn on the vegetation that occurred
177
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
\fi~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~s.HUIpper. View frcm roof of Businessmiieni s Club. The slhrinie area bordering the
military encamlp)lent is at the lower miiargin. It has beeni pitted xN-ith foxlholes. The
broad avenue at the soutlherni margini of the encampment is showx n, and in tlle far
listaince is seen the tall Fukuya department store. A streetcar is visible.
Lower. View tow-ard the niortheast from the Businessmiieni's Club. Across the militarv
encanll)ment is seen the moate(d region of the castle. In this area are the remainis of
the Chugoku Army Headquarters, secn as a low white buildinlg. To the right and
just above the center of the photograph is seeii the large (lark Commlllunication
D)epartmnent Building.
178
l'oliiiiie 38, Ociobcr, 1965
I/;ioshimali l edical Dial tv, 1945 IAEBOWV
at the milomzent of explosioln. As we velit hiigher we couild see the terraill
below that had beeni devastated all abotit the Higashi drill field. Against
the flat backgrotnindl couild be seeni the framilework of a conicrete building
that had crtliulpled awN-ay fromil the hypocenter, shiowN-ilig clearly the direction
of blast imilpact. The dark greeni of the post office btuildinig was also visible
above the plain. \Ve are told that it -as ani animial ctustom datling back to
feudal tlimes for the lor(ds to permit the peasants and villagers to go on
the mintshiroomil hnnlit at this tlime of year; we are milerely folloNwing traditioni.
The miuiishiroomils are fouinid amiong the roots of the pine trees in moist,
sweet-smelling soil, anid are well-hidden. There are shiotuts whenever a finle
slpecimen is dliscovered. The muatsuttavc are large. white, and succtulenlt.
All are said to be safe. A very finie tramp of some fotur or five hotnrs is
enjoyed by everyone. Friendships glow ; niational (lifferelices are forgotten;
the lhorrors of the War anidl the intensity and strain of the work are far
l)elow alnd behind. The miniishiroomils are brought (lon-i to the edge of a
pcaddy. Here is the still greeni tree linie where they are roaste(l indler the
soughilng pinie bouighis in a shallow pit in simiall pans. They are marvelous
with sov sanice conitaininig a fair amilotinit of stigar. The rice is cooked
in a very large pot. \Ve are so hungry that it is Inot qtite (lonie h-leln
we try the first bowls. Col. MAason anid I discuss ways and imieanis of
obtaining additional rice rations for the group, hoping that otir previous
inroads will niot have been takeni too seriously by otr owvn government
auitihlorities. Tlien hlomile to a hot bath in the comimiuinal [apaniese style.
Tlhein still g]lowing, we all go back to the recor(ls to get everything lip
to the maomilenit a(lI to plan for fututre operations.
N'ovcm1)cr 5: Revivified, evTeryone was siliiig anid actually eager to
plunge iiito the work this morninog. Iarlv went to Nihowlhere we milet a
Japanese. _M\r. N'inOl, wo hadl been in Hawaii for 40 years. He ha(l a
beauitifuil chrysanthemumi gaardleni whichi milade a great lit with Col. iMason.
Th'le villayge was relatively inltact. It had narrow streets line(d by the lapanese
lholises which had a weathered beauti. Dr. Mason fotiuid a shop where
hie botighit somiie silk. Later we drove to lUshida -where agaiin arrangemilents
were madle ithi the local police officer for a survev to follow, anid then
to YokogowNa. The police station there was another ceniter for collectinig
Japanese weapons anid e went inl hope of obtainiing a sword. 'None were
as vet avrailable. Col. MIasonl however, found in the village a lianidsomile
pair of lacquer fjcttaz the wooden shoes worn by Geisha. Dr. -Mason is
quite good at haggling and the purchase was made after a pleasant delay.
We thien cotlintied back to Hiroshimna to see the Director of the Redl
Cross Hospital, Dr. Takeuchi, who was glad to let us begin a clinic in
179
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
this hospital designed to start on November 10. In the afternoon we went
to see the Vice-Mayor, Mr. Morishita, whom we had contacted to supply
figures on the distribution of the population within the city. The information
was not yet available.
Then to Kure in the hunt for much-needed supplies. Met Lieut. Col.
Jenkins who introduced us to Major Winslow in charge of the 26th
Medical Laboratory. He supplied us with some paraffin, and methyl alcohol
for our Wright's stain. Inspected the facilities of the laboratory which
was now functioning. Then finally home. A letter had been received in the
meantime from Col. Oughterson from Tokyo stating that he had consulted
statisticians who had advised that 5,000 cases would not be enough, when
distributed among the various sectors, to obtain accurate information
on the symmetry or asymmetry of the atomic bomb effects. He also sug-
gested, somewhat peevishly, that we were free to leave if we wanted to.
November 6: Early in the morning went to consult the authorities at the
Railroad Office and there made arrangements for testing all of the em-
ployees of the road who were in the building, 4.6 kilometers away from the
center. They provided a map of the city showing the burned-out areas.
In the early afternoon again visited Mr. Morishita, the Vice-Mayor, who
allowed us to trace the fire map more accurately. The Mayor also had
promised some pictures of the city before the bombing which were to
be ready on Saturday at 1 :30 p.m.
Later in the afternoon drove to Otake. The chief of police was more
than cordial and promised much cooperation and said that the townspeople
wished very much to be examined. He also promised three Japanese swords
for our group. A friendly gift was in order and a package of cigarettes was
gratefully received. Then a long and cold ride home.
* * *
We had been especially interested in performing a detailed survey at
Otake, since this village together with several nearby communities was
the home of a number of work parties who were at precisely known
locations in Hiroshima at the moment of the explosion. These people
returned to the village and were then carefully followed to recovery or
death. This was one of the most contributory medical investigations in
terms of providing accurate information on the effects both of burns and
radiation, and on the calamitous consequences of a combination of the
two.
* * *
Noveniber 7: Expected to spend a quiet day of work at the laboratory,
but found that a large team representing the U.S. Strategic Bombing
180
Volume 38, October, 1965
I-
Cl)
0 ^;
= 7:$
cn =
cd cn
0
4H
0
0
la-l
V
Vd
ho
=4*
181
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Urppcr. iNlushroom hunit on Ushidayama near Hiroshimila.
Lower-. Rice harvest. Near Hiroshima, 1945.
182
2t'lffllWE".r.
l'olzittie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 W
Survey has arrived. With them is Maj. Luther L. Terry of the U.S.
Public Health Service as medical officer, accompanied by a photographer.
He is desirous of making a report on medical effects but has only a few
days and no help except a photographer. He requests cooperation for
preparation of a summary and help in obtaining photographs of patients.
Since time is short we make a quick change in plans and take Maj. Terry
and the photographer to the Post Office Hospital where they make a
number of photographs of patients familiar to us. We then return to
Ujina and do the same for in-patients. Maj. Terry also visits our team
while it is in full swing at the Railroad Workers Clinic. I proceed with
transcriptions since we are falling behind. We are planning to start work
at Otake early the following morning and pray for good weather. Late
in the afternoon a batch of mail is brought by a team of photographers
who are actually assigned to us with Capt. Charles Brownell at their
head. Their arrival and the mail instantaneously improve morale and we
continue at our tasks until a very late hour.
* * *
Dr. Luther L. Terry was a regular officer in the U.S. Public Health
Service and rose to the rank of Surgeon General in the early 60's. The
negatives that were prepared at the time of his visit, which he mentions
in an appreciative letter, were ultimately made available to the Joint
Commission in Washington.
Charles Brownell had been an employee of the Eastman Kodak Company
and was a very skillful photographer with a splendid feel for photography
of patients and biological specimens. Unfortunately some of the color
film that was available to him had been ruined, apparently on Okinawa
during the great storm of mid-September, and the transparencies when
developed were a hideous blue. Others were quite superb. Through his
help, his company was able to enlarge 35 mm. color film which was in
my possession to a degree useful for preparing larger transparencies and
ultimately for color reproductions, as of the "shadows" on the Bantai
Bridge. In particular, minute sections of the 35 mm. transparencies were
enlarged with a remarkable degree of detail and fidelity of color as, for
example, the lesions of patient Okita whose case record appears earlier
in this diary, and the postmortem specimen of a heart, showing petechiae.
* * *
Novemitber 8: The weather is lovely and we are all set to depart at
07:45 in a convoy of two ambulances and two jeeps. At Otake we pro-
ceed to the large local school. The Mayor and Dr. Nagaoka, a prominent
physician who had followed the patients, are there to greet us. A large
183
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
~~k(~~~~4~~~V4 -gc~~~~ tV-
.g,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.
m ~ A, w65qX v A36 ~Y
i-u£i()
s~a~ ,: AzgA
Note of appreciation from Dr. Luther L. Terry, then holding the rank of Major
in the USPHS. Doctor Terry later become Surgeon General of the USPHS.
184
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
Upper. Group during a visit to Jwakuni. The Naval captain in charge is seated at
the front. Members of the Joint Commission are right to left in the rear, Dr. Ishii
and Dr. Kitamoto. Capt. J. D. Rosenbaum is fourth from right.
Lower. Clinic in session at a temporary building at the Hiroshima central railway
office at Ujina Novemler 7, 1945. Senior students and medical graduates are inter-
viewing and examining survivors. Standing at the rear agaitist the window is Dr.
Luther L. Terry of the USSBS. Seated to his right is Maj. Kramer, and to his left
Dr. Hatano.
185
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
roomii in the sclhool is filled wNith miiore thani 200 people all kneeling anld
sittilng Onl miiats. Some 580 residents of the town had been in the vicinitv of
the Koi Bridge (2,400 imieters) at the timiie of the explosion. They had gonle
there to assist in the creationi of fire breaks since bombing raids were
expected. Many are miiarked with the dark nnt-hrown pigmlienltationl that
we have comiie to call the miiask of Hiroshlimlla. Their faces were exposed
in the openi wlhile facinig the sonrce of the explosion but niot so close
as to stuffer acttual third-degree burns wsith loss of skini. The appearance is
that of verv deel) sunbnrn hnt it has persisted with its deep-brown- color
for over three miioniths. Otlher btnrnis are of various shades of red and
brown. The sighlt is horrible since it involves somiie of the yonngest anid
prettiest of the women.
These peol)le miiade a remarkable contrast study to those of two other
grotnps fron1i Otake that w-ere closer to the ceniter of the city anid wlho
stnffered frolmi radiation effects that the people oni the Koi Bridge were
sparedldespite the persistent widespread injnry so easily- visible. Dr.
Nagaok.a provided detailed iniformiiation fromii his records and the surviving
foremen of the varions grotnps were interviewed. We are graciously treatedl.
At lInich h1ad a large l)late of rice and other assorted foods. By the enid of
the afterniooni ouir grotnp ha(l interviewed 320 patients and had done a
samiiplinig study of laboratory data. At the enid of the afternoon black tea
anld tanigerinies were servedI anid theni another lonig cold ride lhollme. During
this day acqntired the tlhree beautifnl sw-ords which lhad been promiiised by
the police chief, onie of wN-hich I presented to Calvin Koch. Then more
transcriptions of records. Good talk w-ith -Maj. Terry, Capt. Bro-wnell,
anid the rest. M\Iaj. Terry has been chilled andl we providde himii with my
sleepling byag for a miiore comfortable nighlt. Otur several large roomiis are
now well-poputlated with sleepers.
* **
The detailed record of the experience of the "patriotic workmen's
groups" fromii Otake anid snrrounidinig commiiiiuniities is onie of the miiost
initerestinlg anid revealing facets of our enitire ex)erience in Hiroshilmla. It
wsas imiadle eslpecially vivid to uIs by the opportunity of examining the sur-
vix-ors en miiasse and of appreciating their remarkable spirit. It was pos-
sible to reconistruct the scene at the tinme of injury almiiost precisely.
Throtuglh the initerest of an observant anid devoted physician of Otake,
Dr. Naagaoka, accurate folloN-tip informiiation was obtained in the quiet of
the villages away fromii the confusioni of the aid stations and hospitals.
There were three miiajor groups from Otake, each tinder the charge of
a foremlani who camiie to work in Hiroshimlla oni the day of the bombing. The
186
Volititic 38, Octabet-, 1965
Hirosliimla Mledical Diary, 1915 LIEBOW
t4o#V Z41tC'*1sIgucrest
T"M~. Me.
\1v
Sketch prepared by Lt. Elder of the British ImlissionI showing position of various
of the Otake workmen's groups. Buildings are sketched from interpretationi of stereo-
scopic pre-strike photographs made from reconnlaissanice plane. There are slight
differences from Maj. Ganunig's interpretationi. The sketch is dated 21 November 1945.
187
ON-
Iii-
-4 1 I+r
L., (:,t La,"-kr-
A
40LCOV... 6 I w-g-r-.Aat ;
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Upper. Chart to show positioins of the various wo-rkmein's groups fromii Otake and of
the Koi bridge. Persons in the Hinio group on the Koi bridge suffered chiefly from
burns, but not from radiatioin effect.
Lowe!r. Reproduction of perspective drawing prepared by Maj. Gailuilg from pre-
strike air views, showing shadows of the buildings as they would have appeared in
the glare of the bomb. Those groups which were in the shadows of the buildings, the
Nagato group to the left of the roadway, and the Morimoto group to the right,
suffered radiation effect. Those who w!ere oIn the river bank near the Temrma bridge
shown belowv (groups from Kuba, Tachido and Ogata), had a tremendous mortality
from burns, complicated by radiation injury.
188
l'ollitiic 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
first, consisting of 580 persons under Mr. Hino, were crossing, or had
just crossed the Koi Bridge, approximately 1X miles from the hypocenter.
These were predominantly the people seen in the clinic on November 8.
Two men were killed by a collapsing building, seven persons died within
a week as the result of burns, but the others survived without signs of
radiation effect.
The other groups had already arrived in the city and were awaiting
assignment near the Otake Group Office, only 1,000 meters from the
hypocenter. A reconstruction of the scene was possible from pre-strike
stereoscopic air views of Hiroshima made by American reconnaissance
planes. This was first accomplished by Lieut. Elder during the visit of
the British mission, and again at the request of the Joint Commission, at
greater leisure, after returning to Washington, by Maj. A. L. Ganung,
who also drew in the shadows as they would have been cast by the buildings
in the glare of the bomb.
Men of Mr. Nagato's group had been lolling about in the shadows of
the buildings prior to muster. Those in this group who were otherwise
unhurt returned to Otake on foot. All subsequently showed evidence of
radiation effect, with loss of hair, and most had petechiae. Seventy-two of
130 died of radiation effects, the first on August 20, and almost all of
the rest by September 13. The consequences were similar in the case
of Mr. Morimoto's group, similarly shielded and only a short distance from
the Nagato group.
Those who were on the bank of the river near the Temma Bridge,
however, including groups from Kuba and Tachido villages and from the
Ogata district, were unprotected from heat by the houses and suffered
tremendous mortality, many on the spot, and most by August 10. There
were only ten survivors of a total of 193 men and these all showed radiation
effect, even though their burns had partly healed.
This study provided a sharp contrast between those who had suffered
purely from severe radiation effect at 1,000 meters and those who had,
at the same distance, also been exposed to burns. The radiation complicated
the effects of the burns which were in themselves severe. The third group
at 2,400 meters, without radiation effects, and with less severe burns, had
a much higher survival rate.
* * *
Novemlber 9: In the morning began the photography work with Capt.
Brownell and his very pleasant crew. A permanent rack was made for the
camera and the equipment was prepared for synchronized flash shots.
This took a good part of the morning. Early in the afternoon spent
189
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
miiuch timlle goinlg over otir records and observations to date with Dr. Terrv
who was about to depart. He wished to take the negatives with hillm. I
was fearful that they might be lost. He promised to give them1 to Col.
Schwichtenberg, nowx the semior medical officer at Advanced Headquarters
in Tokvo. It is rumolored that Col. Dietnaide and Gen. Mlorgan froml the
Surgeon General's Office anld Col. Shull', the mledical constultant of the
Sixth Arnmy are to arrive in Hiroshima. Later in the evening was at work
wheni the anniiotuncemiienit camiie that Col. Shull had indeed arrived. WVe
welcomed him but lhad to pltunige back to get the (lay's transcription work
finisled(l. Otur first print wN-as developed 1w Capt. Brownell anid his staff
during the evening. The black anid w-hite work was stuperl).
A'oz'cui bcr- 10, 1945, Satuorda': Early in the mlorning conitinued witl
photography, chiefly of the specimiienis of clothinig and atitopsv material,
with Capt. BrownN-iell's equipmlenit. There is no certainty that miiy own 35 mmll1.
slhots x-ill prove to be prol)erly exposed since I had no exposutre miieter
w-heni the photography wN-as first done. Three itemiis of clothinlg that had
been brought in wsere especially remarkable. One wNas a girl's shirt writlh
a pattern of smiiall roses on the sleeves, slhotilders anid collar, andl pocket
flaps. Somiie of the roses hiad l)ecome completely burned througlh o0l the
sidle imiost directly facing the explosion, but others on the cturve of the
sleeve showed a brown scorchinig only of the darker petals of the roses,
with the greeni of tlhe leaves intact. The light pinik background also was
spare(l. Aniother shirt had a pattern of dark-blue polka dots againist a
lighter blue-green cloth. This showed simiiilar effects witli less burIiiilg
where tile rays were niore oblique. The tlilrd silirt coinsisted of striped
rayon. In parts of it only- certainl folds had apl)arenltlv beell exposed to
tlhe flash and hlere the dark stripes had disinItegrated leaving the white
initact. WNe also photographed in black aild -hite a piece of rice paper
oi w-hicll the lbrtished Japallese cliaracters hlad been sharply butrned otut,
althougih the rest of the paper was inltact. This was froli a sclloolroom
about 1 ' 2 illiles fromii the hy-pocenlter.
* * *
These clotlles caused ille s0ille difficultv since I carried tlielli in iill
hanid luggage oil the way b)ack to the UlUited States. The luggage w-as
sutbject to iilspectioil bly Customiis in Hawaii and the ilone-too-clean ladies'
garilleilts caused somile eyebrows to be raised. This clotliiilg was ptit oil
perillaileint display, at the AFIP alollg with the records, specinllens, anld
other illaterials, but unifortunatelyIhas lecoille faded with tile years.
* * *
Theil off with Dr. Mlitani to Hirosiinla Prison to arrange for a survey
tealll visit. \Ve tliotigilt this would provide aii opportuinity for investigatinlg
190
Voluine 38, Ortobet-, 1965
Hi} os/liimla Mledical Diary, 194-5 LIEBOWV
Above. View of the Koi bridge (2,400 meters) from the hypocenter. Persons of the
group from Otake were oI1, or had just left, this bridge.
Below. The river bank near the Temmlia Bridge (1,000 nmeters) which is shown in
the background.
191
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
192
Voluine 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
effects of the heat flash on men whose exact position was known and who
(at 2,300 + meters) were beyond the range of severe gamma radiation.
We had been told that some were exercising in the open and others
confined to their cells. A good comparison could be made of effects of
radiant heat on persons in the open and under various degrees of shading.
Comparison with the Otake group who had been on the Koi Bridge in
another part of the city at about the same distance from the hypocenter
also would be of interest. We met the prison doctor to whom we
explained the aims of the survey, especially our need to know just where
each man was-if near a window whether it was open or not, the precise
clothing, etc. Dr. Mitani also asked permission to perform some sperm
counts on the prisoners who would serve as controls for a study Dr. Okoshi
was performing on persons exposed to radiation in Hiroshima. At the
distance of the prison no significant radiation effect would be expected.
Small gifts would be furnished those prisoners who cooperated. The
prison medical officer was entirely agreeable to all of the proposals.
Arrangements were made to begin the survey on Monday morning. We
were introduced to the warden who presented Dr. Mitani with a large
basket of fine tangerines.
Later in the afternoon went again to the office of the Vice-Mayor who
had kept his promise and had left us a good collection of pictures from
the various school books, postcards, etc., showing the city as it was before
the bombing. Later more photography. Then a satisfying Japanese bath,
some cribbage with Maj. Kramer, more work on records, and then to bed.
Novemtber 11, 1945: Early on this Sunday morning went again to
Otake with Dr. Ishii who said that we had received an invitation to
dine but was rather mysterious about it. It was a beautiful morning after
a someewhat miisty sunrise. We called first at the home of the Mayor
Upper. Differential effect of dark and light surfaces in absorbing heat. The material
is rice paper representing a teacher's name card, which was oln the outside of a class-
room facing the center at 2,300 meters. The inked characters, which read "Arai
House," have been burned out, whereas the white paper has reflected the heat and is
almost intact.
Lozwer left. Scorching of the darker blue-black stripes, Nith less effect on the lighter
stripes by heat rays at 1,700 meters. Only certain folds of this garment onI the side
away from the bomb were in the path of the rays. On the near side a portion of the
cloth was charred. Patient suffered second and third degree burns of the chest, under-
lying the charred cloth where it was tightly stretched over the skin, and also of the
exposed face, chest, arms, and neck.
Lower right. Charring and scorching of dark blue portions of the polka dot pattern
of clothing at 1,600 meters. Minimal effect on lighter background. Some of the polka
dots have become completely burned through. Others are partly scorched.
193
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
.ii
194
Plan of cell blocks supplied by Clhief Warden at Hiroshlilmla Prison where a detail(l
study of burn injurics was performiied bY the Joint CoImmnission. At 2,300 Im1eters fromIl
the hypocenter there XXwere Ino serious immediate racliation injuries.
I
19I
I
D
l'olititie 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
ct__ 7-1-bX w - e K
ctwC~-'S. s --t ~ ~ ~ t B ct ' - ~ t
6 R4 c&4w-eR O j~ <e'-;_,y _
-AL-~~~~
Q H*H>o<SGss~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Cl
- =<_K_i~a
X b tP%5-- /v-G . -2<de,9 lt.
lli 7 Z A,f -a,, , -- i,,,,s,,_A
i GAA~~ edCr - e -
* EU;~ A-G4-~ >-4M -}9^^ . o XZ ~'Fh J ^:. 7 oz-~ '- < 9
Notes miadle by Col. Mason during interviewx wxith as. istant wvarden at Hiroshiimai
Prisoni. Simiulated Japaniese doodlinigs in miargini.
anid fouind that hie hiad arrange(l for us to visit Dr. Nagaoka. 'We wNere
escorted to the doctor's homie. This was typically walled off fromi the
street anid hiad its own private court comiplete wAithi dwarf trees. He was
arather tall miiddle-aged mian w,ith a lined grave face and qluiet demleanlor,
(Iressed in the traditional dark kimono. e were introduced to MIrs.
Nagaoka. The receptioni wAas ceremionious and miost graciouis. Sukiyak"i
_~~~~~i the tru dl
was served iJapanese manner with a charcoal stove in the mile
of the table. Taro anid uiiatsv-take wAere thrown in together with smiall
(julantities of mieat anid chiicken anid muchi soY sauce and coarse brownl
suigar. The lady of the house did not partake of the meal, but appeared only,
occasionially to serve. Our conversation wNas entirely through interpretation
but I was able to capture a sense of Dr. Nagoaka's concern for the citizens
195
II
t1.
-4649 *V-*t
CL4.1
-&-I
."I,
"26..
,11
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
of his village, many of whom had been his patients in the past. Most
interesting was his evident appreciation of the scientific value of the
records he had kept. After the fine dinner a beautiful blue silk haori
(lady's short coat) was brought out and ceremoniously presented to me.
Dr. Nagaoka said that he had learned that I was planning to marry and
that he hoped that my wife would be happy with this gift.
On returning I found that Col. Mason had opened an acipak and all
the chocolate and other good things were placed above his bed ready
to be distributed. This was done for all hands.
Novemiiber 12: Spent the morning photographing the remainder of the
autopsy specimens with Charlie Brownell. Was informed in the early
afternoon that three technicians were to arrive from the 262nd Station
Hospital. They did indeed arrive accompanied by Maj. Achenard and
Capt. Pierce. This was a tangible result of Col. Oughterson's efforts to
strengthen our staff. Dr. Ishii reported that Dr. Tamagawa of the
Okayama University Medical School was in the city and we went to
meet him at the Post Office liospital. He promised material, but had not
as yet worked up the autopsies that he had performed in late August. We
visited the morgue which was in a shed behind the hospital, almost in
the open air. Later in the cold afternoon a fine bath which this time had
been reserved for the Japanese officers and physicians and for us. This
was less gay than usual but also less crowded.
The teams that returned from the prison reported that the work was
especially worthwhile. Col. Mason had obtained a detailed record of
casualties with unusually complete follow-up data, since survivors con-
tinued under imprisonment. In the evening was assisted in translating
captions and identifying details of the pictures that had been supplied
by the mayor's assistant. We considered these a find because of photo-
graphic restrictions that had been in force in Hiroshima since the Man-
churian war.
Dr. Murachi reported considerable progress in his major preoccupation
with the building and protection studies, in which he was now assisted
Left. Typical profile burn. The patient, a nurse at the Red Cross Hospital, aged 17.
was exposed at 1,700 meters. There is depigmentation sharply outlined by pig-
mented tissue in a very narrow band. There is a crusted exudate in the peri-aural
region.
Right. Typical "mask" burn in a prisoner at the Hiroshima prison (2,300 meters).
The pigmentation has a deep chocolate brown color. The outlines are very sharp.
There is protection of the upper portion of the neck which was shaded by the mandible.
At this distance there were no burns beneath the clothing. A blue prison cap protected
the skin. of the forehead.
196
Volume 38, October, 1963
Hiroshimria Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
197
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
IW
Top. Hiroshinma castle before, amid (bottomn) after the bonmhing. Near the castle
were the headquarters of the military forces itl Hiroshimia (800 mileters).
by Dr. \Iurai, an excellent radiologist froml Tokyo who had joined the
grouip. His inv/estigationis had ideintifie(l tentativelv a nutmiiber of buildings
stuitable for obtaining the (lata desired: the Banker's Club, the Nippon
Bank, the Chligoktu Electric Company building, a large concrete uinider-
ground slhelter near Hiroshima castle adjacent to the Headquarters of
the Cltgoku Army, the Hiroshima Broadcasting Station (JOFK). All
193
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Mlledical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
of these were withliln 1,000 mleters of the hypoceinter. Drs. 'Murachi and
MVIurai had begun the detailed wvork of inqtiry and tracing of individual
patients who had beeni at their desks or in other fixed positions. Since
many of these were dead, Dr. iMurachi said that it was a matter of going
from one person to aniother in the various villages or outskirts of the city
to obtaiin hearsay reports, and( confirmation when possible. This was
(liffictult and( tinme-consuminiig, but a surprising amounit of useful information
bad already beeni gathered.
* * *
At this timiie a less focused but still quite useful stud(ys was also in the
iimaking. This consiste(d of the comiipilation of reports onl the fate of people
in the muajor buildings, whiclh miade possible a comparison of the protective
effect of concrete buildings as compared with woodeln structures. For this
purpose the report of the Communications Department, which had several
butildings at various points in the city, was especially useful. Informatioin
oni the fate of the personnel had been compiled by- Dr. Hachiya. Similar
information was obtained by questioning officials of the Hiroshima City
Hall and Red Cross Hospital. In addition, since most of the school buildings
had been of wood, the fate of the children in the btildings provided
coml)parative (lata. Particularly tuseful was the report of the Yasudla Private
School which has beenimentioned.
* * *
Novcemb1ecr 13: \Vent to the Red Cross Hospital and( took photographs
of patients well-known to tus, oine of a young nurse with depigmentation
which was very severe, but outlined by a sharp line of dark brown.
Althotuglh the skies were gray and threatening, took the photographlic
teamii to Hiroshimila castle in the military headquarters area. The castle
was a tangled pile of rubble on a stone base situated in a corner of a
sqluare plot of land surrounded by a moat. Photographed all aspects of
the unidergrotund concrete bunker near the military headquarters in which
20 young girls had served as telephone operators. Both inside and outside
views were recorded. Dr. Murai had prepared a "shadow(diagram'i" of
the bunker. This showed the thickness of earth and concrete projected on
the ground that wotld have intervened between a person in any part of
the btunker anid the gammlila rays, assuming that they traveled in perfectly
straighlt linies from the epiceniter. \Ve disctussed the principles as they
w-otil(l apply to more complex structtures andI it was quite clear that
(letailed btilinig plans wotould have to be obtainedl. Despite tlle drizzle,
visited several other underground shelters. In one, directly opposite the
headquarters building I fotunid in the litter anid rtubble a bltue covere(d
199
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Exterior and interior of Communiications Bunker. Cliugoku Armiy Headquarters.
(800 meters).
200
Volutiie 38, Oclobet-, 1965
Hiroshliml(aIMedical Diary, 1945 LIEBOWV
Initial sketclh of building plan of Cenitral Teleplholne Office showing, position of
certaini persons whlo were sul)sequently traced.
copy of The Life of Clafsczcit.v, the famiiotus Pruissiani militarv tacticianl,
written in Englislh anlel extensively annotated in Japaniese. The covers were
faded and( stainedl-with moistture but this treasture itself was esselntially
intact.
In the evening was (leliglhted to find that Dr. Nakao had acquired addi-
tionial informiationi, largely blood data. on the early patients in the Iwaktini
201
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
series. These were transcribed. Ishii lhas had no success in obtainilng addi-
tionial autopsy nmaterial but the search is still on.
AN'ovemiiber 14: In the early morninlg photographed patients with C.
Brownell's teamii at the Post Office Hospital. At the samiie time obtainied
tissues fromii maniy autopsy cases. Most of these seemed irrelevant or were
lacking in miaterial. Dr. Tamiiagawa seemiied well-iniformiied but talked about
Notes regarding finidiiigs ill certain lersons whose position in the Cenitral Telephone
Otffice was known and(I for w-hom shileldinig (lata were calenilated.
eaclh case at great lenigtlh. Dr. Islii w-as of the greatest lheli) in abstractilln
thLe monologue.
Later in the afterniooni lhad a mllost initerestinig visit at the prison w-here
inmiiiates were pb)otographed. AIany lha(l the samiie imiask-like dee)lv pig-
mented burns as the Otake pattients. Somiie remarkable shadows onl tlle
wall of the prisoni cast by onie wall againist the wall at right anigles to it
were fotund(l by Capt. Rosenibatiumi and photograplhed.
Dr. Okoslhi had good sticcess in obtaining seobieti speciiioeiis froili tle
prisoners. Oni the preceding day Col. AMason lbadblrought alonig a supply
of chocolate bars whlich were tused as a reward for the meni N-ho cooperated.
In the evening I Nas appalled to discover that somiie Iwakuni cases coIn-
siste(l of protocols that did niot miiatch aultOpsy miaterial or that there wN-ere
202
T'olu"ie 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshima AMedical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
THE UFE OF CLAUSEWITZ 1
Ig:I± The Reality of War: A Companion to Clausewitz E
V-OI{Al'& k5Uo *&3io Gordon Highlanders L C T
tt+];§ffi1XR0 rciStrh , Major Stewart L. Murray
-e Z 2g:C)V Popular Edition 13: Captain A. Hillard
Atteridge it I .CIt ! 60 S t .I±tJ Famous Modern
Battles, The British Army of To-day ;
D£k .t Spenser Wilkinson O Clausewitz t i; ia
J3!g;6( 1 tt
Top. Portioin of first page of Clausewitz. From bunker at Japanese military head-
quarters in the castle area at Hiroshima.
Bottomji. Imprint of Japaniese Army Transportationi Corps oIn flyleaf of Clausewitz.
203
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
tissues from some early deaths without protocols. Asked Dr. Ishii to visit
Iwakuni to see that everything was properly lined up. He seemed embar-
rassed by this difficulty and assured me that everything would soon fall
into line.
* * *
The eager and excellent photographic team consisting of Capt. Charles G.
Brownell, M.A.C. and Capt. Ted Bloodhart, S.C., which at long last had
been assigned to us, was a most important and stimulating addition. Much
of my time in those days was spent in bringing their talents to bear on the
photography of tissue specimens, clothing, and patients who had become
familiar in the various hospitals and clinics, or as new and worthy
subjects were identified by the teams in the field. Later they performed
yeoman service in recording the appearances of the effects of physical
phenomena such as the "shadows" on the bridges and buildings. The major
buildings and shelters in which the special casualty studies were being
performed were also photographed. For correlative work, one set of views
of the buildings was made from the direction of the hypocenter.
* * *
Novemiiber 15: Most of the day was spent with Brownell-Bloodhart,
et al. making numerous photographs of the large buildings, mostly in
the direction of the rays from the bomb for correlation with protection
factors. All of the important rooms were photographed.
Upon returning, saw Zenker's solution being mixed and guessed at once
that an autopsy was in the offing. There was indeed a case to do: a
lung abscess. Dr. Ishii and I performed the autopsy together. The patient
was a 31-year-old soldier who was recovering from radiation-induced
aplastic anemia, but died on the hundredth day. This was the ultimate con-
sequence, perhaps, of focal pulmonary necrosis which had developed during
the earlier agranulocytosis from which the patient suffered. During the
autopsy I saw a number of persons in the hallway outside the small and
none-too-clean autopsy room peering in whenever the door was opened.
Among them I noted an elderly gentleman in street clothes whom I
assumed to be the undertaker. When I asked Dr. Ishii whether this
was true, he inquired and then told miie nonchalantly that it was the patient's
father waiting to claim the body. I was distressed but the elderly gentle-
man himself showed no emotion. After the autopsy was completed I found
that the first photos of the specimen had returned. These were reasonably
good but rather too full of highlights and had to be redone. The remainder
of the day was spent with Drs. Murachi and Murai in compiling the
204
Volutize 38, October, 1965
Hir osliimi Aledical Diary, 1945 LIEBOWt'
Uppcr. Bankers Club (200 meters from the hypocenter).
Lozwcr. Hiroshiima City Hall. Despite its burned-out condition this building was
used to conduct the business of the city throughout the time the Joint Commission
was at work in Hiroshima.
205
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
information that had been obtained to date on the building and shielding
studies.
* * *
At this time only the position in the buildings and fate of certain persons
could be established, and a crude estimate made of the direction of the
rays. The building plans needed to determine the relation to the air-
burst itself and thus the angle of incidence of the gamma rays, assuming
a limited source, were not available. Immense labor was necessary to
obtain the projections of all the components of the buildings, exclusive of
the furnishings, in order to determine depth of shield, which was calculated
in "water equivalent."
* * *
Novemlber 16: The survey work is now nearly complete. Only Loge
and Koch are involved with the teams, working at the Post Office Hospital
clinic, which is still active. Here are seen as outpatients employees of the
Communications Department.
Spent most of the day in the field with Drs. Murai and Rosenbaum
and the photographic group at the radio station. This was a small battered
dark-green concrete building. Parts of it seemed unsafe and the work was
conducted gingerly with tests to see whether the weight of a man could
be borne. Although only a few persons were exposed in this building, their
positions were accurately known, and Murachi has been insistent on the
value of the detailed study. Also began photography on the Nippon Bank,
a much larger and more complex structure in which there were only a
few survivors. Its proximity to the hypocenter and its very heavy con-
struction could provide valuable data on the amount of shielding necessary
for protection. Returned to find Maj. Kramer in the midst of transcrip-
tion of the Communications Bureau reports. These gave raw survival
data for the employees, but not visitors, in the various divisions of the
Communications Department. These comprised several large buildings
in the heart of the city.
Novemlber 17: Continued with photographic documentation of buildings
near the hypocenter with Kramer and Rosenbaum whose clinical duties
are now complete, and Murai, Murachi, and the photographers.
Col. Oughterson finally arrived late in the evening followed by Dr.
Tsuzuki not long after. An impromptu meal was prepared and then, with
Col. Mason and Dr. Tsuzuki, talked into the small hours on the progress
that had been made and what was still to be done. Scotty was particularly
interested in the work with the Otake villagers and what had been learned
from the survey of school children that had been carried out largely on
206
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 19453 LIEBOW
I'.I
!sI 4. a.
t.....M. .;..
-...7...
Views of Nippon bank (250 meters):
Upper. Building seen from outside, with camera in line with the hvpocenter.
Middle. Eighteen inches of cinders had been placed on top of the tile for protection
against fire raids. Capt. Brownell is in the picture.
Lower. Interior view showing shattered concrete partition.
207
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
the initiative of the Japanese medical officers. After looking at my now
crowded distribution chart, Scotty agreed that although more patients
would be better, the survey work could be considered at an end and
that he would be satisfied with our total of well over 6,000 cases. This
was to my immense relief, since I knew that those who had been doing the
daily stint were weary and anxious to go home, or at least to have a
change. There remained still many important collections of material else-
where that had been gathered by various investigating groups from the
Japanese institutions. Also some patients had been evacuated in numbers
to other places. Some of these institutions contained the particularly
precious records of patients examined and investigated soon after the
bombing. We had already collected some of the most valuable material in
surveys at Iwakuni and at Saijyo Sanatorium. The latter required an
overnight trip. There still remained a number of institutions in Okayalila
and in the Kyoto district, especially at the Imperial University there,
and we still had the major problem of obtaining building plans from the
central offices in Tokyo.
It was agreed that it would be best to send a team ahead to Kyoto
to begin the transcription of records and review of collections of material
there. Maj. Kramer would be in the advanced party and Col. Mason and
Capt. Rosenbaum would join him there after completing work at Hiro-
shima. My own assignment was to go to the intermediate points, allowing
the most time for Okayama as soon as the shielding and population
surveys could be completed here.
The chief remaining problem, and perhaps one of the miost imnportant
objectives of the joint Commission, was to establish mortality and casualty
curves, in order that information on particular groups-for example,
those relatively protected in concrete buildings-could be related to the
general casualties at the same distance from the hypocenter. Since it was iowv
very late, we determined to postpone this discussion until tomorrow
so that all could contribute their thoughts. This problem had never been
far from our minds.
Novemiber 18: Much of the day was spent by the entire group in discus-
sion of how best to obtain the information for constructing a casualty
curve in relation to distance. The best idea put forward is that a sampling
should be made of survivors who are to be questioned not only concerning
their own injuries but also the fate of their relatives who were in the city.
As we discuss the matter it is obvious that there will be some error
since certain persons may have been en route, and some may not have
been in the place where they were supposed to be. We decide to proceed
208
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 W
with this since it appears to be the only way in which we can obtain
information regarding persons now dead. It is clear that we will need
help from those more expert in population studies, especially in the matter
of proper sampling. Col. Oughterson suggests that such men must be
available on the USSBS team which has now left this area. He promises
to investigate at once. Our Japanese colleagues also suggest that older
school girls could perform this survey very well once the list of persons is
selected.
In the late afternoon Dr. Tamagawa arrived and we invited him to a
late supper with us. He brought more records and the transcriptions
of these were begun with both Tamagawa and Ishii at work.
Novemlber 19: Drs. Tsuzuki and Oughterson left for Nagasaki in the
hope of obtaining expert help with the population study from the USSBS
now at work there. This morning made a tour with Brownell and Co.
to photograph the various "shadows." Most of these were still clearly
visible but the penumbra effect on the "Korean building" was less evident.
Photographed Brownell himself actually standing in the footmarks on
the Bantai Bridge.
Returned in time for a farewell dinner for Milton Kramer who was
leaving for Kyoto to begin the work of collecting case records and other
materials available there. Arrangements had been made by Dr. Tsuzuki.
Maj. Kramer left by train in company with Drs. Ito, Hatano, and Gotoh.
We were to be reunited in Kyoto within the next two weeks.
The remainder of the afternoon was spent in histological work, cutting
and staining, to bring our material closer to completion. To bed late at
night.
Novemzber 20: Col. Oughterson returned from Nagasaki. He had in the
meantime contacted the USSBS in regard to help with the demography
of the casualty study. A Navy Lieutenant, Mr. Nisselson, who is said to
have a good statistical background, has been assigned to us and is to
come soon. Later in the day, without our prior knowledge, members of
a large British mission arrived with Col. Solandt, a Canadian physiologist,
in charge of the casualty aspects. They seemed a very keen and pleasant
group. We made a working tour of the more interesting and revealing
institutions and landmarks in midafternoon. More of the building exteriors
were photographed by Brownell. On returning, discussed census figures
with Col. Solandt and found some discrepancies between his data and
ours that must be resolved. Of major interest to the British group are the
protection and survival data. We discuss our procedure and findings to
209
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
date in great detail. They Nere, of coturse, fascinatedl by the Otake work-
men's groups and the fact that good follow-up data are available. WNre
discussed the possibilitiy of mlaking a visual reconstructionl of the city
before the bombing froml air mlaps in order to establish the shadow-ing
effects of the buildings, and theN- said they would attemiipt it.
A',Tovecilbcr 21: "Ne spent a part of the mlorninig reviewing the medical
findings and protection data with Col. Solandt ancd others of his group.
Later in the morninlg we returnied to the Mayor's office with Col. Solandt
and again had a long talk, stressing the necessity for correct data and
also the need for the rice ration lists for setting up the populationl survival
study. The city now\ is rather heavily populated with investigating groups
concerned largely Nith estimiiates of damage. Lieutenanits Martin and M\Iont-
gomery are here froml Survey Teaml #4. On returniing wve mleet Group
Captain Thomiias an(l Group Commliland(ler Bronowskv of the Britislh milissionl
which has been busily at work on the stereoscopic prebombing air milaps.
Lieut. Elder has prepared a perspective (lrawing of the banks of the river
near the Koi Bridge where the Otake workmen's groups were situiated
at the moment of the explosion. Actual btiildinigs and the positionl of
the men were identified with the help of our Japanese colleagues w\ho
had been with us at Otake.
Jack Rosenbaum left for Nagasaki in nmid-afternooni. He had requested
this trip before joininig the group in Kyoto.
* * *
For the casualtv studies several basic pieces of iniformlationi were re-
quired. The first of these was the actual population of the city on August 6.
The best estimate that could be made, 255,000, was onl the basis of the
rice-rationiing figures of June 30, 1945. Those, as of the last of tuly ha(l
been lost in the fires of August 6. An estimate based on newx-spaper circtula-
tion gave a figure lower by 25,000, but this was consideredI minimiial and
less reliable because it was based on more assutmptionis than the estinmate
for the rationing dlata. Data on the distribution of the popuilation in the
various sectors were also requested fromii Mr. -Morishita, the Vice-MaYor,
and he ultimiiately comiiplied.
For the constructioni of the casualty cturve, the mletlhod finallv chosen
after consultatioii nwith the statisticians, Lietit. H. Nisselson, USSBS,
Lieut. M. Habel, F.A.. and Dr. -Motosaburo 'Masutvama. Instittite of
Statistical WMathematics, Tokyo Imiiperial University, was to secutre a raindomii
sample of the population aged betw-een 13 and 60. The first probleml wxas
to randonize the choice of precincts. For this purpose a designationl
num'ber, 270, wsas choseni. The populations of the iil(lividual precincts were
210
l'olzitiie 38, Ortobei-, 1965
Hiyroshiyytya Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
aclded and the first selected was the one in which the cumilulated population
fell closest to 270. This number was theni added to the new total and the
populations of the precincts Nere further cumulated, the one chosen being
that wlhiclh fell closest to the new total and so oni. On this basis, 265 of
the 523 available precincts were chosen. A nationial census had, fortunately,
been taken early in November 1945. The Hiroshima High School girls
were responsible for handing out ancd collecting a qtuestionnaire directed to
H I ROSH IM A
RELATION OF MORTALITY AND
TOTAL CASUALTY RATES TO DISTANCE
Percent
too
X _ X'L 4OOOmef*rs' Iopen
90 _ " Deaths from<burns
\ Totol Cosuolty Rote-
- X Mortality Rote
70 \
0
60 -/OOOmW oX2-
shielded-
50 _Dh from radiation X _- ___
40 -- °-
30 - _
20 K
30 . \ .j
Kilometers 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
The general casualty and mortality curves at Hiroshima as determined fromii the
population study. Against the general curve are shownvi mortality figures from the two
Otake groups, some of whom were shielded from burns although not protected from
radiation effect by being in the shadow of Japanese houses, anid some who were in the
open on a river bank and suffered both burns and radiation injury.
eaclh twentieth person oni the census lists of the designated precincts
that wvas to provide informationi not only about the persons selected for
the sample, but also about their relatives in the city. Some 3,740 of the
cards issued to 4,700 persons in the samiiple were returned. This pro-
cedure wN-as supervised by a group led by Lieut. (later Capt.) Marvin
E. Habel and Dr. M\asuyama who also ultimately calculated the results.
These cards, after exclusion of duplications, provided iniformiiation on the
fate of 20,586 people at various distalnces fromii the hypocenter. Con1-
fidence in the validity of the dlata obtained was supported by the high
mortality figure obtained by this metlhod for the indivriduals in the
innlermiost 500-mleter ring. It could theni be calculated that 25.5 per cent
211
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
of the total population (64,600 persons) had been killed, 27 per cent had
beeii injutred, and(I 47.5 per cenit had escaped physically unscathed. Againist
the total mortality curve also could be plotted data obtained fromi special
groups suchl as the Otake wsorkmeni.
* * *
1Vo,z?cumibr 22: Thanksgiving Day. Had long discussioin with Col. Ough-
terson concerniing the termiinationi of this study which is now clearly in
sight. The shieldiing survey has now been completed. \What reImains to be
done is the general casualty study. This has now been thoroughly discussed
and the detail designed by Lieut. Habel, in consultation with Lieut. Nissel-
sen and Dr. M\Iasuyama. The final report Nill be written in WVashington
at the Army Institute of Pathology and George LeRoy and I will be
assigned to do it, with wlhatever help we need. The question of how to
return the mlass of records, slides, and tissues that have now beeni ac-
cumulated to the U.S. arises. I suggest that the best way w-ould be to
send themii sealed to the Chief Surgeon's Office in Tokyo through USSBS
for conisignmlienit to the AIP. Then Col. Oughterson departed for Kure
to investigate the possibilities with USSBS wNhich is based there. Upon his
retuirn he lhas miiade a tentative arraingemiient with the USSBS to carry
the records to Tokyo for delivery to Col. LeRoy who will have returned
bv that timle. The ship is the USS Haines, a Destroyer Escort vessel con-
verted for transport, now called an APD. Lieut. MIcCarthy, supply officer
of the Hainies, wsill take custody.
Our numiibers have niow been reduced but there are still enough to make
a merrv feast of 10-in-1 rations with its excellent canned chicken a not
too bad substitute for turkey. The delicious Japanese tangerines add
gaiety in substitution for cranberry sauce.
Noveiiiber- 23: In the morning arranged for packing of all our records,
photographs, and slides. Then by jeep to Kure. There were hundreds of
vessels in the broad harbor and the U;SS Haioes was invisible, over-
shadowed by the towering hulks of transports and warships. Conversation
witlh the shore patrol reveals that the only way to locate the vessel is
fromn a chart on the commnland ship. They hail the launch which plies
betwNeen ship and shore. This quickly- brings me to the commlanid ship, the
massive spic-and-span cruiser, Oklahomla City. As a Lieutenanit Colonel
I wN-as piped aboard and, keeping vwhat little I knewN, of Naval etiquette
iniinmd, saluted the flag at the stern and theni the officer of the deck
wlho uslheredime into the captaini's austere presenice. The U.TSS Haiomes
wsas quickly founid on the detailed imlap that indicated the position of every
vessel in the harbor. The captain invited mle to the officers' miess for coffee
212
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOW
and then graciously sent me to the Haines in his gig. The Haines, as a DE,
was much broader than she looked from the water. Lieut. Commander
Laurent was in command but Lieut. McCarthy who was to receive the
consignment of records was ashore and due to return later in the after-
noon. Although there was much pressing business back in Hiroshima, I
decided to stay aboard to make detailed arrangements with him. Members
of the USSBS who were there told me of their fascinating experiences
throughout Japan and also of the difficulties of the landlubber's life
aboard a DE, converted or not. Finally Lieut. McCarthy arrived. We dis-
cussed the techniques of packing and trans-shipment. I indicated also
that we would like to send our Sgt. Buckles back to Tokyo on the ship
so that the material could be delivered in person to Col. LeRoy. Lieut.
McCarthy said that this could be arranged with proper orders. Since the
Haines was to sail within a few days we decided that it would be best
to bring the crates, and Sgt. Buckles aboard tomorrow if possible. After
more coffee we parted, Lieut. McCarthy promising to have us met at
the dock in the late afternoon tomorrow.
Before leaving Kure I picked up two five-gallon water cans for shipping
the wet tissues.
Saturday, November 24: The day was spent in arranging all of the
material systematically and in making a manifest of the records, tissues,
photographs, and other materials. The tissues were wrapped in gauze,
labeled with waterproof tags and put in formalin in these water cans.
Everything was finally accomplished. The boxes were nailed shut with
corners painted according to specifications. On our way to the ship we
stopped at Kure to see Lieut. Col. Hall concerning the return of Sgt.
Buckles to Tokyo. This was quickly accomplished and Buckles and the
boxes were brought to the dock where Lieut. McCarthy graciously took
all in charge, after signing for the latter.
Sunday, November 25: This was a red-letter day since Gen. Hugh
Morgan and Col. Francis Dieuaide, consultants to the Surgeon General,
were scheduled to arrive for a visit. Col. Mason and I therefore went to
Kure, but these gentlemen were nowhere to be found. After an idle morn-
ing we returned. We discussed again with Col. Oughterson the closing of
the establishment at Ujina. This would rest on me after the others had
gone. We have considerable borrowed equipment that must be returned
to the units that had given it to us on loan with the firm understanding that
it would be returned at the completion of the work. Japanese equipment
that had been borrowed from Tokyo Imperial University must also be
sent back. After closing the laboratory at Ujina there would remain only
213
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
the population study which would proceed under Dr. Masuyama anid
Lieut. Habel, and the work of collecting records and materials from other
institutions. Dr. Ishii and 1, who were now close friends, would travel
together by jeep.
Our first stop is to be Okayamia where both the Uiniversity and the
Mlilitary Hospital are said to have many records. \We were informed
that the nu-merous landslides that have occurred in the mountainous
country to the north after the September and October rain have made road
travel between Hiroshima andl Okayama all but impossible. The rail-
roads, however, have been kept in runninig order and we are advised
to send the jeep by flatcar and to proceed to OkaYamia by train. WNe
would thenl go cross-cotunitry to join the group at Kyoto. It is obviotus
also that considerable work will have to be done upoIn returninig to Tokyo,
especially to complete the collection of building plans of those structuires
in Which the protection studies were done. Dr. Tsuzuki has assured tus that
these would be available in Tokyo, since plans for public utility and
hospital buildings would have been kept in central offices there. Then
took the short trip out of town to the Kaitaichi railroad stationi and made
tentative arrangements to get men and equipment on the train.
After supper Col. Oughterson is in a philosophical mlood. I renmind himi
of my desire to return as soon as the job in Japan is comapleted. He
promises to mlake appropriate arrangemenits in the Surgeon's office uponl
lis imminienit return to Headquarters in Tokyo. \Ve discuiss also at length
whliat we have learned of Japan andl of the influence of the Emperor.
Scottv asstures us from wlhat he has been able to observe on his trips to
Tokyo that MIacArthur is held in great respect and is doing a remarkable
jol) wN-ithotut the slightest sigin of vindictiveness anl with J[apan's futuire
recovery foremilost in miind. This has been mlaking a tremlend(lotus imlpression
on the people, who can hardlyz believe it.
Mo,iodav, Novcnilbr 26: In the early mlorniing made anothler trip to
Kaitaichi station and arranged for the (leparttire of otur personnel to
Kyoto an(l Tokyo ancd for the transportation to Toky-o of the large
quantities of Japanese laboratory and(l other equipmllenit that hadl been
loaned to tus ai(I w-hich had now been crated at lUjina. It was to be selnt
in a closedl boxcar andl Lieuit. Habel wX-as to be at the receiving end in order
to release it froml custody. Everythinog was trtucked dowin, the loading was
supervise(l, aid(I the boxcar sealed. Outr two junior officers left for
Kyvoto. Theni retturned to Ujina and fotund( that Gen. Morgan, Col. Tturner.
anid Col. )ieutaide had arrivled. L-tunch w-as preparel. It was a particular
pleasure to renew accluaiitances with C(ol. Dieuaidle whoi I lIad milet miiany
214
Volutize 38, Octobei-, -1965
Hiroshlia Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOWV
imionths previously in New Zealanid Nhere he was mzakinig a consultanit's
tour. \Ve then took the senior officers on the VIP tour of the city throulgh
all of the selected places. Gen. Morgan was my guest-a dignified grey-
haired figure of heroic dimensions who looked the part of senior consultanlt.
On the way I presented to him some more details of the plani of the study
ancd what had been accomplished. \NVhen Ne came to the ' Koreain building"
in order to gain an advantageouis view of the city, I found that things
had changed for the w-orse since my last visit. It w-as most revoltinig
that the landings had b)een use(l as suirface toilets. The General stepped
gingerly andl kept a stiff upper lip anid was rewarded by seeiing the raililg
shadows wvhich were still quite clear and sharp although the peniumbra
was fading in the cemiienit at the top. He marveled at the energy of the
people who wvere beginniing to return to the sites of their holmies. Rude
shelters were springing up amidl the rtubble, walled and covered with
bits of rusted corrtugated maetal, but still the beginnings of a rebirth. To
otur disappointment the shadoNs on the bridge were now only faintly visible
but inmpressed the General. Otur visitors then returned to Kture witl
Col. Turner. It was now getting dark and beginning to drizzle slightly.
Thleni homiie to a delightful steaming bath.
One important iteml still remaiined to be coimipleted. This wvas the protocol
that I had promisedl to Dr. Shigeto of a girl, Fusako Tsuta, froml the Red
C'ross Hospital who hald been atitopsied. The slides were now comupleted.
The death as we expected was not clearly related to the atomiiic-bomllb
inijtury, but rather to typhoid fever. The mlicroscopic descriptions were
comiipleted and typed ouit by Sgt. Huffaker. Then we cooked sonme bacon
anll eggs and brouglht Col. Ouightersoni and( Col. AMason to the railroadl
station to see tlhemii off oIn the liglht traini. Fonid goo(dniiglhts and Godspeed
w-ere said. Col. M\ason was bound for Kyoto and Scotty for Tokyo.
3. MOPPING UP
ANovemiibcer 27: The final closing of the shop was the order of the (lay.
The first itemii of business w-as to returni the refrigerator to the ambulance
company. This was (lone wsith the willing help of our remiiaininig enlistedl
imieniwho were eager to returni closer to civilization. The refrigerator had
been a trustworthy servant througlhout our stay. Tlhen to Kure whliere
Sgt. :Huffaker, who had performied splendidly, was left at his new assigrn-
ment at the 361st Stationi Hospital. Col. -Mason's curette and mxy autopsy kit
were also left there ancd the radio was returned to the tendler miiercies
of the I & l officers. Tlhen hlurried lback to Ujinal for Isllii anid our
luggage. Islhii and I mladle the train sclheduled far 2 :58 p.m. The jeep
215
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
wN-as put oIn a flatcar. The trip from Kure was through a country of sharply
pyramnidal terraced hills, looking like the lovely islands in the inland sea.
W;'e arrived at 7:20 p.m. The jeep was ready for use. WN'hen I opened the
fronit comlpartmiient I foutnd that the copy of \Vintrobe's Hemiiatology that
I had put there was missing. I then looked in the mletal compartmiienit in
the back seat, also unlocked, but all of the numerous cans of chicken
froiim the tenl-in-one rations that we had stored there were still intact.
Tlhis w-as ironic since the chicken wvould have made a muclh more digestible
diet for hutngry people than the ARVintrobe. WNe did not have an easy timie
findinig lodgings for Dr. Ishii. WN-e stopped at a Japanese hotel but
there was no room. \Ve becamie thoroughly confused trying to find the
Okavamia Japanese -Military Hospital from directions that Islhii had
obtained but finally obtained a place of lodging there for Ishii. Then
Nvent in search of the 21st Regimental Combat Team stationed in Okayama
and found it after considerable difficulty. I w-as given a place in 18, a
tguest roomn," bare and cold except for a smiiall charcoal fire in a brazier.
Theni somne writing of these notes and wearilv to bed.
Noz'cuii)er 28: In the miiorning met Gen. MAiura, a friend and formiier
co-worker of Prof. Tstiuzki. Throtughl Ishii, he extendedIhis cooperation
anld w-as all politeiiess. A num-iber of patients fromii Hiroshima were in
this hospital. We photographed several and theln w-ent to inspect the
laboratory. Some gross material was there which after considerable (lis-
ctissionl w-as shared as had been agreed. Again wve emplhasized that they
were free to prepare their onn reports on their owln observations. At
Okavamia University w-e were received by Dr. Tanabe, a patlhologist.
He seemiied a charminig person w-ho offered every help for our wNork in-
cluiding a large room with his personal electric heater. This w-as gratefully
received since the Neather was raw. \Vent to work with Dr. Ishii on the
translation of the autopsy protocols that were available both from the
MIilitary- Hospital and from the University files. Two of the more important
are still missing. Again it wras interesting to observe that when our
attitude wvas made known and the hand of friendship extended it was
gladly seized. Again "lhomiie" after much Japanese tea and conversation.
The officers of the Comibat Team w-ere a gruff but friendly lot and not
very communicative. They seemed to accept their assignment on that
frigid plateau in the two-thirds-destroyed city quite philosophically. Their
disposition to share their whisky was helpful.
Novemiiber 29: Dr. Ishii and I worked througlh the day translatinig the
autopsy material records. Late in the afternoon we wN-ere introduced to
Prof. Tsuida, the Head of the Dept. of Surgery at the LTniversity of
216
Volunte 38, October, 1965
Hiroshlitiia Aledical Dianr, 1945 L
Okayama. He has the mlost orniate office that I have seen in Japan to
date. He andl his staff hadl taken care of some of the evacnees fromii
Hiroshima. Later in the afterlnoon Dr. Tamagawa wlho had prexviously
visited at Hiroshima fulfilledl his agreemiient to share with us miiaterial froml
a number of autopsies he had performle(d both at Hiroshimlla an{d at
Okayamiia. Dr. Tsuda gave permiiissioin to take his clinical records with ns to
Kvoto where it would be miiore convenient to transcribe thelmi and wh-lere
there would be miiore help. W\e were nowm-nore free to concenltrate on the
M1ilitary Hospital records.
Novemiibcr 30: Translations continued. \We founid certain discrepancies in
previously abstracted charts from the Okavama Military Hospital anld
consequently reviewA-ed the original records with special care. Slides already
prepared wNere given to tus from a numiiber of cases by Prof. Tanabe. A
few more not currently available are to be cuit and sent to Us. Wre were
now ready to continue our journey. Again packed up our beloniginigs alnd
new acquisitions for an early start on the followN-ing moruinig.
Satutrdav, December 1: Started at exactly 06:30 on the long roadl to
Kyoto. Ishii was ready anid w\-aiting when I called for himii. It w-as a
sparkling clear day after a very tlhreatening afternoon oni the day before.
The weatlher was freezing cold and it Nas difficult to keep wzarmi w\hile
driving in the open jeep evein in the brilliant sunshine. The trip wAas
through rough high country with the roads still interrupted by washouts
created by the fall rains; the roads were sometimies negotiable by jeep,
but on occasion required detours. Many stops are made for discussions of
the best way across the mlounitains from village to village by Dr. Isllii.
The people were curious but very friendly since there has been almost no
penetration by American occulpation forces into this territory. At about
09:30 wse stopped for breakfast in the sunlight and to thaw out a little
bit in the courtyard of a farmiihouse. We were most graciously received by a
delightful peasant family who prepared some hot tea for uis. They also
seemed very appreciative of our own food that wve in(luced them to
share with Us. \VTe departed good friends, leaving some packages of
chocolate and cigarettes. As the day warnmed, the trip through the ImlouIn-
tainous Hyogo prefecture becamle even more delightful. There w-ere sharp
ridges andl peaks covered by the deep green of pine forests rising above
terraced paddies full of dark water that reflected mountains and brilliant
sky. Our progress toward Himleji w-as slow because of the detours. \Ve
entered this beautiful city at about noon. Here there was a story-book
castle reminiscent of the one at Hiroshima as seen in pre-wxar photographs.
The building, gleaming white, rises to a tower of mainy levels with
217
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
swN-eeping graceful grey tile-covered roofs and an ornate top story. \Vre
took timiie to explore the building wlhich wNithinl actually is a simaple wooden
structtire with rough walls. Jshii told me that truly ancienit castles are
rare in J.apani since fires on the average burn the Japaniese cities at eight-
y-ear intervals. The castle is set in a lovely park of grass and trees that
adds to its beauty. We left Himeji reluctantly and proceeded alonlg a
splendid road to Kobe wvhich we reached 1 2 houirs later. This is a large
commlllercial center, much of it devastated by bombing and fire. Kyoto
was not far and we mlade off along a crowded highwvay to reach our
destiniation at about 4:00 p.m. The Surgeoni's office was at Sixth Army
Headquarters wN-hich occupied a tremlenidous black building, the Daikan.
In the Surgeon's office was Col. 'M. DaN-soni Tyson whose namiie was quite
familiar althouglh I had niever mlet him. He had beeni on the house staff
in pathology at Yale before continuinig in surgery. In civilian life he had
been one of the seniior surgeons at the Hitchcock Hospital in Hanover,
New Hamplishire w-here there w-as a large niucleus of Yale-educated mne(lical
mieni. I was assigned a rooml at the Biwsako, but before proceeding there
it was necessary first to find quarters for Dr. Ishii. Suitable lodgings wNere
founld at a ramiibling Japanese hotel labeled "Off Limits." An additional
difficulty was that MNaj. Kramiier and Capts. Rosenbaum and Loge were
quartered bevonld the center of the city in a tall white commllercial-looking
building remiiniscenit of the Dai Ichi. At long last found Jack Rosenbaum
anid the others. They reported that they had imiade excellent progress in
collecting anid transcribing the clinical data anld that there wNere onily a
few imore days of work left to (1o. \We went to the Mlivako. the mlost
splendid hotel in the city, used for senior officers' quarters. We all
enjoyed the retunioni over cocktails and( a delightful stupper of roast beef.
The tisefulniess of having otur own tranisportation nows became obvious since
I dliscovered that the Biw-ako wx-as far otut of towx-n on Lake Biwa. It
wsrs dark and(l the miiap was diffictult to follow after leavinig the miiain road.
There were a few smiiall sigins in Ei-iglish which had to be read by flash-
lighlt, but at lonig last the hotel was fotund oni what seemiiedl to be a smiiall
islanid connlected with a bridge to the miiainlanid. This was obviously a
resort anid I was given ani immillenise dlouble room with private bath. There
crisp cleani slheets anid the soft mlattress soonl received a tired body.
Entertainmiiienit wx-as in progress and the Imlusic of the samnisei was a
lullabv onlv briefly heard. It all seemed like a dreatm after Hiroshimna.
Smndav, Deccuuibcr 2: WVoke rather late but refreshed. Happily, break-
fast wvas still being mlost graciously served by persoIns wN-ho behaved like
couirtiers. Tlle Biwako was indee(d loxely throtuglhot.t w-ith hulge commlnlon
218
Voliiine 38, Orlobet-, 1965
Him-oshintia Mlledical Diari, 1945 LIEBOWV
rootmis anid delightful lawns and gardens. Fromii my secoiid-floor window
the loftv hills on the far side of the lake N-ere reflected in the blue water.
Since I knew we wsould have imiuch to do in Kyoto anid since I had not
miet the Surgeoni in comminianid I returnied to Headqtiarters. To my stir-
prise even the senior officers w-ere there. I wxas introdtuced to Gen. Haginis.
The General wN-as a bit suspicious of our ImlissiOI, since the intact and(I
lovely city of Kvoto had becomiie a miecca for those of the military desiring
a real taste of Japanese life in its pre-wNar state. I informiied him that
all of this had happenied while our backs wxere turned on the rest of the
coutntr during our labors anid that our imiajor aimii was to obtaini materials
anid records fromii various lJapanese instittutionis. I then becamlle the recipienit
of a onie andl olne-half hour lecture on the world in general anid especially
on how wicked the 'Negroes were. I was anixiotus to leave hlis office to visit
the Kyoto University where Ishii had told mle a pathology imieeting was
to be in progress. AMany of the senior pathologists of Japan were there.
I had the l)leasure of miieeting at once Dr. Riojunl Kinoslhita who was
presiding. He spoke English beautifully. They repaired to Clhiniese res-
tauranits in the vicinity which were in operation but, unfortunately, off
limiiits to nmilitary personnlel and I had to conitenit myself with the remnianits
of a "K" ration. The grouinds of the 'University were delightful in the
bright stunislhinle anid the lunich was enjoyed in solitude. Then returned
to the mleetinag where solmie beautiful pathology was shown. Among the
finiest denmonistrations, the lectures bein-g incomprehensible to me, was
that of Hamiiazaki who spoke on cytological details in diseased tissue. It
was a pleasure also to meet the w-orld famiious hemiatologist of the Ulli-
versitv, Dr. Amiianio, w-ho seemiied reserved and depressed. I was told that he
lhad been with the group that had been lost in the landslide during the
typhoon of micld-September.
Dr. Kinoshita said he had several autopsy cases fromii Hiroshlimila avail-
able anid invited mle to visit his institute at Osaka. I had to leave before
Prof. Tanabe, who was speakinig, wvas finiished, but ultimately the slides
that he had promised reached me through the kind offices of Dr. Ishii.
Late in the afternion had supper at the AMivako xN-ith Col. MIason. While
there boughlt aniother beautiful satsutiiia powder box anid somiie woodeni
bamboo cigarette cases. 'Most imiiportant of all w-as a lovely strinlg of
pearls. designledl for C.G. Col. AMason had already investigated all of the
local stores anid provided miie with details as well as with a miiap. Then
homiie to the Biwako through the dark but still lovely counitryside.
Deccuiber 3: Early in the morninigic-went to miieet the physicians at the
Prefectural Hospital. We were well-received anid they gave us all of the
219
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
gross mlaterial from the few cases that wsere available. At this timle also
saw for the first time films that had been made by the staff by exposinlg
roentgen films to the bones of the bomb victims. These seenm to be artifacts,
since the outline of the bone was (1) sharp, (2) translucent in contrast
-with the black of the rest of the film. At Headquarters in the later morn-
ing was interrogated at length by ILieut. Col. Bogue of G2 who delved
thoroughly into my past history, recent and o0l, apparently considering
our wlhole mission suspect. I produced a copy of our orders of Oct. 12
and informeid him that all cooperation would be expected, or I w-ould find
it necessary to coml-municate directly with Headquarters in Tokvo. This
produced a marvelous effect, since the requiremiient for assistalnce from
the Sixth Army wNas quite clearly indicated.
Called on Prof. Amano in his crowded laboratory at the Kvoto lUni-
versity. \Ve had a somiiewhat halting disctissioni since his English was
far from fluent. Dr. Ishii was most helpful throughout. After some hesita-
tionl Prof. Amano informed me that the hematology slides of the three
earliest cases whiclh had been auitopsied at Ninoshimia would be nmade
available. I then asked himii to collect this material for the followving
morning in time for 9 o'clock. Dr. Funaoka, the Professor of Anatomy,
was also consulted anid stated that some of the autopsy material was
still at Kanazawa University on the \Western side of the country but that
he would telephone to expedlite the transmittal of the material. The late
Prof. Sugiyanma had taught at Kanazawsa in the past.
Deceiwber 4: Promptly in the morning went Nith Dr. Ishii and received
the slides from Dr. Amano. He appeared to be a very sad mlan indeed
and recounted how he had lost his wife and child. WN7hen w\e went to see
Dr. Funaoka he regretfully said that he had not had a reply from Kana-
zawa but that the material would be forthcoming, perhaps by 3 :00 p.m.
In the meantime we had been invited by Dr. Amano to visit a MIrs. M\Iiura
who was German and wlho wishedl to meet an American.
At her home w%e wN-ere served a delightful tea, with Germani kuchen.
The conversation also was bilingual, in German with me and in Japanese
with Drs. Amano and Ishii. A very pleasant interlude.
\When we returned to Dr. Funaoka's office at the University were
glad to find that the slides had indeed arrived from Kanazawa. How-
ever, the gross nmaterial had been taken away by Lieut. Col. French
who w-as conducting a survey of Japanese laboratories for SCAP. This
put an additional complication into the problem, but we had some con-
fidence that this aspect could be rectified ultimately. Gradually various
local intricacies camiie to light: Dr. Amanio also proved to have some slides
220
Voluttie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshlimlla Medical Diary, 1945 L
of the Ono cases. Dr. Fukutani, a mlemiiber of the samle departmiient, had
additional slides on the same cases bnt from different organs! Also Dr.
Fukutani had all of the Ushida slides. This remarkable fact resulted from
misunderstandings that followed the early happy leadership of Sugiyama,
a fine hematologist and pathologist who had been a studeint of Prof.
Kiyono, after whom the institute at Kyoto was named. Further complica-
tions were that a member of the Kyoto group had been asked to leave the
auitopsy room at Nagasaki because, without permission, he had apparently
begun to tamper with some of the material that had been acquired by
Commllainder Shields WNarren. The matter wvas finally resolved by asking
Dr. Ishii to call Prof. MIori, the Chief of the Institute of Pathology, on
the telephone in order to request his help in obtaining representative
slides. This was finally accomplislhed and the mystery of the errant
slides was finally solved. A nuimiber of the slides required remounting
because they had become stuck together. W\e said that we would return on
the 6th for these.
Decemslber 5: I left Dr. Ishii in Kyoto to complete the hagglinog about
the slides in his ow,n quiet and efficient manner anid went wN-ith Dr. IshikawN-a
to keep my appointment with Prof. Kinoshita in Osaka. On the w-av wve
stopped at the Takatsuke Medical School to pick up two important cases
for the Nagasaki group. There we met Dr. Eguchi, who was very gracious
and gave me, without stint, all of his important material and an excellent
set of clinical and pathological records and slides. While there Dr. IshikaN-a
volunteered the information that he had just acquired from Dr. Eguchi
that Dr. Kuno of the Japanese Naval Hospital at Iwakuni, who still had
in his possession some of the best of the early material, was living nearby.
\Ve went on a most interesting hunt through the residential districts and
finally found Dr. Kuno's wife and charming daughter and father in a
clean and lovely Japanese home. There after introductions and tea, a long
letter was left by Dr. Ishikawa in the hope that it would be aniswered by
Dr. Kuno.
WVe proceeded to Osaka and, after dinnier in a small Japanese restaurant
fortunately not labeled off-limits, went on to see Dr. Kinoshita at his
department. He was most cordial and after delivering a tirade against the
mix-up caused by Col. French's intervention, through no fault of his own,
finally produced the specimens that were needed. These included both
gross and microscopic material. He discussed some of his own investigative
work on nutrition. One set of studies was made on prisoners who had a
reasonably constant diet of rice and beans and certain vegetables to a total
of 2,200 calories daily, with 110 grams of protein. They, however,
221
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
developed edlemiia and in somiie inistanices a "cachectic" type of imialnutritioni.
\Vrhen five grams of gelatin xvere given (laily good healtlh as restored.
or the coniditioin could be prevented if prisoniers were fed gelatin initially.
He had continuEtedI his researclhes. Amiiong other pieces of researclh were:
1) \Vork oni the hiistogeniesis of chickeni sarcomas. He believed that they
arise fromii adventitial cells. 2) In the buttter-yellox- wxork that hadl gained
him world-wN-ide famiie, catalase may be tised as ani index of whether or
lnot the liver is gOnllg to become canicerous: It decreases slharply miuiich
before the tumilor is grossly detectable. Dr. Kinioshita lhad )been in the
tTIjited States imianiy tin1es, lhadl a Caucasiani wife, and wsas fully famlliliar
witlh the W\esterni wN-orld.
Theni after a v-ery lonig anid w-earinig but remarkably interesting (lay
back alonig the busy road to Kvoto throtuglh the gatherinig dark.
Decedwer 6: Oni this, whliclh wsas to he our last day in Kyoto, founld tllat
our Japaniese colleagues lbad already l)urchased tickets ancd that there
was nio prollem in getting themii 'lhomiie" in the miiorninig. WVent again to
the University anid received the bone-marrow slides fromii Dr. Amanio
and also calle(d oni Dr. Funlaoka wN-ho was niot there. I was, howN-ever,
advised that hiis miiaterial would he in readiniess later in the afternooni.
Another lonig talk x-as lhad w-itlh Dr. Amiianio conicerning hemiiatology in
genieral. He seemiied miiost pleased at the gift of soal) anid butter and eggs
that I la.ld broughlt for M\rs. Mitura.
* * *
Prof. Amiianio lhad been ani authlor, x-ith Prof. Kivono and Prof. Sugiyamiia,
of an outstandinig book, putblished in 1938, Die Lellre der Vitalfiirbiulil.
Since the war he has written a 'large hematology text of his owsin.
* * *
Early in the afterniooni I finally xvent to the finanice office and dis-
covered that I Nas owed what seemledI to mle the enormiious sum of 11,253
yenl, which included al)l)roximatelv $220 worth of undeserved per diemii.
This was a solmieNwhat illogical, but nevertheless useful. consequence of
orders to live in a place w-here it was almlost impossible to spend moniey
and where wxe were almost completely isolated and confinled to standard
field rations. \With this tremiienidous anmounit of money inl hland, I was ready
to buy a few little thinlgs anid this was accomiiplished in a tril) about the
city wsitlh Dr. Loge-a silver cigarette box, a lovely satsitumia bowl hand-
decorated(and now scarce, anid a red lacquer tray and bowxls. Then rushed
back to the Biwako, signed out aiud quickly lpacked all belongings; then to
the traini. There was a long but not too un1pleasant wN-ait in the station.
222
Volume 38, October, 1965
IIiosIlii(la Medical Diary, 1915 LIEBOW
The berths in the Japanese trains were comifortable but fotur men wN-ere in
a single roomii, and only one at a time cotuld dress.
Dcceulibc'r 7: Oni this anniversarv arrivred againi in Tokyo about 1'2 hours
late, fotind the Surgeon's office and received at once a coturteous offer
of transportationi. In the imieantimiie took a "taxi jeep" to obtain our own
jeep at the Shiodomiie yards, which I thotuglht might have arrived by this
time. It was there but wvould not start anid had to be dragged off the
flatcar. Inspection revealed that the rotor had been taken out and that
somiie of the wires had been stripped. There was nothing to do but wralk
back to the Sturgeon's office and obtain transportation after signinlg in. A
blessed quantity of mail was waiting. I was l)leased again to be assigned
to nmy old homiie, the Dai Ichi. Obtained rooml 858 wlhich Nas sans bath, but
a roomii witlh bath wN-as promiiisedl soon. In the mid(dle of the afternoon imiet
Lieut. Col. Barnacle who Nas takinig the Chief Sturgeon's l)lace pro tem.
He was in every way kind and pleasant. Col. Ouightersoin was there anld
seemiied satisfied with the tultimiiate otutcomiie of the work. He also said
that we wouldt l)e or(lered back jtust as sooni as he ha(l retturneid to the
Ulnited States.
Decenider 8: Our records had been delivered to an office in the Str-
geon's division that was to l)e assigned to imie for the remiiainder of miiy
timiie. \Veent to the University and fotund Dr. Hatano wlho wanted to take
me to the Tokyo First Military Hospital. At the University also met
Dr. Tsutizuki who, to my surprise, was performiiing a hysterectomy, and
Dr. Mitani. Dr. MIitani offered mle his sw-ord and said this wvas a family
heirloomii, an "old sw-ord" mlade at least 400 years ago of (IrawNn Danmascuis
steel. The scabbard anid hand(Ile he said were mloderni anid witlhout particular
w-ortlh. I said that I shotild be glad to keel) the wxeaponi for him in token
of otur friendship) btt that I would wish to returrn it whenl tlle political
circtumstanices againi permitted. He said that he considere(d it a symbol
of miilitarismii anid that he no longer w-anitedl it in his family and wotild
tturn it over to miie in a fewldays.
At the hospital it Nas a pleasure to imieet againi Gen. Hirai and AMaj.
Misonio and for the first timle Maj. Ohashli a pathologist who had lone
mnanx of the autopsies at lUjina dturing Septemiber. All promiiised to have
preparecl the autopsy tissuies that had been ctit in Tokyo w\hichl wN-ere
related to the protocols that we had been tranislatinig in Hiroshilmla with
Dr. Ishii. Ani appointment was made for -Monday imiorninlg to mlleet these
gentlemen againi wN-heni everythinig was to be in readiness. Gen. Hirai
promiiised to have imiaterial fromii the patienits atitopsiel by i\Iaj. Yamlashilna
on Ninoshimia Islanid in the first few (lays after the bomibing. I had alreadl'
223
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Jinv 26, 10S7
Dr. Jaeushi Mittai
Departnt of Obs. & Oyn.
Osaka National University
0saa, Japan
Dear Dr. Mitanis
aUy recall that yu entrust d pur :mily sard to my poe
sesion duing tbe days of our ooepeatUon in Hiz1os*z. I 3mw Al
Cooaiderd this a-trstoeshxip of an beir2es, to ths time Mo.n lt migat
be posible to rtun it.
It may, of oom et be tiat you n lo ger bav an interest in
suh a military symbol. In that initanwe I inten tc keep it a a
memnto of a busy eAd bM) time that vbd ang d ta to-
p.tber.
I v*.ry :much interest in bow ,iou are gettng on ij or
present activities.
With awry good wisb.
Yours snorelly,
Averll A. Liebow *
Join'.lads Ely Professor of Pkatholog
AALust
Reproduction of carbon copy of letter offering return of sword to Professor Mitani.
received some of this material from Dr. Amano, including bone marrows
and certain tissues obtained by the late Dr. Sugiyama. Dr. Hatano also
said that Dr. Kusano of the Tokyo Infectious Disease Institute had done
some autopsies at Saijyo of Hiroshima patients and that he would gladly
give us material. We then went by jeep in search of the Institute but had
failed by closing time and returned, somewhat disgustedly, home.
December 9: Drs. Oughterson and LeRoy had received orders to re-
turn and were to leave tomorrow. George LeRoy's father was ill. After
224
Voluine 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 L
4h Motoomachi
Nagasaki, Japan
July 15, 1957
Dear Dr. Liebow:
I have just read with pleasure your letter which was
forwarded from Osaka University to me. I beg your pardon for
my long silence. I have always recollected your kindness and
courtesy during the days of our cooperation in Hiroshima.
I know that you are-now working especially on lung-pathology.
Concerning the sword which I presented you before, I hope
you keep it as an expression of my appreciation.
I was appointed as a professor of Ilagasaki University in
1947 and have worked to reestablish our department.
After coming to Nagasaki Mrs. Mitani had suffered from
pulmonary tuberculosis for a few years, but she has recovered
from it completely and is now enjoying complete health except
decrease of vital capacity caused by thoracoplastic operation.
Our only son Hiroshi is now attending to the school of techno-
logy of Tokyo University and is expected to be graduated from
it the next March.
I myself have been always healthy, grew fat and my hair
has become thinner. I am now majoring in uterine cancer and
chorionepithelioma malignum and have published several works
on them. Most of them were published in Japanese and I don't
think it adequate to present you those copies. But I should
like to present you some copies of our works published in.
Enclish under seDarate cover, and hope they will be of some
use to you.
I suppose you have several children by now, and I hope
your family are well and happy. I hope to have the opportunity
to see you again in the neir future.
Yours sincerely,
7
Yasushi Mitani, M.D.
Professor of Obstetrics & Gynecology,
Nagasaki University
Letter iiidicating refusal of Professor NMitaini to receive swrord.
225
LIEBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
packing a number of itemiis to be brought back personally by Dr. Oughter-
son, spent the afternoon at the zoo with Maj. Kramer and then wanidered
through the beautiful park oni the crisp afternoon. Then a quiet evelling
at home, broken only by a gay celebration in honor of those departing.
At least some of us were on the homecom--ing path.
* * *
Decemiber 10, 1945-Janiary 25, 1946: It would be best to contract
rather than to give a daily account of what seemiied to be anl encdless timie in
Tokyo before orders came to return. One name and one number on the
endless roster of those with the same desire has a special importance only
to oneself. Had I then more of the philosophy of the country where I was
now an enforced guest, and w-ere there not a special Nedding to attend
more than 7,000 nmiles aNay, I would have taken inore joy in the privilege
that was mine. During this timiie there was opportunity for becominig better
acquainted in their owin setting with the brilliant men of Japan who
had worked so diligently with us at Hiroshima-a fact that I did appreciate
then, and value even more highly now. MIJany have indeed fulfilled the
promise implied in Prof. Tsuizuki's choice of them for this work twenty
years ago when they w-ere very young men, and they now occupy
positions of leadership in Japanese medicine.
As it was, there were still two weeks of labor to gather up the loose
ends. On Monday, December 10, at another visit to the Tokyo First
Military Hospital, the autopsy imiaterial was indeed ready. It incluided
the three earliest cases atutopsied by Maj. Yamashina. At this time also,
AMaj. Motohashi showN-ed imie some superb photographs of patienlts with
petechiae, ulcerative lesions of the mllUcous membranies, and epilation from
the earlier Ujina series. He said that they had all the prints required
and graciously presented the glass negatives. I did finally have the pleasure
of meeting Dr. Kusano at the Institute for Inifectious Diseases anid he
likewise supplied the Saijyo imiaterial. Our records, histological slides,
and gross tissues N-ere now largely in order, except that we had very
little material on the eye.
Although interesting effects oni the eyes had been (lescribed by the
well-knownsi ophtlhaltmiologist, Dr. Takehisa Oguchi (after whomi a here(li-
tary type of nyctalopia has beeni namaed), N-orking at the Kaijini Kai Hospital
in Kure, anid although extenisive notes had been taken by Dr. MIason, we
had almost no tissue. On iniquiry of our good friend Prof. 'Miyake. with
wN-hom I hadl briefly disctissed the subject before, I fouind that Prof.
Shoji of the Eve Institute andl he were planniinlg a collaborative study of
the eyes, but that the sections had not as vet been prepare(l. Prof. Miake
226
f'olzittie 38, Oclobei-, 1965
Hir-oslim.,il AMedical Dia ry, 1915
said that he wsas planning to share this mlaterial wvhen it had been embedled
in celloidin and cut, alnd these blocks did indeed reach us soimie six mlonitlhs
later.
I was informeed also that a documiienitary filml had beeni preparedl at Hiro-
shima by the Nippon Eigasha late in Auguist of 1945. but that this had not
been completely developed. After much discussion witlh Mlessrs. Kobayamla
and Aihara, of that Company. the film was developed and on December 19
viewed in the Surgeon's office. As expected it was a remarkable record.
Its possible use for propaganda purposes was also not difficult to visualize.
The film had been made on nitrate rather than safety stock but a copy was
retained and sent to the United States for use by the Amlericani component
of the Joint Commissioni.
Of greatest help in obtaining the all-important building plans were Drs.
.Murai and Murachi. Those of the broadlcasting station wvere the first to
come to hanid, on Decemlber 10. \Within another week blueprints of the
Communication Department buildings xvere located. This representedl the
bulk of the mlaterial needed. Those of the Central Telephone Office were
found later and those of the Bankers Club Nere located after considerable
detective Nork on the part of Drs. M\,Iurai and Murachi at the architect's
office in Osaka and were subsequently (lelivered. In the mealntilmie mlaniy
informative discussionis were heldlwith these tw-o remarkable mlen who
had been calculating slhieldilng factors in a preliminary way. They were also
most kind in showing me miuichl of Tokyo that I would have missed
otherwise.
On December 14 all of the Amiiericans of the Joint Commiiiiission who
reiiaiied Nere entertainied at a splendi(l dinnlier at the -Militarv Hospital,
with all of ouir Japanese colleaguies in the military, an(l manv of the younger
civilians in attendance. There was plenty of "Suntory" a fine whiskey with
the taste of Scotch. The best of the tradlitionial Japanese (lislhes were
served, complete with enitrees of raw fishl anid squid. alnd endlless quianitities
of warmii sake to wash the many courses (lown. The spirit was a token
of comradeslip based on personial uinderstanidinig that developed uniider
stress and( on recogiition of miierit and that crossedl barriers of race aln(d
politics. Mlfore than thlis, it was a tribute to the wisdom of Ashley \W.
O)tihterson that the ounger of masnoyllOt have possessed.
As to ouir personal affairs, we learnedI for ourselves wh-lat hals lonlg beenl
known that there is niothlilng miiore irksome thalni a delay in getting lhomiie
after a. loong x-ar. AMuistering ouit on "poinlts," of which wve had a great
sIfficiencV, couldI have been arranlge(l at onice, -et this woul(l precltule
ftulfilling our resj,onsibility for writing the report. The imiatter was especially
227
LI EBOW
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
comiiplicated in my case since certain notes were still in shorthand. When
Col. Schwichtenberg returned on December 12 he reiterated what Scotty
had said, that Ne would have to await orders from Washington. W;e were
relieved to discover that someone had thought to assign us to the Eighth
Army, since our original orders had called for our return to our original
stations, wlhich in our case would have been the Marianas-perish the
thought. WVe therefore presented ourselves to ASCOM in Yokohama and
were delighted to find Brig. Gen. Earl M\axwell in charge. Gen. Mlaxwrell
had been the Chief Surgeon of the Army in the South Pacific, where
I had comiie to know him well. He and Col. Snyder Nere sympathetic and
said that they Nould take good care of us while we were in Japan. Lieut.
Phil Loge, soonl to be Captain, was assigned to the 42nd General Hospital
in Tokyo Nhere he was very happy and wrhere we all spent mally pleasant
evenings later. Maj. Kramier was made Chief of the AMedical Service at
the 334th Station Hospital in Yokohomiia. Rosenbaum and myself were to be
left to our owsin devices in the Chief Surgeon's office in Tokyo for tlle
mlomelent. Later Rosenbaum wMas assigned, "condemned" as he put it, to
the 334th. Gen. AMaxwell iiivited Jack and me to dinner oli the folloN-ing
evening in his quarters at the New Grand in Yokohama, an establishmnent
of faded hut substantial splencdor that had been MlacArthur's first home on
hiis returni to lapan. The General, always good company, was at his best
and was reinforced by Col. DeLorimiiier, Chief of the ArmiSy School of
Roentgenologv. \Ve particularly enjoyed reminiscing about persoiialities
in the Yale Hospital Unit as it had been in the South Pacific, anld par-
ticularlv about Cols. Paul Harper and Scotty Oughterson hiinmself. Tlle
evening dlidl much to bolster our spirits, but it wsas still only Decemlber 12
anid wX-e were destined for a long wait.
Contacts w-ith Dr. Ishii were only occasional, as he w-as busy writh his
owin affairs. It wvas on Saturday, December 15 when he presented me with
twN-o thiiigs-a treasure of a blue and red obi for my bride, and the letter
in w\hich lie told for the first time of lis plight. Successful efforts were lmlade
to obtaiii a position for him, and tlhereafter, having survived a siege of
typhoid, possibly acquired dutriiig the mneiiiorable autopsy on the youing
Upper. iMembers of the Joinit Commiiission, December 1 945. From left to right
Lieut. J. Philip Loge, the late MIaj. Milton L. Kramer, and the late Capt. Jack D.
Rosenbauni.
Iliddle. The Dai Ichi buildinig, Headquarters of SCAP, Janiuary 1, 1946, decorated
for the New Year.
Lower, A part of the immense crowd awaitinig the arrival of Genieral MNacArthur oln
New Year's Day 1946. The ladies are -wearing -ay kimionios for the first time in public.
223
Volume 38, October, 1965
lfii-oslhii,a lle(lical )iary, 1945 IAEBOWV
229
.. ........
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
patient from the Red Cross Hospital in Hiroshima, things began to go
better. He was appointed to the Professorship of Pathology at Shinshu
University in M\atsumoto.
\Vre made the best of Tokyo, enjoying the sights and the sounds of this
great capital. Amiiong the most pleasant were made by the violinist, Mari
Iwamoto, by the Nippon Symphony, now revived, and by a choir, mixed
Japanese and Americani, singing the MKessiah together. In the interval of
three months sinlce our coming, the city was showing definite signs of
recoverv. MIuch of the rubble had been cleared. Scaffolding, often a spider-
work cunningly fashioned of bamnboo, Nas rising and stone and concrete
wsere filling old wounds. Shops were bright with wares. Christmas camle
and the Dai Ichi building across the mloat from the Imperial palace xwas
swvathed in green and illuminated, somewhat garishly, like a card. On the
sparkling afternoon of January 1 a vast crowd, the ladies now for the
first time in public dressed in colorful kimonos, stood in a respectful, almost
worshipful, silence as Gen. MacArthur arrived at his headquarters. The
New Year's greeting oni the building seemiied to be intended for civilians
as wvell as for the occupation forces.
\Without signl or sound from \VNashingon and the first weeks of the
New Year gone, I wvas tempted to accept an opening for a return passage
as commiiiiandinig officer of a hospital ship, a purely administrative post, but
one that wN-ould have brought me by way of Okinawa and taken at least 30
days. It is good to report that a miore temperate judgmiient prevailed, for
on the 20th, in response to the urginigs of Col. Schwichtenberg at this
end ancd possibly fromii the patient Oughterson at the other, the blessed
orders camiie. Although miiost of the Commllission's impedimenta had gonie
back, I lhad retained eniouglh records to keep miiyself occupied in preparing
some drafts of portions of the final report. These plus the slides and records
and blueprinits and the tissues miore recently acquired made a sizable
package of somiie 250 pounds, which w-as sealed in a trunk, labeled "Secret,"
and returnied wN-ith mie as courier, at a high priority. The difficulties of
the returni w-ere minor indeed comlpared to its joys. There were, inevitably,
engine repairs oni our elderly C-54 at Kwajalein; a very unmilitary custoimis
officer at Honolulu asking suspiciously whether there were any seeds or
feathers in the sealed and inviolable trunik, and sniffing, to my embarrass-
mient, at the soiled and atom-burned clothing in my personal luggage. But
then fresh HaNaiian pineapple and scenery for a day; two days in San
Francisco; and at last a landing in four inches of snow at the WVashington
National Airport at 1 :00 a.m. of a Saturday morning. For a time we
considered ourselves lucky for the pilot was on the point of returninig
230
Volume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshimla Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
across the Alleghenies, but decided to chance it, and won. Although the
airport was cozy enough, WVashington snowstorms in 1946, even more than
now, had the unhappy effect of isolating us. I put my sealed trunk in
charge of the security officer and decided to doze until the thaws came.
Only the arrival of Gen. Joe Collins on a later flight saved us. He had
been commander of the 25th Division and we had met him many times as
a frequent visitor to the 39th General Hospital. The General with his
customary grace, delivered some of us to our hotel, the Sheraton Park,
in his staff car and ordered the driver to come back until all were rescued.
The warm bed was welcome, blut even mlore the joy of being back at last.
4. Q.E.F.
Early in the morninig of january 28 when I reported for duty, as ordered,
to Col. James Earl Ash, Commanding Officer of the Army Institute of
Pathology, I saluted as smartly as I could. This courtly gentleman vas
astonished, but regained his composure sufficiently to return the courtesy.
Forgiveness was not long in coming, and he said that he had been ex-
pecting mne and that Col. LeRoy and I had been assigned a special
roomii for our work. This was a large chamber separated from the remainder
of the second floor of the wonderful old Army Institute of Pathology by a
ten-foot wrall. Thus immilured, our records could stay in the required
security. The Institute, located at 7th Street and Independence Avenue,
with its back to the mall, was a structure dating to a time not long after
the Civil \Var, with the large windows and pleasant inconveniences charac-
teristic of that era. Enclosed in its dingy but glowinig dark-red brick and
nlustv woodwork were one of the greatest medical libraries in the world
and the treasures old and new of Army- medicine. Here the relics of
Lincoln's assassiniation were reverently preserved together with medical
miemiienitoes and records of all the wNars. But more than this, it was a
treasure house of the science of pathology an immense storehouse of tis-
sues and of the thoughts of the men who had examined them. Both as an
itemi in the history of warfare and of the substance of science there
was no mlore fitting place to Nhich the collection that had been gathered in
Japan should be brought. Nor was there anywhere a place better-prepared
to facilitate the preparation of a report. \VNhile the Institute Nas military
in its origin and affiliation, it had been filling an honored function as a
consultation center for pathologists throughout the wvorld. 1Iost important
was that it was permeated by the fatherly spirit of "Didi" Ash, a scholar
inl his oWIn right, and it had about it an Emersoniani atmosphere of "con-
tented industry."
231
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
\VNhen I arrived Col. LeRov was off to Rochester on temporary (lItty.
It was a relief to find that everything had comle safely across the Pacific.
I was sooIn made acquainte(l -ith the procedures of the Instittute. A single
accession numlber (#158930) Nas assigned to the entire collection, ullder
which it remaiins to this day. WN'hile awaiting orders for leave, I began to
unpack with the willing help of Capt. Edward B. Smith. The five-gallon
water cans had serve(l well andl the tissues Nere identified, blocked and
cut. Recordls were put in order and everything was gotten in readiness.
Discussions were held with Col. Oughterson and Ash regarding a secre-
tariat whiclh obviously wN-ould be necessary.
In the nleantimiie I called C.G. and was pleased to discover her willingness
to come to New York. Our "engagement" lasted only ten days and we
returned happily, after being married in Rochester, to Washington late
in February to share the first six months of our marriage with the atomic
bomlb.
The first task was to decide upon the basic structure of the report ancd
this was done in consultation Nith Col. Oughterson. Although he left the
military service soon after our return he maintained contact with us by
frequent visits to Washington. It wN-as obvious that the work would have
to represent the confluence of four main streams of activity: 1) Statistical
analysis of the data, 2) illustrative wvork, 3) the shielding study, 4)
preparation of the body of the report.
Col. Oughterson arranged for the statistical work to be (lone at the
office of the Air Surgeon through the cooperation of Col. Robert E. Lyons,
Chief of the Biometrics Division. The Joint Commission was most for-
tunate to obtain the services of 'Maj. E. Cuyler Hammond*, and he was
assisted by Dr. B. Aubrey Schnleider, and Capt. Henry L. Barnett. The
first task was to set tip a code and key, at whichl Dr. Harmmond wNas a
past master. It required extensive constiltation on the tise of ternms and
on the clarification of certain ambigtiities, insofar as this was possible.
This he obtained from Capt. Barnett and froml the others of us by an
exchange of ideas and frequent exchange of visits across the Potomlac.
It was an education in itself to work with a man of MIaj. Hammond's
background, intelligence, and integrity. The results of this statistical
analysis in thenmselves occtipy one stotit volutie of the Joint Commission
* Dr. Hammond's outstandinig talents later were recognized by his appointment as
Chief Statistician of the American Cancer Society, a post which hie contillues to hold.
For a time he was also Professor of Statistics at Yale. Dr. Schneider died suddenly
at an early age. Dr. Barnett returned to teaching at Cornell, aind noxx is Chairman of
the Pediatrics Department at the Albert Hinsteini Medical School.
232
l'ollittie 38, October, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 LIEBOWV
Report which is comiiposed chiefly of tabulate(lclata. -Many of the coIn-
cluisions were also imcorporate(I into the body of the report.
Capt. Browrnell was ptut in charge of systematizing the 1,500 photo-
graplhs that had beeni obtained by the Joint Coimmission. The bulk of the
mlaterial consiste(l of phlotographs nmade by himllself and his teamii. In addition
many photographs hadl been giveni to the j-oillt Commlilission by several
Japanese newx-s agencies, notably Bunka-sha anid Domlei, and( by P'rof.
Nishina whlio was in the city within a few\ days of the bombing; there
was also the priceless group of glass negatives presented by AMaj. 'Motohashi
of the Tokyo First MNilitary Hospital. In addition the personial 35 mnmi.
kodaclhromes that hadl been mlade by Col. Oughtersoni and myself proved to
be a valuable resource, since manv of the larger color filnms in Capt.
Browniell's stock had been danmaged, probably by lheat. The smiiall koda-
chromes were enlarged and now comiprise an important compolnenit of the
official record. Capt. Browvnell personally supervised the process at the
laboratories of his company, Eastman Kodak, in Rochester. He was re-
sponsible also for the reproduction andl enlargement froml the negatives,
and the preparation of albumls with appropriate identificationls fronm w-hich
the illustrations for the final report wvere selected. Photomllicrographs were
prepared with Mr. Roy AM. Reeve, a gentleman of the old school, who was
also a muaster of the modern technology for Nhich the Army Institute of
Pathology -as famiious. Diagrams and charts ancd other art work fromi our
crude sketches were skillfullv prepared by Mr. Harry Nussbaumll.
Col. Otughtersoni also had arranged wx-ith the U.S. Strategic Bomibing
Survey to calculate the shielding factors fromii the various building planis
that had been obtained by this group anid by ourselves. \We were in pos-
session of the survival data for persons in specific positionls in these
buil(lings. These had been obtainied largely through the painstaking efforts
of Drs. Murachi and MAurai. The arduous xvork of making tlle projections
froml the building plans was carried out by Lieut. Col. Herbert S. SwAanson
of the Corps of Engineers, assisted by a num-iber of skilled draftsnmen, in
the office of Prof. Harry L. Bowmvian who was Chief of the Physical Damage
Section of the USSBS on loaln fromii the University of Pittsburglh. These
men were housed in temporary buildings (still standing 20 years later)
next to the \V'ashinlgtoni airport. Frequent visits were made to ensture
the necessary comlmunicationi.
As a yokemate George LeRoy Nxas tireless, learned, stimlulatilg, and
witty. WNre thoroughly enjoyed being at hard labor for six monthls, par-
ticularly as a semiiblance of order began to appear out of the great nebula
of data that had been accumilulated. We can say only good things about our
secretaries, IMildred Broscious, MIargaret Dismukes, John O'Donnell,
233
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Agnes Petsing, aiid iMargaret Robb. They wsere niot only efficienit, but tinl-
complaininlg and had a renmarkably high tolerance for persiflage. \Ve
decided that insofar as possible we would attemapt to compare the effects ini
the two cities, writing independently btut in parallel. This Nas possible in
miost of the eleven sections iinto whiclh this work niaturally divided itself.
V'olutmie I
Sectioni 1-Introductioni and sutimmary of the lllost impl)ortant filnd-
ings.
Section 2-Physics.
Section 3-The cities.
Volumiie II
Section 4-.Materials anid miiethods.
Section 5 Clinical observatiolls.
Volume III
Section 6-Hematology.
Section 7- Bone mnarroW.
Volume IN'
Section 8-Pathology.
V'olumiie V
Section 9-Statistical anlalvsis.
V'olumiie VI
Section 10-Population and casualties.
Section 11 Building and shieldinig studies.
Section 2 on Physics was writteni w-ith the collaboration of R. F.
1\arschak, Ph.D., a physicist. It seemed best to combine data fromii the two
cities onl helmlatology anid also on the bone marrow and this section was
written by LeRoy, while I took responsibility siilarly for the volume on
pathology. The statistical section w-as compiled anid written 1y the teai
at the Air Surgeoni's office led 1y Cuyler Hamiimond.
Having established the ml-ajor categories, muclh of the early Nork conl-
sisted of sorting out anid systemiiatizing. For example the autopsy miiaterial
fromii Hiroshimia consisted of the records and slides of three of the early
patients fromi Ninoshima, anid of 12 from Ujina autopsied by Maj.
Yamiiashina; eight in a later group autopsied by Maj. Ohashi; 26 by the
group fromii Tokyo Imiiperial Uniiversity at Ujina; two at Tokyo Imperial
University itself upon evacuees from Ujina; two performiied at Ujinia
dtiriing the time of the Joint Commissioin; 13 fromii Uslhida; 10 from OIno
(Kyoto Imperial LTniversity) six fromii the Kyoto Prefectural University;
six fromii Iwsakunii, includinig sev,eral very early cases; eight from Okavamia
234
Volziiiie 38, Octobei-, 1965
Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW
Military Hospital; one from the Okayama MVedical School; 21 from Saijyo;
19 from the Post Office Hospital, performed by Prof. Tamagawa; one from
Yodobashi Hospital in Tokyo; three from Osaka. This represented a total
of 141 cases of which two had to be discarded. Most of the protocols had
already been translated and redictated into the standard form used by the
Army Medical Department. Others were still in shorthand and required
dictation. This was the first order of business. Later, as the slides were
cut they required study and description. The cases had to be grouped
according to distance from the hypocenter and time of death, and the indi-
vidual findings from the groups had to be catalogued and illustrated.
Similar problems arose for most of the other sections. In many instances
the completion of portions of the work by others-for example, the statis-
tical analyses-had to be awaited, and the results then incorporated into
the general text.
As we wrote, ideas were exchanged, debated, and finally used or not until
a pattern emerged. This was employed to present the data from both cities
whenever applicable. Drs. Oughterson and Shields Warren were frequently
asked for guidance, and we were the beneficiaries of consultations wanted
and unwanted from a large number of interested persons. We were also
the recipients of some lessons in the cold business of war. One afternoon
an officer in the Intelligence Section called to say that Dr. Solly Zucker-
man of the British Medical Research Council was coming to see me.
This was a pleasant surprise since I had known Dr. Zuckerman during
my medical school days in the early 30's when he was a Fellow in Prof.
Fulton's department at Yale; Later he became the Professor of Anatomy
at the University of Birmingham. During the war he had been concerned
with the analysis of the effects of weapons. The concepts of Standardized
Casualty Rate (SCR) and Standardized Killed Rate (SKR) had been
developed, terms as cold and gruesome as they sound. It was his mission
to learn the SKR and SCR for the atomic bomb. Prof. Zuckerman made
us familiar with the methods for the calculation. Fundamentally the SKR
is the number killed, assuming a population density of one person per
thousand square feet in the area at risk. The latter represents the sum
of the products of the fractions killed in each ring zone by the areas of the
ring zones. On this basis we ultimately found in Hiroshima that the
vulnerable area for the killed was 2.85 square miles, and for all casualties
9.36 square miles. From these data an SKR of 79,450, and an SCR of
260,900 were calculated. This SCR is about 6,500 times as great as for a
high-explosive bomb in Britain, assuming a population half in the open
and half in British houses. This ratio is approximate because of the dubious
235
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
assumption that the populations under consideration are comparable. These
data ultimately reached the British and the world.
When Col. Swanson and Prof. Bowman's calculations were completed,
the painstaking labor of tracing the persons and projecting the plans of
the buildings was finally rewarded. It was found that at 250 to 450 meters
from the hypocenter (650-750 meters from airburst), more than 150 inches
of water (5 feet, 4 inches of concrete) were needed to protect against death
from radiation and more than 250 inches of water and nine feet of concrete
to protect against radiation injury. At 750 meters (960 meters from air-
burst) more than 50 inches of water were necessary to protect against
death, and more than 250 inches of water (nine feet of concrete) against
radiation injury. At 1,000 meters (1,165 meters from airburst) more than
3.8 inches of water (1.7 inches of concrete) were required to protect
against serious radiation injury. At this distance very few persons who
were in concrete structures suffered severe radiation effects. When these
calculations had been completed, Dr. Victor Weisskopf of the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, one of the consultants to the Manhattan
Project, came to see us in order to determine whether the medical data
would correlate with physical estimates of radiation dosage at various
distances from the epicenter. He had with him a penciled curve. It was
remarkable that the points, supplied on the basis of an assumed L.D. 50
dose for man, fell rather closely along the curve.
As it neared its end, the tempo of accomplishment in the preparation of
the report actually seemed to increase. Some acceleration may have resulted
from external stimuli. As September approached my Chief at Yale, Dr.
M. C. \Vinternitz, was pointing out with clarity and force that the school
year was about to begin. As a last act we prepared a letter for Col.
Oughterson's signature that summarized the major findings, pointed out
some directions where further investigation was needed, and most par-
ticularly stressed the importance of a continuing study over many years
of the population that had been exposed. This letter was addressed to the
Surgeon Generals of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, to whom the report
was duly transmitted. This recommendation was subsequently referred by
the Surgeon General of the Army to the National Research Council and
was in fact the major stimulus to the creation of the Atomic Bomb
Casualty Commission that has continued the collaborative effort between
Japanese and American scientists that began with the original investigation
of 1945.
And so the work was completed almost one year after it was begun. It
was the end of many journeys, the end of a taxing challenge and struggle,
236
Voluitte 38, October, 1965
Hiroslhima Aledical Diarv, 1915 LIEBOWNI
I
-I
Rebirtlb of a City:
Top. View across hypocenter to-ward tbe Geibi anid Sanwa bank building-s. Tbe wall
at tbe left is a renmlanit of the Sbiniia Hospital. The uprigbt tree, stripped of branches,
inidicates tbe downward (lirectioni of the blast very close to tbe bypocelnter. At the
riglbt are the sbiattered( walls of tbe Banikers Club.
Bottomii. Tbe city in process of regrowtb, Marcb 1949. View comparable to tbe
above.
ancd of can excitinig adv-enituire, ancd the eind aindI the begiinninog of many
searchilngs of souil.
The uise of this wN-eapoln as w-e contemiiplated it, anid theni miiore wx-hen
we saw its effects, and theni even as wve wrote of it, filled Us wNith revuilsion.
\V'e acquiredI a symlpatlhy, not for those on the periphery who acquired a
Promiiethetus coml)lex and cried cutlpa umia as a mleanis of proclaiming their
own imiiportaInce, but for the physicists w-ho bore the real responsibility for the
levelopment of the atomic bomub cand who suffered genuiine tormlent of
coniscienice. \Vrere we, even in the aftermiiath, accessories to a crime against
237
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
att.*.
r " 4 * a
I
L ..
Rebirth of a city andl a mloniunieiit to peace:
UTpper lcft. View of Clhamiiber of Commllerce Building from balcony of Businessmiieln's
Club. The impact of the blast in buckling the concrete walls is evident.
Lower lcft. Viexx com)parable to the one at left, made in 'March 1949 showinlg
rebuilding of the city. The Chamnber Building has been left as a monument of the
first atomic bombing.
Right. Peace moniumenit at the Chamber of Commllerce Buildling, 'March 1949.
238
T'olume 38, October, 1965
Hiroshimia Medical Diary, 1945 | LIEBOW'
nmankind? Surely death and injury of innocents is wickedness that can
never be condoned. But even killing by hand, in comiibat, while honoring
the traditions of "chivalry" is still mnurder. The criimie is of the samiie
kind. Chivalry wras crushed and burned wlhen the first unseeing stones
and firebrands were hurled. It had died centuries before Hiroshima. We
thouglht also of the 15,000 hospital beds in the MIarianas now never
to be used, and of the hundreds of thousands of lives, American and
Japanese, that would have been the cost of assault and conquest of the
hoimie islands of Japan. Had more been spared than were lost and maimed
in the twro cities? But why could not an atomic explosion near, but not
tuponI, a living city, have been as persuasive? Even if it was "necessary" to
destroy one city, how could one justify the devastation of another? WVe
could only lhope that reasons based on morality as xvell as strategy dictated
the decisions.
\When we saw the pitifully crippled and miiaimiied -e felt both guilt and
shame. But was the absence of resentfulness the stoicism of a brave and
disciplined people or was this also somiie reflection of guilt on their owin
part? Perhaps there w-as an element of botl.
But once the deed wras done, criminal or salutary, there was clearlv a
duty to perform: to measure not merely the power of a weaponi soon to
becomiie outmioded or extinct, but the nature and extent of radiation injury
in mlan. Never l)efore had hlumllani beings been exposed en mnasse to this
force that surely would have to be lived with, or even lived by. This power
cotuld be harniessed for good although it would always carry a threat. In
pertormling this work, wre could then, not merely unithinkinglN obey orders,
but milake a partial and uneasy peace with conscienice. \Vhile the opportunity
was born of tragedy, it was clearly a necessity to make the best use of it.
\NVe pluniged into the task with an inner compulsion for we knew that timiie
was runnlling out. The work could surely have been done much better by a
team selected in advance and equipped wvith all the instrumenits of modern
laboratory science. As it was, mtiuch less would have been accomiiplished
w-ithout the expert knowledge, ingenuity, ideas, and uniflagging efforts of
otur Japanese colleagues.
\Vrhen onl September 6, 1946, the comiipleted report of some 1,300 pages,
bounld in six substantial volumes, was hanided to Col. Ash, there ended a
still vivid chapter. But while the chapter came to an end we were left
w%Nith the uneasy feeling that the book remiiains unfiniished-and it coni-
tinues as a hlaunlitng memory. Mav the evil of which it tells never come
back!
239
