THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 63 (1990), 503-508
Long-Term Follow-Up of Bone Marrow Transplant Patients
CAROL J. McGARIGLE, R.N.
StaffNurse, Bone Marrow Transplant Clinic, Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts
May 2, 1990
Preparation for discharge begins prior to the admission for bone marrow transplant. Assess-
ment of the home environment and the effect of prolonged isolation on the life style of the patient
and family are important factors. Once the transplant process has been accomplished and the
patient meets the criteria for discharge, physical preparation of the home environment can begin.
In the immediate post-transplant period, treatment or prophylaxis of graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD) is monitored. Immune globulins may be replaced every three to four weeks. Long-term
follow-up often continues for many years, especially when chronic GVHD is present. Continued
psychosocial support is needed throughout this process to prepare the patient for re-entry into the
community.
Discharge planning for patients who have received an allogeneic bone marrow
transplant (BMT) should begin prior to the transplant itself. Since it will take a
minimum of 12 months post-transplant for the patient to recover immunocompetence,
it is necessary for the patient to maintain certain restrictions for an extended period.
The success of treatment is dependent upon the cooperation of the patient in following
the prescribed restrictions and in reporting subtle physical changes as well as the
obvious signs and symptoms of infection. Since patients are unable to return to work,
shop for themselves, or be in public places for one year, provision needs to be made for
living arrangements and for meeting financial obligations. The home environment
needs to be assessed; city apartment versus farm, how many people live there, their ages
and occupations, pets (type and number), source of water supply, and method of
heating. Any necessary changes in this environment will need to be accomplished
before discharge.
Decisions involving these issues may be stressful psychologically or financially; for
example, when a newly emancipated young adult needs to live with and be under the
care of his or her parents again. When these issues are anticipated before BMT,
however, the transition after discharge itself is smoother. The reader is reminded that
this paper discusses an approach to long-term follow-up and discharge planning that
reflects the specific practices at Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
CRITERIA FOR DISCHARGE
The patient is ready for discharge when he or she is able to eat 1,000 calories and
drink two liters of fluid per day. The mucous membranes must be intact, and the
patient free of infection. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), if present, must be
adequately controlled. The granulocytes should be >500 per ,4L and the platelet count
>20,000 untransfused.
503
Abbreviations: AGVHD: acute graft-versus-host disease BMT: bone marrow transplant CGVHD:
chronic graft-versus-host disease CMV: cytomegalovirus CVL: central venous catheter GVHD: graft-
versus-host disease TBI: total body irradiation VZIG: varicella zoster immune globulin
Copyright © 1990 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
CAROL J. McGARIGLE
PREPARATION FOR DISCHARGE
Preparation for discharge begins while the patient is still hospitalized. The patient's
home is subjected to a thorough cleaning. This process includes washing ceilings, walls,
windows, curtains, and heater vents (all areas where dust collects). Carpets and
upholstered furniture are vacuumed and cleaned. Sinks, tubs, and toilets are cleaned
with bleach. A weekly maintenance cleaning must be done by someone other than the
patient. If there are cats in the home, the patient should avoid all contact with litter
boxes. The acquisition of new pets is discouraged.
Patients develop a sense of security in the laminar air flow environment. There is
frequently a mixed sense of excitement about being discharged as well as about
assuming more responsibility for their own care and resuming their place in the home.
The discharge teaching is extensive and thorough, promoting independence and
providing resources. Continued support and reinforcement of discharge teaching is
provided in the outpatient setting via nursing, social service, and attendance at the
support group meetings. Often the best source of support is provided by the patient's
peers.
IMMEDIATE POST-DISCHARGE PERIOD
Immediately after discharge, patients often report difficulty in sleeping, decreased
stamina, dryness of the skin, and intolerance to cold. They experience difficulty with
eating in that taste is altered, food preparation is exhausting, or the smell of food
cooking causes nausea. Patients are on low-bacteria cooked-food diets for 12 months
after BMT. Maintenance of adequate calories/fluids and weight is essential; many
patients require food supplements such as polycose to meet this goal. It is immediately
after discharge that many families realize the scope of their commitment in providing
actual physical care and supervision of the patient and how that responsibility alters
their own daily routines. Over time, the patient realizes the limits of prolonged
protective isolation, a new role in the family setting (for example, house-husband), and
directly confronts the fact that he or she has survived BMT. The uncertainties of the
future and problems and complications, potential and real, may induce depression. The
members of the health care team must attempt to provide positive reinforcement with
concrete actions, such as increased physical therapy, to enhance well-being.
For the first month, contact is limited to the immediate family. All family members
observe frequent thorough handwashing and attempt to decrease exposure to colds, flu,
or communicable disease outside the home. The visiting nurse, physical therapist, or
tutor coming into the home must wear mask and gloves. The patients wears mask and
gloves whenever he or she goes to the hospital clinic or other populated areas. The
patient is usually discharged with a central venous catheter or venous access device
(CVL) in place; the patient and family are taught the principles and practices of daily
catheter care. If the patient seeks or needs professional dental care while CVL is in
place, appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis should be prescribed.
Continued observation of meticulous oral hygiene is important. Patients prepared
with total body irradiation (TBI) or experiencing chronic GVHD may have a propen-
sity for increased dental caries, especially at the gumline, due to decreased production
of saliva. The mouth may be a source of infection. Chlorhexidene gluconate mouth-
wash, used during the transplant process, may discolor teeth; this discoloration can be
504
LONG-TERM FOLLOW-UP OF BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTS
removed by a professional cleaning. Patients may resume routine dental care after six
months.
The medications at discharge include a multivitamin, until the patient is eating a
well-balanced diet, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole or inhaled pentamidine for
Pneumocystis carinii prophylaxis, and prednisone and/or cyclosporine for graft-versus-
host disease (GVHD) treatment or prophylaxis as necessary. Trimethoprim and
sulfamethoxazole is given twice per day (one double-strength tablet) three days per
week [1,2] and is not usually begun until the platelet count remains greater than
100,000, untransfused, for two weeks. If the patient is allergic to trimethoprim and
sulfamethoxazole, unable to tolerate the associated gastrointestinal distress, or the
platelet count falls below 100,000, inhaled pentamidine (300 mg) may be given once
per month [3]. The initial pentamidine treatment is given before discharge and
supervised by a respiratory therapist, as some patients develop bronchospasm; this
reaction usually responds to an inhaled bronchodilator. Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis
carinii is continued for one full year, or longer, as clinically indicated.
Cyclosporine is converted to oral dosing as soon as it can be tolerated before
discharge and then to alternate-day therapy with prednisone in order to decrease renal
toxicity [4]. There is considerable overlapping of side effects, especially hypertension;
patients need to have simple yet complete information regarding the rationale for and
side effects of these medications. Management ofnausea will allow patients to be more
compliant. Patients should be informed regarding possible side effects (such as facial
hair growth) so they can be prepared to report or to deal with them.
The use of sunscreen after BMT should be considered as a medication. Patients wear
sunscreen whenever they are out of doors, even when riding in a car. Burns of the skin
as a result of sun exposure can be severe, as well as providing a break in the natural
barrier of the skin, which may lead to infection. Sun exposure may also cause a flare of
GVHD, which may result in an increased incidence of skin cancer.
ABO incompatability is not an exclusion criteria for BMT; the transplant recipient
assumes the blood type of the donor. The crossover will not occur for three to four
months. During that time, transfusions of irradiated type 0 red cells are given as
clinically indicated. Patients should carry the correct identification cards and should
wear a medic-alert bracelet, indicating that they have undergone a bone marrow
transplant and that all blood products must be irradiated to prevent graft-versus-host
reaction.
Patients who were myelofibrotic or had splenomegaly pre-transplant may require
continued platelet transfusions after BMT. If the patient and/or the patient and the
donor were cytomegalovirus-(CMV) negative, blood products should continue to be
CMV-negative in an effort to prevent CMV infection. Prolonged thrombocytopenia
appears to be a poor prognostic sign in the post-BMT course [5].
IMMUNE RECONSTITUTION
In spite of reasonable hematopoietic status, it requires several months for the
immune system to recover. In many patients, serum IgG levels remain low. Replace-
ment with intravenous gamma globulin is continued every three to four weeks in an
attempt to prevent recurrent infections by increasing the body's ability to make
antibodies. For those patients exposed to varicella, varicella zoster immune globulin
(VZIG) is administered, regardless of the immune history of the donor.
505
CAROL J. McGARIGLE
The best schedule for immunization has not been established. Since immune
function seems to recover at approximately one year, that occasion appears to be a
reasonable time to attempt reimmunization. Patients are given DT routinely and polio
(inactivated) if indicated; that is, if there is likelihood of exposure. Young children of
the transplant patients should not receive oral polio vaccine if they have any contact
with the BMT patient. Flu and polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine are given at the
appropriate season.
LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
Long-term complications of the preparatory regimen include the formation of
cataracts one to two years after total body irradiation (TBI) (20 percent of patients
who received fractionated TBI). For those patients who received cranial irradiation
prior to BMT, there is a low incidence of leukoencephalopathy and potential for
disturbance of the pituitary-adrenal axis. Issues around infertility should have been
addressed pre-transplant but often continue with regard to self-image; the onset of
menopause in women after TBI serves to underscore this issue. Treatment with
hormonal replacement, usually begun about six months after BMT, may initiate
menses and aids in improving normalcy with regard to a more feminine distribution of
adipose tissue, improving dry skin, and relief of hot flashes. Hormonal replacement
should also be given to retard the development of osteoporosis.
Reactivation of varicella zoster occurs in 50 percent of patients, resulting in
dermatomal zoster. Because of the high risk ofdisseminated zoster, patients are taught
to report the development of pain or vesicles promptly so that treatment with acyclovir
can be initiated. There may be delayed hemorrhagic cystitis as a result of high-dose
cytoxan and/or viral (adenovirus, BK virus) infection. Interstitial pneumonia is a
frequently fatal complication, occurring three to four months after BMT.
Chronic graft-versus-host disease (CGVHD) may develop from two months to two
years after allogeneic BMT and occurs in approximately one-third of patients. It is
described as a reaction of the immunocompetent lymphocytes of the donor against the
host or the impairment of self-tolerance. It may begin as a continuation of acute
graft-versus-host disease (AGVHD), after the resolution of AGVHD, or several weeks
or months after BMT with no previous AGVHD. The incidence of CGVHD may be
higher with the advancing age of the patient, CMV infections, and the grade of acute
graft-versus-host disease. The patients with extensive CGVHD, who progress directly
from the acute to the chronic phase, have a poor survival rate [6].
The clinical manifestations of CGVHD include sclerodermatous skin changes,
chronic liver disease, kerato-conjunctivitis, and increased evidence of bacterial infec-
tion. The involvement of the gastrointestinal tract may include a variety of problems:
mucositis, esophageal strictures, crampy pain, diarrhea, and malabsorption. Dryness of
the eyes and mouth (sicca syndrome) is a source of continuous discomfort to the
patient. In the extreme, there is severe wasting, myositis, contracture of the joints, and
obstructive pulmonary disease [6,7].
As described, the body's natural defenses or innate immunity are affected by
transplantation. These defenses are first altered by the preparatory regimen. Then they
may be further reduced by AGVHD. For patients with CGVHD, these functions may
be permanently abnormal, requiring frequent hospitalizations and prolonged prophy-
lactic care. Treatment/patient care management is the result of a thorough and
506
LONG-TERM FOLLOW-UP OF BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTS
ongoing collaborative assessment; the plan of care includes both physical and psycho-
logical supportive measures.
Most patients with CGVHD will have itchy, dry skin with or without a rash. There
may be hyper- or hypopigmentation. The sclerodermatous skin changes are often
disfiguring and slow to resolve. The patient may have the appearance of one who has
suffered severe third-degree burns. Contracture of thejoints will occur unless an active
physical therapy program is initiated. Patients often experience photophobia; sunlight
may exacerbate symptoms. Alopecia may be prolonged or patchy, with increased
grayness of the hair. When the fingernails and toenails regenerate, they may be soft,
rigid, painful, or even chronically infected.
Mucous membranes are all affected. The continued sicca syndrome of the eyes and
mouth may lead to chronic conjunctivitis, lacrimal insufficiency, recurring mouth
sores, and poor dentition. The sense oftaste may remain altered for months. There may
be continued nausea, diarrhea, and malabsorption, leading to weight loss and decondi-
tioning. In the liver, bile ducts may be absent or dysfunctional, and the alkaline
phosphatase may remain elevated for several months.
There can be webbing of the vagina, chronic inflammation, dryness, and/or chronic
infection [8]. Use of vaginal estrogen creams may provide some relief. It is important
for women to resume routine gynecological examinations annually.
Chronic bacterial infection continues to be a problem, as well as the viral and fungal
infections of varicella, candida, CMV, and aspergillus. There may be recurrent
pneumonia with restrictive or obstructive pulmonary disease. The prolonged immuno-
suppression for the treatment of CGVHD, as well as the intrinsic immunoincompe-
tence induced by CGVHD, increases the risk of recurrent potentially life-threatening
infection.
CONCLUSION
Treatment and patient care management is a challenge. The patient experiences
alteration in many bodily functions, body (self) image, compromised coping, grieving,
and increased potential for injury from the environment, family and friends, and from
him- or herself. The follow-up care must be consistent and thorough. Minor details and
subtle changes often herald major complications. The patient should be well known to
the caregiver.
The psychosocial implications are endless: the initial decision to have a bone marrow
transplant, the rigors of the immediate course, initial excitement of discharge, the
effect of long-term isolation, coping with the side effects of treatment, and the
uncertainty of the future. For many, this process relieves them of the imminence of
their death only to confront them with a chronic and sometimes debilitating disease
[9]. In a study of 26 adult survivors of BMT [10], one-quarter to one-third self-
reported the current symptoms of CGVHD as moderate to severe after three and
one-half years. About 70 percent reported current good health.
Caring for patients undergoing a bone marrow transplant in all phases of the process
provides nursing with a unique opportunity. In a multidisciplinary team, the nurse can
be the pivotal force. BMT is an intense as well as an intensive procedure, requiring a
high level of technical, predictive, and clinical ability coupled with the teaching,
communication, and referral skills which make the patient and the family feel safe and
informed.
507
508 CAROL J. McGARIGLE
Continued research and observation have made allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion a more viable option for patients with hematologic malignancy or dysfunction. As
a result, there are more long-term survivors. There is a need for creative nursing
interventions for those who continue to live with the long-term side effects, especially
CGVHD. There is also a need for more research in the area of assessment ofquality of
life and re-entry into established patterns ofcommunity.
REFERENCES
1. Hughes WT, Kuhn S, Chaudhary S, et al: Successful chemoprophylaxis for pneumocystis carinii
pneumonitis. N Engl J Med 297:1419-1426, 1977
2. Hughes WT, Rivera GK, Schell MJ, et al: Successful intermittent chemoprophylaxis for pneumocystis
carinii pneumonitis. N Engl J Med 316:1627, 1987
3. Guidelines for prophylaxis against pneumocystis carinii. JAMA 262:335, 1989
4. Sullivan JM, Witherspoon RP, Storb R, et al: Alternating day cyclosporine and prednisone for
treatment of high risk chronic graft vs host disease. Blood 72:555-561, 1988
5. Sullivan KM, Witherspoon RP, Storb R, et al: Prednisone and azathioprine compared with prednisone
and placebo for treatment ofchronic graft vs host disease: Prognostic influence of prolonged thrombocy-
topenia after allogeneic marrow transplantation. Blood 72:546-554, 1988
6. Ringden 0, Paulin T, Lonnquist B, et al: An analysis of factors predisposing to chronic graft vs host
disease. Exp Hematology 13:1062-1067, 1985
7. Storb R, Prentice RL, Sullivan KM, ct al: Predictive factors in chronic graft vs host disease in patients
with aplastic anemia treated by marrow transplantation from HLA-identical siblings. Ann Int Med
98:461-466, 1983
8. Corson SL, Sullivan KM, Batzer F, et al: Gynecologic manifestations of chronic graft vs host disease.
Obstet Gynecol 60(4):488-492, 1982
9. Nims JW, Strom S: Late complications of bone marrow transplant recipients: Nursing care issues.
Semin Oncol Nurs 4(1):47-54, 1988
10. Wolcott DL, Wellisel DK, Fawzy FI, et al: Adaptation of adult bone marrow transplant recipient:
Long-term survivors. Transplantation 41:478-483, 1986
