YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 74 (2001), pp. 259-298.
Copyright X 2001. All rights reserved .
Yale University School of Medicine
Thesis Abstracts - 2001
SUBLAMINAR ORGANIZATION OF THE ADULT MOUSE OLFACTORY BULB
NERVE LAYER. Winnie W. Au and Charles A. Greer. Department of Neuro-
surgery, Yale University School of Medicine New Haven, Connecticut.
Axons of olfactory receptor cells (ORCs) grow from the olfactory epithelium (OE)
to the olfactory bulb (OB), where they travel through the olfactory nerve layer (ONL) of
the OB, reorganize extensively, and innervate specific synaptic targets in the glomeruli.
Within the ONL a unique population ofglial cells, the olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs),
surround ORC axon fascicles and accompany them to the OB. To better understand the
relationship between the OECs and the axon fascicles in the ONL of the adult mouse, we
used confocal microscopy and antibodies to the low affinity nerve growth factor receptor
p75 (p75), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and S-100 to identify glia and olfactory
marker protein (OMP) and neuronal cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) to identify ORC.
Electron microscopy characterized the ONL ultrastructure. We found that glial processes,
in particular those of the OECs, were not uniformly distributed in the ONL. The p75+
OEC processes were largely restricted to the olfactory nerve and the outer ONL sublami-
na, and oriented parallel to the plane of the OB layers. GFAP+ processes were largely
restricted to the inner ONL sublamina, the ONL/GL boundary, and the GL, where they
delineated loosely aggregated axon fascicles that entered the glomeruli obliquely. S-100O
processes and somata were broadly distributed throughout the ONL; the outer and inner
ONL were equivalent in their S-100 staining. Ultrastructural studies supported our
immunocytochemical findings suggesting a sublaminar ONL organization. Our data sug-
gest that the differential organization of the ONL may subserve distinct functions; axonal
extension may occur predominately in the outermost ONL while glomerular targeting
occurs in the the inner sublamina of the ONL.
INVESTIGATING THE IMMUNE MECHANISMS OF IDIOPATHIC APLASTIC
ANEMIA. Ami Bhatt. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
I present here two sets of studies of aplastic anemia:
I. The relationship of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria to aplastic anemia.
II. A study of a patient with thymoma associated severe aplastic anemia.
I. Clinical and laboratory experience suggests an immune pathophysiology for idio-
pathic aplastic anemia (AA), yet the etiology of the disease remains unknown. Paroxys-
mal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a clonal disorder in which an acquired mutation
in the PIG-A gene leads to generalized deficiency of glycophosphoinositol (GPI)-
anchored proteins expressed on hematopoietic cells. GPI-deficient clones are present in a
large proportion (30 percent) of AA patients, but the nature of the relationship between
these conditions is unclear.
Two hypotheses for the coexistence of AA and PNH exist. First, the appearance of
GPI-deficient clones may be a primary event that induces an immune attack leading to
259
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
bone marrow failure. Second, an immune attack directed against normal hematopoietic
cells may result in the selection of GPI-deficient cells as an escape mechanism.
Our studies show that GPI-deficient and normal bone marrow cells are similar in
their ability to provide an activation signal to autologous T-lymphocytes. GPI- and GPI+
bone marrow progenitors are equally susceptible to T cell mediated killing. Direct addi-
tion of GPI-anchored proteins does not induce activation of specific T-cells nor are anti-
bodies to these proteins found in vivo. These findings argue against the theory that a GPI-
anchored protein is an inciting antigen. When bone marrow cells from PNH patients are
cultured in vitro, there is no expansion of GPI-deficient clones over time nor does manip-
ulation of the culture conditions (addition of T cells, interferon-gamma, Fas) change the
GPI+/GPI- ratio.
These experiments refute the "immune advantage" theory of PNH by demonstrating
that PNH clones do not display a survival advantage over normal cells. These experiments
also predict that the role of PNH as an inciting event in aplastic anemia will require an
understanding of the processing of GPI anchored proteins as neither whole PNH cells nor
pure GPI anchored proteins are antigenic by our methods.
II. Literature suggests that thymoma associated aplastic anemia is elicited by the
presence of circulating antibodies to the thymoma that cross-react with bone marrow stem
cells leading to hematopoietic failure. The experiments shared here demonstrate: a strik-
ingly immature phenotype of T cells with an inability to produce effector cytokines;
patient serum that is unable to alter growth of autologous bone marrow suggesting that
antibodies to the bone marrow do not exist; a lack of antigen-specific T-cells using V-beta
spectratyping; and clinically, a dramatic resolution of bone marrow failure with the use of
immunosuppressive therapy with antithymocyte globulin and cyclosporine.
These laboratory data and the clinical and laboratory response to therapy suggest that
mechanisms different from the postulated antibody inhibitors are responsible for thymo-
ma associated aplastic anemia. I propose that a dysregulated, immature T-cell population
rather than an antibody-mediated attack may mediate bone marrow failure in this case.
THE EFFECT OF WEATHER ON MIGRAINE HEADACHE. Patricia Birgeneau
Prince and Alan M. Rapoport (Sponsored by Pierre Fayad). Department of Neurol-
ogy, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, and The New
England Center for Headache, Stamford, Connecticut.
Headache patients, especially migraineurs, often note several factors which trigger
their headaches. Most patients believe that weather is a trigger. This study investigates the
relationship between weather and headache. Seventy-seven patients at The New England
Center for Headache in Stamford, Connecticut, provided daily headache calendars for a
period ranging from 2 to 24 months from February 1997 to January 1999. Seventy-three
of the 77 patients had a diagnosis of migraine only or migraine in combination with ten-
sion-type headache. Four patients had a diagnosis of chronic tension-type headache only.
Weather data were collected from the National Weather Service from three stations cen-
tral to the residences of the study participants. Analysis was performed on the raw weath-
er data to generate three independent variables termed "factors" to minimize the compli-
cation of co-linearity of multiple weather variables. These three factors each represented
a compilation of individual measures of weather, and accounted for the necessary rela-
tionship that exists between such measures. The factors were then used in linear regres-
sion analysis to examine the relationship between headache and weather in our study pop-
ulation, including analysis for each individual patient and patient sub-groups.
260
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
Thirty-nine of 77, or 50.6 percent, of headache patients studied for the presence or
absence of weather triggers were statistically significantly sensitive to various weather
conditions. Thirty patients were sensitive to one of the three weather factors, and nine
patients were sensitive to two of the three factors. Twenty-six patients were sensitive to
factor 1, absolute temperature and humidity. Eleven patients were sensitive to factor 2, a
changing weather pattern including change in barometric pressure, temperature, and
humidity. Ten patients were sensitive to factor 3, absolute barometric pressure and change
in pressure from 2 days prior to the start of the headache. Subgroup analysis showed no
effect on susceptibility to weather based on gender, age, diagnosis, frequency ofheadache,
or self-report of weather sensitivity.
THE OUTCOME OF READING DISABILITY IN A POPULATION FOLLOWED
FROM KINDERGARTEN TO YOUNG ADULTHOOD. Fabienne C. Bourgeois,
John M. Holahan, Bennett A Shaywitz, and Sally E Shaywitz, Department of Pedi-
atrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
I investigated how reading disability in childhood affects the especially challenging
transition to young adulthood. The outcomes of young adults with RD were compared to
non-impaired (NI) readers in general self-concept, academic self-concept, education, anx-
iety/depression, delinquency, and alcohol/nicotine use. RD and NI groups were compared
in academic aspirations, type of post-secondary school attended, locus of control, person-
al perceptions of learning disability, mentoring, and rates of marriage and pregnancy. Fur-
thermore, we analyze whether environmental stressors and protective factors predict out-
come in the domains of adulthood. 395 young adults from the Connecticut Longitudinal
Study, who have been prospectively followed for 17 years, completed a telephone inter-
view addressing these issues. The RD group was subdivided into criterion-specific groups:
Low achievers, (LA), Low Achievers who also met the discrepancy criterion (LARD), and
those who met the discrepancy criterion with reading scores above the criterion for low
achievement (HiRD). The NI group was further subdivided into a high IQ group (HiIQ),
a high reading with average IQ group (HiRead) and the remaining participants were iden-
tified as average readers (AVG). The multivariate comparison (NI, n = 231; RD, n = 73)
revealed statistically significant differences (p < .001), with the univariate comparisons
revealing that the RD group performed worse in academic self-concept, delinquency, and
education, but better in general self-concept. Significant differences were also observed in
pairwise comparisons of the LA and AVG, and LARD and AVG (p < .001) subgroups,
with the LA and LARD performing significantly worse. Subjects with high levels of envi-
ronmental stressors (high risk) did not differ in outcome from those with low risk. The
protective factors failed to predict favorable outcome among RD subjects.
DELAYED-TYPE HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIVITY AND ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE ASSAY RESPONSES IN HIV-INFECTED CHIL-
DREN. Stephenie A. Boykin, David Venzon, Judy A. Zuckerman, Susan Sandelli,
and Lauren V. Wood. HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Biostatistics and Data Man-
agement Section, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. (Sponsored by
Ramsay Fuleihan, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine.)
HIV infection and AIDS are characterized by defects in CD4 T lymphocyte number
and function. Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin testing and lymphoproliferative
assays (LPA) are used to monitor and assess antigen-specific cellular and CD4 helper
261
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
immune responses that are critical to successful long-term control of HIV-infection. His-
torically, there has been a direct correlation between in vivo DTH skin test reactivity and
in vitro lymphocyte proliferation to antigens. Although most studies in HIV-infected
patients support this theory, there are reports of patients with discordant results. There
have been no studies investigating the correlation between DTH reactivity and LPA
responses in HIV-infected children. In a retrospective study we examined or immune-
based treatment protocols. A total of74 patients had baseline and follow-up DTH and LPA
testing performed while receiving the following investigational therapies: recombinant IL-
2 (n = 28), REMUNE therapeutic vaccine (n = 28) ritonavir (n = 18). In these patients,313
paired DTH/LPA responses were available for analysis for discordance. The majority of
the responses were concordant, although anergic (DTH/LPA-). Discordance of DTH skin
testing and LPA responses were frequent (32 percent) with the majority of these respons-
es being correlated (DTH+/LPA-). CD4 absolute counts and percentages correlated sig-
nificantly with DTH reactivity. This was antigen-specific, occurring to candida, tetanus,
and HIV-1 Immunogen, but not to mumps. Our results demonstrated that discordance
between DTH skin testing and LPA responses are frequent in HIV-infected children. In
addition, positive DTH skin test reactivity in this population is more likely to be associat-
ed with a negative rather than a positive LPA response and correlate with CD4 counts. By
exploring the discordant DTHI LPA relationship in patients, we hope to elucidate how
antigen-specific cellular and helper immune responses are affected by HIV infection and
subsequently altered by treatment.
LEGAL, PROFESSIONAL, PUBLIC AND POLICY BARRIERS TO THE DEVEL-
OPMENT OF ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANTATION IN THE REPUB-
LIC OF ARMENIA. Sharon Anoush Chekijian (Sponsored by Asghar Rastegar, Internal Medi-
cine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, and by Ministry of Health,
Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia).
Statement of purpose: This study proposes to document and assess the current status
of organ donation and transplantation by assessing the legislation, public policy, profes-
sional and general public opinion in the Republic of Armenia.
Methods: This project is an interdisciplinary project that encompasses law, policy,
and medicine. Legislation was surveyed and translated. Public policy towards transplan-
tation with regard to financial concerns, feasibility of developing centralized wait-lists,
and commitment to specific donor/transplantation legislation was assessed and docu-
mented with cooperation of the Ministry of Health. Two surveys were administered, one
to the general public and one to practicing physicians. The surveys were adapted from The
Partnership for Organ Donation/Gallup Poll survey of 1993. The instrument addresses
such issues as attitudes toward death and donation, degree of willingness to donate, and
financial considerations.
Results: Transplantation legislation was elaborated and now currently exists in a draft
form in the Republic of Armenia. Overall, there appears to be support for a law to legal-
ize cadaveric organ donation and transplantation. 70.4 percent of the population would
support such a law. The logistics of how a transplantation program is to be organized
remains to be legislated. Given little exposure to the subject or donation, Armenians seem
accepting of organ donation. 47.5 percent of those polled said they would like to donate
their organs upon their death. 38.2 percent of the population states that in the absence of
an advance directive. they would be willing to donate the organs of a loved one to a
stranger in need. 85.8 percent of physicians would agree with a new law to legalize trans-
262
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
plantation. There was a widespread misconception that organ donation decreases both the
longevity and the quality of life of the donor.
Conclusions: Successful navigation of barriers to implementation of transplantation
programs will lead to a sufficient, timely, equitable, and life-saving supply of organs. Fail-
ure to address these issues can lead to undesirable commercialism, inequality in the dis-
tribution of organs, and ethical dilemmas for physicians who have no other alternatives to
offer their patients. The development of education programs for both physicians and the
general public should serve to overcome the barriers delineated by our survey results. The
findings of this project will form the basis for a report to the Minister of Health and will
thus serve as the impetus for debate, dialogue, and collaboration between physicians, law-
makers, and policy officials within the Republic.
BREAST-CONSERVING THERAPY IN THE SETTING OF COLLAGEN VASCU-
LAR DISEASE Allen M. Chen, Edward Obedian, and Bruce G. Haffty. Department
of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con-
necticut.
Background: It is currently unclear whether the presence ofcollagen vascular disease
(CVD) should be considered a contraindication to irradiation. This study was undertaken
to determine whether women with preexisting CVD have an increased incidence of com-
plications after breast-conserving therapy (BCT).
Methods: A cohort of 36 patients with documented CVD was conservatively treated
for early stage breast cancer between 1975 and 1998. All of these patients were treated
with conventional radiation therapy to a total medium dose of 64 Gy. Seventeen had
rheumatoid arthritis; 4, scleroderma; 4, Raynaud's phenomenon; 5, lupus erythematosus;
2, Sjogren's disease; and 4, polymyositis. Each ofthese CVD patients was matched to two
control patients without a history of CVD based on age, radiation therapy technique,
chemotherapy or hormone therapy use, tumor histology, and date of treatment. Acute and
late complications were assessed using a 6-point scale from the toxicity criteria of the
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and the European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). The scoring system for both acute and late reactions
ranged from 0 (no change over baseline) to 5 (radiation led to death). For the purpose of
statistical analysis, patients were classified as having a significant complication ifthey had
a score of 3 or greater.
Results: With a median clinical follow up time of 12.5 years (range 3.0 to 22.5 years),
no significant difference was detected between the CVD and control groups with respect
to acute complications (14 percent vs. 8 percent, p = .40). With respect to late complica-
tions, a significant difference was observed (17 percent vs. 3 percent, p = .001) between
the two groups. However, when patients in the CVD group were analyzed by specific dis-
ease, this significance disappeared in all but the scleroderma group.
Conclusions: Patients with scleroderma have a statistically significant increased inci-
dence of radiation therapy complications after breast-conserving surgery and radiation.
The presence ofother CVDs should not be considered a contraindication for this treatment
modality.
263
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
THE CORTICAL SHELL ARCHITECTURE OF HUMAN CERVICAL VERTE-
BRAL BODIES. Neal C. Chen, Eon K. Shin, Jaw-Lin Wang, and Manohar M. Pan-
jabi. Biomechanics Research Laboratory, Department of Orthopedics and Reha-
bilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
This is an anatomic study of cervical vertebral bodies to provide quantitative infor-
mation on the cortical shell architecture of the middle and lower cervical vertebral bodies.
Some external dimensions have been measured, but little quantitative data exist for the
cortical shell architecture of the vertebral bodies of the cervical spine. Twenty-one human
cervical vertebral bodies (C3-C7) were sectioned along para-sagittal planes into five 1.7
mm thin slices for each vertebra. Radiographs of each slice were digitized and external
and internal dimensions were measured. Averages and standard deviations were comput-
ed. Single factor ANOVA was used to determine significant (p < .05) differences between
the vertebral levels. The superior endplate was thickest in the posterior region (range: 0.74
to 0.89 mm) and thinnest in the anterior region (0.44 to 0.56 mm). The inferior endplate
was thickest in the anterior region (0.61 to 0.81 mm) and thinnest in the posterior region
(0.49 to 0.62 mm). In the central region, the superior endplate (0.42 to 0.58 mm) was thin-
ner than the inferior endplate (0.53 to 0.64 mm). Variation with vertebral level was depen-
dent upon the dimension studied. These data may be useful in improving the understand-
ing of the three-column and other vertebral-fracture theories; the fidelity of the finite ele-
ment models of cervical spine; and the designs of surgical instrumentation.
EARLY MOBILITY AFTER HIP OSTEOTOMY IN CHILDREN: RESULTS OF 100
HIPS AND NATIONAL SURVEY OF PRACTICES. Kirk D. Clifford, Jim Dziura,
and James S. Marsh. Department of Orthopedics and Rehabilitation, Yale Univer-
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Osteotomy of the proximal femur is frequently required by the pediatric orthopedist
to treat hip pathology in children. Following osteotomy, if fixation is judged to be tenu-
ous, many surgeons will apply a body (spica) cast. This commonly employed method,
however, is not without negative consequences. Reported complications of spica casting
range from joint stiffness and muscle atrophy, to postimmobilization fractures and pres-
sure sores, often associated with lengthy physical therapy and patient and parental dissat-
isfaction.
To investigate the feasibility of osteotomy without casting, 100 consecutive hip
osteotomies in 67 pediatric patients were fixed with a compression hip screw (CHS). No
patient underwent spica casting. Patients' charts and radiographs were retrospectively
reviewed and data collected regarding time to weight bearing, radiographic union, and
surgical time were compiled. Complications were noted. As a corollary to this study,
members of the Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America (POSNA) were surveyed
regarding their use of spica casting following proximal femoral osteotomy, their implant
preferences, time to weight bearing, and complications.
In our study of 100 hips, of which 50 percent had concomitant surgery, mean time to
weight bearing for all patients was 12.9 + 3.6 days. 24 patients (35.8 percent) were weight
bearing on post operation day one. Time to healing was 7.3 + 1.65 weeks. There were no
cases of hardware failure, skin breakdown, nonunion, malunion, avascular necrosis, pre-
mature physeal closure, or joint stiffness. There were 2 deep wound infections discovered
at time of implant removal that did not compromise care or time to healing, Two patients
suffered proximal femur fracture after hardware removal. 54.4 percent POSNA members
admitted routine use of spica casting following femoral osteotomy. Reported time to
264
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
weight bearing associated with spica cast use 6.36 + .18 wks, significantly longer than in
our group (p < .0001).
Fixation with the above device without spica casting results in improvement over
standard methods that require postoperative spica casting without increased complica-
tions. This practice allows for early mobilization and return to activities of daily living.
THE ABILITY OF CLINICIANS TO PREDICT OUTCOME OF EXTUBATION IN
THE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT. Esther K. Choo, Lloyd Friedman, Martin Mayse,
Steve Nivison, and Mark D. Siegel. Pulmonary Critical Care Section, Department
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecti-
cut.
The purpose of the study was to examine how well health care providers are able to
predict the outcome of patients being extubated in the medical intensive care unit. Fol-
lowing the decision to extubate a patient, staff members, including attendings, fellows,
residents, interns, respiratory therapists and nurses, were asked to predict likelihood of
success by assigning the patient a comparison to average (CTA) score and a percentage
likelihood (PL) score. Higher scores indicated a greater chance of successful extubation.
29 extubation events were evaluated. Seven patients failed extubation, requiring re-intu-
bation within 72 hours. Chi square analysis of PL scores for successful vs. failed extuba-
tion showed no difference between actual distribution of scores and a random distribution
for all health care providers studied: x2 = 1.87, p = .39 for attendings; x2 = 2.99, p = .22
for fellows, X2 = 1.61, p = .66 for residents. X2 = 0.24, p = .88 for interns; X2 = 2.57, p =
.28 for respiratory therapists; x2 = 2.24, p = .52 for nurses. The mean of all staff scores
also did not predict outcome (X2 = 1.56, p = .67) better than random. Similar results were
found for CTA scores. The results of our limited study suggest that the predictions of the
medical staff, presumably made by integrating patient observation with respiratory para-
meters and other standard clinical data, are not able to accurately determine patients at
greater risk of failure with current methods in use in our ICU.
THE TWO-POCKET AMNIOTIC FLUID INDEX: AN EVALUATION OF SECOND
TRIMESTER AMNIOTIC FLUID QUANTIFICATION AND PERINATAL OUT-
COME. Andrea L. Ciaranello, Maurice L. Druzin, and Kafui A. Demasio. Divisions
of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford
University Medical Center, Stanford, California, and Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
This study describes the normal distribution of 2-Pocket amniotic fluid index
(2pAFI) at 15 to 23 weeks of gestation. and investigates the association between 2pAFI
and intrauterine growth restriction.
We prospectively evaluated 2pAFI in 334 unselected women presenting to the Peri-
natal Diagnostic Center between March and August of 1998. The 2pAFI was obtained by
dividing the uterus in half along the linea nigra, below the umbilicus, and summing the
heights of the deepest vertical fluid pocket absent of fetal parts and cord from each of the
two uterine halves. Maternal medical records and perinatal outcomes were obtained. A
normal population was defined by the following: delivery at or after 37 weeks of gesta-
tion, Apgar score > 7 at 5 minutes, birthweight > 10th percentile, no congenital anomalies.
and no maternal comorbid conditions (diabetes, hypertension, or autoimmune disorder).
Growth restriction (GR) was defined as a birthweight less than the 10th percentile. Dis-
265
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
tributions of 2pAFI for normal and growth restricted pregnancies were compared by Stu-
dent t test and ANOVA.
Complete maternal and neonatal outcome data were available for 247 pregnancies
(74 percent). The frequency of low birthweight neonates (<2500 grams) in the study pop-
ulation was 10.5 percent. the frequency of preterm delivery (before 37 completed weeks)
was 8 percent. There were 188 normal pregnancies (mean birthweight 3309 grams). The
95th, 50th, and 10th percentiles of 2-pocket AFT ranged from 103 to 126, 7.1 to 84, and
52 to 66 mm respectively. A significant positive linear correlation was demonstrated
between 2pAFI and birthweight (p = .007). Ten fetuses were growth restricted at birth
(mean birthweight 1920 grams). The distribution of 2pAFI in the growth restricted group
was not significantly different from that of the normal group (p = .08). In conclusion, this
study describes a nomogram for 2pAFI by gestational age betwen 15 and 23 weeks. There
is a positive linear correlation between birthweight and 2pAFI. Further investigation of a
larger population is need to determine the clinical utility of second trimester 2pAFI for
detecting growth restriction.
DETECTION OF BORRELIA RECURRENTIS USING THE QUANTITATIVE
BUFFY COAT TECHNIQUE (QBC) IN RURAL ETHIOPIA. Frederick C. Cobey
and Curtis L. Patton. Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Univer-
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
The diagnosis of louse-borne relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis) is commonly
based on the detection of Borrelia spirochetes on Giemsa's stained blood films. In the pre-
sent study, we used acridine orange coated Quantitative Buffy Coat (QBC) tubes, differ-
ential centrifugation, and fluorescence microscopy to detect Borrelia. During July and
August 1998, we examined the blood of all patients who presented with fever and a pre-
sumptive diagnosis of malaria at a rural clinic in southwestern Ethiopia. Among approxi-
mately 200 patients, seven were positive for Borreliosis. In laboratory studies using Bor-
relia burgdorferi as a model, we detected spirochetes in whole blood at concentrations as
low as 10 organisms/mm3. The greater sensitivity of the QBC technique is important in
areas where Borrelia is endemic, as in the horn of Africa. It may also prove useful in eval-
uating relapsing fevers in travelers.
PHYSIOLOGIC AND IMMUNOLOGIC RESPONSES IN DIISOCYANATE-
EXPOSED AUTO BODY SHOP WORKERS: A ONE YEAR FOLLOW-UP. Bar-
bara A. Coren, Meredith H. Stowe, Adam V. Wisnewski, and Carrie A. Redlich.
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Program, Department of Internal Med-
icine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
A one-year follow-up investigation was undertaken as an adjunct to the SPRAY study
(Survey of Painters and Repairers of Auto bodies by Yale) to characterize the effects of
diisocyanate exposures on auto body shop workers over time. Seven of the original par-
ticipating shops were re-surveyed after one year. Of the original 45 subjects at these shops,
39 participated in the follow-up study (32 of these were at the same shops and 7 were
located at other area shops). The remaining 6 had left the industry and comprise the "lost
to follow-up" cohort. An additional 14 new employees were also surveyed. Questionnaire,
physiologic, and immunologic data were obtained for the "follow-up" cohort and the
"new" cohort; data collected at baseline for the lost to follow-up cohort were retrospec-
tively compared to baseline data on the follow-up cohort. Among the follow-up cohort, a
266
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
low prevalence of asthma was detected at both baseline (0 percent) and follow-up (2.6 per-
cent), as defined by a positive methacholine challenge (PC20 < 8 mg/ml). Of note, a rela-
tively high prevalence ofHDI-specific immunologic phenomenon was detected; at follow-
up, 17 percent of workers had HDI-specific IgG and 18 percent had elevated lymphopro-
liferative responses to HDI. One worker at each time point had HDI-specific IgE. There
were no significant changes in physiology or immunologic responses from baseline to fol-
low-up. Compared to the follow-up cohort, those lost to follow up were significantly
younger, less experienced in the industry, and contained more atopics. Most notably, those
lost to follow-up had more bronchial hyper-responsiveness, i.e., PC20 < 25 mg/ml (50 per-
cent vs. 8 percent, p = .005), and statistically non-significantly higher HDI-specific IgG
and lymphoproliferation. In conclusion, the low prevalence of asthma in the follow-up
cohort, combined with the observed differences in physiology and immunologic respons-
es between the workers lost to follow-up and those remaining in the industry, strongly sug-
gest the Healthy Worker Effect in this industry. There appears to be a self-selection out of
the industry among those workers with markers of increased susceptibility to diisocyanate
sensitization and/or early disease.
EXPRESSION AND SECRETION OF A FUNCTIONAL SINGLE CHAIN ANTI-
BODY IN Corynebacterium pseudodiptheriticum. Carl V. Crawford, Ravi V. Dur-
vasula and Frank F. Richards. Mac Arthur Center for Molecular Parasitology.
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
Our lab has developed a strategy to introduce foreign genes into humans through the
genetic transformation of human commensal bacteria. These gene products are to be
expressed at mucosal sites in proximity to infectious pathogens. Thus, this represents a
form of system specific passive immunity (SSPI). This work is derived from our ongoing
projects intended to control the infectivity of disease-transmitting insect vectors by genet-
ically modifying their bacterial symbionts. Our current project involves the expression of
functional single-chain antibodies by transgenic human symbiotic bacteria with the aim of
neutralizing respiratory infectious agents.
This approach is being applied to the human respiratory tract symbiont Corynebac-
terium pseudodiphtheriticum. Here we report the transformation of C. pseudodiph-
theriticum via protoplasting with the shuttle plasmid pRrMDWK6. This plasmid contains
a kanamycin resistance selection marker and consists of the promoter and signal
sequences of the Mycobacterium kansasii a antigen (MKa) ligated in frame with the
VH/K single-chain antibody rDB3. rDB3 is a murine antibody fragment that binds prog-
esterone with high affinity and is used as a model for antibody production in our lab. We
have been able to detect activity of this antibody fragment from our transformants.
Recently, we have been able to genetically alter C. pseudodiphtheriticum and other
related actinomycetes with the integrative plasmid pBP-2 via electroporation. pBP2
allows for direct and stable transgene insertion into the genome of this organism to allow
permanent secretion from transformants. Expression of rDB3 using this integrative plas-
mid is currently under way.
To optimize antibody expression and secretion, we are also attempting to alter the
promoter and signal sequences of pRrMDWK6 and pBP-2 to allow continuous secretion
of rDB3. Expression, secretion, and activity of rDB3 will be assessed from C. pseudo-
diphtheriticum engineered with these plasmids.
267
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
In summary, the use of transformed human symbiotic bacteria as vectors for the
delivery of functional single-chain antibodies may prove useful as a novel strategy in con-
trolling the spread of infectious disease.
THE WHITE PLAGUE IN THE RED CAPITAL: THE CONTROL OF TUBERCU-
LOSIS IN MOSCOW, 1900-1940. Michael Zdenek David. Department of History,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (Sponsored by John Harley Warner, Sec-
tion of the History of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.)
The hypothesis is that changing political and economic factors were central to the
establishment of a distinctive Soviet tuberculosis control infrastructure in Moscow
between 1900 and 1940, and that these factors had a direct impact on the lives of tuber-
culosis patients and their physicians. Standard methods for historical research were used,
including extraction of data from archives and libraries in Moscow, Russia and in the
United States. Excel spreadsheets were used for data for analysis. In 1909-1917, a small
number of facilities in Moscow was provided by the All-Russian League for the Struggle
with Tuberculosis, a private organization based on European models. After the Revolution
of 1917, many of the League's experts, working with idealistic Bolshevik Party members
in the new Commissariat of Public Health, devised a tuberculosis control scheme that
developed in Moscow by the late 1920s. The Soviet tuberculosis dispensary, derived from
a pre-Revolutionary model, was designed for an idealized Soviet state, where housing,
diet, and labor were controlled and manipulated to benefit the workers. In the early 1930s,
social conditions deteriorated with the industrialization drive, the collectivization of agri-
culture, and the resultant massive population shifts, and urban mortality from tuberculo-
sis increased. The original antituberculosis scheme of Narkomzdrav was undermined by
economic constraints. With two decrees of high state authorities in 1934 and 1936, the
tuberculosis experts, organizing themselves into a semi-autonomous group, controlled a
small Tuberculosis Fund, which they used for several projects, including the BCG cam-
paign ofthe late 1930s. Patients and physicians were constrained by the limits ofthe Russ-
ian then the Soviet economies and political structures on the individual, city, and nation-
al levels as the goals of state leaders shifted between 1900 and 1940.
PREDICTING RUPTURE, DEATH, AND DISSECTION: THE NATURAL HISTO-
RY OF THORACIC AORTIC DISEASE. Ryan R. Davies, Michael A. Coady, John
A Rizzo, and John A. Elefteriades, Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery and tSchool
of Epidemiology and Public Health Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
Background: Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are serious, potentially fatal
diseases. Ability to estimate simply the yearly rate of rupture/dissection would greatly
enhance clinical decision making for specific patients.
Methods: Data on 668 patients (414 m, 254 f) (median age 65.8 yrs) with thoracic
aortic disease were entered into a computerized database over nine years. 3115 imaging
studies were available. 304 patients were dissection-free at presentation; their natural
(unoperated) history was followed for rupture, dissection, and death. In order to assess the
impact of familial clustering of aortic or aneurysmal disease, family pedigrees were
obtained through telephone inquiry of 218 (142 m, 76 f) patients without Marfan syn-
drome (WS).
268
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
Results: 5-year survival in unoperated patients was 54 percent at 5 years. Aortic size
was a very strong predictor of rupture, dissection, and mortality. For aneurysms > 6.0 cm
in diameter: rupture occurred at 3.6 percent per year, rupture or dissection at 6.4 percent
per year, death at 10.8 percent, and death, rupture or dissection at 14.1 percent per year.
At size > 6.0 cm, the odds ratio for rupture was increased 15-fold (p = .0041). Elective,
preemptive surgical repair restored life-expectancy to normal. Of 218 patients contacted,
44 (18.9 percent) had one or more first-order relatives with aneurysmal disease. Patients
with non-MFS familial aggregation were similar to those with sporadic disease, but had a
trend toward higher growth rates and mortality (odds ratio 1.594, p = .5124).
Conclusions: This study indicates that (1) Thoracic aneurysm is a lethal disease. (2)
familial aggregation occurs in 19 percent of cases and may carry a worse prognosis (3)
Aneurysm size has a profound impact on rupture, dissection and death. (4) For counsel-
ing purposes, the patient with an aneurysm exceeding 6 cm can expect a yearly rate of rup-
ture or dissection of at least 6.4 percent and a death rate of 10.8 percent. (5) Elective sur-
gical repair restores survival to near normal. This analysis strongly supports careful radi-
ologic follow-up and elective, pre-emptive surgical intervention for the otherwise lethal
condition of large thoracic aortic aneurysm.
A PHANTOM STUDY ON THE EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN ORBIT RELATED
POSITION AND L-MODE (1800) OR H-MODE (3600) ACQUISITION ON TECH-
NETIUM-99m-SESTAMIBI SPECT CARDIAC IMAGES. Oleg E. Drozhinin.
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
Background: Several Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
imaging studies have compared 180 degree and 360 degree data acquisition employing
Thallium-201. These studies used qualitative methods to compare the imaging protocols.
However, there are no reports comparing imaging protocols using Technetium-99m-
labeled sestamibi SPECT imaging. This Technetium-99m-sestamibi study compared
quantitatively 180 degree and 360 degree acquisition protocols.
Methods and Results: A cardiac phantom was used, and imaging was performed with
a GE Millenium dual headed camera. The phantom was filled with 0.25 uCi/mL of Tech-
netium-99m and placed in a "feet first" orientation at different distances from the center
of the rotation in a straight or 30 degree angled positions. Studies were performed with
(L-mode) 180 degree or (H-mode) 360 degree acquisitions. The phantom was also imaged
after placing fillable cardiac inserts of 5mL, 10 mL, and 20 mL, simulating 4 percent, 8
percent, and 16 percent defects of the total volume, respectively. Images were filtered and
reconstructed. Myocardial perfusion was than quantified using the automated Wackers-
Liu cardiac quantification method. The results show that L-mode acquisition creates mild
anterolateral defects in the normal phantom placed in off-center position and severe
defects of up to 4 percent of the total volume in phantom placed 6 inches off-center posi-
tion. L-mode acquisition created larger defects in the off-center position in the phantom
with defect inserts. H-mode data acquisition did not create center of rotation error in the
normal phantom, and quantification ofdefect sizes acquired in the H-mode correlated well
with the actual defect sizes. Placing the phantom in a straight or angled position did not
have a quantifiable effect on defect size in the SPECT images.
Conclusions: We found that L-mode acquisition created anterolateral defects in the
normal phantom placed in an off-center position, whereas H-mode acquisition did not. In
phantom with defect inserts, L-mode acquisition created larger defects in the off-center
position, whereas defect sizes in the phantom imaged in the H-mode correlated well to the
269
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
actual defect. These findings in the L-mode acquired images may be attributed to the geo-
metric distortion in SPECT imaging caused by center of rotation error. Further experi-
ments on patients rather than the phantom are needed to elucidate the clinical implications
of these finding. If the patient study would confirm these findings, Technetium-99m-ses-
tamibi H-mode acquisition would be the preferred choice in SPECT imaging.
ENHANCING MEDICAL OBSERVATIONAL SKILLS THROUGH FINE ART: A
RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDY. Jacqueline C. Dolev, and Irwin Braver-
man. Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether first year medical students can
learn and enhance the observational skills necessary for medical diagnosis by studying
and discussing paintings. The study was conducted at the Yale University School of Med-
icine and the Yale Center for British Art (YCBA) over two academic years. One hundred
seventy-six (176) first year medical students participated. In 1998-1999 ninety students
were randomly assigned to three groups: the YCBA group, the lecture group, and the con-
trol group. The YCBA groups studied and discussed paintings with their peers and the
museum's Curator of Education. The control groups attended their regularly scheduled
clinical tutorial session, in which they were taught clinical skills by a physician preceptor.
The lecture group attended an anatomy lecture targeted at teaching students how to read
x-rays. In 1999 to 2000, eighty-six students were randomized into the YCBA and control
groups only, after the preliminary data revealed that the lecture group's observational
skills were unchanged after attending the didactic lecture (p = .928). All students were
given a performance exam before and after their event. A predetermined key was used to
grade blindly students' ability to describe the visual features necessary for medical diag-
nosis in a series of color photographs. Students' medical observational skills were tested
along two time points, the pre-test (T1), and post-test (T2). Post-test scores differed
between the two groups for both years [two way repeated measures ANOVA, [F (1,144)
= 8.9, p = .003]. YCBA students achieved significantly higher scores and improved more
often than the control. Students also completed a word list search task after their events in
1999-2000. The YCBA group's mean scanning rate was found to be significantly faster
than the control group (p = .035).
Lecture
YCBA Control (1998 only)
Groups (n = 81) (n = 65) (n = 30)
Pre-test exam 50% (±10%) 57% (±10%) 46% (±14%)
Post-test exam 57% (±9%) 46% (±11%) 46% (±12%)
First year medical students can and do learn medical visual skills by studying and
describing representational paintings.
270
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
INCIDENCE AND RATE OF DISAPPEARANCE OF RETINAL HEMORRHAGE
IN NEWBORNS. M. Vaughn Emerson, Dante J. Pieramici, Kathleen M. Stoessel,
John P. Berreen, and Raymond F. Gariano. Section of Retina, Department of Oph-
thalmology and Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
To determine the prevalence, associated biometric factors, and rate of disappearance
of neonatal retinal hemorrhage, healthy newboms (n = 149) at an urban hospital were
examined using indirect ophthalmoscopy within 30 hours of birth. Newboms with retinal
hemorrhage were re-examined biweekly until hemorrhage resolved. Intraretinal hemor-
rhage was present in 34 percent of newboms and varied from a single dot hemorrhage in
one eye to bilateral widespread hemorrhages, occasionally with white centers. The inci-
dence of hemorrhage was higher for vacuum-assisted (75 percent) than for spontaneous
vaginal deliveries (33 percent), and was least for infants delivered by cesarean section (7
percent, p < .001). The mean matemal age was greater for infants with retinal hemorrhage
(p < 0.04). By two weeks postpartum, retinal hemorrhage resolved in 86 percent of eyes,
and at four weeks, no intraretinal hemorrhage was detected, though a single subretinal
hemorrhage persisted until six weeks postpartum. Intraretinal hemorrhages are common
in the immediate postnatal period and resolve by one month of age. Retinal hemorrhage
in infants older than one month should heighten the suspicion that the hemorrhage is asso-
ciated with factors other than birth.
DETERMINANTS OF HOSPICE USE AMONG TERMINALLY ILL ELDERLY
INPATIENTS. Sara E. Erickson and Elizabeth H. Bradley. Department of Epi-
demiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
The objectives of this study were to 1) describe the frequency with which hospice is
used among a hospitalized set of terminally ill patients with cancer, 2) to identify factors
associated with hospice use among terminally ill patients, 3) to examine the frequency,
content and timing of discussions about hospice between patients and clinicians, and 4) to
identify correlates of having a discussion about hospice. This was a cross-sectional study
that used medical records of terminally ill cancer patients who were at least 65 years old
and admitted to six randomly selected study hospitals. Information that was abstracted
from the medical record included demographic data, clinical data, discharge disposition,
and hospital-specific data (i.e., inpatient hospice unit vs. no inpatient hospice unit). Data
from documented discussions were also abstracted from the medical record and included
the date and timing, participants, and content of the discussions. The majority of the study
population did not use hospice services (74.6 percent). Factors associated with hospice use
were 1) being admitted to a hospital with a hospice unit, 2) receiving hospice care prior to
the hospital admission and 3) having a discussion of prognosis recorded in the medical
record. The majority of the study population (62.1 percent) had no discussion about hos-
pice documented in their medical record. Factors that were associated with having a dis-
cussion about hospice were 1) being 80 years or older, 2) being admitted to a hospital with
a hospice unit, 3) receiving hospice care prior to the hospital admission, and 4) having a
discussion of prognosis recorded in the medical record. Most of the terminally ill cancer
patients in this study did not discuss or receive hospice care. Local health resources, in this
case, having a hospice unit within a hospital, influenced hospice utilization and were sig-
nificantly associated with an increased likelihood of hospice use. If hospice services were
made widely available within hospitals, hospice use would likely increase dramatically.
271
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
THE EVALUATION OF OP-1 IN A RABBIT MODEL OF POSTEROLATERAL
FUSION. Jonathan S. Erulkar, Jonathan N. Grauer, Tushar Ch. Patel, Nancy W.
Troiano, Gary E. Friedlaender, and Manohar M. Panjabi. Department of
Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
The purpose of this study was to 1) establish the New Zealand white rabbit as a bio-
mechanical flexibility model for the lumbar spine, 2) evaluate the biomechanical stability
of lumbar fusion, 3) evaluate BMP-7 (OP-1) as a substitute for autograft, and 4) determine
the ability of OP-1 to overcome the inhibitory effect of nicotine on fusion. Ten non-oper-
ative rabbit lumbar spines were tested biomechanically using a three-dimensional flexi-
bility protocol. Also, single-level posterolateral fusions were performed on 49 New
Zealand white rabbits. The rabbits were divided into five groups: (1) autograft, (2) OP-1
with its collagen-based carrier, (3) carrier alone, (4) autograft in the presence of nicotine,
and (5) OP-1 with its carrier in the presence of nicotine. Animals were sacrificed five
weeks following surgery, and the success of fusion was evaluated biomechanically, histo-
logically, and radiographically.
The range ofmotion (ROM) between the L5-L6 vertebrae was 12.380 (2.700) in flex-
ion, 5.580 (1.480) in extension, 4.960 (1.700) in lateral bending, and 0.35° (0.610) in axial
rotation. The ROM of the fused specimens was significantly decreased from that of non-
operated specimens in flexion (81 percent), extension (61 percent), and right and left lat-
eral bending (67 percent and 83 percent). Five of eight autograft rabbits fused (63 per-
cent), none of the carrier alone rabbits fused (0 percent), and all of the OP-I rabbits fused
(100 percent). Two of eight nicotine-exposed autograft rabbits fused (25 percent) and all
of the nicotine-exposed OP-1 rabbits fused (100 percent).
Several conclusions were drawn from the data. First, baseline flexibility data of the
rabbit lumbar spine was established. Second, successful fusion significantly limits, but
does not eliminate, intervertebral motion. Third, OP-1 appears to be an effective bone
graft altemative for intertransverse process spine fusion. Finally, OP-1 appears able to
overcome the inhibitory effects of nicotine on spinal fusion.
CONTROL OF VESSEL IDENTITY BY BIOMECHANICAL FORCES. Roger Fan
and Michael A. Gimbrone, Jr. The Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology and
Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology. Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (Sponsored by Vincent T. March-
esi, Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.)
The structural and functional differences between arteries and veins have traditional-
ly been assumed to reflect physiologic influences such as blood pressure and oxygenation.
However, recent evidence suggests that vessel identity may instead be established by mol-
ecular differences between arterial and venous endothelial cells. This molecular identity
is marked by endothelial cell expression of the protein ephrin-B2 in arteries but not in
veins. Although ephrin-B2 is a marker for arterial endothelial cell identity, and is also
essential for angiogenesis and vascular development, the determinants of ephrin-B2
expression in endothelial cells remain unknown. Here we show that biomechanical forces
influence the expression of ephrin-B2 in human endothelial cells in vivo and in vitro.
Ephrin-B2 expression was examined in a human vein graft after coronary artery bypass,
where the vein segment was surgically inserted into the arterial circulation. Immunostain-
ing of vein grafts revealed de novo endothelial and smooth muscle expression of ephrin-
272
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
B2, implicating ephrin-B2 expression as a molecular descriptor of anatomical arterial
arterialization. When cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells are exposed to a
physiologic level of fluid laminar shear stress (LSS) typical of large arterial geometries,
ephrin-B2 mRNA and protein expression is increased compared to that of cells under sta-
tic conditions. Moreover, the LSS-dependent upregulation of endothelial ephrin-B2
expression is time-dependent. These results demonstrate that biomechanical stimuli regu-
late ephrin-B2 expression and strongly suggest that hemodynamic forces may be respon-
sible in part for the genesis and maintenance of arterial identity.
PATTERNS OF INFECTION IN PATIENTS MAINTAINED ON CHRONIC PERI-
TONEAL DIALYSIS THERAPY WITH MULTIPLE EPISODES OF PERITONITIS.
Emily Finkelstein, James Jekel, Alan Kliger, and Frank Bia. Department of Inter-
nal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
The causes of peritonitis in patients with end-stage renal disease on chronic peri-
toneal dialysis (CPD) are uncertain. One possible explanation for peritonitis, particularly
in patients with multiple episodes of infection, is the release of planktonic bacteria from
biofilms on the walls of catheters. It has been shown that bacteria form biofilms on the
walls of catheters within 48 hours of their placement. If this explanation is correct, one
would expect there to be repetition of organisms causing infection in patients with multi-
ple episodes of peritonitis.
The charts of all patients starting CPD at New Haven CAPD after 1/1/90 were
reviewed. Patients were included in the study if they had more than one episode of cul-
ture-positive peritonitis, with complete data recorded on cultured organisms and sensitiv-
ities. Episodes of infection, organisms, and sensitivities were reviewed as well as catheter
changes.
198 patients out of 630 patients were identified. 114 were male; 104 were Caucasian.
Of 198 patients, 157 (80 percent) had at least one repeat infection with the same organ-
ism. Of these 157, 124 (79 percent) had more than 50 percent of their episodes caused by
the same organism. Of the 90 patients who had more than 4 episodes of infection in their
history, 59 (65 percent) had at least half or more of their episodes caused by the same
organism. Sequential analyses for independence revealed that, for Staphylococcus epider-
midis, and for Staphylococcus aureus, there was a significantly increased likelihood for
these organisms to follow themselves (p < .05). Of 67 patients with catheter changes and
subsequent peritonitis, only 10 (15 percent) developed repeat infections with the same
organism after the catheter change (and 8 of these were due to yeast.)
The data above support the hypothesis that bacterial biofilm on the walls of catheters
is associated with peritonitis in patients maintained on CPD. Further research is needed to
establish a causal relationship.
A SIMPLE STRATEGY FOR IMPROVING PATIENT CONTACT FOLLOWING
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT DISCHARGE. Rockman Ferrigno, Keith Bradley,
and Michael Werdmann (Sponsored by Edward Monico). Department of Surgery,
Section of Emergency Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
The purpose of this study was to assess strategies to improve telephone contact with
adult patients discharged from the emergency department (ED).
273
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
The design of this study was a prospective, randomized, interventional trial, which
was set in an urban/suburban, community, teaching hospital. The study population was a
sample of patients 18 years or older being discharged from the ED. Patients were exclud-
ed if they had altered mental status or were unable to communicate with the College
Research Associates (RA). Patients were randomized into a Control and Intervention
group. A RA asked subjects in the Intervention Group a set of scripted questions at dis-
charge. These questions confirmed the patient's telephone number and established a time
when a follow-up call could be expected. Control Group subjects received routine dis-
charge instructions from the ED staff. All subjects were called back within four days of
ED discharge.
The results are as follows: Eighty-seven Control Group subjects and 76 Intervention
Group subjects were enrolled. There were no significant differences at baseline between
the two study groups for race, sex, and insurance status. Forty-seven (54 percent) Control
Group subjects were contacted compared to 58 (77 percent) in the Intervention Group (p
< .003; Chi-square test).
In conclusion, a simple patient interview conducted immediately prior to discharge,
used to confirm the patient's telephone number and setting a time when a follow-up call
can be expected, significantly improve patient follow-up contact rates.
RALOXIFENE ENHANCES ENDOTHELIAL FUNCTION IN HEALTHY POST-
MENOPAUSAL WOMEN. Melissa E. Fuchs, Philip M. Sarrel, Haq Nawaz, Wendy
Chan, and David L. Katz. Yale-Griffin Prevention Research Center, Yale Universi-
ty School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Endothelial dysfunction has been shown to correlate strongly with both coronary dis-
ease and its risk factors. Vasodilatory effects of estrogen are believed to contribute to
potential cardiovascular benefits of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in post-
menopausal women. We therefore studied the effects of a selective estrogen receptor mod-
ulator (SERM), raloxifene, on endothelial function in healthy post-menopausal women
not using HRT. Twenty healthy post-menopausal women underwent both brachial artery
reactivity studies (BARS) and laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) before and after taking
either raloxifene or placebo daily for six weeks with a "wash-out" period of at least six
weeks between the two phases. Brachial artery diameter increased 5.00 percent after treat-
ment with placebo and 8.56 percent after treatment with raloxifene (SE = 1.83, p = .03).
The BARS results did not differ among the three untreated scanning sessions. When the
diameter change (response) was adjusted for the magnitude of hyperemic flow (stimulus),
the difference between raloxifene and placebo widened (p = .009). Using the LDV flux
measurements, Response period AUC/ Reference period AUC ratio for placebo was 1.18
and the ratio for raloxifene was 1.28 (p = .05). The percent diameter change as measured
by BARS and the AUC ratios as measured by LDV correlated significantly with r = 0.33
(p = .04). This study suggests that raloxifene enhances the vasodilatory response in the
brachial artery and in the microcirculation, mitigating endothelial dysfunction and possi-
bly producing a cardioprotective effect. Raloxifene may therefore prove particularly valu-
able for postmenopausal women at risk for coronary artery disease.
274
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
HIV-RELATED KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDES, AND BEHAVIORS AMONG STD
PATIENTS IN HUNAN PROVINCE, CHINA. Joshua Gibson and Chen Xi. Hunan
Provincial Sexually Transmitted Diseases Surveillance Center/Hunan Provincial
Health & Anti-epidemic. (Sponsored by Kaveh Khoshnood. Yale School of Epi-
demiology and Public Health.)
This study was designed to assess the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors relating to
HIV/AIDS among patients visiting an STD clinic in Hunan Province, China. It is hoped
the results of this cross-sectional survey will be useful in the effort to prevent HIV/AIDS
from becoming a major public health issue in the province. 117 patients at a local STD
clinic were included in the study. Participants were tested for antibodies to HIV. All par-
ticipants were HIV negative. Knowledge regarding HIV transmission and condom use
was low. Participants correctly identified routes of transmission between 75.2 percent and
13.7 percent depending on route. Only 50.4 percent of respondents knew condoms pre-
vented pregnancy; only 38.5 percent knew condoms prevent infection. 43.6 percent of
patients responded they never used condoms. Only 25.6 percent of people reported con-
dom use the last time they had sex. women. especially under age 30, were less knowl-
edgeable about HIV and condoms. Young women were also less likely to report condom
use (49.2 percent report never using condoms). Education regarding condom use, STD
and HIV transmission will be essential if China is to avoid an HIV/AIDS disaster.
CENTRAL T CELL TOLERANCE IN MURINE LUPUS. Kira Giovanielli and Joe
Craft. Section of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
This investigation compares central T cell tolerance in a murine mouse strain that
develops spontaneous lupus with two non-autoimmune strains, in response to a conven-
tional agonist antigen and to several altered peptide ligands. In order to allow the study of
a large number of thymocytes, the T cell receptor (TCR)a and f chain genes of the AND
TCR specific for amino acids 88-104 of pigeon cytochrome c were fully backcrossed to
the Fas-intact lupus-prone strain MRL/+Fas-lpr and non-autoimmune strains B10.BR and
CBA/CaJ. Transgenic CD4+CD8+ and semi-mature CD4+CD8lOHSAhi thymocytes were
cultured in the presence of antigen presenting cells and peptide ligands with varying
affinities for the T cell receptor. After culture, cells were examined by flow cytometry to
determine peptide dependent deletion and TCR downregulation in response to both the
agonist and altered peptide ligands. Additionally, the percentage of cells upregulating
CD69 was determined before and after culture with various peptides. CD69 upregulation
occurs on all thymocytes undergoing negative as well as positive selection and is an indi-
cator of TCR signaling. I found intact thymic deletion of double positive and semi-mature
HSAhi cells in the lupus-prone mice in response to both the agonist peptide and the altered
peptide ligands. Additionally, there was no difference in TCR downregulation or in per-
centage CD69 upregulation. However, before peptide exposure the Fas-intact MRL/+Fas-
lpr thymus had a significantly smaller percentage of double positive cells, and these cells
expressed significantly more CD69. These experiments indicate that central thymocyte
deletion is intact in lupus-prone mice, but differences in T cell receptor signaling demon-
strated by increased basal levels of CD69 and fewer double positive cells suggest that cen-
tral tolerance is altered in MRL/+Fas-lPr mice. Initial work involving bone marrow
chimeras to evaluate the positive selection of lupus-prone thymocytes in an H2-M-/- back-
ground did not suggest a lowered positive selection threshold, but further examination of
275
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
positive selection in response to altered peptide ligands may reveal defects in lupus-prone
mice.
AN APPROACH TO ESTABLISHING FOREIGN GENES IN SIMULATED FIELD
POPULATIONS OF CHAGAS DISEASE VECTORS. Matthew Goodwin. Depart-
ment of Orthopaedics & Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
A strategy for the control of certain arthropod-borne infectious diseases known as
paratransgenesis, involves the expression of disease transmission-blocking molecules by
genetically altered symbiotic bacteria of their insect hosts. Previously, our laboratory has
shown that the symbiont bacterium, Rhodococcus rhodnii, of the Chagas Disease vector,
Rhodnius prolixus, can be transformed to express the gene encoding Cecropin A, pore
forming peptide toxic to Trypanosoma cruzi. Furthermore, we've demonstrated in lab
colonies of aposymbiotic R. prolixus, the spread of a genetically altered strain of bacteria
in the synthetic fecal preparation, CRUZIGARD.
This study reports results of CRUZIGARD applications to R. prolixus in a setting
that simulates field conditions. Adult insects were collected in Olopa, Chiquimula,
Guatemala. After laying eggs, the adult insects were removed. The progeny were then
raised in cages containing a microenvironment simulating the natural environment of the
parental generation in which competing microbes were present. CRUZIGARD laden with
the genetically altered symbionts, containing the plasmid pPrMDWK6, which encodes
resistance to kanamycin and a single chain antibody, rDB3, was applied monthly to the
cages containing the R. prolixus nymphs. Results showed that greater than 50 percent of
R. prolixus nymphs exposed to CRUZIGARD containing the genetically altered R. rhod-
nii, retained the transgenic bacteria throughout their development. In these paratransgenic
insects, approximately 90 percent of the bacterial colony forming units (CFU) were the
genetically altered bacterial symbionts. There were no noted adverse effects on insect
development or fecundity as a result of the CRUZIGARD. These data suggest that
CRUZIGARD may represent a powerful method of dispersing recombinant symbiotic
bacteria among field populations of the Chagas Disease vector, R. prolixus. Issues of effi-
cacy, environmental safety, and ethics are discussed.
HEALTH CARE REFORM IN JAMAICA: THE ROLE OF DECENTRALIZATION
IN MAINTAINING EQUITY AND STRENGTHENING THE HEALTH CARE SYS-
TEM. Garth N. Graham. Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Uni-
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Health care reform is an active process currently taking place in a number of coun-
tries across the world. In many developing countries decentralization is a significant com-
ponent of health care reform. The island of Jamaica, like many other Caribbean and Latin
American nations, has undertaken the process of decentralizing the administration of
healthcare as a part of nationwide structural reform. This has resulted in the transference
of most of the day to day management of the system to Regional Health Authorities. In
this study we looked at the overall process of health care reform in Jamaica and in partic-
ular the impact that recent decentralization has had on issues of equity and strengthening
of the healthcare system. Many experts have hypothesized that decentralization on a
whole has the potential to negatively impact the health care system, we looked at this
hypothesis in the Jamaican context. Data from the 1999 Jamaica Survey ofLiving Condi-
276
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
tions, an annual nationwide survey, was looked at and compared to previous years. The
data showed little evidence for differences in equity along geographic or economic groups
but did identify the very old and the very young as particularly vulnerable populations, in
addition the data highlighted the significant utilization of the private sector (60.9 percent
in Kingston and 53.6 percent in rural areas) by the population and based on this sugges-
tions were made for successful public-private partnerships
HEALTHY AMERICAN CHILDREN WITH PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE: A
COMPARISON OF HMO AND FEE-FOR-SERVICE CARE. Avery S Grauer and
Benjamin Druss. Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut.
The majority of children with private health insurance are healthy, but no study to
date has focused exclusively on these healthy children and how their insurance coverage
affects their health care. This study attempts to fill this gap. Data from the 1994 National
Health Interview Survey were analyzed. The survey conducted interviews with 45,705
households and was weighted such that it is considered representative of the United States
civilian non-institutionalized population. The 13,838 identified healthy children with
clear-cut health maintenance organization (HMO) or fee-for-service (FFS) coverage were
studied for how HMO vs. FFS coverage was associated with five aspects of health care:
1) Premium payment; 2) Service utilization; 3) Plan parameters; 4) Care availability; and
5) Patient satisfaction. Survey questions were answered by parental proxy. Healthy chil-
dren enrolled in both HMOs and FFS plans were found to be quite similar, with highly
met medical needs and high levels of satisfaction. The ways in which these children's care
most strikingly differed included HMOs having greater in-plan but lesser out-of-plan
financial coverage and permitting more limited choice of physician. Among healthy chil-
dren with private insurance, enrollees' parents most perceived differences in those areas
of care related to the design of their insurance plan type. While more studies are suggest-
ed to examine long-term outcomes, short-term outcomes seem relatively unhampered by
HMO vs. FFS enrollment and come at decreased cost.
LONG-TERM OUTCOMES OF NONOPERATIVE TREATMENT OF BLUNT
ABDOMINAL TRAUMA. Matthew A. Gutierrez and Peter B. Angood. Department
of Surgery, Washington University Medical Center, Washington University, St.
Louis, Missouri. (Sponsored by Manish Tandon, Department of Surgery, Yale Uni-
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.)
The purpose ofthis study was to determine if nonoperative treatment ofblunt liver and
splenic injuries has any long-term consequences that may be detrimental to patients. A ret-
rospective review was conducted of 1 12 adult trauma patients that were treated nonopera-
tively for blunt abdominal trauma between 1991 and 1998. The patient records were fol-
lowed up to see if this patient population had an increased occurrence of medical problems
that could be related to nonoperative management. Approximately one patient developed
post-transfusion hepatitis, two patients developed delayed hemorrhage of their injuries but
continued to be managed nonoperatively, one patient failed nonoperative treatment and
required splenectomy, three patients developed sepsis, and one patient died during nonop-
erative management from an asthma exacerbation. There was no incidence of small bowel
obstruction in the series. It appears from these data that long-term complications related to
277
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
nonoperative management are minimal, and it should continue to be the treatment of choice
in hemodynamically stable patients who sustain blunt abdominal trauma.
INJURIES IN INFANTS & TODDLERS: UNINTENTIONAL OR MALTREAT-
MENT? A VIEW FROM THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT. Caroline N. Harada,
John M. Leventhal, Carolina M. Takizawa, and Bonnie D. Kerker. Department of
Pediatrics and School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Improved epidemiologic information is needed by clinicians to help in distinguish-
ing unintentional injuries from those due to maltreatment. The purpose of this study of
injuries in young children was (1) to determine the frequency of maltreatment and (2) to
identify injury characteristics associated with maltreatment. We reviewed the medical
records of all children under three years old evaluated for injuries in the pediatric emer-
gency department (E.D.) ofYale New Haven Hospital from 1/1/97 to 12/31/97, recording
details about each injury and its evaluation. Two reviewers independently rated the likeli-
hood of maltreatment in each case using specific, pre-defined criteria and a nine-point
scale ranging from unintentional injury to neglect and definite physical abuse. 1055 cases
were included; 58 percent of this population was male; 51 percent white, 25 percent
African American, 23 percent other; 20 percent were under one year of age, 40 percent
were one year olds, and 41 percent were two year olds; 40 percent used Medicaid. 1.4 per-
cent of cases were rated as physical abuse and 2.0 percent as neglect. 60 percent of unin-
tentional injuries were due to falls, 28 percent due to collisions with people or objects, 5
percent to bums. 48 percent of injuries were soft tissue injuries, 23 percent closed head
injuries, 8 percent fractures, and 5 percent bums. 90 percent of injuries were minor in
severity. Eleven percent of injuries required the use of an ambulance, 26 percent diagnos-
tic imaging, 9 percent consultations with social workers, and 5 percent admissions for
inpatient care. Maltreatment was significantly associated with age less than one year old,
Medicaid, evening presentation to the E.D., bums, fractures, injury to the trunk, and
injuries of high severity (p < .05). In conclusion, one in 29 injuries in children under three
years of age evaluated in a pediatric E.D. suffered from physical abuse or neglect. High-
er rates of maltreatment were seen in infants and in patients with bums, fractures, or
injuries of high severity.
A VIRTUOUS LIVING: AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION V. FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION, 1975-1982. Natalie F. Holt (Sponsored by John Harley
Warner). Department of the History of Medicine and Science, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
From its inception in 1847, the American Medical Association has fostered a distaste
for the notion of treating medicine as a business. Yet medical practice has a mercantile
aspect, however awkwardly wedded to its altruistic side. Through the early decades of the
twentieth century, with the ascent of modem medical science, American physicians
increasingly gained public trust. Concomitantly, a series of state and federal court cases
reinforced the notion that professional self-regulation could be a sufficient guiding prin-
ciple upon which the medical marketplace could function. So it stood for several decades:
the humanitarian side of medical practice overshadowed the business side, adequately
sidelining discussion of the latter.
278
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
In the middle of the twentieth century, changed societal circumstances revised this
premise. As medical costs set off on a relentless ascent, citizens lost faith in the idea that
physicians could place personal prosperity behind public welfare. In general, individuals
became less inclined to cede control to authority figures. So marked the climate that
brought about in 1975 the landmark suit by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) against
the American Medical Association (AMA) over the organization's restrictions on compe-
tition and free market enterprise in medicine. The FTC's victory illustrates the extent of
the shift in public attitude toward the medical profession and portended the current refash-
ioning of how medicine is practiced.
THE EFFECTS OF ACUTE 02 DEPRIVATION ON THE CELL CYCLE AND
CELL DIVISION IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTOR EMBRYOS. Benjamin H.
Huffard, Robert Douglas, and Gabriel G. Haddad. Section of Respiratory Medi-
cine, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
Hypoxia is the causative agent in much of the morbidity and mortality observed in
both pediatric and adult medicine. Previous research has demonstrated the ability of the
fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) to survive extended periods of anoxia, and that D.
melanogaster embryos enter a unique state of chromosomal condensation and cell cycle
arrest at low oxygen concentrations. Understanding the mechanisms that protect these
cells from anoxic death may help us learn how we can protect our own cells.
We have developed two methods in which we are attempting to characterize the phe-
nomena, first we have developed an anoxia chamber in which we can incubate and per-
form tissue fixation at controlled oxygen concentrations; and second, we have developed
a perfusion chamber that allows us to control oxygen concentrations while viewing live
embryos on the confocal microscope. These experiments have demonstrated the follow-
ing: 1) Anoxia (pO2 = 0) for periods of 30 minutes or longer produces a chromosomal con-
densation at the nuclear periphery; 2) 5 percent oxygen for 120 minutes results in chro-
mosomal condensation at the nuclear periphery; 3) Embryos exposed to anoxia for 120
minutes then returned to normoxia developed into normal larvae; 4) 60 minutes of anox-
ia followed by 60 minutes of normoxia showed a dramatic reduction in chromosomal con-
densation; 5) Using BrdU incorporation as a marker of DNA replication, we demonstrat-
ed complete cessation of the cell cycle during periods of anoxia; and 6) Using Embryos
genetically engineered to express green fluorescing protein (GFP) tagged to kinesin, we
demonstrate two distinct arrest points in the cell cycle, interphase and metaphase, depend-
ing on the phase of the cell cycle where anoxia is started.
In summary, embryonic cells respond to low oxygen tensions by entering a reversible
state of arrest, and we are now poised to further dissect the mechanisms which control
these hypoxia-sensitive checkpoints.
TRANSPLANTED OLFACTORY ENSHEATHING CELLS REMYELINATE
AXONS AFTER TRAUMATIC SPINAL CORD INJURY IN ADULT RATS. Christo-
pher Shayne James, Department of Neurology. Yale University School of Medi-
cine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Mechanical trauma to the spinal cord produces axonal destruction and extensive
demyelination by damaging not only axons but also oligodendrocvtes and astrocytes. The
capability of the central nervous system to remyelinate after such contusive injuries has
279
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
been well documented, even though it had been described as an abortive and incomplete
process (Ceballos 1997). It has been established that transplantation of olfactory ensheath-
ing cells (OECs), which have properties of both astrocytes and Schwann cells can remyeli-
nate axons with a Schwann cell-like pattern of myelin. At present there are no morpho-
metric studies to assess the pattern and extent of remyelination after transplantation of
OECs into a contusive lesion. With the purpose of understanding this phenomenon better,
the dorsal columns of adult rats subjected to a severe weight-drop contusion injury were
evaluated 9 weeks after injury. The model for the contusive injury was made using a stan-
dardized device developed for the Multicenter Animal Spinal Cord Injury Study (MAS-
CIS) (Gruner 1992). Cell suspensions of acutely dissociated OECs from neonatal rats
were injected into the lesion 4 weeks post-injury. Thus, transplants were in place 5 weeks
prior to sacrifice. Qualitative histological analysis revealed remyelinated axons near and
remote from the cell injection site, consistent with extensive migration ofOECs within the
lesion. The total amount of remyelination observed in lesions with transplanted cells was
21,000+
14,000-axon mm (n = 4) compared to 11,500+ 6,700-axon mm (n = 4) in the
control Group. Although it is our strong belief that remyelination was significantly greater
in the transplant group, we unfortunately could not reject the null hypothesis with the
unpaired Student's t-test (p = .352). This test may have failed to detect a real, perhaps clin-
ically relevant, difference in part because the sample sizes were too small to give the study
enough power to recognize the effect. We were able to prove a statistical difference
between groups by multiplying our sample size by four (n = 16) and using the Mann-
Whitney Rank Sum Test (p = .023). The results from this test suggest that transplantation
of neonatalOECs into the crushed dorsal column have substantial remyelinative capabil-
ities.
GENETIC AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF AUTOIMMUNE LYMPHO-
PROLIFERATIAVE SYNDROME (ALPS). Michele M. Johnson, Richard M.
Siegel, John K. Frederiksen, and Michael J. Lenardo. Laboratory of Immunology,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland. (Sponsored by Robert Tigelaar, Department of Dermatology,
Section ofImmunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine.)
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) is an inherited disorder of
immune homeostasis in which a defect in lymphocyte apoptosis is most often associated
with a heterozygous mutation in the APT] gene encoding Fas (Apo-1/CD95). Although
most Fas mutations in ALPS occur in the intracellular (IC) domain of Fas, some also occur
in the extracellular (EC) domain. Patients and their mutation-bearing relatives with IC
mutations have significantly higher penetrance of the ALPS phenotype and greater mor-
bidity than patients with EC mutations. To determine whether the increased penetrance in
IC families was related to a difference in the severity of the apoptosis defect, these IC and
EC kindreds were compared using patient-derived EBV-transformed lymphocytes in a
novel quantitative in vitro Fas-mediated apoptosis assay. Results demonstrated that the
dominant inhibition of apoptosis was more pronounced in lymphocytes with IC muta-
tions. Thus, mutational position strongly influences the development and clinical severity
of ALPS and raises the issue of how these EC mutations work. Furthermore, within each
kindred apoptosis defects correlated with the Fas genotype of each individual regardless
of their disease phenotype, suggesting other genetic or environmental factors may also
play a role in the development of ALPS. The ability of EC mutations to dominantly inter-
fere with Fas signaling, coupled with their inability to bind Fas ligand, contradicts the
accepted view of ligand-induced oligomerization as the initiating step of TNF receptor
280
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
family signaling. We propose that the formation of a Fas signaling complex requires pre-
assembly of Fas receptors prior to ligand binding. Pre-associated Fas complexes were
found in living cells by means of fluorescence resonance energy transfer between variants
of green fluorescent protein. Through co-transfections and immunoprecipitation of vari-
ous EC mutants with wildtype Fas, the first extracellular cysteme-repeat domain (CRD 1)
was shown to be critical for Fas receptor pre-assembly and has been termed the "preligand
assembly domain" (PLAD).
HELIUM-OXYGEN FOR THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA.
Samuel H. Kim, Henry Lin, and Gail D'Onofrio. Section of Emergency Medicine,
Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con-
necticut.
A complete review of the literature regarding the use of helium-oxygen mixtures in
the treatment of severe asthmatic attacks shows a lack of robust, well-controlled, clinical
trials that use appropriate endpoints. We propose to use a two-arm, prospective, random-
ized, controlled clinical trial to determine if helium-oxygen breathing during a severe
asthmatic attack in the emergency room causes a reduction in intubation and admission
rates. Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be utilized to select for subjects who are not
responding to standard therapy and for whom respiratory failure seems a likely outcome.
Currently, all preparations for the clinical trial have been done with the exception of edu-
cation for the residents and the attending staff.
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN BRCA STATUS, MOLECULAR MARKERS AND
CLINICAL VARIABLES IN EARLY, CONSERVATIVELY MANAGED BREAST
CANCER. Sung Kim, David Rimm, Daryl Carter, Atif Khan, Nicole Parisot, Mayra
Alvarez Franco, Allen Bale and Bruce G Haffty. Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
Patients with early stage, premenopausal breast cancer undergoing breast conserving
therapy have a higher rate of local relapse and more often have a genetic predisposition to
breast cancer. The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the interactions between
BrcalI2 status, molecular biological markers, and local relapse in the conservatively man-
aged breast.
A total of 76 patients who were treated with breast conserving surgery and radiation
at our facilities between 1975 and 1999, who consented to genetic testing, and in whom
paraffin embedded tissue samples were available were the focus of the current study. All
76 patients underwent complete sequencing ofthe Brcal and Brca2 gene. Paraffin embed-
ded material from the primary breast tumor of each patient was processed for immuno-
histochemical staining using either a tissue microarray technique, if possible, or individ-
ual staining. Each tumor sample was stained for er, pr, vegf, p53, her2neu, and pcna.
Staining was interpreted by pathologists who were blinded to the clinical data and Brca
status.
As of December 2000, median follow up of the 76 patients was 10 years. The medi-
an age of this group of premenopausal patients was 39. There were 18 ipsilateral breast
tumor relapses, resulting in a 10-year breast relapse free rate of 75 percent. Of the 76
patients, 50 had normally sequencing Brcal and Brca2, 15 had variants of unclear signif-
icance and 11 had deleterious mutations in Brca 1 (6 patients ) or Brca2 (5 patients).
Immunostaining revealed the following: 40/73 (55 percent) tumors were er positive; 44/75
281
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts -2001
(59 percent) of tumors were pr positive; 6/75 (8 percent) tumors were her2neu positive;
25/75 (33 percent) tumors were p53 positive; 53/67 (79 percent) tumors were pcna posi-
tive;1/71 (1.4 percent) were vegf positive. p53 positivity correlated with deleterious muta-
tions in Brcal (p = .023) but not in Brca2. There was a trend for er negativity and pr neg-
ativity to correlate with Brcal mutation status, though these associations were not quite
statistically significant (p = .087 and .054, respectively); there were no correlations
between er and pr and Brca2. Of note, all11 tumors with Brca mutations were her2neu
negative, though this association was not statistically significant. Positive er and pr status
were highly correlated with each other. Both Brcal and 2 were associated with a positive
family history. In this selected population, higher local relapse rates were correlated to er
positivity (p=.003) and pena negativity (p = .001). The 5 year relapse free rate for er pos-
itive tumors was 74 percent and for er negative tumors 96 percent (p < .008). 5 year
relapse free rate for pcna negative tumors was 62 percent and for pcna positive tumors 88
percent (p < .006).
Patients with Brcal and Brca2 mutations have a molecular profile which is unique
and differs from patients with wildtype Brcal and Brca2. In this group of patients with pre-
menopausal breast cancer, the higher rate of local relapse among er positive and pcna neg-
ative patients was significant, and warrants further investigations.
CAPTOPRIL RENAL SCINTIGRAPHY AS A SCREENING TEST FOR RENO-
VASCULAR HYPERTENSION. Anthony Lemaire. Department of Surgery, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
While Captopril Renal Scintigraphy (CRS) has been advocated as an accurate non-
invasive screening test in patients suspected of having renovascular hypertension (RVH),
widespread use has been limited by reports that have failed to demonstrate consistently
high sensitivities and specificities. With contrast angiography as the gold standard, most
of these reports have used a 50 percent stenosis as the cutoff for a positive CRS study.
Since higher degrees of stenosis are considered more significant clinically, and more like-
ly to trigger a decision to intervene, we evaluated the reliability of CRS in predicting an
angiographically documented renal artery stenosis (RAS) of 75 percent or greater. We
postulate that by using 75 percent or greater as the criterion for a clinically significant
RAS, CRS would be able to identify reliably those patients whose hypertension is not on
a renovascular basis and who require no further work up. To this end, we reviewed the
CRS and renal arteriogram in 84 patients (141 kidneys) undergoing evaluation for pre-
sumed RVH. The data suggest that in patients with severe RAS, more likely to be signif-
icant both hemodynamically and clinically, CRS can be a useful screening test with a neg-
ative predictive value of 97 percent (p value = .0002).
THE UNIQUE HISTOPATHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF NEVI ON AND AROUND
THE EAR. Brian Lester, Jennifer McNiff, Earl J. Glusac, Tamara Handerson, and
Rossitza Lazova. Departments of Dermatology and Pathology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Nevi on certain areas of the body such as the acral, genital, and flexural regions, can
be benign, yet exhibit characteristic "atypical" histopathological features. The purpose of
our study was to characterize the unique features of nevi with a junctional component
located on and around the ear. We examined 101 compound and junctional nevi received
at Yale Dermatopathology Laboratory between May 1990 and August 2000.
282
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
Forty-two (41.6 percent) of these 101 nevi were poorly circumscribed, showed a lat-
eral extension of the melanocytes beyond the dermal component, and showed elongation
of the rete ridges with bridging between them. Twenty-four (57.1 percent) nevi of this
group showed a unique pattern in which the nests at the dermal-epidermal junction were
large and varied in size and shape. They were often located between rete ridges rather than
at their tips. The majority of the cases (26 cases; 61.9 percent) exhibited characteristic
cytological features in which the melanocytes were uniformly large, with abundant pale,
finely granular cytoplasm. They had large vesicular nuclei that were not hyperchromatic
and did not have prominent nucleoli. We surveyed the clinicians who submitted these 42
cases for a clinical follow up and received 25 responses. There was no local recurrence of
pigment at the site after the initial biopsy or re-excision except in one case, in which a
small pigmented area was present two years after the initial partial biopsy. This patient
was lost to follow up.
We believe that we have identified a unique subset of nevi on or near the ear that, like
certain nevi located on acral skin, genitalia, and flexural sites, are benign and yet exhibit
unique and characteristic features which may be misinterpreted as "atypical."
PERIOPERATIVE OUTCOMES OF PEDIATRIC CARDIAC SURGERY
PATIENTS: THE IMPACT OF MULTISYSTEM GENETIC DISEASE. Melissa S.
Lee, Wendy Chan, and Martina Brueckner. Section of Cardiology, Department of
Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Children born with congenital heart disease have a higher incidence of multisystem
genetic disease than the general population. We sought to examine the impact of genetics
(extracardiac malformations, chromosomal abnormalites, or the presence of a defined
syndrome) on perioperative outcomes of pediatric cardiac surgery patients. Data were col-
lected from a retrospective cohort chart review of pediatric (0 to 2 years) patients under-
going primary surgical repair of complete atrioventricular canal (CAVC), partial atrioven-
tricular canal (PAVC), coarctation of the aorta (CoA), or tetralogy of fallot (TOF) from
1994 to 2000. All surgical procedures were performed at Yale-New Haven Hospital, by the
same cardiac surgeon. Hospital records were reviewed and assessed for length of hospi-
talization, duration of intubation, interval of intensive care unit (ICU) stay, use of inotrop-
ic drips, total parenteral nutrition, and presence or absence of infection, post-operative
arrhythmias, surgical complications, and mortality. Statistical analysis was performed
using non-parametric techniques and Kaplan-Meier curves.
The presence of chromosomal abnormalities, malformation syndromes, or extracar-
diac anomalies in patients undergoing repair of TOF or CoA significantly affects total
length of hospitalization (p = .0002, p = .0203), and duration of mechanical ventilation (p
= .0025, p = .0481). Affected TOF patients had longer ICU courses (p = .0007). The rate
of infection following TOF and CoA repair (p = .022, p = .031) was higher in children
with extracardiac genetic anomalies. In the setting of TOF and CoA repair, patients with
additional genetic abnormalities or malformations are more likely to have prolonged
lengths of mechanical ventilation and total hospitalization, and are at higher risk for post-
operative infection. No significant differences in perioperative outcomes were observed
between the two groups following atrioventricular canal repair.
283
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
AGONIST-INDUCED UP-REGULATION OF DOPAMINE RECEPTORS IN
TRANSFECTED CELL LINES. Darren L. Lish, Zafar U. Khan, and Patricia S.
Goldman-Rakic. Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut.
Receptor desensitization is characterized by a reduction in receptor responsiveness
following agonist exposure. This loss of responsiveness may be due in part to a decrease
in the density of receptors on the plasma membrane. However, a clear understanding of
the regulation of receptor density induced by agonist exposure has been lacking. cDNAs
encoding human Dl, D2L, and D2S dopamine receptors were ligated into a eukaryotic
expression vector. The resulting recombinant plasmid was used to produce genomic
mRNA transcripts in vitro that, when co-transfected with helper RNA, were packaged into
virus-like particles. Infection of mammalian cell lines with these pseudovirions resulted
in the transient expression of the receptor protein for study. Expression of Dl, D2L, and
D2S receptors in each cell line was confirmed by receptor-specific radioligand binding
assays, in which the transfected cells showed an increase in binding ranging from 21 to
61 percent of non-transfected control cells. Further, these transfected receptors were visu-
alized by immunofluorescent labeling of permeabilized whole cell samples. Agonist-
induced regulation of membrane receptor density was studied by incubating transfected
cell lines with 100 pM dopamine for times ranging from 30 minutes to 4 hours. In all
cases, agonist exposure led to a significant up-regulation of receptor density, as measured
by radioligand binding. Increases ranged from 113 to 305 percent of non-exposed control
cells, and maximal increases were often detected as soon as 30 minutes following agonist
exposure. This up-regulation of receptors is also evident by immunofluorescent labeling
of cells exposed to agonist. These results suggest that efficient transfection of multiple
dopamine receptor subtypes can be accomplished in several cell lines with the recombi-
nant viral technique. Further, our results show that exposure of transfected cells to
dopaminergic agonists for as little as 30 minutes results in an upregulation of Dl, D2L, and
D2S receptor density on the plasma membrane.
EARLY FOLLICULAR PHASE HORMONE LEVELS IN RELATION TO PAT-
TERNS OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND COFFEE USE. Jennifer M. Lucero,
Bernard L. Harlow, and Daniel W. Cramer. Section of Obstetrics-Gynecology Epi-
demiology Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (Sponsored
by Harvey Risch, Department of Epidemiology, Yale University School of Medi-
cine, New Haven, Connecticut.)
A cohort of non-depressed women from the Harvard Study of Moods and Cycles,
community based cohort study was used. This study evaluated the relationship of early
follicular phase hormone levels to patterns of alcohol, tobacco, and coffee use. The par-
ent study was a cohort design comprised of women aged 36 to 44 years who were classi-
fied as either depressed or non-depressed. From the parent study all non-depressed women
aged 36 to 44 years. who completed a baseline food-frequency questionnaire, were not
currently on exogenous hormones, or breast feeding were included in these analyses. A
total of 498 women was used. We confirmed results from previous studies which found
that women aged 40 to 45 had significantly higher Follicular Stimulating Hormone (FSH)
levels as compared to women aged 36 to 39 (p = .03). Additionally, we found that women
who currently smoke have higher FSH and total Estradiol (E2) levels than women who do
not currently smoke (p = .02). The novel findings of this study relate to coffee and cho-
284
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
lesterol on early follicular total E2 levels. We found a dose response for total E2 as a func-
tion of cups of coffee consumed (p = .006). Additionally, higher cholesterol consumption
was associated with higher total E2 (p = .04).and approached borderline significance (p =
.073) in the linear regression model.. The most significant predictor of SHBG was Body
Mass Index (BMI) (p = .0001). An association of caffeine and SHBG reached borderline
statistical significance (p = .079). Higher caffeine consumption was associated with
greater SHBG levels. These findings indicate a relationship between coffee. cholesterol
consumption, and total E2 The mechanism by which caffeine exerts its effect is not entire-
ly clear. Possible explanations relate to E2 metabolism, cAMP mediation, and interaction
of steroidogenic acute regulator (StAR) protein.
STUDIES ON THE MOLECULAR MECHANICS OF INSULIN RESISTANCE IN
PANCREATOGENIC DIABETES. Ajay V. Maker, Michael Eisenberg, Kumudesh
C. Sritharan, John P. Geibel, Bhanu P. Jena, and Dana K. Andersen. Departments
of Surgery and Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con-
necticut.
Chronic Pancreatitis (CP) and surgical alteration of the pancreas results in altered
glucose metabolism (pancreatogenic diabetes). Approximately 70 percent of patients with
CP develop oral glucose intolerance and approximately 20 percent require insulin thera-
py. Previous experiments have shown altered expression and availability ofhepatic insulin
receptor (IR) and glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2) in CP, however, the cellular mechanism
of resistance has not been established. To assess whether changes in IR and GLUT2 phos-
phorylation mediate glucoregulatory dysfunction, rats with CP (n = 12), induced by 99
percent oleic acid injection into the pancreatic ducts, and sham-operated rats (n = 12) were
studied. Animals were fasted 24 hours, with half of each group fed intraduodenally prior
to liver harvest. IR and GLUT2 were isolated from the liver homogenates by immunopre-
cipitation with anti-IR or anti-GLUT2 antibodies and probed for phosphorylated tyrosine
(RTyr) or phosphoserine (P-Ser) residues respectively. Total tissue phosphotyrosine phos-
phatase (PTPase) activity was measured by the paranitrophenyl phosphate assay. To deter-
mine if IR and GLUT2 organized spatially in a receptor/transporter complex, the proteins
were analyzed with immunofluorescence confocal microscopy and co-immunoprecipita-
tion. IR-P-Tyr increased 24-fold after feeding in sham animals, but increased only 13-fold
in CP. Similarly, GLUT2-P-Ser increased -5-fold in sham tissues, but demonstrated min-
imal phosphorylation in CP animals. This corresponded to -12-fold less IR-P-Tyr (p <
.05) and almost 5-fold less IR-P-Ser (p<0.05) in pancreatitic animals vs. sham animals in
response to feeding. Total PTPase activities were not different. Confocal microscopy
demonstrated colocalization of IR and GLUT2 on the hepatocyte membrane and the pro-
teins coimmunoprecipitate significantly over a ubiquitous hepatocyte control protein (p <
.05). These data confirm that hepatic IR and GLUT2 are normally phosphorylated in vivo
on tyr and ser residues, respectively, upon feeding. This phosphorylation is impaired in
livers from rats with CP, suggesting that impaired IR Tyr kinase activity may contribute to
the inappropriate hepatic glucose production seen in pancreatogenic diabetes secondary to
CP. This parallel defect in phosphorylation implies a spatial and chemical relationship,
and coimmunofluorescence and coimmunoprecipitation confirm their colocalization on
the hepatocyte membrane, providing evidence for a receptor/transporter complex.
285
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
EFFICACY OF CARDIAC REHABILITATION: THE INFLUENCE OF ADHER-
ENCE AND GENDER ON CLINICAL OUTCOMES. Jessica Mega And Teresa
Caulin-Glaser. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medi-
cine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Cardiac rehabilitation services are comprehensive programs involving medical eval-
uation, prescribed exercise, cardiac risk-factor modification, education, and counseling.
This study examined the adherence patterns after completion of these programs and the
longitudinal effects of rehabilitation on men and women. One hundred eleven people par-
ticipating in a twelve-week cardiac rehabilitation program were evaluated based on their
physical and psychological health, prior to beginning the program and after completing it.
One year later, follow-up questionnaires were sent to each of these people. At program
entry, 4.17 percent of participants exercised regularly; one year after completion of the
program, 56.60 percent were exercising at least three times a week and following dietary
recommendations. Participants on average were exercising 3.96 minutes per week before
the program and 157.75 minutes per week one year after the program (p < .001). The rates
of adherence between men and women were comparable at the one year follow-up, with
men exercising 159.90 minutes per week and consuming 29.08 percent dietary fat and
women exercising 151.18 minutes per week and consuming 30.33 percent dietary fat (p =
ns). This study also demonstrated that those people who maintained long-term adherence
to the principles of cardiac rehabilitation had significant improvements, as compared to
non-adherers, in: perceived physical and psychological functioning as assessed by SF-36
health surveys; dietary habits; body weight; and cardiovascular workload capacity as
assessed by metabolic equivalent levels. Gender did not have an effect on the outcomes in
the majority of the analyses. These findings suggest that comprehensive cardiac rehabili-
tation programs have the ability to significantly improve the lives of their participants,
regardless of gender.
RESULTS OF NERVE TRANSFER TECHNIQUES FOR RESTORATION OF
SHOULDER AND ELBOW FUNCTION: A META-ANALYSIS. Gregory A. Merrell,
Kimberly A. Barrie, David L. Katz, Scott W. Wolfe, and Manohar Panjabi. Depart-
ments of Orthopaedic Surgery, and Epidemiology, Yale University School of Med-
icine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Purpose: To establish and define landmarks by which we, and other investigators,
could assess surgical results and compare treatment modalities.
Methods: A Medline search was conducted to identify all English-language articles
that refer to the use of nerve transfers for restoration of either elbow or shoulder function
in patients with traumatic brachial plexus avulsion injury. A cross-reference bibliography
check was performed to ensure a complete list of potential studies. Only those patients
who underwent surgery within 12 months of injury and who had a minimum of 1-year fol-
low-up were included. Perinatal brachial plexus palsies were excluded. Results were com-
bined by a pooling of proportional outcomes data. Hypothesis testing was performed by
use of the chi-square statistic for proportional data.
Results: One thousand eighty-eight nerve transfers from 27 studies met the inclusion
criteria of the analysis. Seventy-two percent of direct intercostal to musculocutaneous
transfers (without interposition nerve grafts) achieved biceps strength > M3, vs. 47 per-
cent using interposition grafts. Direct intercostal transfers to the musculocutaneous nerve
had a better ability to achieve > M4 elbow power than transfers from the spinal accesso-
286
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
ry nerve (41 percent vs. 29 percent). The suprascapular nerve fared significantly better
than the axillary nerve in obtaining > M3 shoulder abduction (92 percent vs. 69 percent).
Conclusions: This study suggests that interposition nerve grafts should be avoided
when possible when performing nerve transfers. Better results for restoration of elbow
flexion have been attained with intercostal to musculocutaneous transfers than with spinal
accessory nerve transfers; and, spinal accessory to suprascapular transfers have appear to
have the best outcomes for return of shoulder abduction.
ISOLATED CHOROID PLEXUS CYSTS AND TRISOMY 18: A NEW SCREEN-
ING ALGORITHM. Patricia L. Moore, Utku Oz, and Ray 0. Bahado-Singh. Sec-
tion of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Although many studies exist in the literature regarding the risk of trisomy 18 in the
presence of isolated choroid plexus cysts (CPC), no consensus has developed regarding
the recommendation of amniocentesis. The purpose of our study was to develop an algo-
rithm that would more precisely estimate individual risks of trisomy 18 in the presence of
isolated CPCs in order to help parents make a more informed decision regarding amnio-
centesis. We studied 754 pregnant women in the midtrimester whose fetuses were found
to have isolated choroid plexus cysts on ultrasounds performed in two perinatal units dur-
ing an eleven-year period. Stepwise logistic regression identified maternal age, femur
length (FL) (expressed as the multiple of the normal median [MoM]), and 2 vessel umbil-
ical cord (2VC) as the best predictors of trisomy 18 in the presence of isolated CPCs.
Using data from previous studies, we combined the maternal age related risk of trisomy
18 with the likelihood ratios for 2VC and FL (MoM) in order to calculate the overall risk
of trisomy 18 for each patient. Using this algorithm in our series, the largest series pub-
lished to date, we found that a risk threshold of 1/13 detected trisomy 18 with a sensitiv-
ity of 50 percent and a false positive rate of only 0.4 percent. The negative predictive value
was 99.9 percent which allowed for identification of patients at very low risk for trisomy
18 who could safely avoid amniocentesis. The greatest clinical benefit ofthis development
will be to provide reassurance and reduce anxiety in the common clinical circumstance in
which an isolated choroid plexus cyst is found in the fetus.
EXPRESSION OFTHE NAI/H+ EXCHANGER ISOFORM NHE3 IN EPITHELIAL
CELLS OF LIVER AND PANCREAS. Dan Negoianu, Daniel Biemesderfer, and
Peter S. Aronson. Section of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Sodium/proton exchangers (NHEs) have a major role in cellular homeostasis in vir-
tually all tissues. The sodium/proton exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3) has been shown to play
an important role in trans-epithelial fluid reabsorption in the mammalian kidney and intes-
tine. The purpose of the present study was to identify the cellular and subcellular sites of
NHE3 expression in hepatic and pancreatic epithelial cells.
Three isoform-specific anti-NHE3 monoclonal antibodies were used to label NHE3
in immunocytochemical and immunoblotting studies of rat tissues. In fixed sections of
liver, staining for NHE3 was found on the apical (canalicular) membranes of hepatocytes
and on the apical membranes of intrahepatic bile duct epithelial cells (cholangiocytes).
Labeling of NHE3 as an 80-85 kDa protein was confirmed using an anti-NHE3 polyclon-
al antibody on Western blots of a hepatocyte membrane fraction enriched for canalicular
287
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
markers. NHE3 was not detected by immunoblotting of crude liver membrane vesicles,
likely because apical duct and apical hepatocyte (canalicular) membranes represent only
a very small fraction of the overall membrane population in liver.
Staining for NHE3 was observed on the apical membranes of epithelial cells lining
pancreatic ducts in fixed sections of pancreas studied by immunocytochemistry. No stain-
ing was detected on pancreatic acinar cells.
We conclude that the Na+/H+ exchanger isoform NHE3 is expressed on the apical
membranes of rat hepatocytes, cholangiocytes, and pancreatic duct epithelial cells, indi-
cating a likely role in mediating transepithelial acid-base and fluid transport across these
cell types.
THE EFFECT OF AN ER-SELECTIVE CALCIUM ATPASE INHIBITOR ON
CHLORIDE TRANSPORT IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS-AFFECTED EPITHELIAL
CELLS. Lamioko S. Pappoe. (Sponsored by Marie E. Egan.) Department of Pedi-
atrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of thapsigargin, an ER-selective
Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor, on chloride transport in CF-affected epithelia both in vitro and in
vivo. It has been proposed that thapsigargin allows mis-folded AF508-CFTR to bypass the
endoplasmic reticulum's quality control mechanism and escape to the cell surface. As
such, this study will contribute to a larger investigation that is evaluating the suitability of
thapsigargin, and related compounds, as therapeutic agents for cystic fibrosis. In vitro
studies consisted of evaluating the ion transport properties of a CF-affected cell line,
CFPAC-1, while under short circuit conditions. In monolayers treated with thapsigargin,
cAMP-stimulation resulted in a 14.6 ± 6.6 percent increase in short circuit current (ISC
which was inhibited by furosemide, suggesting it was due to an increase in net chloride
secretion (n = 12, p = .02). When compared to the Isc studies on T84 monolayers (a cell
line expressing high levels of CFTR), the cAMP-stimulated increase in Iscwas not signif-
icantly different (p = .11). In untreated CFPAC-1 monolayers, cAMP stimulation did not
increase Isc (n = 12).
These observations were translated to an in vivo ion transport assay. Nasal transep-
ithelial potential difference (PD) studies (pre-thapsigargin treatment) were performed on
wild-type and CF-affected mice. As reported in the literature, the CF-affected mice had a
raised basal nasal transepithelial PD, reflecting increased sodium absorption. Absence of
the CFTR protein was evidenced by the lack of hyperpolarization of the nasal mucosa
when perfused by low chloride solutions and isoproterenol. Investigation of nasal PDs in
CF mice post-thapsigargin treatment are ongoing in the Egan laboratory.
This study indicates that: 1) treatment of CFPAC-1 cell monolayers with thapsigar-
gin alters the ion transport properties of AF508-affected epithelia such that a measurable
chloride current is produced when under stimulating conditions. 2) In vivo nasal transep-
ithelial potential difference can be used to detect the defective ion transport properties of
CF epithelia and will serve as a means of investigating whether thapsigargin can correct
these abnormalities in vivo.
288
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
THE OUTCOMES OF MITRAL VALVE SURGERY IN PATIENTS WITH LEFT
VENTRICULAR DYSFUNCTION. Anna Paszcuk. Department of Surgery. Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Background: The mitral valve surgery in patients with low ejection fraction is con-
sidered a very high risk procedure due to the previously reported prohibitory operative
mortality and dismal long term survival.
Methods and Results: This study was a retrospective chart review of outcomes after
mitral valve surgery among patients with ejection fraction < 35 percent. A control group
of patients treated medically was not included. The symptomatic state of the patients fol-
lowing mitral valve surgery improved. The NYHA congestive heart failure class
decreased from a mean of 3.58 to 1.53 (p < .0001). The CCS angina class decreased from
a mean of 3.02 to 1.19 (p < .0001). Surgery provided patients with the benefit of a mean
9 percent increase in ejection fraction (increase from 26 percent to 35 percent, p < .0001).
The operative and the 30-day mortality rates were 1.6 percent and 4 percent, respectively.
Six factors were identified that had an effect on long term survival. These included NYHA
CHF class IV or cardiogenic shock on presentation, ejection fraction < 25 percent, histo-
ry of peripheral vascular disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and concomi-
tant left ventricular resection. The overall survival was 78 percent at 1 year and 46 percent
at 5 years. Patients with three or more of the identified factors had significantly smaller
survival rates.
Conclusions: The study results show that the patients with left ventricular dysfunc-
tion who undergo mitral valve surgery benefit from symptomatic relief as well as a 9 per-
cent increase in their ejection fraction. The study found acceptable operative and short
term mortality rates. The overall long-term survival was comparable to the survival of
patients following heart transplantation. In the face of the shortage of hearts for trans-
plantation, conventional mitral valve surgery can be safely performed in some patients
with left ventricular dysfunction as an alternative to transplantation. Patients with a com-
bination of three or more factors identified in this study as predictors of survival may ben-
efit more from heart transplantation than conventional surgery.
ROUTES TO ANTIBIOTIC PURCHASES FOR CHILDREN IN BEIJING AND
GU'AN COUNTY, CHINA: A SURVEY-BASED STUDY. Dena Rifkin, Siobhan
O'Connor, Scott Dowell, and Orin Levine. Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta,
Georgia. (Sponsored by Nora Groce, Department of Epidemiology and Public
Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.)
Antibiotic overuse and misuse is a major concern in China and around the world
because of the growing problems of antibiotic-resistant disease and illness due to antibi-
otic misuse. In countries like China where antibiotics are available without a prescription,
it has been assumed that physicians cannot control antibiotic misuse because antibiotics
can be procured without physician involvement. Parents of young children in Beijing and
in the nearby rural county of Gu'An were interviewed to determine who controlled the
decision to use antibiotics and what paths parents followed to obtain antibiotics for their
children's respiratory infections. In the population surveyed, 84 percent of all antibiotic
purchases are made with a prescription, and 89 percent of antibiotics are purchased either
with a physician prescription or with indirect control by a medical professional (purchas-
es of previously prescribed drugs, purchases according to the recommendation of a West-
ern or traditional doctor). The majority of those surveyed (68 percent in kindergartens, 85
percent in pharmacies) also indicated that they would not demand antibiotics if they were
289
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
not offered by the physician. These observations suggest that the major factor in antibiot-
ic use is physicians' prescribing patterns rather than the availability of antibiotics without
prescription, and that effective interventions directed at physicians would likely reach the
majority of those purchasing antibiotics for children.
PATIENT KNOWLEDGE OF THEIR CARE PROVIDERS IN A UNIVERSITY
TEACHING HOSPITAL. Ron E. Samet and Walter N. Kernan. Department of
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Purpose: To examine patient ability to correctly identify and differentiate the capa-
bilities of medical team members caring for them, and to determine patient demographic
and experience factors associated with their level of awareness.
Methods: During a four-week period at Yale New Haven Hospital, 17 internal medi-
cine inpatients were interviewed using a researcher-administered questionnaire to assess
their knowledge of the identities and capabilities of the medical housestaff caring for
them. Index cards with names and printed photographs of the housestaff were used to test
patient knowledge of titles, responsibility hierarchy, level of education, and capabilities
among medical students, interns, residents, and attending physicians. Responses were
analyzed using descriptive statistics and chi-square tests for differences in patient knowl-
edge.
Results: Overall, patients demonstrated poor comprehension of their caretakers'
identity and capabilities; in fact, 47.1 percent of patients were unable to correctly identi-
fy the title of any of their providers. Of all patients, 64.7 percent were unable to correctly
order the basic medical team members by level of responsibility. Patients showed defi-
ciencies at distinguishing the different educational level of housestaff (48 percent correct
responses overall), yet patients showed slightly better knowledge of housestaff examina-
tion and treatment authority (76.5 percent and 53.0 percent correct responses, respective-
ly). Professional identities and roles were better understood for medical students and
attendings than for interns and residents. Lower awareness was observed for patients with-
out either a college degree (p < .02) or numerous previous hospitalizations (p < .06).
Conclusions: Patient knowledge of their care providers in a teaching hospital is min-
imal with most patients unaware of the names, titles, and medical capabilities and respon-
sibilities of their caretakers. To comply with the needs for proper informed consent from
patients, several suggestions are offered for improving patient awareness and understand-
ing of the respective roles of their medical providers, such as the creation of new unam-
biguous nomenclature for housestaff (e.g., "Doctor-in-Charge," "Senior Team Doctor,"
"Team Doctor," and "Team Medical Student").
THE EFFECT OF SUTURE LOCKING ON THE BIOMECHANICAL PERFOR-
MANCE OF A MULTISTRAND FLEXOR TENDON REPAIR. Dinakar Shenbaga-
murthi Kimberly A. Barrie, Christopher Shean, Scott W. Wolfe, and Manohar Pan-
jabi. Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Although early active motion protocols following zone II flexor tendon repairs have
improved patient outcomes, they demand repairs with high tensile strength and resistance
to gap formation. Locking loops, although demonstrated to increase the strength of two
strand repairs may adversely affect the performance of multistrand repairs by causing
uneven distribution of tension between strands. A new in situ dynamic testing apparatus
290
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
was developed to determine whether the nonlocked Cruciate repair would demonstrate
improved biomechanical performance in comparison to a Cruciate repair with locking
loops. Twenty flexor digitorum profundus tendons from fresh frozen cadaver hands were
lacerated transversely and repaired in situ in zone II using either a nonlocked Cruciate or
locked Cruciate repair. Ultimate tensile strength, resistance to gap formation, and work of
flexion were measured simultaneously on a tensile testing apparatus. The Student's two-
tailed t-test was used for statistical analysis. No statistically significant differences were
found between the locked Cruciate and nonlocked Cruciate with respect to ultimate ten-
sile strength (p < .05). With the numbers of fingers tested, no significant differences in
work of flexion and resistance to two mm, three mm and four mm gap formation were
detected (p < .05). Our findings suggest that locking of multistrand repairs poses no bio-
mechanical advantage, and may in fact have deleterious effects by facilitating load mald-
istribution among the suture strands. Nonlocked repairs allow suture gliding so that the
tensile load across the repair site is distributed evenly among the longitudinal strands.
Although locked and nonlocked tendon repairs are biomechanically comparable, non-
locked repairs have several clinical advantages. Nonlocked repairs are technically easier
to perform and pre-tension than locked repairs. Locked repairs leave more suture materi-
al exposed to the flexor tendon sheath and require more operative manipulation ofthe ten-
don, so the risk of postoperative adhesions is increased.
ANATOMIC MORPHOLOGY OF HUMAN CERVICAL PEDICLES: CONSIDER-
ATIONS FOR TRANSPEDICULAR SCREW FIXATION. Eon K. Shin, Neal C.
Chen, Jaw-Ling Wang, and Manohar M. Panjabi. Biomechanics Research Labo-
ratory, Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Transpedicular screw fixation has recently been shown to be successful in stabilizing
the cervical spine. Controversy exists, however, over its efficacy due to the smaller size of
cervical pedicles and the proximity of significant neurovascular structures. The purpose of
our study is to provide quantitative information on the internal dimensions and cortical
shell thicknesses of middle and lower cervical pedicles as well as comparative graphical
data which would systematically document the anatomic variability in pedicle morpholo-
gy. Twenty-six human cervical vertebrae (C3 to C7) from six specimens were secured to
a thin sectioning apparatus to produce three 0.7 mm-thick pedicle slices along its axis.
Radiographs taken of these pedicle slices were scanned and digitized to facilitate mea-
surement of pedicle dimensions. External dimensions (i.e., pedicle height and width) and
internal dimensions (i.e., cortical shell thicknesses of the superior, inferior, medial, and
lateral walls, and the cancellous core height and width) of cervical pedicles were mea-
sured using specially-developed computer software. Averages and standard deviations of
all pertinent anatomic dimensions were computed, and one-way ANOVA was performed
to determine statistically significant (p < .05) variation between pedicle slices. Superior
and inferior cortical thicknesses of pedicle thin slices were found to be similar, while the
lateral cortical thickness was significantly smaller than the medial thickness. The medial
cortical shell (average value range: 1.2 to 2.0 mm) was 1.4 to 3.6 times as thick as the lat-
eral cortical shell (average value range: 0.4 to 1.1 mm). Direct visual observation of pedi-
cle slices corroborated these quantitative findings, and also demonstrated that pedicle
slices exhibit substantial variability in composition and shape. Thus, the cervical pedicle
is a complex structure exhibiting extensive variability in morphology. These physical find-
ings must be noted by surgeons attempting transpedicular screw fixation in the cervical
spine.
291
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
THE TRANSDUCTION OF DENDRITIC CELLS FOR THE IMMUNOTHERAPY
OF CANCER. J. Mark Sloan, Michael Kershaw, Chris Touloukian, Rejean
Lapointe, Paul Robbins, Nicholas Restifo, and Patrick Hwu. Surgery Branch,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(Sponsored by Ira Mellman, Department of Cell Biology; Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.)
The unique antigen presenting capabilities of dendritic cells make them an attractive
means with which to initiate an anti-tumor immune response. Using dendritic cells trans-
duced with tumor antigens for immunotherapy has several theoretical advantages over
peptide-pulsed or tumor lysate-pulsed dendritic cells. Since both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
have been shown to play important roles in anti-tumor immunity, one potential advantage
is the possibility that transduced dendritic cells are capable of presenting multiple and
undefined epitopes on both class I and class II MHC molecules. To test this theory, we
inserted the human tumor antigen gplOO, which has known class I and class II epitopes,
into dendritic cells derived from the bone marrow of mice transgenic for HLA-DR,1
*0401. The human gplOO gene was inserted using either adenovirus or a VSV-G pseudo-
typed retrovirus. A murine CD8+ T cell clone recognizing an H-2Db restricted epitope for
gplOO and a murine CD4+ T cell line recognizing an HLA-DRO1 *0401 restricted gplOO
epitope were then used in a cytokine release assay to test for reactivity against the aden-
ovirally or retrovirally transduced dendritic cells. Both the CD8+ and CD4+ gplOO specif-
ic T cell lines were able to recognize the g plOO transduced dendritic cells significantly
more than GFP transduced controls. lending support to the use of gene-modified dendrit-
ic cells as a means to simultaneously initiate a CD4+ and CD8+ anti-tumor response. Addi-
tionally, VSV-G pseudotyped retroviral vectors were investigated as a means of inserting
multiple genes into dendritic cells. This ability, combined with the ability to immunize
mice against genes expressed by transduced dendritic cells, is explored as a potential
means of antigen discovery and direct immunization against tumor.
MOLECULAR MARKERS IN HEAD AND NECK CANCER. Benjamin D. Smith,
Grace L. Smith, Darryl Carter, Clarence T. Sasaki, Michael DiGiovanna, and Bruce
G. Haffty. Departments of Therapeutic Radiology, Pathology, Surgery (Section of
Otolaryngology), and Medicine (Section of Oncology), Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
This retrospective cohort study assesses the prognostic value of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), p53, cyclin Dl, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
expression in a cohort of patients with oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC). Chart review identified 77 patients with oral or oropharyngeal SCC treated with
gross total surgical resection and post-operative radiation between 1981 and 1992. Suffi-
cient follow up and tumor tissue were available in 56 (73 percent) patients. Expression of
these oncoproteins in archival tumor tissue was determined using immunohistochemistry
and scored by a pathologist blinded to the clinical outcomes. The association between pro-
tein expression and outcome was assessed in a bivariate and multivariate model using two-
sided statistical tests. VEGF positivity was significantly correlated with poor disease-free
and overall survival in both bivariate (p = .007 and .0004, respectively) and multivariate
models (p = .03 and .0004, respectively). In addition, cyclin Dl positivity was a significant
predictor of poor disease-free and overall survival in a multivariate model (p = .007 and
.01, respectively) but failed to correlate with these outcomes in bivariate analysis. In con-
trast, p53 and EGFR status did not correlate with disease-free or overall survival. Deter-
292
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
mination ofVEGF and cyclin Dl protein expression may be useful in identifying a subset
of oral and oropharyngeal SCC patients at risk for disease progression and death.
LONG-TERM FOLLOW-UP IN ANOREXIA NERVOSA: ADJUSTMENTSTOTHE
MORGAN-RUSSELL OUTCOME ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE. Heidi W. Smith
and Richard E. Kreipe. Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital at Strong,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY. (Sponsored by Walter R. Anyan, Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine.)
This study was undertaken to create a modified version of the Morgan-Russell Out-
come Assessment Schedule (M-ROAS) and then to compare it to the original with the
intent of providing a more accurate long-term outcome score for patients with anorexia
nervosa. This modification could improve the precision with which the outcomes of vari-
ous treatment protocols are compared. Questionnaires, sent to all female inpatients treat-
ed for anorexia nervosa at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester, NY between 1979 and
1992, included the M-ROAS and a modification that allowed credit for on-going educa-
tion and full-time mothers. Binge-eating/purging and use of hormones to achieve regular
menses were also addressed. Repeated measures ANOVA found a high statistical signifi-
cance [F (1,81) = 21.22; p < .0001] between the M-ROAS (mean score 9.32 ± 1.85) and
the modified version (mean score 9.69 ± 1.76). Statistical significance was also seen with
the issues of student status and full-time mothers [M-ROAS average 9.45 ± 2.24, modi-
fied M-ROAS average 10.00 ± 1.94; F(1,82) = 33.41, p < .0001] as well as binge-eat-
ing/purging [M-ROAS average 7.09 ± 3.04, modified M-ROAS average 8.46 ± 2.51; F
(1,82) = 82.51, p < .0001]. Given the small number of subjects, no statistical significance
was found regarding use of hormones to regulate menses [M-ROAS average 10.88 ± 3.0,
modified M-ROAS average 10.44 ± 3.6; F (1,81) = 3.08, p = .083]. In the population stud-
ied, the modified version of the M-ROAS improved the average outcome score.
RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY IN THE CARE OF PATIENTS WITH HIV:
BELIEFS AND PRACTICES OF PROVIDERS. Carmit Steren, Gerald H. Fried-
land, Launs C. Kaldjian, and James F. Jekel. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
Universit. School of Medicine New Haven, Connecticut.
The combination ofphysical and emotional suffering, likelihood ofpremature death.,
and personal and social stigma faced by patients infected with HIV (Human Immunode-
ficiency Virus) underlies a need for discussion ofreligious or spiritual issues with medical
providers. While several investigations have suggested that providers infrequently discuss
religion or spirituality with their patients, the extent to which these topics are addressed
by providers of patients with HIV has not been reported. A cohort of 74 providers of HIV
care was interviewed in order to elucidate religious beliefs and practices as well as atti-
tudes regarding the consideration of patients spiritual needs in medical care In addition,
data from a survey ofpatients with HIV were utilized in order to directly compare the reli-
gious and spiritual beliefs and practices of providers and patients. Providers differed from
patients according to belief in a divine being (77 percent vs. 98 percent), religious affilia-
tion (77 percent vs. 93 percent), and daily prayer (31 percent vs. 69 percent: all p < .005).
Providers who reported conversing with at least one patient about religion or spirituality
(87.8 percent), including the initial patient interview, estimated discussing these issues
with a median of 33 percent of their patients. Barriers to these discussions included dif-
ferences in provider-patient beliefs (28.4 percent,. viewing religious and spiritual issues
293
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
as external to the medical paradigm (27 percent), and lack of adequate training or knowl-
edge (18.9 percent). Education and training that targets these barriers may be effective in
improving support for HIV patients with spiritual and religious needs.
MUTAGENESIS OF THE NATURAL KILLER CELL 2B4 RECEPTOR. John C.
Tilton, Carsten Watzl, and Eric 0. Long. Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, Rockville,
Maryland. (Sponsored by Charles A. Janeway, Department of Immunobiology,
Yale Universitv School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.)
Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity is a complex process regulated by the intri-
cate balance between stimulatory and inhibitory signals. The 2B4 receptor, despite being
one of the first receptors found to augment NK cytotoxicity, remains poorly understood.
To investigate the signal transduction cascade initiated by stimulation of the 2B4 receptor,
missense and nonsense mutants of the receptor were generated by site-directed mutagen-
esis. Since the 2B4 receptor is present on all NK cells, a hemagglutinin epitope was
attached to the extracellular domain of the receptor so that the mutant molecules could be
stimulated independently of the endogenous receptor. The mutant receptors were suc-
cessfully created and introduced into the human NK cell line YTS. Biochemical analysis
of the receptors revealed that no single tyrosine residue was critical for phosphorylation.
Functional analysis 2B4 was hampered by differences in expression levels of the mutant
receptors between YTS clones and by variability in the killing potential of these clones.
Future experiments may help unravel the function of the 2B4 receptor and help elucidate
the mechanisms of NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
MANAGEMENT OF ANGIOGRAPHICALLY DISEASE-FREE VEIN GRAFTS
DURING REDO CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING. Joy M. Weinberg,
Inder D. Mehta, Marc F. Jones, George Tellides, Gary S. Kopf, Richard K. Shaw,
Barry L. Zaret, and John A. Elefteriades. Sections of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
Department of Surgery, and Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
This retrospective study addresses existing controversy concerning management of
disease-free saphenous vein grafts (SVGS) at the time of redo coronary artery bypass
grafting (CABG).
One hundred thirty-two consecutive patients (113 men, 19 women, aged 46 to 88
years, mean 67 years) underwent revascularization with one or more angiographically dis-
ease-free SVGS at the time of redo CABG. Thirty-six patients had the disease-free grafts
replaced (R) and 96 did not (NR). The mean interval from the first CABG was 9.25 years.
Surgical mortality was comparable in the NR and R groups (5 of 96 or 5.2 percent
vs. 3 of 36 or 8.3 percent, respectively; p < .5). Survival at 1 and 3 years was higher in the
NR group than the R group (98 percent vs. 80 percent, and 95 percent vs. 66 percent
respectively; p < .0001). Late myocardial infarction was less common in the NR group
than in the R group (12 of91 or 12.9 percent vs. 12 of 33 or 36.4 percent; p < .003). Recur-
rent angina was less common in the NR than in the R group (12 of 91 or 23.1 percent vs.
15 of 33 or 45.5 percent; p < .015). Cardiac hospitalization was required less commonly
in the NR than in the R group (11 of 91 or 12.1 percent vs. 12 of 33 or 36.4 percent; p <
.002). In nondiseased grafts undergoing angiographic evaluation late after redo CABG,
rate of new stenosis was lower in NR grafts than in R grafts (2 of 12 or 16.7 percent vs. 2
294
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
of 3 or 66.7 percent; p < .05). In a subset of 3 R group and 12 NR group patients catheter-
ized yet again for symptoms late after redo CABG, NR grafts had satisfactory survival.
We conclude that disease-free vein grafts may not require routine replacement at redo
CABG. A randomized study is required for definitive resolution.
GENE EXPRESSION FOLLOWING LUMBAR INTETRANSVERSE PROCESS
SPINAL ARTHODESISIN A NEW ZEALAND WHITE RABBIT (ORYCTOLAGUS
CUNICULUS) MODEL: A COMPARISON OF AUTOLOGOUS BONE GRAFTTO
RHBMP-7/OP-1 ALONE. A.P. White, M.A. Weinstein, M. Horowtiz M, T. Ch. Patel
and G. Friedlaender. Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Despite the widespread knowledge that the harvest of autologous iliac crest bone
graft for augmentation of lumbar spinal arthrodesis results in additional morbidity of this
common procedure, no generally accepted alternative has yet been adopted. The expres-
sion of genes in a New Zealand White rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) model of lumbar
arthrodesis was investigated; gene expression following the arthrodesis procedure utiliz-
ing either iliac crest autologous bone graft or recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein seven, also known as osteogenic protein one, was studied. Lumbar arthrodesis was
performed on 25 New Zealand White rabbits which were randomized into two groups: one
whose arthrodesis was augmented by iliac crest bone autograft and another whose
arthrodesis was augmented by the recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein
(rhBMP-7/OP-1) in a bovine collagen matrix carrier. Animals were sacrificed on post-
operative days 2, 4, 7, 14, and 35. Messenger RNA was isolated and purified from juxta-
transverse process tissues. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction amplifications
were performed to evaluate gene expression fox genes of interest at each post-operative
time point. Genes of interest included those encoding GAPDH, Type I Collagen, BMP-2,
BMP-4, BMP-5, BMP-7, PDGF, VEGF, IGF-beta, and basic FGF. The expression of each
gene was characterized by its level of RT-PCR amplification compared to that of the con-
stitutively expressed gene GAPDH. A similar level of expression of genes in the autograft
group and in the OP-I group at the five post-operative time points was observed. Both the
autograft and the OP-I groups of animals demonstrated an ordered and gradual pattern of
expression for most of the genes investigated. Some specific differences in expression
between the two groups were noted, however, which may help to elucidate the rationale
for the difference in arthrodesis outcomes between autograft and OP-I augmented fusions
in this rabbit model. Additionally, gene sequences for 0. cuniculus BMP-5 (1104 base
pairs) and BMP-7 (1007 base pairs) were determined for the first time.
THOMAS AQUINAS AND PLACEBOS IN OVERSEAS CLINICALTRIALS. Brian
D. Woods (Sponsored by Robert J. Levine and Margaret Farley). Department of
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine and Yale Divinity School,
New Haven, Connecticut.
The use of placebos in clinical trials in developing countries is a prominent point of
contention. Economic deficiency in the Third World limits provision of care such that
interventions available in industrialized nations become nearly impossible to obtain.
Poor communities require economically feasible methods of therapy. Clinical trials
studying reduced versions of common interventions with the use of a placebo arm are per-
formed in developing countries to answer scientific questions arising from economic lim-
itations. Critics charge that use of placebos in overseas HIV therapy trials violates the
295
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
Declaration of Helsinki's requirement for providing the "best proven therapeutic method."
In contrast, such trials are defended on the basis of "highest attainable and sustainable
therapy," that is, approval is given contingent upon local limitations. Much of this debate
has been couched in terms of dynamic utilitarianism against absolute principlism, but this
problem benefits from a tradition outside of either school. The philosophical framework
of Thomas Aquinas also provides insight to the debate over placebos. The Thomistic
approach reveals that circumstance plays a key role in evaluating moral acts. Taking cir-
cumstance into consideration, Thomistic moral analysis promotes research that both pro-
tects the subject and responds to local scientific needs. The limitations ofThomistic ethics
with respect to modern clinical research are explored, and avenues for further inquiry are
discussed.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OUTCOMES AFTER ACUTE MYOCARDIAL
INFARCTION AND PHYSICIAN VOLUME. Jerry Wu, Zhen-qiu Lin, Martha J.
Radford, Saif S. Rathore, and Harlan M. Krumholz. Section of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut.
We sought to examine the relationship between physician volume and in-hospital
mortality in the care ofpatients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) by studying 1,296
patients treated at Yale-New Haven Hospital for AMI from 1997 to 2000 using data from
the National Registry of Myocardial Infarction 2 and 3. We created four distinct physician
volume groups (1-5, 6-11, 12-34, >34 total cases during the study period) and compared
differences in patient characteristics between these groups. We then created a series of
logistic regression models to assess mortality differences while controlling for several
covariates. We also performed a medical record review of all patient deaths in the study
to develop a more detailed clinical picture of this patient cohort.
Patients of low volume physicians were more likely to have a non-cardiac admission
diagnosis and were less likely to receive an initial reperfusion therapy and guideline-sup-
ported medications. Patients in the lowest volume group had a higher relative risk (RR) of
in-hospital mortality compared to the highest volume group, after controlling for baseline
characteristics; RR = 1.88 (95 percent CI 1.09-3.13). The RR of inhospital cardiac death
for the lowest volume compared to the highest volume group was 1.54 (95 percent CI,
0.85-2.71). Our clinical review found that patients who died with low volume providers
were more likely to have severe non-cardiac comorbidities that were not captured by our
study database and more likely to die of non-cardiac. complications.
From a statistical analysis using variables from a national myocardial infarction data-
base, we found a significant association between the number of AMI cases a physician
treats and short-term mortality such that lower volume physicians have higher risk-adjust-
ed mortality rates. However, our review of deaths suggested that we could not adjust for
important comorbidities in our patients that could have accounted for a large proportion
of this volume effect. Our study demonstrated that in future studies of this relationship,
these additional covariates should be explicitly determined and controlled for in the analy-
sis. In addition, the more specific outcome of cardiac death should be examined.
296
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
CORRELATES BETWEEN ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISOR-
DER DIMENSIONAL BEHAVIORAL SCALES AND URINARY NEUROCHEMI-
CAL EXCRETION. Benson R Yang, John M. Holahan, George M. Anderson, and
Bennett A. Shaywitz. Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medi-
cine, New Haven, Connecticut.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurobiological condition
characterized by inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity. This study of 251 boys
attempts to establish biological correlates of the core features ofADHD through measur-
able differences in sympathoadrenomedullary function. Behavioral constructs based on
recent DSM notions of ADHD were empirically derived from factor analysis of several
assessment instruments. The constructs were examined as dimensional variables to deter-
mine whether certain behavioral profiles were predictive of catecholamine or cortisol
excretion. Data from parents and teachers were analyzed separately to examine the rela-
tionship between informant source and urinary neurochemical levels. Bivariate analyses
revealed that reduced urinary epinephrine excretion was significantly correlated with the
DSM-IV-based inattention scale. These correlations were stronger when children were
rated by teachers (r = -0.213, p = .001) than when they were rated by parents (r = .-0.145,
p = .022). Furthermore, significant negative correlations were found between the DSM-
IV-based inattention scales and urinary norepinephrine excretion, but only for teacher-
completed ratings (r = -0.177, p = 0.005). Analysis using a multiple regression model
reaffirmed the results found with bivariate correlations. Overall, measurements of neuro-
chemical excretion support the construct validity of the DSM-IV characterization of
ADHD which separates inattention and impulsivity over the DSM-III characterization
which combines these constructs.
KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDES, AND MEDICATION ADHERENCE AMONG SELF-
IDENTIFIED HYPERTENSIVE PATIENTS ATTHE YALE PRIMARY CARE CEN-
TER. John L. Yang, Patricia R. Hebert, and Harlan M. Krumholz. Section of Car-
diology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.
Despite the serious consequences of uncontrolled hypertension, medication nonad-
herence is present in two-thirds of America's patients with hypertension. This study
sought to identify the prevalence of medication nonadherence among self-identified
hypertensive patients at the Yale Primary Care Center (PCC), their reasons for nonadher-
ence, and factors affecting adherence. One hundred twenty eight patients were inter-
viewed. Two-thirds of patients reported at least some nonadherence in their medication
taking. The only demographic factors that correlated with medication adherence were
Caucasian ethnicity, increasing age, and possibly, male gender. The most commonly cited
reasons for nonadherence were simply forgetting (76.8 percent), running out of medicines
(59.8 percent), inability to pay for medications (28.0 percent), inability to access a phar-
macy (25.6 percent), side effects (24.4 percent), and discontinuing medications when feel-
ing better (20.7 percent). Poorer functional status and less satisfaction with physicians' lis-
tening skills were also possible predictors of nonadherence. Patients were fairly knowl-
edgeable about the adverse effects of hypertension, but this knowledge did not influence
adherence. In summary, medication nonadherence is a very common problem among
hypertensive PCC patients. Understanding the factors that patients perceive to be hinder-
ing their medication adherence is essential in developing appropriate interventions.
297
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2001
LONG-TERM SEIZURE OUTCOME IN PATIENTS INITIALLY SEIZURE-FREE
AFTER RESECTIVE EPILEPSY SURGERY. Harry H. Yoon, Anne T. Berg, Judith
Hess, and Susan S. Spencer. Department of Neurology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
The objective was to evaluate the likelihood of and risk factors for seizure recurrence
in patients seizure-free for at least the first year after surgery for intractable epilepsy. By
chart review and telephone interview, we retrospectively studied 163 patients who under-
went lobectomy between 1972 and 1992 and who were seizure-free during the first post-
operative year. Seizures associated with changes in antiepileptic medication regimen were
considered recurrences. Of the 163 patients (mean follow-up 8.8 years), 61 percent never
relapsed. The likelihood of being seizure-free after two postoperative years was 89 + 5
percent, 84 + 6 percent after three years, 71 + 7 percent after five years, and 56 + 9 per-
cent after ten years. Of patients 30 or older at the time of surgery, 48 percent relapsed,
compared to 32 percent (96) of patients under 30 (p = .046). Patients experienced similar
seizure frequencies regardless of when they relapsed from the time of surgery. Fifty-six
percent of first relapses were medication-related, mostly associated with physician-
advised changes. Risk of relapse was not significantly influenced by underlying patholo-
gy, gender, or the location of resected tissue. The study indicates most patients who are
initially seizure-free after epilepsy surgery experience excellent tong-term seizure control.
However, even when surgery renders prolonged remission, seizure tendency is not com-
pletely abolished in a significant number of patients, with relapse often related to changes
in medication. Older age at the time surgery may be a risk factor for relapse.
EFFECT OF PKC ON THE INTERACTION BETWEEN CFTR AND ROMK2, AN
INWARDLY RECTIFYING POTASSIUM CHANNEL. H.C. Yun and M.E. Egan.
Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con-
necticut.
Coexpression of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
with ROMK2, an inwardly rectifying renal K+ ATP channel, enhances ROMK2's gliben-
clamide sensitivity. Furthermore, this interaction is attenuated by protein kinase A (PKA)
phosphorylation. The effects of protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation have not been
examined. In order to examine if PKC activation has similar effects upon the
CFTR/ROMK2 interaction, two-electrode voltage clamp studies were performed on
Xenopus oocytes expressing CFTR and ROMK2. These were treated with phorbol
12myristate 12-acetate (PMA), an activator of PKC. After treatment with PMA, approxi-
mately 50 percent of the K+ current was inhibited by glibenclamide, which is similar to
the sensitivity in untreated cells, suggesting that there is no attenuation of the
CFTR/ROMK2 interaction by PKC. Similarly, there was no effect on glibenclamide sen-
sitivity when the human sulfonylurea receptor (SUR) was coexpressed with ROMK2 and
stimulated with PKC. However, when ROMK2 was expressed alone, PMA enhanced the
glibenclamide sensitivity in a dose-dependent manner. This increased sensitivity to
glibenclamide is similar to that achieved when ROMK2 is expressed with either CFTR or
SUR. These data suggest that PKC phosphorylation modulates the glibenclamide sensi-
tivity of ROMK2 and may provide clues about the CFTR/ROMK2 subunit interaction.
298
