THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 58 (1985), 195-203
Book Reviews
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY OF CONGENITAL BRAIN MALFORMATIONS. By Mohammad
Sarwar. St. Louis, MO, Warren H. Green, Inc., 1985. 169 pp. $45.00.
This volume succinctly presents a review ofcentral nervous system development and
congenital malformations and illustrates the material superbly with numerous tables,
diagrams, graphs, pathological specimens, brain sections, and, of course, CT scans.
The author has done an admirable job in combining the illustrative advantages of an
atlas with a review text's orientation to pertinent, concisely stated information.
After an introduction in which the incidence of various CNS malformations is
presented, the author devotes separate chapters to CNS embryology, corpus callosum
dysgenesis, holoprosencephaly, Arnold-Chiari and Dandy-Walker malformations,
hydrocephalus, neurocutaneous syndromes, and miscellaneous disorders. The section
on miscellaneous malformations both discusses and illustrates encephalocele/menin-
gocephalocele/meningocele, anencephaly, microcephaly, porencephaly, hypo- and
hypertelorism, lissencephaly, median cleft face syndrome, megalencephaly, fetal
alcohol syndrome, arachnoid cysts, craniofacial anomalies in the amniotic band
disruption complex, and anomalies of the septum pellucidum. The malformations
themselves as well as pertinent physiological principles, developmental factors, and
possible etiologies are discussed; the characteristic CT scan findings are described in
depth. Each chapter is well organized and comprehensively referenced, and the text is
printed on fine glossy paper.
The excellent combination of atlas and text conveys a vast amount of information
about congenital CNS malformations in a well-organized and superbly illustrated
fashion. With the recent advent and increasing use of computed tomography, the
volume is certain to become a valuable teaching tool popular among resident
physicians in neurology, neurosurgery, and radiology, and it would be a fine addition to
any medical library.
DUNCAN KINNEAR FISCHER
Medical Student
Yale University School ofMedicine
APLASTIC ANEMIA: STEM CELL BIOLOGY AND ADVANCES IN TREATMENT. Edited by
Neal S. Young, Alan S. Levine, and R. Keith Humphries. New York, Alan R. Liss,
Inc., 1984. 357 pp. $74.00.
Volume 148 ofProgress in Clinical and Biological Research is the proceedings ofthe
Third International Conference on Aplastic Anemia. The text of this symposium
focuses on the experimental research and clinical experiences that provide the
framework for the basic concepts and potential treatment of the bone marrow
dysplasia termed aplastic anemia.
The first three sections of this volume discuss in detail the development of
hematopoietic cell development, which has been shown to be dependent upon survival,
proliferation, self-renewal, and differentiation of stem cells. Additional chapters
195
Copyright o 1985 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
196 BOOK REVIEWS
within these sections expand upon those concepts, discussing the complexity of the
marrow's involvement in hematopoietic cell differentiation by providing the extracellu-
lar matrix and the cell-cell interaction, as well as the diffusible regulatory molecules
that are necessary for normal hematopoiesis. The use of agents, both in vivo and in
vitro, such as the ,B-xylosides, which produce optimal conditions for long-term marrow
cultures, or the use of regulatory molecules such as human cell growth factor to
stimulate stem cells appear to be likely candidates for clinical trials.
The concept that the T-lymphocyte is important in influencing the regulation of
hematopoiesis is well documented in Section IV of this book. The bone-marrow
damage in aplastic anemia appears to be caused by immunological mechanisms. This
hypothesis is documented in those chapters that discuss humoral inhibitors of
erythropoiesis as well as abnormal T-cell levels and function. The experimental data
indicating the involvement of immunosuppression of hematopoiesis as one cause of
aplastic anemia are well balanced by the last section, which reports on the clinical
observations using treatments like anti-lymphocyte globulin or combinations of
irradiation and cyclophosphamide.
The role of bone-marrow transplants versus immunosuppression therapy still needs
to be evaluated for successful responses, diminished graft-versus-host disease, and
long-term survival. This volume provides an excellent review of the state of the field
and presents important laboratory and clinical findings in the treatment of aplastic
anemia.
CHRISTINA GAMBA-VITALO
Department ofPharmacology
Yale University School ofMedicine
MODERN METHODS IN PHARMACOLOGY. VOLUME 2. Edited by Sydney Spector and
Nathan Back. New York, Alan R. Liss, Inc., 1984. 132 pp. $28.00.
This is the second in a series of texts designed to disseminate advances in
biochemical pharmacology techniques. Three topics are addressed: radioligand bind-
ing assays, monoclonal antibody production, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
studies. The diversity of topics results in a diversity of approaches with which the
various authors have chosen to enlighten the reader.
The author responsible for the monoclonal antibody chapter appears to have best
understood the goals of the series. He provides a very practically oriented treatise
concerning the methods used and the problems encountered in developing hybridomas.
The topic is subdivided into seven sections: immunization schedules, myeloma types
and culture, macrophage preparation, cell fusion, clone stabilization, antibody purifi-
cation, and antibody screening. Personal biases are not evident as multiple protocols for
many procedures are detailed clearly and comprehensively. The discussion ofscreening
procedures is excellently written; different approaches are suggested for the different
classes of antigens, depending on their degree of purity, characterization, ability to be
chemically coupled, and cellular localization. The author, ever mindful of practicality,
even provides a description of how to stock a lab for antibody production and which
sources can supply reagents and equipment. There are only two minor faults. First,
there is little explanation of theory; only a few lines are included to explain why certain
procedures are performed. Theoretical bases, however, are not the primary focus of
this book and may be easily found elsewhere. Second, the author should have included
