YALE CASE STUDIES
AGRANULOCYTIC ANGINA
DRS. FRANCIS G. BLAKE, MILTON C. WINTERNITZ, ARTHUR J.
GEIGER, JOHN C. LEONARD, and LINCOLN OPPER
Presentation of Case
DR. LEONARD: The patient, a 42-year-old civil engineer, was admitted to
the Isolation Division of the New Haven Hospital complaining of difficulty
in breathing. The present illness began 5 days before admission, after the
patient had driven for about six hours through a heavy snowstorm. He
arrived home at 10 P.M., feeling cold and "chilly," took a hot bath, and
retired. The next morning the patient felt well but remained at home
because of "bad weather." That afternoon and evening he again experi-
enced "chilly sensations" and headache. In the evening of that day he took
another hot bath, one ounce of gin, and retired. During the night he per-
spired a great deal and slept poorly. The following day (3 days before
admission) his temperature was 1020 F. (per os), his throat felt sore and
tonsils felt swollen. At that time he said that his throat was "red with
yellow streaks." Two days before admission the family physician was called,
who swabbed the patient's throat with silver nitrate solution and left a gargle
of potassium chlorate. The temperature was 1030 F., the patient slept very
little, and felt much worse. One day before admission the temperature was
still 1030 F., slight jaundice of the skin and sclerae was noted, and the
patient expectorated thick, sticky, yellow material. There was no cough, or
chest pain. At 2:30 A.M. on the day of admission the patient awoke com-
plaining of severe difficulty in breathing. Morphine was given with no effect,
a consultant was called and hospitalization was advised. There had been
headache and anorexia for the previous four days, and dyspnea was becoming
progressively more severe.
The patient had had irregular attacks of "biliousness" for the past 15 or
20 years, with gaseous distress, bad breath, and headache, but no vomiting.
He had always been a nervous individual. For the four months preceding
the present illness he had taken from 5 to 10 grains of Novaldin* every
evening because of persistent headache, and for two months he had taken
Luminal grs. 1/3 t.i.d. At least 250 grains of "Novaldin" had been taken
during the 3 weeks preceding the onset of the present illness.
* Novaldin (Winthrop Chemical Company) is sodium phenyl dimethylpyra-
zolon methylamino-methane sulphonate. (Amidopyrine is Dimethyl-amino-phenyl-
dimethyl pyrazolon.)
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
The family history was irrelevant. The patient was regular in habits
and careful in eating.
Physical Examination: Temperature 104.60; respirations 28; pulse 160;
blood pressure 130/80. The patient was a well-developed and nourished
white male of 42 years, acutely and desperately ill. He was markedly
dyspneic, showing marked inspiratory stridor and used his accessory muscles
of respiration to a moderate degree. There was no cyanosis of the face, but
slight cyanosis of the nail-beds. The jaundice of the skin and sclerae was
moderate in degree. He was perspiring profusely, and the skin was hot and
moist. He appeared to be very apprehensive. There was no orthopnea.
The pupils were small (morphia), but equal and regular and did not react.
The extra-ocular movements were normal. The conjunctivae were not
injected; the eye grounds were not seen. Examination of the ears and nose
was negative. The teeth were fair; the gums slightly red; and the tongue
showed a grayish-white coating. The throat and tonsils were a fiery red and
covered with a grey-black membrane which, upon being removed, left a
surface covered with bleeding points. The breath was very fetid. Edema
was not present in proportion to the redness. There was no involvement of
the uvula, or of the soft or hard palate. A great deal of thick, white,
tenacious, mucoid material was present in the nasopharynx. The tonsillar
and anterior cervical glands were markedly enlarged, much more on the
left side with questionable involvement of the soft tissues of the neck. The
left side was slightly tender, and the posterior cervical glands were slightly
enlarged. The thyroid was normal. The chest was symmetrical and there
was moderate use of the accessory muscles of respiration. The tactile
fremitus and percussion note were normal. The breath and voice sounds
were poorly heard because of inspiratory stridor; no rales were heard. The
heart rate was 160 and regular; no abnormal sounds were detected. It was
not enlarged to percussion. There was no peripheral sclerosis. The blood
pressure was 130/80. Slight tenderness was noted in the right upper
quadrant. The liver was palpable 2 finger-breadths below the right costal
margin in the midclavicular line. The spleen and kidneys were not palpable.
There was no spasm and no masses were felt. An appendectomy scar was
present in the right lower quadrant. Genital and rectal examinations were
negative. The extremities showed no edema or clubbing. The glands,
other than the cervical, were normal. The reflexes were hypoactive; the
right and left plantar reflexes were normal.
Laboratory Findings: Red blood cells 5,000,000; hemoglobin 90%o (S).
White blood cells 150,-polymorphonuclear leukocytes 0, lymphocytes 90,
large mononuclears 10 (20 cells). Urine: cloudy, dark amber, acid, specific
gravity 1.018, albumin F.T., sugar 0, bile ±±, sediment negative. The
Kahn test was negative. Cultures from the throat yielded a non-hemolytic
streptococcus and a hemolytic Staphylococcus albus. Bact. diphtheriae was
466
YALE CASE STUDIES
not present. No pus cells were seen in smears from the throat. Blood
group: Jansky I. Icteric index: 100+; Non-protein nitrogen: 81 mg.%o;
Blood culture: Streptococcus viridans and B. alkalescens.
Treatment: The patient was placed in a steam room and then in a steam
tent for four hours without relief of dyspnea. Tracheotomy was then per-
formed, with complete relief of the respiratory distress. The patient was
given 20,000 units of diphtheria antitoxin intravenously and 40,000 units
intramuscularly as a precautionary measure. Saline and glucose were also
given frequently by the intravenous and subcutaneous routes. Two citrated
whole blood transfusions of 500 cc. each were given. Five cubic centimeters
of liver extract and 1.4 grams of pentnucleotide were given intramuscularly.
Course in Hospital: The course was rapidly down hill. Although the
respiratory distress was relieved by the tracheotomy, the patient became more
and more toxic, more deeply jaundiced, and the blood pressure dropped
despite all supportive measures. Terminally, the temperature rose to
106.50 F., the pulse to 160 and the respirations returned to 40. Immedi-
ately after the second transfusion the patient's white blood count rose to 1950
and just before death it was 600, but at no time were any polymorphonuclears
seen in the blood films. He expired 24 hours after admission.
Clinical diagnosis: Agranulocytic angina.
Pathology
DR. OPPER: The body was that of a well-developed and well-nourished
white adult male weighing 171 pounds and measuring 170 cm. in length.
The deep yellow jaundice of the skin and sclerae, the wound of the recent
tracheotomy with its grey necrotic edges, and the marked bilateral swelling
of the cervical lymph nodes, particularly of the anterior chains, presented the
chief findings on external examination.
The major pathologic changes, however, were confined to the respiratory
tract. The epithelium and underlying connective tissue of the posterior third
of the tongue, the soft palate including the uvula and palatine tonsils, the
epiglottis, and the oral and laryngeal portions of the pharynx were involved
in a green-black gangrenous process. The necrosis had produced a small
necrotic defect in the upper margin of the epiglottis. Apart from a few
small areas of subepithelial hemorrhage around the wound of tracheotomy,
the inner tracheal lining was quite smooth and glistening. The lower lobes
of both lungs were extremely dense and hemorrhagic, but the lack of friability
distinguished the pulmonary tissue grossly from the usual pneumonic process;
the upper lobes bilaterally were hypercrepitant. There was no trace of a
pleuritis.
Microscopic preparations of the upper respiratory tract revealed an exten-
sion of the necrosis deep into the subepithelial connective tissue and even
467
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
involving the striated muscle beneath it. The complete absence of a poly-
morphonuclear leukocytic response in the tissues was most striking. A few
scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells among abundant hemorrhage and
cellular debris were the main findings.
The involved pulmonary parenchyma also presented an unusual picture
microscopically. Clumps of bacteria were found in the bronchial lumina
and alveolar spaces. The latter were engorged with fibrin, edema fluid, and
red blood cells. Here again the polymorphonuclear leukocytic components
of the blood were completely lacking despite the obviously overwhelming
infectious process.
No change could be recognized grossly in the bone marrow of sternum
and vertebrae. Microscopically the marrow appeared definitely hypoplastic;
no "blasts" at all were seen.
Pathological Diagnosis: Acute necrotizing tonsillitis, glossitis, epiglottitis,
and pharyngitis; cervical lymphadenitis; hypoplastic bone marrow [Clinically,
Novaldin (amidopyrine derivative) poisoning]; edema of larynx (wound of
tracheotomy); acute bronchitis; pulmonary congestion and hemorrhage;
cloudy swelling and edema of kidneys (bilateral); generalized jaundice.
Subsidiary: Calcified node in left lung; apical pulmonary scars (bilateral);
scar of appendectomy.
Discussion
DR. BLAKE: How big was the spleen?
DR. OPPER: 200 grams.
DR. WINTERNITZ: Dr. Leonard, will you tell us more about Novaldin?
DR. LEONARD: It is said to have none of the dangers of pyramidon. He
took 250 grains during January. The amount taken before is not known.
He had taken at least 5 grains if not more in an evening.
DR. WINTERNITZ: The picture that you have just seen is obviously that due
to a leukotoxic substance which destroys white blood cells in the circulating
blood. There is no damage in the liver cells: the jaundice must be hemolytic
in origin.
DR. BLAKE: The question arises if icterus is a terminal event.
DR. WINTERNITZ: It obviously does not destroy the red blood cells. White
blood cells primarily are destroyed as in benzol poisoning. What was the
appearance of the bone marrow?
DR. OPPER: It was hypoplastic with many normoblasts.
DR. WINTERNITZ: There were no granulocytic cells so that there is obvi-
ously a leukotoxic poisoning, killing the white cells in the circulation and bone
marrow. When there is an infection superimposed there is no resistance and
we see an aplastic type of pneumonia with serum and fibrin. A good deal
468
YALE CASE STUDIES
of fibrin may be produced. The most important thing is the direct influence
upon the leukocytes.
DR. BLAKE: The history of this disease is an extremely interesting one.
Beginning in 1929 it was believed that this condition was a terminal result
of some infection such as is demonstrated by this case. It was then looked
upon as the beginning of some new kind of severe, fatal infection, and from
1924 to 1929 most of the studies of this disease and experiments in connection
with it were directed toward trying to find an organism responsible for it.
B. pyocyaneus was blamed at one time, and other studies by Gorham sug-
gested a spirillum, with which he could produce the condition in animals and
recover the organism from the lesions. Later the disease began to appear
more frequently and was not always fatal. Cases were encountered where,
perhaps by chance, as in the case here, there was a hypersensitivity of the
blood elements. Gradually more cases with a remittent type of course were
encountered. Another outstanding feature at first was that the great major-
ity of cases appeared in women, but later more cases were encountered in
men. In 1929 the idea of infection began to be considered as a terminal
part of the picture and the disease was thought of as a new type of blood
dyscrasia. Many suggestions began to appear that something in the environ-
ment was responsible for the condition, until a suggestion was made that it
might be amidopyrine. An analysis of old hospital records to disclose a
possible relationship of this drug to the disease, showed that in most cases
nothing of this nature had been used. But hospital records failed to show
whether or not an individual had been taking amidopyrine under some trade
name. Dr. Geiger has looked up 15 or more drugs going under various
trade names containing amidopyrine.
DR. GEIGER. I have a list of 21 proprietary drugs containing amidopyrine.
Most of them are either secret formulae or are so obscurely named that their
amidopyrine content is not suspected. The two most commonly used by us
in hospitals are Amytal Compound and Allonal, and I trust that we all know
we are employing in them a combination of a barbiturate with amidopyrine.
However, similar combinations under less familiar names are Peralga, Amido-
neonal, Cibalgine, Pyraminal, Neonal Compound, Phenamidal, Neurodyne,
Optalidon, and Amarbital. In addition to these "sedatives," amidopyrine
combined with other drugs is widely offered as "pain cures"-Gynalgos,
Amidophen, Compral, Midol, Dysco Tablets, Cinchopyrine, Kalms, Novaldin,
Lumidron, Benzedo Compound.
Since the manufacturers of these preparations are guilty of using pro-
prietary, uninformative names for perfectly familiar pharmacopeial sub-
stances, none of them has been approved or accepted by the Council of
Pharmacy and Chemistry of the American Medical Association and rightly
so; for the experience with today's case illustrates the dangers of "blind
medication".
469
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
DR. BLAKE: Most of them are advertised for headaches, neuralgia, and
sleeplessness?
DR. GEIGER: Although many of the preparations contain both amidopyrine
and a barbiturate, the last report of the A. M. A. Council holds, on present
evidence, that the barbiturates have little or nothing to do with causing
granulocytopenia.
DR. WINTERNITZ: Can all of these be purchased by the public?
DR. GEIGER: Yes. Something is being said now about legislation to permit
their being purchased by prescription only.
DR. BLAKE: Another aspect of the pathogenesis which is not understood is
why do only a relatively small proportion of individuals who take these drugs
develop agranulocytosis? While the evidence is accumulating that amidopy-
rine is responsible, there must be something about certain individuals which
renders them peculiarly susceptible to this action. We do not know what
that something is.
DR. WINTERNITZ: Are the infections in these people characteristic, related
to the way the organism enters?
DR. BLAKE: There is no consistent type of lesion found. There are plenty
of cases where the local infections are mostly ulcerative lesions of the throat.
DR. WINTERNITZ: There are a good many bacteria in the throat.
DR. BLAKE: Ulcerative lesions are found in the intestinal tract also. Per-
haps it is primary where there are all sorts of organisms.
DR. WINTERNITZ: Has much other work been done with this particular
chemical from the standpoint of metabolism or change in the hematology and
bone marrow?
DR. BLAKE: I know of no hematological studies of the bone marrow.
DR. WINTERNITZ: What happens to the individual without any leukocytes?
DR. GRAVES: I know of one case of myelogenous leukemia in which there
were no granulocytes for a period of weeks, nevertheless no ulcerations
occurred.
DR. WINTERNITZ: Did that patient die?
DR. GRAVES: Yes. The autopsy was performed a few days ago. She died
of a terminal pneumonia.
DR. CUSHING: In people who have recovered, was there a rapid or a slow
return of leukocytes?
DR. BLAKE: There are no studies on record at the present time. Various
therapeutic measures have been used-transfusions, X-ray, liver extract, and
if you will recall, Jackson several years ago introduced nucleotides and felt
that there seemed to be a definite stimulus, as shown by an outpouring of
granulocytes following the use of the drug. Others have not obtained such
consistent results as he seemed to get, and I think it has gradually become our
feeling here that these remissions would have occurred anyway.
470
YALE CASE STUDIES
DR. CUSHING: Would it be possible to have a group of volunteers submit to
the drug in order to see if leukocytes go down? How dangerous is the drug?
DR. WINTERNITZ: That question arose last week in the case of a child
with aplastic anemia as to whether it had had benzene poisoning or other
manifestations.
DR. BLAKE: Just where, if due to amidopyrine, in the course of the poison-
ing, you reach a point where there is no recovery, I don't know.
DR. WINTERNITZ: In an exhaustion of bone marrow in animals which have
become poisoned with benzol you can apparently get an anemia or leukopenia.
DR. BLAKE: We have several cases. A woman, somewhere around 35,
came down with epigastric pain. On admission there was a perfectly normal
white count. On a routine repeat count about 10 days later there was a
marked agranulocytosis. She had had several successive admissions for
granulocytopenia apparently caused by pyramidon, since we have learned to
avoid this drug she has not had to return. At present I think she is all right.
DR. CUSHING: Are the pure food and drug people interested in this?
DR. BLAKE: Not that I know of.
DR. WINTERNITZ: With this evidence piling up, action will have to be taken
to prevent indiscriminate use of this drug.
DR. GEIGER: In answer to Dr. Cushing, as to how long the white blood
cells may remain decreased, I noted an interesting experiment by Madison
and Squire, who produced 3 attacks in a single patient with small doses of
amidopyrine, the granulocytopenia in each attack lasting about 4 days. It
was interesting that amytal compound caused one of these attacks. The use
of amytal alone did not have any deleterious effect.
DR. WINTERNITZ: This is also true with benzol; after small doses the bone
marrow activity will return.
DR. KIRK: Has there been any explanation for the discrepancy between the
number of cases in the United States, Germany, and Great Britain?
DR. GEIGER: Amidopyrine was first produced in Germany and was patented
there under the name of Pyramidon. I think that when the patents ran out
there, others were taken here and it was under these United States patents
that the drug was so widely exploited here in the last decade. The high
incidence of cases in this country is probably a reflection of the efficiency of
the American advertising profession and the gullibility of our public and
profession.
471
