YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 76 (2003), pp. 167-180.
Copyright © 2004. All rights reserved.
SYMPOSIUM
The Life and Legacy of Marie Curiea
Sara Rockwell
Departments of Therapeutic Radiology and Pharmacology and Office of Scientific Affairs,
Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut
Marie Curie was a remarkable woman whose discoveries broke new ground in physics and
chemistry and also opened the door for advances in engineering, biology, and medicine.
She broke new ground for women in science: she was, for example, the first woman to
receive a doctor of science degree in France, the first woman to win Nobel Prize, the first
woman to lecture at the Sorbonne, the first person to win two Nobel Prizes, and the first
Nobel Laureate whose child also won a Nobel Prize. Her life offers insights into the chang-
ing role of women in science and academia over the past century. It also offers examples
of many ways in which scientists can, and should, work to improve the educational pro-
grams and career opportunities available to those who follow in their footsteps.
This paper is based on a talk given at
the Marie Curie Nobel Centennial
Symposium: Celebrating Women in
Science, at which The Yale community
and their guests celebrated the centennial
of Marie Curie's first Nobel Prize and the
legacy that this remarkable scientist left to
the women who followed her in the sci-
ences. In this paper, I will talk about the
life of Marie Curie [1-4], focusing on the
challenges she faced, the barriers she
breached, her skills, and her activities
(both heralded and unsung) that we should
emulate and should encourage in the
young women we mentor.
MARIA'S CHILDHOOD
Maria Salomea Sklodowska was born
in Warsaw, Poland, November 7, 1867.
She was the youngest of the five children
of Bronislawa and Wladyslaw
Sklodowski. Maria came from an interest-
ing and unusual family. Her parents were
both from families of the minor Polish
nobility, who had been stripped of their
lands and political powers after the defeat
ofPoland by Czarist Russia. At the time of
Maria's birth, the January uprising of
1864 had recently been crushed, and the
city of Warsaw lay under brutal occupa-
tion. One of Bronislawa's brothers had
To whom all correspondence should be addressed: Sara Rockwell, Ph.D., Departments of
Therapeutic Radiology and Pharmacology and Office of Scientific Affairs, Yale University
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8040. Tel.: 203-785-2963;
Fax: 203-785-7482.
aThis paper was originally presented at the symposium Marie Curie Nobel Centennial:
Celebrating Women in Science, November 6 to 8, 2003, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut.
167
168 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
been exiled to Siberia; another had been
wounded twice in the war and had escaped
to France. The harsh political repression of
the occupation affected the life of the
Sklodowski family deeply, and its shadow
remained throughout Maria's life.
Both of Maria's parents came from
highly educated families that valued rigor-
ous and comprehensive education for girls as
well as boys. Maria's grandfather had been
considered very radical, because he had
risked hisjob as school principal by insisting
that "talented peasants" should be educated
along with the children ofthe nobility. Little
Maria was born into a family that expected
its children, both girls and boys, to be serious
and rigorous in their studies, to continue
their education throughout their lives, to
have meaningful careers, and to pass their
knowledge on to others, regardless of the
rewards or risks incurred in doing so.
Maria's mother had been educated at
the Freta Street School, the only private
girls' school in Warsaw at the time. After
graduation she remained at the school as a
teacher and soon became headmistress.
From 1860 until 1868, the family lived at
the school, in the apartment reserved for
the headmistress. Here Bronislawa bore
and cared for her five children, while run-
ning the school, teaching, and caring for
her brother-in-law, who was dying of
tuberculosis.
In 1868, Maria's father Wladyslaw
was promoted to the position of headmas-
ter of the public school where he taught,
and the family moved into the headmas-
ter's apartment. Maria's mother resigned
from her position to care for her family
and because of her failing health. To
stretch Wladyslaw's meager salary, she
made the family's clothes (including their
shoes) and took in student boarders.
Maria's childhood saw many hardships.
Maria's father was demoted from his head-
master position by the Russian govern-
ment for his political views and for the
family's connections to "revolutionaries."
Maria's oldest sister contracted typhus and
died when Maria was 11. Her mother, who
had suffered from tuberculosis for many
years, died from this disease soon after-
ward.
Nevertheless, the family was deter-
mined that the children should get the best
education possible. Maria, like her sib-
lings, was sent to a combination of public
and private schools where she was rigor-
ously educated in several languages, math-
ematics, and the sciences. Her education
included intensive training in Polish lan-
guage, literature, and history, despite the
fact that such education was illegal. Public
mention of the lessons she learned as a
child at school and at home could have
resulted in the arrest and exile of her
teachers and family. Maria appears to have
been a brilliant child, with a great gift for
languages and an extraordinary memory.
She graduated from the gymnasium at the
age of 15 and, like her older brother and
sister, she was first in her graduating class
and received many academic awards.
THE GOVERNESS YEARS
There was no chance of further formal
education. No university in Warsaw, or in
Poland, admitted women. Her father, bare-
ly able to support his son in medical
school in Warsaw, certainly did not have
the means to send any of his three surviv-
ing daughters to study in Paris or St.
Petersburg, where some universities were
open to women. Maria and her sister
Helena, therefore, did the logical thing
after graduating: they left to visit the coun-
try homes of relatives and family friends,
and apparently spent an entire year travel-
ing and partying.
They then returned to Warsaw and
began to work as private tutors, one of the
few intellectual jobs open to women. They
also enrolled in courses in a clandestine
university for women, called the Flying
University. This illegal school organized
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 169
scholars and scientists to meet with small
groups of women students secretly in
apartments, homes, and shops, to provide
an advanced education, which had been
outlawed for women in Poland under the
Russian occupation.
Maria and her older sister Bronia
came up with a plan for escaping from this
situation. Bronia would use their meager
savings to leave immediately for Paris,
where she would study medicine. Maria
would take the most lucrative governess
position she could find. She would use her
wages to support Bronia while she stud-
ied. When Bronia finished medical school
she would, in turn, support Maria while
she studied in Paris.
For the next three years, Maria
worked as a live-in governess in a small
and isolated village in rural Poland. She
taught the family's three children (a baby,
a 6-year-old, and an 18-year-old girl). She
also organized clandestine classes, in
Polish, for the peasant children of the vil-
lage. Both teaching peasants to read and
teaching Polish language, culture, and his-
tory were illegal acts, punishable by exile
to Siberia. Maria also continued to study
and read voraciously. During this time,
Maria and the family's oldest son
Kazimierz, a student at Warsaw
University about two years older than
Maria, apparently decided that they were
in love and announced their intention to be
married. The parents, however, were out-
raged that their son would think of marry-
ing a penniless governess and forbade the
marriage. The relationship apparently
waxed and waned, always with the total
disapproval of his parents, even after
Maria returned to Warsaw to accept a new
governess position and to recommence her
studies at the Flying University.
During this time in Warsaw, Maria,
for the first time, had an opportunity to
perform laboratory research. Her cousin,
Jozef Buguski had returned to Warsaw
after studying in Russia with Mendeleev
to direct the Museum at the Ministry of
Industry and Agriculture. Under his tute-
lage, Maria secretly began to study wet
bench chemistry, performing experiments
in the chemistry laboratory that formed
part of the museum collection. It was dur-
ing this period that Maria discovered her
love of and talent for experimental labora-
tory research.
PARIS
Bronia, in the meantime, married,
graduated from medical school, and
opened a practice in Paris. She wrote
repeatedly to Maria, urging her to come to
Paris; Maria hesitated for some time,
apparently torn between her desire to study
in France and her ties to Poland, which
included her concern for her father and her
younger sister, her continuing affection for
Kazimierz, and her reluctance to leave her
beloved homeland. In 1891, Maria, now
23, went to Paris and enrolled at the
Sorbonne. She first lived with Bronia and
*..:.:::........._w~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..............::......~~~~~~~~~~~~~~... ........
l_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~... ......._ 1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.. ...-..
Figure 1. Marie Curie. (The Frontier
Press Company.)
170 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
her husband in the small apartment that
also served as the office ofthese two physi-
cians, but found that the distractions of the
crowded apartment/office made studying
difficult and that the long trip to the
University was exhausting and expensive.
She moved to a small attic room near the
University. This was a very daring thing to
do. In this era in Paris, proper young ladies
did not leave their houses without an escort
and would not think of entering a restau-
rant or a cafd alone, much less walk alone
through the streets of the Latin Quarter
where Marie's new apartment was located.
There were few women among her
fellow students. Although the universities
of France were nominally open to women,
it was nearly impossible for women edu-
cated in France to gain admission. The
girls' schools in France did not offer the
physics, biology, Latin, and Greek needed
to pass the baccalaureate exam, which was
required for entry into the University.
Most of the 210 women at the University
when Marie enrolled were, therefore, for-
eign. There were about 9,000 men. In
1893, when Maria received her Licence
des Sciences, equivalent to a Master of
Science, she was one of only two women
recipients in the University. She was one
of five women licencees when she
received her licence in mathematics in
1894.
During this period, Maria, who had
registered at the Sorbonne using the
French form ofher name, "Marie," studied
with some of the greatest scientists of the
day in France. She was a brilliant student,
placing first on the exam for the degree in
science and second on the exam for the
degree in mathematics. Finances contin-
ued to be a problem. Marie's family could
offer only meager financial support and
her own small savings had been nearly
exhausted by the cost of her trip to Paris,
and she lived on a budget of 3 francs a day
[1]. Marie, therefore, lived in the cheapest
of student apartments, with the barest of
necessities, and no luxuries whatsoever.
She might not have completed her mathe-
matics degree had a friend not arranged for
her to receive a 600-ruble Alexandrovitch
scholarship, which allowed her to continue
her studies for this final year.
Although some biographies imply
that Marie had no life outside the class-
room, her correspondence and the mem-
oirs of others clearly show that she social-
ized with family and friends in Paris, took
long summer vacations to visit her family
in Poland and even seems to have become
romantically involved with a fellow stu-
dent, known from their correspondence
only as M. Lamotte. This romance ended,
as did her plans to return permanently to
Poland after receiving her degrees, when
she met Pierre Curie in the spring of 1894.
PIERRE CURIE
Pierre Curie was born in Paris in
1859. His father, a doctor from a family of
Protestant scientists and physicians, had
participated in many of the riots and rebel-
lions of this period in French history.
Pierre's life and schooling were unconven-
tional. Because his father feared that
Pierre's way of learning and thinking was
not compatible with the teaching methods
of the French school system, Pierre was
educated at home, by his father and by
tutors. He matriculated into the University
at age 16, received his Licence des
Sciences at the age of 18, and immediate-
ly joined the Sorbonne as a "preparateur"
or research assistant in the physics labora-
tory. He began to perform and publish
original research almost immediately, first
with his mentor Paul Desains and then
with his brother Jacque Curie. The Curie
brothers performed seminal research on
symmetry in crystals and discovered the
phenomenon of piezoelectricity, which
underlies the use of crystals in a variety of
applications including microphones,
sonar, balances, and the detection ofradia-
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 171
tion. In 1882, Pierre left the Sorbonne to
become a laboratory supervisor at the
Ecole Municipale de Physique et Chemie
Industrielles in Paris. Here he developed
the analytic balance and performed cele-
brated research on magnetism.
Pierre Curie's scientific brilliance
earned him an international scientific rep-
utation for the incisiveness of his research
and thinking, for the precision of his
experimentation, and for the fine analytic
instruments he made for use in his
research. However, he was very much an
outsider in the French scientific establish-
ment. He had not attended the "appropri-
ate" schools. Moreover, he had absolutely
no interest in the rituals of science and
academia. Despite performing and pub-
lishing work that would have been more
than sufficient for his doctorate, he never
bothered to write a thesis and obtain his
degree. As a result, when he met Marie in
1884 he had been in his position at the
very bottom of the academic ladder at an
unprestigious trade school for 11 years.
COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE
Marie and Pierre were introduced by
mutual friends. The husband, a physics
professor from Poland, knew Pierre and
his work; his new bride had been an
acquaintance of Marie's during her years
as a governess in Poland. The dinner to
which Pierre and Marie were invited in the
spring of 1884 apparently generated spirit-
ed scientific discussions. These escalated
rapidly during Marie's last few months in
Paris into a scientific relationship (begin-
ning with Pierre sending Marie reprints of
his scientific papers), then progressing to
exchanges of more personal letters and
visits, and eventually to Pierre's sugges-
tion that Marie not remain in Poland after
completing her exam, as she had planned,
but instead return to Paris and move into
an apartment on the Rue Mouffetard with
him.
Marie did return to Paris but moved
into an apartment attached to her sister
Bronia's office. Marie began to perform
her research on the magnetic properties of
steel in a converted storage room in
Pierre's modest laboratory space. During
the next year, Pierre wrote up his long-
delayed thesis and was immediately given
a professorship at the Ecole.
On July 26, 1895, Pierre and Marie
were married in Paris, in a simple ceremo-
ny attended by both of their families. As a
wedding present, they bought bicycles,
and went bicycling through the country-
side of Brittany. A delightful photo taken
on their honeymoon [1] shows the happy
couple. Marie is often described as being
somber and unfashionable, but in this
photo her bicycle is decorated with flow-
ers and she is wearing the height of shock-
ing 1895 bicycling fashion: a very trendy
brimmed boater hat, knickers, and stock-
ings that reveal the shape of her legs.
After their honeymoon, Marie and
Pierre moved into a modest three-room
apartment on Rue de la Glaciere, over-
looking a garden, but furnished simply,
almost starkly with furniture borrowed
from their families. They made an effort to
keep their lives simple, allowing them to
focus on their work in the laboratory. To
quote Marie, "I am arranging my flat little
by little, but I intend to keep it to a style
which will give me no worries and will not
require attention, as I have very little help:
a woman who comes in for an hour a day
to wash the dishes and do the heavy work.
I do the cooking and housekeeping
myself' [1]. In this as in many other
things, the Curies defied the convention of
Parisian society of the belle epoque by
focusing on practicality, not on appear-
ances. They reserved their few discre-
tionary funds for the things that mattered
to them, such as a little help with the heavy
household work, their bicycles, day trips,
weekends and vacations in the country-
side, and flowers.
172 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
DISCOVERY OF RADIOACTIVITY
In the laboratory, Pierre and Marie
continued to perform research on magnet-
ism, as a team, for the next three years.
Their research took a dramatic turn in
December 22, 1895, when Conrad
Roentgen released his paper announcing
the discovery of X-rays. This paper was
telegraphed around the world the same
day. Scientists and the public were fasci-
nated. In Paris, Henri Poincare reported to
the French Academy of Sciences on
January 20, 1896, that X-rays produced
phosphorescence not only on the glass
walls of the tube but also on a screen coat-
ed with a phosphorescent substance. Henri
Becquerel was fascinated by the report and
began to explore the idea that phosphores-
cent substances also produced X-rays. In
the next few weeks he reported that of the
many phosphorescent materials he tried,
only uranium salts produced these rays,
and that it did not matter whether the ura-
nium was in a phosphorescent chemical
form or whether it was exposed to light.
Becquerel then seems to have lost interest
in this phenomenon and instead turned to
work with X-rays.
It was William Thomson, Lord
Kelvin, who stirred the Curies' interest in
Becquerel's "uranium rays" by showing in
an experiment using an electrometer that
Pierre Curie had made for him, that urani-
um rays, like Roentgen's X-rays, "electri-
fied" the air. The timing of Kelvin's paper
was fortuitous. Marie and Pierre's first
child, Irene, had been born September 12,
1897, after a difficult pregnancy. Marie,
who had spent much of the summer in
Brittany, was now back in the laboratory
and eager to work on a new subject, which
could be used for her doctoral thesis.
It would be easy to underestimate the
resolution behind this decision. No woman
in Europe had yet completed a doctorate,
although Elsa Neumann, in Germany, was
well into her thesis in electrochemistry.
Most of the Curie's contemporaries doubt-
ed that Marie, a frail young wife and new
mother, would ever complete her thesis.
The approach Marie used rested com-
pletely on measurements of radioactivity
using the highly precise piezoelectric bal-
ances and electrometers that Pierre had
developed. Pierre was clearly involved in
this project from its earliest stages, as
shown by the interchanging handwriting
in their laboratory notebook. Their collab-
orations were to continue in this same
vein, with the two researchers working
together as intellectual collaborators on
some elements of the research, serving as
technicians for each other in other studies,
and each taking sole responsibility for
other elements and developing these inde-
pendently or with other collaborators.
On April 12, 1898, the members of
the Academy of Sciences heard a report
written by Marie Sklodowska Curie, enti-
tled "Rays emitted by uranium and thori-
um compounds." Because neither Marie
nor Pierre was a member of the Academy,
Marie's professor, Gabriel Lippman, pre-
sented the paper. The implications of this
paper went well beyond the superficial
conclusion that both pitchblende and chal-
cite produced ionization. First, Marie con-
cluded that the activity she was measuring
was an atomic property, not a molecular
property, because the uranium activity did
not depend on the chemical state of the
uranium and because the level ofthe activ-
ity was always proportional to the amount
of uranium in the compound being tested.
Second, she introduced the concept that a
new, unknown element could be discov-
ered by showing that its radioactivity was
different from that of any known element.
RADIUM AND POLONIUM
Marie and Pierre set out to isolate this
new element. Because the amount of the
mystery material in their samples was far
too small to detect by spectroscopy or
chemical tests, they measured their
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 173
progress in purification by measuring the
ionizing activity of the products. Here
again, we see a new concept: the idea that
the purification of a new material could be
guided by measuring the radioactivity in
the reaction products. This concept has
since become familiar to biologists purify-
ing radiolabeled biomolecules, as well as
to chemists.
On July 18, 1989, Henri Becquerel
read to the Academy of Sciences the paper
by Pierre and Marie Curie "On a novel
radioactive substance contained in pitch-
blende." This paper attracted immediate
attention. Later in July, the Academy
awarded to Marie a 3,800 franc prize, cit-
ing both her work on the magnetic proper-
ties of steel and her July paper suggesting
the existence of a new element in pitch-
blende. Interestingly, although the
Academy did break tradition by awarding
this prize to a woman, they couldn't quite
bring themselves to communicate this
news to her directly. Instead Henri
Becquerel and Marcelin Berthelot wrote
letters to Pierre, informing him that Marie
had won the prize. Becquerel's letter ends,
"I congratulate you sincerely, and beg of
you to present my respectful compliments
to your wife" [2].
Immediately afterward, the Curies
left to summer in the volcanic mountains
in the Midi of France and did not return to
Paris until mid-November. They were not
totally inactive during the summer: Marie
had ordered a very large shipment of
pitchblende, which they began to attack
immediately upon their return to Paris.
Pierre's laboratory was too small for
this massive purification project, and the
fumes, chemicals, and metals released
during the purification procedure were too
toxic to work with in an enclosed space.
The University provided them with an
additional facility, a storage shed with an
open courtyard. This shed lacked electric-
ity, was open to the weather, and was an
exceedingly primitive facility even by the
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Figure 2. Marie, Irene, and Pierre Curie.
(The Century Company).
standards of the day. Here Marie under-
took the formidable task of isolating, puri-
fying, and characterizing Polonium and
Radium. This task required many years
and the donation by the Austrian govern-
ment of over 10 tons of pitchblend.
Although the shed and the adjacent
laboratory were primitive, minimally fur-
nished, and dreary, the facility did have a
property that gave the Curies great plea-
sure: it glowed from the luminescence of
the highly radioactive materials. To quote
Marie, describing their evening visits to
the laboratory, "Our precious products, for
which we had no shelter, were arranged on
tables and boards; from all sides we could
see their slightly luminous silhouettes, and
these gleamings, which seemed suspended
in the darkness, stirred us with ever new
emotion and enchantment" [2]. It is not
surprising, in retrospect, that both of the
Curies began to exhibit signs of ill health,
ranging from fatigue and anemia to chron-
ic, painful "buns" to the skin of their
hands, and weakness and movement prob-
lems in their hands and legs.
Tihe purification of the new elements
Radium and Polonium progressed. Over
the next few years, Marie published 19
papers describing various aspects of her
thesis research, ten with Pierre as co-
author. In addition, Pierre published 14
additional papers on other aspects of
174 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
radioactivity. On May 11, 1903, Marie sub-
mitted her thesis, which she defended suc-
cessfully on June 12, 1903, receiving the
degree of Docteur des Sciences Physiques
with the mention "tres honorable."
The thesis was reprinted widely.
Seventeen editions, in five different lan-
guages, were published in the first year
after its defense, including an English edi-
tion published in London by the Chemical
News [5, 6]. One of the interesting things
about this groundbreaking thesis is that it
reads smoothly and easily, either in French
or in the English translation, which Marie
prepared herself. Marie's amazingly clear
and simple writing style allows the impli-
cations of her complex science to be pre-
sented clearly to scientists unfamiliar with
the details of the subject and even to non-
scientists.
This was a period of scientific success
for the Curies - and apparently a happy
period as well. Pierre's salary was modest
in the extreme. Marie's was truly minimal.
They had made a deliberate decision to
publish their data on the isolation and
purification of Radium, rather than pursu-
ing patents on the process. As a result,
many companies made and sold radium,
but no profits flowed to the Curies.
Both Marie and Pierre held part-time
teaching positions to maintain their family.
Both seem to have taken great pleasure in
their teaching roles. Marie became the first
woman to teach at the Ecole Normale
Supereure de Sevres, France's best
preparatory school for woman teachers.
She altered the Physics curriculum in her
classes from one that emphasized reading
and rote memory to a "hands on" science
curriculum in which students designed,
performed, analyzed, and interpreted
experiments using equipment borrowed
from research laboratories. Many of
Marie's students went on to become physi-
cians, science teachers, scientists, and
mathematicians. Marie invited her physics
students to hear her defend her thesis.
They were reportedly proud to hear her
respond to questions and delighted to hear
that she received the mention "tres honor-
able." Even Marie Curie's own thesis
defense became a part of her teaching and
mentoring.
The Curie's lived happily, but very
modestly, in the outskirts of Paris, with
their daughter Irene and Pierre's widowed
father, Eugene, who apparently relished
being a grandfather and who provided sta-
bility to a household headed by two very
intense, busy, and driven scientists. As
with two-career couples today, Marie's
journals show that childcare (live-in nan-
nies) and household help were continuing
expenses, needed to enable the profession-
al lives of the parents. The Curies also
used their money for things they consid-
ered important - repaying the scholarship
that had allowed Marie to finish her degree
in mathematics, so that another Polish stu-
dent could be sent abroad to study, and
helping family and students with financial
problems. None of the family appears to
have had any interest whatsoever in the
"appearances" of the household. The fur-
nishings and decor in the household
remained simple and minimal throughout
Marie's life, although flowers and gardens
were always a priority. The family also
lived simply. In a city where fashion, the
Arts, and Society were valued, the Curie
family relished quiet activities with family
and friends - casual dinners, long walks,
gardening, and bicycling in the country.
They also spent long summer holidays in
the country or on the coast, relaxing with
academic and scientific colleagues as well
as family members. Their letters remark
on the "restorative" value of these vaca-
tions. Given their constant exposure to
radiation in the laboratory, this was
undoubtedly true. In August 1903, Marie's
health worsened after the miscarriage of
her second child. She began to show signs
of the anemia and lung problems that
would persist for the rest of her life.
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 175
THE FIRST NOBEL PRIZE
The scientific world began to note the
Curie's scientific accomplishments. In
November 1903, the Royal Society of
London presented them with the Davy
Medal, for the most important discovery
of the year in chemistry. While Pierre was
in London accepting this award, Marie,
too ill to travel, received word that they
would share with Henri Becquerel the
1903 Nobel Prize in Physics for their
"joint work concerning investigations of
the radiation phenomena described by
Henri Becquerel." Marie became the first
woman to receive a Nobel prize.
These events raised the Curies to
celebrity status. The moneys from these
and subsequent prizes stabilized and sim-
plified their personal and scientific lives:
they hired a laboratory assistant, and they
installed indoor plumbing in their home.
They also used some of the money to pro-
vide a scholarship to one of Marie's stu-
dents at Sevres and scholarships for stu-
dents from Poland studying in Paris. They
sent money to Maria's sister Bronia, who
was establishing a tuberculosis clinic in
Poland, and money to help other family
members. They continued to live simply
and modestly and, to the decreasing extent
possible, privately. A chair in physics was
created for Pierre at the Sorbonne. When
Pierre told the University that the salary
was inadequate to support him, and that he
would need to retain his outside teaching
job, the deputies added funds to support
his laboratory, including a post of "Chef
des Travaux," or Laboratory Chief, for
Marie. The enhanced resources and the
scientists eager to collaborate ensured that
the Curie's research efforts remained at the
cutting edge of the revolution occurring in
physics. Their laboratory facilities, how-
ever, remained primitive. In addition, the
Acadamie des Sciences, which had reject-
ed Pierre's 1902 application for member-
ship, admitted him in 1905 only by the
narrowest of margins. The Curies were
never fully accepted into the French scien-
tific establishment.
In 1904, Marie again became preg-
nant. Wary from her miscarriage the year
before and still not fully recovered, she
remained in the country until the birth of
her second child, Eve, in December. It was
not until the summer of 1905 that Pierre
and Marie were in sufficiently good health
to travel to Stockholm and receive their
Nobel Prize. They then went to the beach
for their summer vacation before returning
to Paris and to their exhausting routine of
research and teaching.
PIERRE'S DEATH
On April 19, 1906, disaster struck,
when Pierre Curie, rushing through a
heavy rain along the Rue Dauphine at the
Pont Neuf intersection, stepped into the
path of a heavily ladened wagon and ran
into the horses. As the horses reared up, he
was flung under the wheels of the wagon
and killed. The accident sent Marie into
the depths of depression; it was months
before she reassumed work in the labora-
tory and years before she recovered from
this emotional blow. She was described by
a friend, Marguerite Borel, as "dead to the
world. She is a scientist walled in behind
her grief' [2].
The Sorbonne was faced with a great
problem: what to do about Pierre's chair,
laboratory, and courses. No woman had
even taught in or held a faculty position at
the school, but Marie's credentials were
hard to ignore. The school finally compro-
mised on a solution. Pierre's chair was left
vacant. Marie, as director of the laborato-
ry, continued with her research. She also
assumed Pierre's teaching responsibilities
and became the first woman to lecture at
the Sorbonne.
Her first lecture typifies her attitude
toward this new position. Hundreds of
people gathered hours before the lecture:
reporters, photographers, celebrities, col-
176 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
leagues, scholars, and curious Parisians, as
well as the students scheduled for Pierre's
class and students from Marie's advanced
physics class at Sevres, who had been
granted permission to attend her lectures
because she could no longer teach their
course. Most attendees hoped for drama
- a tribute to Pierre or at least a mention
of the historic nature of the event. Marie
instead entered the room quietly at the
exact hour the class was to begin, dressed
in a simple black dress, and began to lec-
ture directly to her students on the sched-
uled introductory topic. Her lecture began
with the understatement, "When one con-
siders the progress in physics in the last
decade, one is surprised by the changes it
has produced in our ideas about electricity
and about matter" [2].
Marie Curie took an active role in the
teaching of her own children. She believed
the programs of girls' schools were inade-
quate, not only because of the weaknesses
in experimental science and mathematics,
but also because of the lack of preparation
in languages and classics and the lack of
physical activity, which she viewed as
essential for maintaining physical and
mental health. She tutored Irene, whose
interest and obvious talents in science and
math she knew needed fostering in ways
not well met by the standard curricula, and
she ensured that Eve received training to
develop her obvious language and musical
talents. For a time, she and her scientific
colleagues even ran a cooperative school
for their children, with each one teaching
his or her area of expertise. Recently dis-
covered class notes taken by one of her
students at this school show the rigorous
demands made on the students and also the
joy of the students with their curriculum
and their growing laboratory skills [7].
Marie continued her research on
radioactivity and radioactive elements,
acquiring an ever-growing group of young
scientists from around the world to work
in her laboratory, with its primitive facili-
ties but cutting-edge science. Marie's
research program was greatly enhanced by
the gift from Andrew Carnegie of a
$50,000 endowment, which in 1906 was a
small fortune, to fund "Curie
Scholarships" for Marie's trainees.
In 1910, Marie emerged from the long
depression that had followed Pierre's
death into scandal, by having, or appearing
to have, an affair with Paul Langevin, a
physicist and longtime scientific colleague
and friend of the Curies. Although
estranged from his wife, Paul Langevin
was married and the father of four young
children. The relationship between this
married Frenchman and the "foreign"
woman scientist was a scandal, which the
press and the gossips relished. For a time,
Marie even left Paris, seeking peace and
safety with scientific colleagues and
friends abroad.
In the midst ofthis turmoil, Marie was
proposed for membership in the Acadamie
des Sciences. The Academy, uneasy with
the scandal and the associated publicity
and with some members extremely vocal
in their objections to admitting any woman
to membership, selected another candi-
date. Marie, embittered by this insult, and
still angered by the Academy's earlier
refusal to admit Pierre, was later to refuse
invitations to reapply for admission. It was
not until 1945 that the Acadamie des
Sciences would admit a woman to its
membership.
THE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE
The Nobel committee, however, was
less impressed by scandal than by science
and on November 5, 1911, awarded Marie
Curie the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, recog-
nizing the work on Polonium and Radium
that she had performed after receiving the
1903 prize.
Marie continued to head a large and
active research group, with an internation-
al group of students and collaborators and
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 177
an international reputation. This grew into
the Institut du Radium, a facility dedicat-
ed to the study of radiation and its uses.
Construction on the Institut du Radium
began in 1912, with two buildings, one to
house Marie Curie's research group and
one to house the physicians, headed by
Claudius Regaud, who were pioneering
the use of radiation in medical diagnosis
and in the therapy of cancer. The Institute
was completed in 1914, just as WWI
erupted.
RADIOLOGY CARS
The war brought another era into
Marie's life. She was appalled at the lack
of modern medical care available to the
wounded soldiers on the front lines. To
address this problem, she devised and
built "radiology cars," made from donated
vans, trucks, and limousines to carry diag-
nostic radiology to the battlefront. These
vehicles not only carried portable fluoro-
scopes, X-ray units and darkrooms to the
medical tents on the front lines and nearby
hospitals, along with technicians to oper-
ate them and physicians to interpret the
films, but also provided the power to oper-
ate these machines, as many towns and
hospitals in rural France still lacked reli-
able, standardized electricity.
Marie also established and oversaw
programs to train physicians and techni-
cians to operate these units. These pro-
grams trained over 400 physicians as radi-
ologists and also trained 800 men and 150
women as radiology technicians. Both
Marie and her daughter Irene, now 18,
headed radiology teams. Over 1 million
wounded soldiers had their care directed
by radiographic exams from these units.
The success of these units in improving
emergency care on the battlefront soon
transformed Marie in the eyes of the
French public from the scandalous foreign
woman into a French patriot and national
heroine. Her name became associated
IFigure 3. Marie Curie in her laboratory.
(Gerald Howe, Ltd.)
with the medical uses of radiation through
this route, as well as through the growing
use of radium in the treatment of cancer.
Research at the Institut du Radium contin-
ued and increased as the group continued
to expand to include a cadre of scientists
with growing independence and scientific
maturity. Even today, many leaders in the
radiation sciences and radiation medicine
trace elements of their own training to
those who studied with Marie Curie and
Claudius Regaud.
COMMUNICATING SCIENCE
Marie had by this time realized the
importance of communicating directly to
the public about the importance of radia-
tion in science and medicine. She gave
talks and wrote books for lay audiences
including a biography of Pierre Curie [8]
and "La Radiologie et la Guerre," which
tells the story of the radiology cars and
describes the science and technology
behind them [9]. One ofmy favorite plates
from this book illustrates Marie's ability
to communicate complex ideas through
familiar analogies. The picture shows a
hand wearing two rings: a gold ring,
which casts a very dark shadow, and a ring
of similar size made of aluminum, which
(being less dense) casts a fainter shadow,
and allows the bone in the finger to be
178 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
seen passing through the ring. On the wrist
is a bracelet with an iron chain (which can
be clearly seen), covered by a very thin
aluminum plaque (so thin as to be invisi-
ble). The bones of the hand and wrist can
be seen clearly; the flesh, only faintly. A
radiochromometer, a device used to mea-
sure radiation dose and energy, is shown
beside the hand. This device is now easily
understood to be only a series of metal
plates of varying density and thickness.
Only a woman would think to explain
radiation absorption and measurement
using jewelry.
Marie Curie also spent increasing
amounts of her time and energy raising
money for research and promoting science
and education. The economy of France
had been devastated by the war, as had the
facilities and resources of the country.
Funds for research were sparse and diffi-
cult to come by, even for the Institut du
Radium.
An unexpected development aided
these efforts. Marie, who hated interviews,
agreed to be interviewed in 1920 in her
home by Marie Mattingley Meloney.
"Missy" Meloney was the editor of a
"thoroughly respectable" American
woman's magazine called The Delineator,
published by the Butterick Company.
During this interview the two women
developed an immediate rapport, which
formed the basis for a long friendship.
Missy was astounded to learn that the
Institute was so poorly funded and, more-
over, had almost no Radium beyond the
limited supply that Marie had originally
isolated during her thesis work, despite the
fact that factories around the world were
now producing large quantities of this and
other radioactive materials for use in sci-
ence, industry, and medicine using the
techniques that Marie had developed but
never protected with patents. Missy, a
dynamic, energetic, and totally media
savvy mover and shaker, decided that
Marie Curie needed and deserved better
facilities and equipment to support the
research efforts of her Institute, and
devised a plan to fund them. She organized
a campaign through her magazine, which
reached out to women and women's
groups throughout the United States to
raise $100,000 to buy Marie Curie 1 gm of
radium.
VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES
The campaign was an immediate and
overwhelming success. By January 1921,
Missy was eagerly planning Marie's trip to
the United States to receive the Radium
from President Harding in a ceremony in
the Blue Room of the White House. The
plans grew and grew, ending in a seven-
week long trip in which Marie would
receive 10 honorary degrees, visit numer-
ous laboratories and factories, and visit
several women's colleges, including
Smith, Holyoke, and Vassar. The trip also
included the largest meeting of American
university women yet held. At this meet-
ing, held at Carnegie Hall and sponsored
by the American Association of University
Women, 3,500 women came to see and
hear the heroine they had been hearing so
much about in the press. Marie was also to
be given the "grand tour" of the United
States, with stops at Niagra Falls and the
Grand Canyon.
Marie, Eve, Irene, and Missy arrived
in New York on May 4, 1921 to begin this
whirlwind tour. Marie, not strong and
never comfortable with crowds and cere-
monies, was exhausted even before the
tour began. The limitations of her stamina
resulted in the cancellation of some activ-
ities and in Irene and Eve serving as her
proxies in other functions. Nevertheless, it
was a successful trip, which raised the vis-
ibility of Marie Curie and her research,
raised funds to support the Institut, and
also served as a touchstone of encourage-
ment for American women seeking entry
Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie 179
into the still very masculine worlds of sci-
ence and academia.
MARIE CURIE AT YALE
One ofMarie Curie's last stops on this
trip was here at Yale. It appears that
encouragement for her visit to Yale and the
nomination for her honorary degree came
from members of the faculty of the School
of Medicine, with whom she had commu-
nicated about the medical uses of radium
and X-rays. While in New Haven, Marie,
Irene, Eve, and Missy stayed at the home
of Dr. and Mrs. Henry W. Farnum, at 43
Hillhouse Avenue. This house was later
sold to Yale, remodeled, and is now the
house of the President of Yale University.
Marie Curie's visit to Yale coincided
with the June 21, 1921, commencement. A
new University president was being
installed at the same event; as a result, the
commencement ceremonies were larger
and more celebratory than usual, with
presidents from most Ivy League schools,
major women's colleges, and other univer-
sities in attendance for the installation cer-
emonies. The attention of the University
community and the media was focused on
the presidential installation, rather than
Marie Curie's visit. At commencement,
Marie Curie was given an honorary Doctor
of Science degree. The dedication that
goes with Yale's degree [10] is interesting:
Introduction:
Marie Sklodowska was born in Warsaw and
has always been a scientist; her father was a
distinguished professor and her husband,
Pierre Curie will never be forgotten. She was
educated at Warsaw and at Paris and has been
Professor of Radiology at Warsaw. It is super-
fluous to mention her discoveries in science
and now she has discovered America. She has
often encountered dangers in scientific exper-
iments, but nothing so dangerous as
American Hospitality; it is to be hoped that
she will not be a Woman Killed with
Kindness. She is unique. There is only one
thing rarer than genius, and that is radium.
She illustrates the combination of both.
President Hadley's dedication:
For the distinguished services that you have
rendered to science and the world, we claim
the privilege of adding one more to the many
honors which you bear with such charm; and
to enroll you among our Doctors of Science,
admitting you to all its rights and privileges.
AN AMBASSADOR FOR SCIENCE
In the years that followed, Marie
Curie continued her work as a scientist and
an ambassador for science. Irene Curie
became increasingly important to the
research effort at the Institut du Radium,
receiving her doctorate and often serving
as her mother's chief collaborator. Irene
married another researcher in the laborato-
ry, Frederic Joliot, and they collaborated
on experiments that led eventually to the
discovery that Beryllium, when bombard-
ed by alpha rays from a Polonium source,
emitted penetrating radiations, which were
eventually shown by Chadwick and
Rutherford to be neutrons. In 1934, the
Joliot-Curies also showed that by bom-
barding Aluminum with alpha particles,
they could produce a radioactive isotope
of phosphorus. 1935, Irene and Frederic
Joliot-Curie received the Nobel Prize in
chemistry for this "synthesis of a new
radioactive element."
Eve Curie did not share her family's
passion for science or their introspective
nature. Instead, she was an outgoing,
attractive woman, with a flair for fashion
and talent in the arts. She was a fine
pianist, and for some time considered a
career in music, but instead turned to a
career in journalism. Her first book was a
biography of her mother, which became
one of the most popular books of the
Twentieth century.
Throughout her life Marie Curie con-
tinued to be active as the head of the
research group and as an ambassador both
180 Rockwell: Life and legacy of Marie Curie
for her own group and the larger scientific
community. Her health continued to
decline, with problems including persis-
tent anemia, lung problems, and cataracts,
which were probably induced by radiation.
With her typical desire for privacy, she hid
these problems, and many (including her
blindness) were unknown, even to her stu-
dents, until after her death. Marie Curie
died July 4, 1935, at the age of 66. The
cause of her death was given at the time as
aplastic anemia, but it is now thought that
the anemia was actually a secondary effect
of radiation-induced leukemia [4].
Marie Curie is still one of the world's
most popular scientists, remembered not
only for the excellence of her science, but
also for her passion for science, her battles
to allow women scientists to take their
place alongside their male colleagues, her
ability to convey science to the non-scien-
tist, and her role in changing education for
women. Her position as a role model can
be illustrated by a trip to your public
library - in my town of Guilford,
Connecticut, the library has on its shelves
two biographies ofMarie Curie written for
adults but eleven different biographies
written for children and adolescents. Her
legacy is being passed on to another gen-
eration.
REFERENCES
1. Curie E. Madame Curie. New York:
Doubleday, Doran, and Company; 1938.
2. Quinn S. Marie Curie: A Life. New York:
Simon and Schuster; 1995.
3. Reid RW. Marie Curie. New York:
Saturday Review Press; 1974
4. Langevin-Joliot H. Radium, Marie Curie,
and modem science. Radiation Res 1998;
150:S3-8.
5. Curie MS. Recherches sur les Substances
Radioactives. D. Van Nostrand Company,
London, 1904.
6. Klickstein HS. Marie Sklodowska Curie:
Recherches sur les Substances
Radioactives, a Bio-bibliographical Study.
St. Louis, Missouri: Mallinckrodt Classics
of Radiology, Vol. 2; 1966.
7. Chavannes I. Lecons de Marie Curie. Paris:
EDP Science; 2003.
8. Curie M. Pierre Curie - With autobio-
graphical notes. New York, Macmillan;
1923.
9. Curie M. La Radiologie et la Guerre. Paris:
Librairie Felix Alcan; 1921.
10. Yale Alumnae Weekly, July 8, 1921, pp.
1100-1101.
