EVENTS
YALE MEDICAL SOCIETY
April 10
THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM-HISTORICAL AND CLINICAL
CONSIDERATIONS
DR. JOHN HOMANS
Clinical Professor of Surgery, Harvard Medical School
The development of the study of the lymphatic system dates from the
time of Galen, who first described the vessels. In 1627 appeared the report
of Aselli's discovery of the lacteals in dogs. The discovery of the thoracic
duct by Pecquet in 1647-1650 brought, oddly enough, the great disapproval
of Harvey. The presence of the duct in man was first shown by Van Hoorne,
who described its entrance into the subclavian vein. The contention of the
connection of the intestinal lymphatics with the thoracic duct brought about
the famous Rudbeck-Bartholinus argument as to priority of the disclosure.
Late in the seventeenth century Nuck began the modern method of study of
the lymphatics by injection, and a very commendable piece of work using
mercury was done by Cruikshank in 1790.
The lymphatics form a closed system of vessels which take up a high per-
centage of protein. The surface lymphatics are always associated in dis-
tribution with the veins, while those of the deeper structures follow both the
arteries and the veins. A newer conception of distribution is suggested by the
fact that indurated areas present the greatest induration in the deep fascia, as
though there were there another set of lymph vessels similar to those of the
skin.
The flow of lymph is regulated by the valves, first described by Pecquet,
arranged so that the fluid always flows in one direction. The flow is prob-
ably initiated chiefly by muscular movements.
The balance between flowing of lymph and its congestion is a delicate one,
very easily upset. The most important factor in upsetting the balance is
venous congestion. Thus, for example, in thrombophlebitis, as the fluid
exudes from the tissues it is found to have a higher and higher protein con-
tent. It is not understood, however, just how the lymphatics become ob-
structed, although the factors of filariasis, infection, and anatomical peculi-
arities are well comprehended. Once obstructed, the distal lymphatics are
destroyed and the fluid is allowed to accumulate in the extremity by gravity.
This has been demonstrated by injecting a dye into the skin of the foot of a
patient afflicted with elephantiasis, elevation of the leg causing the dye to run
proximally by gravity.
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
By the injection of quinine and dust into the leg lymphatics, the speaker
was able to reproduce elephantiasis in dogs, with the attacks of fever, etc.
resembling lymphahgeitis in man. He has found bacteria in the tissues of
patients with lymphangeitis which, when injected into the tissues of a dog,
produce the same symptom-complex as is seen in the tissues from which
the culture was taken. This reproduction of the disease does not occur if
the bacteria are injected into the blood stream.
To treat cases with elephantiasis one must adopt the attitude that there
can be no restoration of the damaged lymphatics. This is the basis of the
success of the Kondoleon operation whereby skin-flaps are turned back and
the entire subcutaneous tissue is removed, thus eliminating the system by
which the lymph can accumulate by gravity. J. B. L.
April 24
EMBOLISM OF THE ARTERIES OF THE EXTREMITIES
GUNNAR NYSTR6M
Professor of Surgery, University of Upsala
From the time of the first attempted embolectomy in 1895 until 1924
results were quite unsatisfactory. Since the latter date a number of success-
ful operations have been reported, the bulk of the work coming from Sweden.
The origins of emboli may be ascribed to disease of the left heart, dis-
eased vessels, postoperative conditions, and infectious diseases.- In the rare
instances of paradoxical emboli the right heart is diseased, the embolus reach-
ing the peripheral vascular system by way of a patent foramen ovale. From
the nature of the basic lesions it can be understood that the greatest age
incidence is between 50 and 70 years.
Emboli lodge most frequently in the lower extremities, the commonest
location being where the profunda femoris branches from the femoral artery.
An embolus may produce a transient arteriospasm, as is shown by a return
of blood flow in from five to ten minutes after the accident. Secondary
thrombus formation may occur in from a few hours to five days. The
development of gangrene after embolus formation depends both on the col-
lateral circulation and on the condition of the heart.
The symptoms are well known, and the treatment may be either con-
servative or radical. To the former belong expectant therapy, the use of
antispasmodic drugs, and the more recent type of massage known as "pump-
ing" of the extremity by means of intermittent suction. The advisability of
the time-honored application of heat to the injured extremity now seems
open to question. Radical treatment is operative. Unless operative therapy
is contraindicated by the condition of the patient or by the nature of the
embolism, the conservative methods offer too great a risk in the dislodgment
of emboli to more dangerous locations.
560
The operative technic was briefly described. Conditions interfering with
favorable results are the formation of multiple small emboli, calcification of
the vessel wall, secondary thrombus formation, and, occasionally, arterio-
sclerosis. Clumsy handling of tissues, bad suturing, and injudicious coapta-
tion of the vessel walls may lead to an unfavorable result in an otherwise good
operative chance. It is essential, moreover, to remove emboli within ten
hours after their formation.
The greater percentage of embolectomies has been performed on the
femoral artery, but some successful attacks on the aorta (at its bifurcation),
the iliac arteries, and even the pulmonary arteries have been made. The
number of these cases is as yet too small, however, to permit conclusions.
Of 135 cases of femoral embolectomy which Nystr6m has reviewed, cir-
culation was restored in 34 per cent; 17 per cent of the cases were success-
ful operatively but the patients subsequently died. This series of cases includes
those operated on within ten hours after the embolus formation. Of a total
of 382 cases operated upon in Sweden (including late operations) 22.5 per
cent have had restored circulation with survival of the patient.
Removal of the embolic obstruction is, however, not the only problem
in this type of patient. The basic disease is yet to be treated, and is also
the cause of these patients presenting an unusual operative risk. J. B. L.
May 8
THE INFLUENCE OF THYROIDECTOMY ON THE POLYURIA OF
EXPERIMENTAL DIABETES INSIPIDUS
WILLIAM MAHONEY and DONAL SHEEHAN
Diabetes insipidus, produced in dogs by applying a silver clip to the pitu-
itary stalk, and diabetes mellitus in a dog and in a monkey were studied. Cor-
rection of the upset water balance of diabetes insipidus was attempted by
thyroidectomy. On healthy dogs daily measurements were made of the
total fluid intake and of the urinary output, the "insensible" loss of fluid by
way of intestine, skin, and lungs being calculated by computing the difference
between the fluid intake and the urinary output.
The clip was applied to the pituitary by the subtemporal approach.
Thyroidectomy was performed with care to preserve the parathyroid bodies.
It was found that the occlusion of the pituitary stalk with a silver clip is fol-
lowed by extreme polyuria and polydipsia. This effect is abolished by sub-
sequent total thyroidectomy and reestablished by oral administration of desic-
cated whole thyroid gland, leading to the production of alternate states of
polyuria and oliguria at will. On the other hand, total thyroidectomy has
no demonstrable effect upon the daily fluid intake and output of the normal
dog, although in dogs with intact pituitary stalks thyroid feeding has a mild
561EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
diuretic action, in no way comparable to the extreme polyuria and polydipsia
produced by administration of thyroid gland after occlusion of the pituitary
stalk.
Houssay and Biasotti, in 1930, stated that toads did not manifest the signs
of diabetes mellitus after pancreatectomy if the pituitary gland were removed.
Similar studies were carried out by the authors on a dog and monkey, which
have remained alive for 8 and 10 months respectively without pancreas, with-
out pituitary, and without insulin. There has been some loss of weight, but
the animals are still in very good health. On the average diet for the species
the blood sugar is normal, neither acetone bodies nor sugar being found in the
urine. The tolerance of the dog has been increased from 1 gm. of glucose
per kg. of body weight to twice this quantity without spilling sugar in the urine.
Complete removal of the pituitary is important, otherwise the pancrea-
tectomy leads to fatal diabetes. On this basis irradiation of the pituitary body
is not to be recommended as a satisfactory treatment of diabetes mellitus.
S. K.
CATARACTS PRODUCED BY A RATION OF GALACTOSE
ARTHUR M. YUDKIN and CAROLINE H. ARNOLD
The lens of the eye has neither blood vessels nor nerves, except in fetal
life, and the concentrations of foodstuffs which nourish the lens cells must
penetrate through the lens capsule from the aqueous humor. - In old age the
lens is flatter and softer than it is in youth, and it has the highest concentra-
tion of protein, the soluble protein decreasing and the insoluble protein
increasing with age. Cystine, glutathione, ascorbic acid, and oxidative
enzymes have all been found in the lens, as has an internal oxidative system
which is less than that of muscle but more than that of nerve.
The causes of cataracts may be many, viz., changes in permeability of the
lehs capsule, changes in water-binding properties of the lens tissue, and
abnormal infiltration of fat and other organic substances. It was found
that 21-day-old albino rats fed on a diet containing 70 per cent of dextrose
as the source of carbohydrate did not develop cataracts. A diet containing
70 per cent lactose leads to cataracts of the peripheral type in 90 days. A
diet in which 50 per cent of galactose is incorporated produces cataracts in
14 days. The growth of the animals was less on the galactose diet than on
the normal dextrose diet.
Albino rats 21 days old and weighing 35 grams developed cataracts in
12 to 15 days on a diet containing 35 per cent galactose. However, 68- and
85-day-old rats, on a 50 per cent galactose diet showed surface opacities of
the lens in 31 days, and surface cataracts in 35 days. It was also found
that the calcium content of the cataract lens is high, and, in addition, calcium
metabolism disturbances often lead to cataracts. Naphthalene in the diet of
562
rabbits will invariably produce cataracts even though the calcium content of
the blood is high. It is suggested that the calcium detoxicates some sub-
stances-perhaps tyrosine, histidine, or guanidine-which can cause cataracts.
S. K.
THE INFLUENCE OF SALTS IN THE DIET ON THE INTESTINAL
FLORA OF THE ALBINO RAT
ERCEL S. EPPRIGHT and GEORGE VALLEY
A synthetic diet adequate in all recognized essentials except salts has been
developed and this ration, when fed to the albino rat, invariably produces an
animal which readily reflects the effects of lack of salts. Following a limita-
tion in growth there is a persistent increase in the body length, a postural
hump, ambling gait, loss of hair, hemorrhagic nose, and pigmented fur. The
bones are very fragile, strikingly poor in ash, and show an increase in organic
connective tissue. The kidneys and adrenals hypertrophy, the spleen and
heart regress. The inorganic constituents of the blood are remarkably con-
stant and there is a marked increase in the excretion of ammonia and phos-
phorus through the kidney. The drain of the calcium from the skeleton is
from the calcium carbonate store rather than from the calcium phosphate store.
There is a progressive increase in erythrocytes, a concomitant decrease in the
relative concentration of hemoglobin, and a significant decrease in cell volume.
The basal metabolic rate is higher than is that of calorie controls.
The irregularities of fecal matter and diarrhea of the lovv salt rat sug-
gested an investigation of the flora of the intestines. The low salt animals
were carefully selected and rationed on carefully washed casein 18 per cent,
dextrin 55 per cent, hydrogenated fat 27 per cent, supplemented with yeast,
extracts of wheat germ, and cod-liver oil; 408 mg. of Osborne-Mendel salt
mixture were added for the control diet of the normal rat. The differences
of growth of the rats on the fractionated Osborne-Mendel salt additions to
the diet were ascribed mainly to the lack of mineral matter.
The aciduric organisms, i.e., Lactobacillus acidophilus, were practically
eliminated as a group by the low salt diet. Supplying sodium chloride and
potassium chloride to the low salt diet did not restore the aciduric flora, but
calcium phosphate added to this diet maintained L. acidophilus, as did the
Osborne-Mendel salt mixture. Hence, it seems that calcium phosphate is the
most suitable form of salt to maintain the aciduric flora. Calcium supplied in
the form of calcium carbonate did not maintain the flora but seemed to favor
the appearance of large numbers of enterococci. Phosphorus in the form of
sodium phosphate also failed to maintain the aciduric flora. Animals which
had been kept on a low salt diet and had lost their .L. acidophilus reestablished
the aciduric flora quite readily when realimented with calcium or with
Osborne-Mendel salt mixture. s. K.
563EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
INFLUENCE OF THE THYROID ON THE MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
GROWTH OF THE CRETINOUS INFANT
ARNOLD GESELL and CATHARINE STRUNK AMATRUDA
Cretinism among children of early age is apparently increasing in the
United States. In six young female cretins the psychological aspects of
thyroid gland disorders were studied, and the period of thyroid treatment, the
time of administration, and the effect of this treatment were correlated. It
was found that the maximum improvement occurs during the first two years
of treatment. A single 44-year-old cretin showed an unchanged behavior
pattern after the administration of thyroid extract over a period of years. A
marked physical improvement occurred in all six cases studied, but this was
not always accompanied by development of normal mentality. Mental im-
provement showed a wide range of variation, from unaltered persistent mental
deficiency to normal intelligence and behavior.
Individual reactions to treatments were ascribed to differences in the
degree and type of involvement of associated endocrine glands, especially the
pituitary. Early diagnosis was shown to be extremely desirable, and this
usually involves a comparison of the infant's behavior with the standards of
development for normal infants. The cinema can here play an important
role. s. K.
EASTERN SURGICAL SOCIETY 1935 SESSION
April 26 and 27
EFFECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY ON
PERIPHERAL VASO-MOTOR ACTIVITY AND BLOOD PRESSURE
DR. ASHLEY W. OUGHTERSON
With patients under varying conditions of temperature and humidity an
attempt was made to correlate the temperature of the extremities with changes
in blood pressure. It was found that as vasoconstriction of the extremities
was induced by low environmental temperatures there was a tendency toward
elevation of blood pressure. This was most pronounced in young individuals
suffering from so-called essential hypertension, the maximum elevation being
100 mm. of Hg, which occurred coincidentally with the peripheral vasocon-
striction, and was approximately the same as that induced by the injection of
1 cc. of adrenalin in the same patient. Older individuals with a fixed vascular
system showed less pronounced changes. Normal subjects showed little or
no change. H. H.
564
A DEMONSTRATION OF REMOTELY CONTROLLED STIMULATION
OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
DR. RICHARD U. LIGHT
The material embodied in this presentation has appeared in the YALE
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Volume 7, pp. 83 and 441.
HYPERTENSION
DR. HARVEY CUSHING
The material embodied in this paper is essentially that presented before
the New Haven Medical Association on April 17, and abstracted in this issue
of the Journal.
THE TRAINING OF A SURGEON
DR. SAMUEL C. HARVEY
In speaking of the training of a surgeon I am referring, not to the under-
graduate teaching in the School of Medicine, where it is generally conceded
that adequate preparation for this specialty cannot be provided, nor to the late
"refreshener" or intensive courses, in the main didactic which, while they may
serve a purpose, cannot be adequate for the complete training of a surgeon.
Rather, I wish to discuss that period lying between the time of graduation and
of entry into practice, during which the student may be given an increasing
and graduated responsibility under an apprentice type of teaching, and arrive
in from four to six years at a point where he is competent to undertake the
practice of surgery. This in its most highly developed form is exemplified
by the "resident system."
The practicability of putting this type of training into effect depends upon
two factors; namely, the number of surgeons that are needed, and the
number that can be turned out according to this method.
The annual turnover in surgeons in this country, according to a rough
estimate, lies somewhere between 250 and 450. Intensive study is needed
to determine more accurately this figure, but even this inaccurate guess indi-
cates the magnitude of the problem.
There are in the neighborhood of 60 to 70 schools of medicine, of which
not more than one-half for various reasons can at any near time establish the
proper system for the training of a surgeon. As a matter of fact, there are
probably not more than ten or a dozen that are doing so at the present time.
This means that at the present time perhaps 25 to 50 adequately trained sur-
geons are being turned out yearly, and that with a rather optimistic viewpoint
of the developments in the schools of medicine, this might be increased from
565EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
50 to 100 yearly. It is obvious then that the problem transcends the facilities
available now or in the immediate future.
There are, however, a considerable number of splendidly equipped and
well-operated hospitals, where a competent surgical staff is available. The
answer lies, I believe, in the introduction of the resident system into such
institutions, with some check by a specialty licensing board or other similar
body as to the efficacy with which the training is carried out.
THE UNDESCENDED TESTICLE
DR. RALPH H. JENKINS
In cases of undescended testicle one of two courses may be followed: first,
to wait for spontaneous descent despite delay; second, surgical treatment. A
new form of therapy consists in the administration of an anterior-pituitary-like
principle, extracted from the urine of pregnancy. The results with this type
of therapy were found to be 50 per cent successful. Instituted in anticipation
of surgery, it sometimes allayed operation; it also proved valuable as a sup-
plementary treatment to surgery. H. H.
METASTATIC MALIGNANCY OF THE BRAIN
DR. WILLIAM J. GERMAN
A series of 15 metastatic intracranial tumors was reviewed, together with
a brief resume of the literature on the subject. Of the cases reported, 12
were limited to the brain, and 3 involved the skull with intracranial extension.
Fourteen operations were done on 12 patients, with 1 death. The average
survival period after operation was 8>2 months. The series included 2 cases
of thyroid carcinoma with skull metastases. H. H.
A DEMONSTRATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF OVARIAN HORMONE
ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF MAMMARY GLANDS
DR. WILLIAM U. GARDNER
A DEMONSTRATION OF THE BIOELECTRIC CHARACTERISTICS
OF MAN
DR. HAROLD S. BURR
A DEMONSTRATION OF CHIMPANZEES FOLLOWING OPERATION
ON FRONTAL LOBES
DR. JOHN F. FULTON
566
IMMEDIATE MOBILIZATION IN JOINT FRACTURES-END RESULTS
DR. MERRILL K. LINDSAY
The use of mobilization was discussed as part of the general treatment
of fractures, which includes immobilization, traction, and operative procedures.
While immobilization produces progressive calcium absorption from the bones,
it causes atrophic structural changes in the soft tissues leading to loss of elas-
ticity and contractility. When an extremity is immobilized one or the other
of the opposing groups of muscles will shorten and the antagonists will be
weakened.
Early immobilization is indicated in those cases in which no gross deform-
ity is present or likely to occur from forces employed in obtaining motion;
for instance, in subperiosteal and incomplete fractures of the shaft and com-
plete and incomplete fractures in and about the joints. The part niust be
protected against injury and deformity by suitable splints and dressings
between treatments. The type of motion used in early treatment before
there is any fixation of the fragments by callus is derived from the action
of gravity on the relaxed extremity. Gentle, rhythmic massage is useful in
relieving muscle spasm and preventing excessive swelling. H. H.
ILIOPECTINEAL BURSITIS
DR. DENIS S. O'CONNOR
Iliopectineal bursitis is a condition that frequently escapes correct diagnosis.
In general, it is a disease of adult life with a considerable proportion of cases
occurring in persons under 20 years of age; and it is often associated with
athletic games which call for violent action of the hip joint. The mechanism
of injury is usually one that induces sudden traction on the bursa, producing
irritation because of its attachment to the front of the hip joint and to the
iliopsoas tendon. In old age the condition has been found in many instances
to be associated with hypertrophic changes about the joint.
Localized pain, which infrequently radiates to the front of the knee, and
tenderness to pressure over a small area just below Poupart's ligament are
the most common symptoms. Passive abduction of the thigh accompanied
by internal rotation, hyperextension, and other movements that exert pressure
on the bursa elicit pain. It is important to know that the bursa is located
over a point in the hip joint capsule at which a needle is sometimes inserted
to aspirate the articular cavity for diagnostic purposes when inflammation of
the joint proper is suspected. By such procedure either of these two separate
anatomical regions may be contaminated or the true site of infection be con-
fused. However, in about 15 per cent of individuals the bursa communicates
directly with the joint cavity. Other conditions that must be differentiated
from iliopectineal bursitis are psoas abscess and inguinal or femoral hernia.
H. H.
567EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
ALPHA OMEGA ALPHA LECTURE
April 15
OBSERVATIONS ON THE ROLE OF SALT IN ADRENAL
INSUFFICIENCY
ROBERT F. LOEB
Associate Professor of Medicine, Columbia University
In 1855 Thomas Addison described the syndrome of the disease which
now bears his name and suggested that a study of this disease might lead to
some understanding of the function of the adrenal glands. Not only has the
clinical approach to the problem of adrenal insufficiency added knowledge to
the physiological activities of these structures, but also two other methods of
attack have been employed: (1) a study of changes occurring in adrenal-
ectomized animals, and (2) a chemical approach involving the use of extracts
of the medullary and cortical portions of the glands.
The similarity of salt loss, dehydration, and the state of shock typical of
these disturbances to acute adrenal insufficiency in Addison's disease sug-
gested the possibility that in this condition the loss of salt and water might
prove to be significant.
In a study of three cases of Addison's disease the sodium content of the
blood was found to be below normal, and in the case of one patient the sodium
content of the blood fell markedly during the first week following admittance
to the hospital. Sodium chloride was administered to this patient for one
month with a resulting increase in the sodium content of the blood, and at
the end of this time the patient was permitted to leave the hospital. However,
the same patient developed an edematous condition, and a salt-poor regime
was advised. At the end of a week the blood sodium was again found to be
low, and the patient complained of being weak. Salt was again administered.
Strength returned, the blood pressure and the blood sodium rose, and within
a week the patient was discharged.
From these observations it was concluded that: (1) Acute adrenal insuffi-
ciency of Addison's disease was associated with a sharp decrease in the sodium
content of the blood. (2) Insufficiency had been induced by the withdrawal
of sodium chloride. (3) This insufficiency had been overcome by the
administration of sodium chloride.
To arrive at a conclusion concerning the mechanism by which the sodium
concentration of the blood was lowered in Addison's disease, blood studies
and electrolyte-balance observations were conducted on adrenalectomized
dogs. In the dogs studied the sodium content of the blood fell rapidly fol-
lowing removal of the second adrenal gland, and there was also an increase
in sodium excretion by the kidneys. From the results obtained in these
568
animals three hypotheses were advanced for the mechanism involving sodium
disturbance: (1) The removal or destruction of the adrenal glands is asso-
ciated with the liberation of some foreign acid which calls upon the fixed base
for its excretion. (2) The loss of sodium is due to the loss of water through
the kidneys. (3) The adrenal cortex acts as a regulator of sodium meta-
bolism-acting to control the excretion not only of sodium but also of urea.
The first two hypotheses were discarded, while an attempt was made to prove
the third.
Comparative studies of the effect of the withdrawal of salt and of cortin
in an adrenalectomized dog were made, and the following observations noted:
(1) Withdrawal of both salt and cortin resulted in a fall in the sodium con-
tent of the blood and an increased concentration of urea. (2) When cortin
was withdrawn the sodium level could not be maintained even though salt
was administered. (3) Removal of salt from the diet resulted in no loss of
blood sodium provided a cortical extract of adequate potency was employed.
A fall in the sodium content of the blood, in spite of its diagnostic impor-
tance, is not an infallible criterion of the presence of Addison's disease due to
the fact that the picture of acute adrenal insufficiency is quite complex, and
other factors, such as ketosis and hypoglycemia, can enter the picture. How-
ever, the value of salt as a therapeutic measure in adrenal disease, as well as
in adrenalectomized dogs, is found in the fact that salt withdrawal may
induce acute adrenal insufficiency and that frequently the only therapeutic
measure necessary to relieve it is the administration of sodium chloride.
Nevertheless, the administration of sodium chloride alone will not maintain
the proper sodium level of the blood. A certain amount of the cortical sub-
stance must be present or injected into the body in order to raise and maintain
the proper level of blood sodium. R. D. M.
YALE CHAPTER SIGMA XI LECTURE
April 1 7
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PURPOSEFUL BEHAVIOR IN MAMMALS
BEFORE BIRTH
LEONARD CARMICHAEL
Professor of Psychology, Brown University
In these experiments guinea pigs were used. A record was made of the
time of copulation, and at various periods thereafter operations were per-
formed on different females. The technic was as follows. An incision was
made in the abdominal wall and the fetus, contained within the amniotic sac,
was floated out into a tank of physiological saline. A maximum of freedom
of movement was permitted, there being only the umbilical cord to hinder.
569REVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
This technic permitted the fetus to remain in the type of environment
from which it had been' removed. The fluid was kept warm and an attempt
was made to rule out any external stimuli, except those used in experiments.
Various stimuli were used, such as electrical, tactile-light stroking and deep
pressure-sound, light beams, dropping water of various temperatures on the
fetus, and turning of the head to produce Magnus reflexes. Response to
stimuli was influenced by certain factors, such as gestation age of fetus, size
of area stimulated, number of stimuli, the transient physiological condition of
the fetus, posture, and changes in viscera. In spite of this, all fetuses tended
to show a uniformity of response.
By the 25th day there were certain skeletal muscle responses with changes
in pressure in the non-ruptured amniotic sac. The first real response occurred
a little later and was evidenced by a bending of the neck. From now on
detailed responses appeared. Stimulation of vibrissae produced neck move-
ments which appeared to be "protective."
At the 40-day period operations on unopened eyes showed that the eye-
balls would move on light stimulation. This shows that the neuromuscular
mechanism is in action while the animal is in utero. From this period a mass
of reflexes appeared, such as nostril dilatation, movements of the tongue on
stimulating the lip, labyrinthine reflexes with changes in body posture, sucking
and biting patterns, defense struggle reactions, etc.
Motion pictures were shown of fetuses being stimulated by various means.
The pictures showed animals up to the time of birth offering evidence that the
guinea pig starts life with a well-developed set of behavior patterns. R. R. C.
DELTA OMEGA LECTURE
April 18
THE CHICAGO OUTBREAK OF AMEBIASIS
ABEL WOLMAN
Engineer for the Maryland State Department of Health
The amebiasis of the Chicago outbreak was unusual in the number of
people infected, the period of incubation, the high morbidity, and the fatality.
This pointed to some recurring dosage reaching the guests of the Congress
and the Auditorium hotels. Inasmuch as another epidemic affecting resi-
dents of both hotels had re-occurred after rigid regulations had been installed
following the outbreak of amebic dysentery in August, 1933, in the same
hotels, it appeared that food could not be the carrier.
An engineering study of the hotel disclosed four possible sources of
infection: 1. The municipal water supply used to cool carbon dioxide pipes
of the Congress Hotel cooling system was returned to an open tank in the
570
basement and then lifted by pumps to the upper stories of the Congress and
the Auditorium Hotels. The lower floors of both hotels were supplied
directly from the municipal water supply. To avoid overflowing, two pipes
were led off from the open tanks in the basement of the Congress to the
municipal sewer lines which were at a higher level than were the water supply
lines. Under load the sewage supply ran into the water supply. 2. Supply-
ing some of the upper stories of the Congress Hotel was an open tank ice-
water system beneath a myriad of sewer pipes and, in particular, a wood-
plugged sewer elbow. All the piping was concealed by a covering of insula-
tion designed to prevent moisture formation. This accounted for the
epidemic in the middle of December which involved only the Congress Hotel.
3. Fifty-year-old steel pipes, full of holes, were found in both the sewage and
water supply lines. Under a pressure test the basement was virtually flooded.
Back siphonage into the water lines was also possible because of the antiquated
lavatory facilities. 4. Two storms of unprecedented severity occurred in
Chicago in June and July, flooding one and one-half blocks of basement in
the Congress Hotel where food was handled.
The epidemics might not have occurred but for the fact that the hotels
handled 88,400 guests from June, 1933, to January, 1934. There was,
therefore, a non-resident population greater than the population of most of
the cities with which we deal, yet the hotels were not and are not subjected
to sanitary inspection. There were 999 cases of amebic dysentery discovered,
distributed over 43 states, and involving 200 cities. There were 58 deaths.
The incubation period for the disease was, for the first quartile, 13 to 14 days;
for the median, 20 to 24 days; and for the third quartile, 36 to 40 days.
For only 198 cases was there no history of food or water consumption at the
hotels mentioned. A geographical study is now being made of these cases.
Several implications may be drawn. 1. Rigid regulations were violated
in the three epidemics. What is evidently lacking is private inspection. 2.
We have been lax in educating the layman to the simple rules of personal
hygiene which were all violated by the food handlers at the hotels. 3. We
have yet to determine the responsibility of the public and of the private corpora-
tion such as a hotel. To offset the 150 law-suits aggregating $5,000,000,
the Congress and Auditorium Hotels will charge negligence on the part of
the Board of Health in not determining that a dangerous situation existed,
or having determined the existence of such a situation, in not pointing it out
to the hotels. We have yet to see whether the hotels will be held responsible
to the extent of money damages. 4. The current methods of chlorination are
not effective against the Endameba histolytica cyst. The epidemics may be
an incentive to Chicago to change to the effective rapid sand filtration
method. 5. The periodical examination of food handlers is a losing game.
The 50 to 60 thousand food handlers in Chicago were regularly and efficiently
examined without avoiding the epidemics. N. E. R.
571EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
HARVEY CUSHING SOCIETY
May 2, 3, and 4
THE ROLE OF THIRST IN DIABETES INSIPIDUS
ROWLAND T. BELLOWS and WILLIAM P. VAN WAGENEN
Whether polyuria or polydipsia is the primary phenomenon in diabetes
insipidus has not been definitely determined up to the present time, the
general assumption being that polyuria is the primary factor.
In order to study the relationship of the excessive thirst to the polyuria of
experimental diabetes insipidus, the two phenomena were separated. This
was accomplished by establishing esophageal fistulae in dogs and keeping the
animals on a constant adequate water intake administered per esophagus.
Following the induction of diabetes insipidus, the onset and course of polyuria
and polydipsia could be observed as independent factors to a degree hitherto
unattainable.
Permanent diabetes insipidus differs from temporary diabetes insipidus in
respects other than in mere duration. Hence the customary designation
"temporary" or "permanent" is unsatisfactory. "Temporary" diabetes in-
sipidus in fistulous animals was characterized by polyuria and polydipsia which
seemed to be physiologically independent of one another, though occurring
somewhat simultaneously. The polyuria was of brief duration and relatively
slight magnitude as compared with the polydipsia. "Permanent" diabetes
insipidus, on the other hand, in animals with esophageal fistulae, was found to
consist of two phases. The first had the characteristics of the typical "tem-
porary" diabetes insipidus. This was followed by the second or permanent
phase consisting of a persistent polydipsia without an attending polyuria.
Moderate hydration during the permanent phase, by increasing the water
intake per esophagus, diminished the polydipsia and produced a water diuresis.
The essential nature of the persistent phase of experimental diabetes would
appear to be a primary polydipsia. The great polyuria of this phase, which
parallels the exaggerated intake, would appear to be simply a water diuresis.
The nature of "temporary" diabetes insipidus or of the apparently identical
first phase of "permanent" diabetes insipidus is less clear. It has been shown
in this and other work that there is a polydipsia that is apparently not con-
secutive to the polyuria. The polyuria usually present in this phase would
appear to be a water diuresis superimposed upon the brief polyuria of unknown
origin.
These observations suggest that the polydipsia of diabetes insipidus is due
to the abnormal or exaggerated activity of a hypothetical thirst mechanism
.572
in the hypothalamus. The concurrent polydipsia and polyuria of the initial
phase suggest a disturbance in the water economy.
An effort was made to determine the relation of thirst to peripheral sensa-
tion. The onset and usual course of polydipsia in experimental diabetes
insipidus in dogs was not altered by: (1) anesthesia of mouth and face result-
ing from intracranial division of the trigeminal nerves; (2) loss of gustatory
sense resulting from peripheral division of the glossopharyngeal nerves and
chordae tympani; or (3) loss of olfactory sense resulting from resection of
the frontal lobes and olfactory tracts.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE PITUITARY GLAND UPON THE
STIMULABILITY OF BLOOD ESTERASE
RICHARD M. BRICKNER
In these experiments, the blood esterases were measured in two ways:
with each blood serum, estimation was made of (1) the amount of spon-
taneous esterase activity, and (2) the degree to which that activity could be
accelerated by quinine. It had previously been learned that, with methyl
butyrate as the substrate, quinine accelerated serum esterase activity by 200 to
300 per cent. This effect was referred to as "stimulability."
A norm was determined by studies upon medical students.
The following results were obtained:
1. (a) In untreated or unsuccessfully treated patients with chromophile
tumors of the pituitary body, the stimulability is much reduced. (b) In such
patients successfully treated by X-ray therapy the values are normal.
2. (a) In untreated or unsuccessfully treated patients with chromophobe
tumors the stimulability is increased. (b) In such patients successfully treated
by X-ray therapy the values are normal.
3. Antuitrin-S, injected into medical students, markedly reduces the
stimulability.
4. Pituitrin, injected into medical students, increases the stimulability.
The exact nature of these effects is not yet fully understood, but it is
highly probable that the anterior pituitary has a depressing, and the posterior
an accelerating effect upon the stimulability of blood esterase by quinine.
THE SURGICAL TREATMENT OF HYPERTENSION
EDGAR A. KAHN
Following a preliminary report made before the Society a year ago, Dr.
Kahn presented further results in the surgical treatment of hypertension.
There have been 56 bilateral operations performed, and 40 of the patients
573EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
lhave been studied from 2 to 18 months postoperatively. Six of them are
symptom-free, and show' a normal blood pressure. In 50 per cent of all the
cases there is an appreciable drop in blood pressure. In a larger percentage
of cases the patients show definite symptomatic improvement.
PITUITARY-HYPOTHALAMIC MECHANISMS
WILLIAM MAHONEY
Experimental observations were made upon fluid exchange, carbohydrate
metabolism, and temperature regulation of animals after hypophysectomy,
and after lesions of the hypothalamus. Temperature regulation depends
upon the hypothalamus for permanent control, although a subsidiary influence
radiates from the pituitary body, possibly through its linkage with carbohydrate
metabolism. Absolute pancreatic diabetes can be fully overcome by complete
hypophysectomy, but not by hypothalamic damage. Fluid exchange is mark-
edly upset by hypothalamic disturbance, especially the extrarenal factor, and
this alteration can be remedied by complete thyroidectomy. These phenom-
ena do not follow hypophysectomy.
BASOPHILIC ADENOMAS OF THE PITUITARY BODY
HARVEY CUSHING
After briefly citing some twenty verified examples of what has been
called pituitary basophilism that had been brought to his attention since his
last paper on the subject, and after giving the end-result with verification of
the lesion in Case 11 of his original paper in the Johns Hopkins Hospital
Bulletin for March, 1932, Dr. Cushing attempted to answer so far as possible
the following questions: (1) Is a basophilic adenoma actually the cause of
the disorder? (2) In what way does a basophilic adenoma differ from simple
hyperplastic conglomerations of basophilic elements? (3) How may a differ-
ential diagnosis be made between the basophilic syndrome and that produced
by a malignant adenocarcinoma of the adrenal cortex? (4) What is the
relation of these disorders to vascular hypertension and malignant nephro-
sclerosis of Volhard and Fahr?
The essential polyglandular nature of the syndrome was reemphasized,
as was the necessity of further efforts to reproduce its main characteristics,
either by pituitary or by adrenal extracts, before its peculiar features can
be fully understood. In conclusion, the effects of pituitary irradiation on the
disorder and the possibility that direct surgical attack may some day properly
be made on the adenoma itself were then briefly discussed.
574
EVENTS
DEMONSTRATION OF A SYSTEM (REMOTE CONTROL) OF ELEC-
TRICAL STIMULATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
E. LEON CHAFFEE and RICHARD U. LIGHT
A laboratory demonstration was given of a method of stimulation
(described in Science, March 30, 1934, and in the YALE JOURNAL OF
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE for December, 1934, and May, 1935). Dr.
Light gave a brief historical introduction and then Professor Chaffee outlined
the design of some of the circuits. The members of the Society were
allowed to test the induced current by touching an electrode to the tongue.
When the small secondary coil was brought into the field of a one-turn
primary coil of two meters diameter, an E.M.F. of 15 volts was generated,
and Professor Chaffee pointed out that this could be easily raised to 40 or 50
volts if desired by the use of a different set of condensers. Various acces-
sories of the circuit were shown, including the trip frequency meter, the
vacuum tube peak voltmeter and, with the cathode ray oscillograph, the form
of the stimulating wave was demonstrated.
At the end of the demonstration a baboon was placed in the magnetic
field. An operation had been performed some weeks earlier with implanta-
tion of a secondary coil, at which time the active electrode was placed on the
surface of the motor cortex in the hand area. When the circuit was operated
at slow rates of discharge, 1 to 10 per second, the animal responded by extend-
ing the wrist in rhythm with the stimulation. When the rate of stimulation was
increased to 20 or 25 per second, a Jacksonian attack followed, which involved
all four extremities as well as the body and head, and the animal became
unconscious, going through what appeared to be a typical generalized epileptic
convulsion. He recovered within a minute.
Discussion followed, with numerous suggestions as to possible applications
of the method both in the central nervous system and in the study of functions
through stimulation of peripheral nerves.
THE CUSHING TUMOR REGISTRY
LOUISE EISENHARDT
A visit was made to the laboratory of the Registry in the Yale School of
Medicine by members and guests of the Society. Dr. Eisenhardt gave an
account of the accomplishments during this first year of establishment, with
an exhibition of the files of microscopic sections, the various card-catalog
systems of tumors and patients, the library of reprints, the lantern-slide col-
lection for teaching purposes, and the set of photographic negatives and prints
for the entire series, followed by a description of the Museum in which the
gross specimens are kept. Announcement was also made of the fact that
575
576 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
steps are being taken to obtain duplications of Dr. Cushing's clinical records
of verified cases in the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, for the library of the
Registry.
During the year numerous specimens have been received from this country
and from abroad, either for an opinion as to diagnosis or to add to the
interesting group of atypical neoplasms of the brain. As this group increases,
it is hoped that through study of comparable lesions and histories a further
understanding of the clinical treatment and prognosis in cases of tumors
of the rarer types will develop.
It was requested that anyone forwarding specimens send preferably
stained sections, in addition to some tissue in 10 per cent formalin if available,
together with an abstract of the clinical history. In some instances the brain
or specimen in toto is submitted.
Several graduate workers and fellows have recently taken advantage of
the opportunity to study the histopathology of intracranial tumors in the
collection.
THE PLACE OF RADIATION IN THE TREATMENT OF
CEREBELLAR MEDULLOBLASTOMAS
E. C. CUTLER, M. C. SOSMAN, and W. W. VAUGHAN
An analysis of the clinical results in 81 cases of cerebellar medullo-
blastoma showed that there was a progressive increase in the duration of life
ielated to the amount and type of X-ray therapy. The authors believe that
patients with cerebellar tumors of this type should be treated by X-ray only,
without operative extirpation or even a palliative decompression.
DIAGNOSIS OF TUMORS WITHIN THE THIRD VENTRICLE
LEO M. DAVIDOFF and CORNELIUS G. DYKE
Tumors within the third ventricle apparently present no characteristic
clinical syndrome, and the diagnosis can be made with certainty only by
pneumoencephalography. The air studies of a series of verified cases were
shown.
DEFORMITIES OF THE SUBARACHNOID CISTERNS
CORNELIUS G. DYKE and LEO M. DAVIDOFF
The deformities in the basal cisterns produced by tumors and other lesions
are demonstrable in the encephalogram. Frequently tumors along the base
of the skull present difficulties in diagnosis clinically. Furthermore, the air
studies show the ventricular system to be normal. It is only by the normal
appearance of the basal cisterns that recognition of deformities produced by
small tumors is possible.
ENLARGEMENT OF THE ORBITAL FISSURE AS A DIAGNOSTIC SIGN
IN ANEURYSM OF THE INTERNAL CAROTID
KENNETH G. MCKENZIE
The histories and operative findings of two patients were presented. In
both patients the aneurysm, approximately the size of a walnut, had arisen
from the intracranial portion of the internal carotid artery before its exit from
the cavernous sinus. The aneurysms had split the dura and were completely
surrounded by it. They were situated directly behind and adjacent to the
orbital fissure, and had produced a marked enlargement of the fissure and
atrophy of the bone in this region. The resulting roentgenograms were so
striking that it was felt that a pre-operative diagnosis of aneurysm of the
internal carotid artery could be made from the characteristic enlargement of
the fissure. The other common lesion in this situation, namely, sphenoidal
ridge meningioma, produces no enlargement of the fissure or atrophy of the
adjacent bone, but a thickening and increased vascularity of the bone.
When the diagnosis is made, and it is considered necessary to cut the
sensory root of the. fifth nerve for pain, it is felt that the only feasible
approach is by the posterior route. The ordinary temporal approach is made
impossible by the size of the lesion and, moreover, manipulation might easily
cause rupture of the aneurysm.
POLARIZATION MEASUREMENTS IN THE
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
M. SPIEGEL-ADOLF and E. SPIEGEL
Excitation is due, according to Ostwald, Nernst, and others, to changes
of ion concentration on semipermeable cell surfaces. One may expect,
therefore, that at least some agents that influence the excitability of the central
nervous system act by changing the permeability of the cell membranes and
thus the ion concentration.
Due to semipermeability, polarization phenomena occur that can be used
in measurements of changes in permeability. The resistance of such mem-
branes, as measured by a Wheatstone bridge, decreases with the increasing
frequency of the alternating current flowing through it. After preliminary
experiments on artificial membranes, the present investigators used, therefore,
the difference (A) of the resistance in high and low frequencies as a measure
of the permeability. The influence of agents that increase or decrease the
excitability upon A was studied in brains in vitro and in vivo (e.g., hypotonic
577EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL. OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
and hypertonic salt solutions, Hofmeister's series, alkalosis and acidosis, anox-
emia, narcosis, etc.). A marked parallelism in the effect upon the excitability
and upon the permeability of the brain tissue was observed. The experiments
seem to justify the conclusion that the common fundamental process under-
lying the influence of various agents upon the excitability is a change of the
permeability on the surface of the excitable elements in the central nervous
system.
PECULIAR SYNDROMES OF UNSUSPECTED INTRACRANIAL LESIONS
WINCHELL McK. CRAIG
In spite of a suggestive history and a confirmatory examination, peculiar
and unsuspected intracranial lesions are sometimes found during operation.
Five cases illustrating this point were presented.
The first was that of a woman, aged thirty-one, who suffered from
headache, impaired vision, and unilateral exophthalmos. The clinical findings
suggested an intraorbital lesion, but a roentgenogram disclosed what appeared
to be a basofrontal intracranial lesion, which was also indicated by a loss of
smell on the same side. The basofrontal region was explored, with no
evidence of intracranial tumor, but on unroofing the orbit an intraorbital
neurofibroma was found. Following the operation there was relief of all
symptoms.
The second patient was a woman who had been confined to a state
hospital for the insane because of emotional instability, carelessness in dress
and habits, and complete change of personality. Her trouble had begun
following pregnancy complicated by delirium; this had been associated with
failure of vision in the right eye. General, neurological, and roentgenological
examinations were negative. The fundi were normal, with visual reduction
to 6/60 in the left eye and moving objects in the right. Perimetric fields
showed incomplete bitemporal hemianopia. Vision improved somewhat fol-
lowing the removal of abscessed teeth, but because it then remained stationary
and a chiasmal lesion, probably inflammatory, was strongly suspected, a trans-
frontal craniotomy was carried out. A large suprasellar meningioma, measur-
ing about 10 cm. in diameter, was removed after excision of a portion of the
right frontal lobe. Following operation the patient's mental status changed
so that she is almost normal in her reactions, except for intermittent periods of
emotional instability.
The third case was that of a boy, aged seven years, who had sustained a
severe head injury that necessitated confinement in a hospital. Six months
after recovery he began to have periodic attacks of headache and vomiting.
These increased in severity and frequency until they were lasting three or
four days, becoming quite disabling. Examination was essentially negative
except for roentgenograms of the head, which gave evidence of increased
578
intracranial pressure and enlargement of the sella turcica. The first perimetric
fields were negative but on examination with a tangent perimeter, a relative
paracentral scotoma on the right was found. This, in conjunction with the
enlarged sella, suggested a lesion unassociated with the history of head injury,
probably a craniopharyngioma. A transfrontal craniotomy was therefore
performed, and a large bluish cyst anterior to the optic chiasm was disclosed
and completely removed. It contained about 5 cc. of yellowish, thick fluid
and proved to be a cyst of Rathke's pouch.
The next patient was a woman, aged forty-six, who complained of pain
in the head and right arm, and of dimness of vision. These symptoms had
been present for eight months, increasing in severity. Visual acuity was
6/10 in the left eye atnd 6/20 in the right, with bilateral choked discs of 4 D.
Roentgenograms revealed a rounded calcified mass in the left basofrontal
region, suggesting a calcified meningioma. A left transfrontal craniotomy
was performed and three meningiomas were found. One was in the
extreme frontal region, the middle one was the calcified meningioma com-
pressing the posterior inferior frontal region, and the third was compressing
the arm center. Following removal of these tumors the basofrontal region
was explored, but no evidence of further neoplasms was present. The patient
was completely relieved of symptoms.
The last case was that of a youth aged eighteen, Who had suffered from
frontal headaches daily for nine months. These had become so severe that
at times he had to spend a day or so in bed. The last two months projectile
vomiting had been associated with the headaches. Examination was nega-
tive except for choked discs of 3 D. Ventriculograms revealed internal hydro-
cephalus, with a large, irregular, lobulated tumor extending on either side of
the septum pellucidum into each ventricle, particularly the left, and displacing
the third ventricle to the right. There was very little reaction from ventric-
ulography, and three courses of radiotherapy were administered, following
which the patient's papilloedema subsided and he has been clinically well for
a period of twenty-four months.
METASTATIC INTRACRANIAL TUMORS
WILLIAM J. GERMAN
Of fifteen metastatic intracranial tumors, twelve were limited to the
brain, and three involved the skull with intracranial extension. Fourteen
operations were performed on twelve patients, with one fatality. The aver-
age survival period after operation was eight and one-half months. The
series included two cases of thyroid carcinoma with metastases to the skull.
579EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
SKELETAL TRACTION IN THE TREATMENT OF FRACTURE OR
FRACTURE DISLOCATION OF THE CERVICAL SPINE
KENNETH G. MCKENZIE
Cervical injuries are treated by a combination of manipulation and skeletal
traction until the deformity has been reduced. Skeletal traction is often
the method of choice. Dr. McKenzie described an original method for
carrying out this treatment, with demonstration of a caliper devised especially
for the purpose. The instrument is heavier than those ordinarily supplied,
with sharp points, a safety shoulder, and a locking device to prevent change
of position after application.
Dr. W. Gayle Crutchfield, during the discussion, exhibited an instrument
he devised for use in similar cases.
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL TRACT SECTION
ERIC OLDBERG
Six cases were described in which a high cervical extrapyramidal tract
section had been performed for relief of spasticity with athetosis. In one
case the operation was bilateral, the other procedures being unilateral. There
was evidence of a probable birth-injury in all but one case. Dr. Oldberg
presented a series of motion pictures showing the patients before and after
operation.
AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF PENETRATING WOUNDS
OF THE BRAIN
COBB PILCHER
In a series of 54 experiments on dogs, the importance of various factors
in the ultimate outcome of penetrating wounds of the brain was studied,
with the following results:
1. The duration of penetration. The foreign body was left protruding
from the brain. In all experiments in which the missile was not removed
in 12 hours or less, the animals died of fulminating infections of brain,
meninges, and ependyma. 2. The depth of penetration. If the lateral
ventricle was penetrated, the result was almost uniformly fatal. 3. Com-
munication with the surface of the skin. This was found to increase the
danger of a fatal outcome. 4. Communication with the subarachnoid space.
This also was found to increase the likelihood of a fatal result. 5. Removal
of a wide area of bone. In already established infections this procedure com-
bined with open drainage was found to augment the possibility of recovery.
580
From these experiments, the following conclusions were drawn: (a) All
foreign bodies communicating with the skin, subarachnoid space, or ventricle
should be immediately removed. (b) Deeply situated foreign bodies which
are not included in the above-mentioned group and which do not cause symp-
toms may be left alone. (c) Infections already established about foreign
bodies should be widely drained.
A NEW OPERATION FOR THE RELIEF OF MENIERE'S SYNDROME
TRAcY J. PUTNAM
Although operations for the relief of labyrinth vertigo will probably be
less common since the advent of the Furstenburg diet, there appear to be some
cases that are resistant to medical treatment. Subtotal resection of the eighth
nerve is doubtless a satisfactory procedure for these cases, but a technically
easier, more rapid, and probably safer operation is the destruction of the
labyrinth through the roof of the petrous bone by a subtemporal approach.
This has been found entirely feasible in two cases, and it is not difficult to
destroy the function of the labyrinth without destroying hearing. The
cochlea may also be destroyed if tinnitus is present, but relief of the tinnitus is
uncertain. A similar approach may be used for pontine-angle tumors.
SURGICAL CARE OF VASCULAR ANOMALIES IN THE
PREMOTOR AREA
F. L. REICHERT
Recently two young patients presented somewhat similar histories of
frequent severe headaches, of fainting spells accompanied by unilateral rigidity,
and of a sudden cerebral alteration producing unilateral signs, with a residuum
consisting of clumsy movements and unsteadiness of extremities, spasticity,
forced grasping, and a cold limb that subjectively indicated a poor circulation.
Ventriculograms showed slight abnormalities.
At operation an abnormal vascularity of the dura or falx with numerous
connecting vessels to the adjacent cortex was revealed. Electrocoagulation
was used to interrupt the vascular anomalies between dura and cortex.
An extensive cerebral edema developed after operation which was uncon-
trolled by dehydration, removal of ventricular fluid or subtemporal decom-
pression. The edema was rapidly overcome by repeated intravenous injec-
tions of hypertonic glucose and sodium chloride solutions.
ROUND-TABLE DISCUSSION: THE FRONTAL LOBES
Dr. Donald Marquis described experiments on the functions of the visual
cortex in monkeys and dogs. Conditioned reflex and training methods
581EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
showed that discrimination of light intensity was practically unimpaired after
bilateral removal of the area striata. This was contrasted to the complete
absence of form or object vision. It was suggested that in the encephalization
of visual functions in mammals, the cortex is primarily concerned with spatial
discrimination.
Dr. John Fulton opened the round-table discussion on the functions of
the frontal lobes by describing: (1) the chief cytoarchitectural areas of the
frontal lobes in primates and man, i.e., motor, premotor, eye field, frontal
association areas, and, in man, the speech area; (2) the anatomical con-
nections of these regions including the recent work of Poljak and E. C.
Hoff; (3) the electrical excitability of each field as delineated by the Vogts,
Foerster, Bucy, and others; (4) the results of extirpation of the motor and
premotor areas respectively, as observed in the chimpanzee. Dr. Fulton
then demonstrated reflex changes in a number of chimpanzees with lesions
of the frontal lobes (Yama, Mussai, and Becky).
Dr. Carlyle Jacobsen gave an account of his recent studies on trained
chimpanzees from which the frontal association areas had been removed.
The memory deficit as seen in tests of delayed reaction and certain aspects of
the use of sticks as tools was described. This failure of one kind of memory,
recall, was contrasted to the excellent memory for other kinds of sensory-
motor habits. The deficit in recall was shown to be peculiarly dependent
upon injury to the frontal areas.
General discussion by the members of the Society followed. L. E.
SCIENTIFIC PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
CONNECTICUT STATE MEDICAL SOCIETY
May 22 and 23, 1935
RECENT ADVANCES IN RENAL SURGERY, EXPERIMENTAL AND
CLINICAL STUDY
OSWALD S. LOWSLEY
New Canaan, Connecticut
The principle of conservation of tissue should lie foremost in the surgeon's
mind. It may be promulgated in urology by use of a pliable, diaphanous
ribbon gut. Wrinkling of the material is avoided by employing flat, spear-
pointed needles slightly wider than the ribbons.
582
Hemostasis and repair of the renal wound in removing pelvic calculi are
excellently served by ribbon gut. The stones are approached by an incision
in the lower pole after encircling the kidney with ribbon gut passed at several
points through the capsule. Hemorrhage is controlled by compression of the
pedicle by an assistant's hand rather than by even rubber-tipped clamps. The
use of ribbons is better than repair with deep sutures penetrating the kidney sub-
stance because tissue is conserved. This has experimental support. Studies
in dogs show that the tissue underlying ribbon gut applied about the kidney
in repair of wounds is histologically well preserved. Too much pressure,
however, results in fibrosis.
Heminephrectomy for localized renal lesions is again coming into its own.
It is unwise, however, to employ it in renal tuberculosis since, in the author's
experience, the disease invariably recurs.
Intracapsular rupture of the kidney is an indication for early operation.
Neglected lesions result in progressive renal damage due to extravasation of
urine. The fibrous capsule should, therefore, be opened, bleeding stopped by
plugs of living fat, and the organ repaired with ribbon gut. A. A. L.
A NEW TYPE OF RETENTION CATHETER
DANIEL C. PATTERSON
Bridgeport, Connecticut
The usual adhesive tape technic for retaining catheters is unsatisfactory.
Excoriation of the glans may result and the adhesive is uncleanly due to soak-
ing with the urine.
The catheter can better be retained by means of strips of rubber latex
wound in a flange around the distal end of the catheter leaving many ends
free. The ends can then be passed backwards and attached proximally upon
the shaft of the penis with circular adhesive tape. Latex does not become
soiled nor does it irritate the glans. A. A. L.
THE TREATMENT OF NEUROSYPHILIS
LLOYD J. THOMPSON
New Haven, Connecticut
The statistics of mental hospitals in general show no definite decline in
the incidence of neurosyphilis. The question of whether or not the etiology
is a special type of spirochete or rests in the individual susceptibility of the
patient remains unanswered. Nevertheless, there are a certain number of
patients in most clinics in whom early invasion of the nervous system, shown
by repeated cerebrospinal fluid examinations, might be ascribed to inadequate
583EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
treatment. Dattner of Vienna believes that cases treated before the eruptive
stage exhibit a greater tendency toward the development of neurosyphilis than
do those untreated until the second stage is established.
The pathology of neurosyphilis is divided into central, autonomic, and
peripheral involvement with the possibility of gummatous formation anywhere.
The clinical picture of central nervous system syphilis varies considerably;
the principal lesions may be referable to the cortex (paresis), basal ganglia
(Parkinsonian syndrome), and the posterior horn cells (tabes). The cortical
damage may be parenchymatous, vascular, or meningeal, with overlapping.
Studies on paretics show that from 3 to 10 per cent of untreated cases have
spontaneous remissions lasting from 3 months to a period of years.
During the latter part of the 19th century large doses of KI and Hg were
used for paresis, sometimes inaccurately diagnosed. In 1890 Wagner von
Jauregg introduced the hyperpyrexia treatment in the form of tuberculin
injections; later relapsing fever, rat-bite fever, typhoid vaccine, non-specific
protein, and malaria were tried. In 1891 lumbar puncture was recom-
mended; in 1905 the Treponema pallidum was discovered by Schaudinn; in
1909 Ehrlich perfected salvarsan; and in 1912 Noguchi demonstrated the
organism in the brain. In the same year the Swift-Ellis method of injecting
salvarsanized serum intrathecally (and later into the brain ventricles) was
described. In 1920 cisternal puncture with injection of salvarsanized serum
was practiced, as was also spinal drainage. From this time on the number of
remissions has increased to 20 per cent. Lately, Tryparsamide, one of the
drugs discarded by Ehrlich, was found to be more specific for neurosyphilis
than was any other arsenical. The results of diathermy and electrotherapy
have been reported; hot blankets, hot water baths, hot air cabinets with con-
trolled humidity are in process of trial. Of all Wagner von Jauregg's meth-
ods malaria is the most favored. With these various modes of treatment 30
to 35 per cent of patients have valid remissions, i.e., are able to earn their
livelihood.
The choice of treatment depends on the individual patient. Hg and Bi
are still recognized as valuable adjuncts and KI may be useful. Radical
procedures like spinal drainage have been abandoned. Tryparsamide has
invoked objections because it may cause optic atrophy; yet in only 3 per cent
of cases is vision interfered with. It has as good a record when used alone as
has the hyperpyrexia treatment in some clinics. The signs of toxicity to watch
for are flashes of light or color, scotomata, or any unusual visual disturb-
ance. Visual acuity and visual fields should be taken before and during
treatment. If optic damage is to occur, the signs are usually present during
the first 3 doses.
A course of treatment begins with a 1-2 gram dose, followed by 3 grams
weekly. Since it has very little spirocheticidal action the patient should be
allowed vacations of several weeks during which Hg and Bi may be given.
584
In hyperpyrexia treatment malaria is the method of choice unless contraindi-
cated. Certain syphilologists think that the plasmodia stimulate the cells of
the reticulo-endothelial system to greater phagocytic activity. None of the
hyperpyrexia procedures is without danger. An adequate course includes 5-10
injections of Tryparsamide followed by 10-20 paroxysms of malaria. Tryp-
arsamide is then continued with vacations during which the heavy metals
may be used. Treatment should be instituted early, which means that sus-
pected cases should be subjected to lumbar puncture, and that the members
of the patient's family should also receive careful examination. H. H.
CONNECTICUT'S NOTEWORTHY CONTRIBUTIONS TO MEDICINE
(Presidential Address)
WALTER R. STEINER
Hartford, Connecticut
The medical history of Connecticut has been enriched by the contributions
of many men, and at least five of these are worthy of specific mention. The
group referred to is composed of Nathan Strong, Elisha North, Nathan
Smith, Noah Webster, and William Beaumont.
Nathan Strong Jr., a graduate of Williams College, was an early mem-
ber of the Connecticut State Medical Society. For his thesis for admission to
the Society he wrote on "spotted fever," the first paper to be published about
this disease.
Elisha North had gone into practice in Connecticut after an apprentice-
ship under a physician, in order to make enough money to take him through
medical school. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania Medical
School in 1791. He became particularly interested in the new subject of
vaccination, and is noted as having had the first case of vaccine sickness. He
also wrote the first book to be published on epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis,
and founded at New London the first eye infirmary in the United States. It
was from this interest that he exhibited to the Connecticut State Medical
Society some eye specula of his own invention.
Nathan Smith, although not a native of Connecticut, is claimed as a Con-
necticut product because of his 16 years of residence here, and because of
his association with the Yale Medical College. He is noted for having
established a medical school at Dartmouth after his completion of studies
at the Harvard Medical School. Soon after this was started he came to Yale
as Professor of the Theory and Practice of Physic, Surgery and Obstetrics.
His "Practical Essay on Typhus Fever" and his work entitled "The Pathology
and Treatment of Necrosis" are still memorable.
Noah Webster graduated from Yale in 1778 and pursued his main inter-
585EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
est in law and journalism. He dabbled somewhat, however, in medical
experimentation, and made contributions on "Bilious Fever" in 1796, and on
"The History of Epidemic Diseases" in 1799. Although he was a non-con-
tagionist in principle, he is recognized as having realized the importance of
collecting factual data, and thus he aided in establishing modern epidemiology.
William Beaumont was born in Connecticut. After farming for a time,
he went out to seek adventure. After studying medicine in Vermont, he
entered the army and distinguished himself during the War of 1812. Fol-
lowing his discharge he reentered the army, and it was at this time that he
encountered Alexis St. Martin, "an elusive, drunken old reprobate," whose
accidental gastric fistula furnished Beaumont with the material for his epochal
studies of the gastric juice. This has been called America's foremost con-
tribution to physiology. Upon retiring from the army, Beaumont established
a private practice in St. Louis, where he later died. He was made an honor-
ary member of the Connecticut State Medical Society. J. B. L.
CHROMIUM POISONING
EDWARD H. KIRSCHBAUM
Waterbury, Connecticut
The derivatives of chromic acid are the most toxic compounds of the metal.
They are absorbed chiefly by the respiratory tract, but also by the gastro-
intestinal tract and to some extent by the skin. Salts of chromic acid are
extremely toxic when taken internally, though this occurs only in the rare
cases of suicide with this acid. The most important toxicological aspect of
the metal is as an industrial poison.
The industrial hazard is chiefly due to the local effect of the poison. A
study of 890 cases has shown that there is no relation between chromium
poisoning and cancer of the lung. The greatest hazard occurs in the use of
chromic acid in etching, whereby the spray becomes deposited on the nasal
mucosa.
The local lesion is usually a dermatitis which comes on about 180 days
after the beginning of employment. It is accompanied by vomiting, itching,
and severe conjunctivitis. The "chrome ulcer" of the skin does not occur
unless there has been a previous abrasion. It is a sterile, painless, circular
ulcer which develops a gray, necrotic slough. It is very slow of penetration,
and is seen most frequently on the hands and on the nasal mucosa.
Prophylaxis consists in the prevention of contamination by the chromic
acid derivatives through transverse suction, the use of rubber gloves, aprons
and boots, by frequent washing of the hands, and avoidance of picking the
nose (which predisposes to absorption of the metal by making abrasions of the
mucosa). J. B. L.
586
EVENTS
NEUTROPENIA
WILLIAM P. THOMPSON
Presbyterian Hospital, New York
The Presbyterian Hospital has had 58 cases of neutropenia (agranulo-
cytic angina) of which there are 50 cases with adequate records for study.
The disease is one of recent origin, having been first reported significandy
by Schulz in 1922. The earliest record of a case with the absence of neutro-
phils in the smear was published in 1882, in an article in an obscure journal,
and signed "Graybeard." Tl he first case seen at the Presbyterian Hospital
was in 1925, and since then there has been noted a wave of increase in
incidence of the disease with a recent, interesting decrease.
The clinical picture of the disease, which occurs chiefly in middle age, is
that of an abrupt onset of fever, prostration, and chills, followed in from
36 to 48 hours by the characteristic lesions of the mouth and throat. These
are small red ulcers which tend to become necrotic. The rest of the physical
findings are usually negative. There has been a rare case of endometritis
and one of urinary tract involvement due to the disease. The blood elements
are normal with the exception of the leukocytes, which show a marked
reduction to 1000 per cubic millimeter or below. The majority of the white
blood cells present are of the lymphocytic series.
In diagnosis, neutropenia must be distinguished from aleukemic leukemia
and from aplastic anemia.
The majority of cases are fatal in from 5 days to 2 weeks. Some few,
however, recover. The prognosis is based on the severity of the disease and
on the depression of the white cell count. At the Presbyterian Hospital it
has been found that in cases exhibiting a count of 1000 or below there is a
mortality of 92 per cent; in those with 1000 to 2000 white cells, a mortality
of 40-50 per cent. Cases showing a transient leukopenia usually recover.
The Presbyterian Hospital records show a mortality of just 50 per cent, includ-
ing cases in which there was a depression of the white count to 1500 cells
or below.
The following conclusions as regards the bone marrow have been reached:
(1) Evidence of bone marrow involvement precedes other evidences of
the disease. (2) A peripheral blood neutropenia is the cause of the severe
infection which follows the onset. (3) The blood dyscrasia is an acute,
reversible reaction. (4) There is a definite tendency for the disease to recur.
Factors found associated with the neutropenic episode are two. The first
is the endocrine feature. It has been found that the disease occurs in the
majority of cases in females, the peak of the age period being between 52 and
72 years. In many cases the onset of the acute phase has been observed to
occur about 4 days prior to the onset of menstruation; one patient was found,
587
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
however, to show a depression of the white count 4 days before .menstruation
without the clinical picture of neutropenia. A male (reported by Thayer),
who had had leukopenic episodes every three weeks over a period of years, was
found to exhibit some correlation between the leukopenic episode and the
excretion of female sex hormone and prolan in the urine.
The second factor involves the use of chemicals, of which amidopyrine
has attracted the greatest attention. Forty-two cases with a definite drug
history are reported. Of these, 21 had taken some form of pyramidon either
with or without barbiturate compounds. Of the 21, 13 had taken the
drug before without ill effects. Of the remaining 8, 3 developed neutro-
penia while taking the drug under observation. Thus the relationship of the
drug to the disease is not convincing.
The treatment of agranulocytic angina is the general treatment for
severe febrile diseases, namely, rest in bed, fluids, keeping the bowels open,
and the use of sedatives (omitting amidopyrine, and, according to a recent
suspicion of Thompson, novocaine). The mouth lesions should not be treated
too vigorously, but by gentle saline irrigations of the ulcers.
There is no specific treatment of the bone marrow for amelioration of the
blood dyscrasia. Pentnucleotide, X-ray, and transfusions are of no specific
value. Endocrine therapy is still of doubtful effect. J. B. L.
HOW MANY CANCERS ARE PREVENTABLE? TREATABLE? CURABLE?
WHAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT THEM?
WILMAR M. ALLEN
Hartford, Connecticut
Carcinoma may be subdivided into groups favorable and unfavorable from
the point of view of prevention and arrest. The number and relative in-
cidence of the cases observed at the Hartford Hospital during the period
1932-1934 are as follows:
FAVORABLE GROUP
Number
Skin (including vulva and penis) ............ 232
Breast ........ ..................... 148
Cervix ......... .................... 106
Mouth .. 61
Lip ............................. 46
Tongue ......... .................... 17
Total ......... .................... 610
Per cent
17
11
8
S
3
1
45 of all cases
588
UNFAVORABLE GROUP
Number Per cent
Genito-urinary (exclusive of cervix) ...... 193 14
Gastro-intestinal (exclusive of stomach) .... 182 14
Stomach .......... ................... 105 8
Lymphatic system and blood .................... 745
Respiratory system ............................. 634
Miscellaneous ................. ............ 12910
Total ................. ............ 746 55 of all cases
The lesions in the favorable group are characterized by their ready
accessibility. Consequently, the opportunity for early diagnosis and successful
treatment is at hand. In this group etiology and, therefore, prophylaxis are
better understood. Thus avoidance of chronic irritation and the early care
of all indurated, scaly, or ulcerated cutaneous lesions should do much in
control. It is said that 95 per cent of advanced cases of uterine cervical
carcinoma are preventable by early treatment of obstetrical lesions with sub-
sequent frequent examinations. Avoidance of oral sepsis, poor dentures, and
excessive smoking, and early adequate treatment of syphilis should help in
preventing cancer of the buccal contents.
Judicious use of eye, hand, tongue-depressor, vaginal speculum, and five
minutes of the patient's time will go far in cancer control. - A. A. L.
VISUALIZATION OF THE URINARY TRACT WITH ESPECIAL
REFERENCE TO EXCRETION UROGRAPHY
MARCY L. SUSSMAN
New York City
No one technic of roentgenographic examination of the urinary passages
is always the method of choice. Excretion urography, properly applied, is a
valuable tool. Intravenous injection of adequate doses, occupying two min-
utes, is the best method and has never in the present experience had any
untoward reaction. Most often visualization is satisfactory within five
minutes. In the presence of obstruction, however, it is sometimes best after
4-5 hours. Failure of visualization does not necessarily indicate permanent
suppression of renal function nor an absent kidney. Temporary functional
inhibition due, for example, to ureteral calculus has been observed.
Excretion urography does not give the fine detail of the retrograde method.
The kidney shadow, however, is accentuated, a feature useful in diagnosis.
Visualization in individuals more than sixty-five years of age tends to be poor.
589EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
The application of the intravenous method at the Mount Sinai Hospital in
New York City has yielded valuable diagnostic and physiological insights.
The calyces have often been found in a state of contraction which may result
from irritation associated, for example, with renal carbuncle or trauma. The
triad of obliteration of the psoas border, tenting of the spine with concavity
toward the affected side, and obliteration of the kidney outline is not pathog-
nomonic of perinephric abscess, as it has been seen in a case of hydronephrosis.
Demonstration of strictures interfering with retrograde pyelography has been
accomplished with the intravenous method. One case gave evidence that adre-
nal tumors can displace the kidney upward. Blood clots should be considered
in the differential diagnosis of filling defects. This was made apparent in a
case of bleeding associated with carcinoma that came under study.
Bladder pathology lends itself well to demonstration by intravenous urog-
raphy. Cystoscopic intervention is, therefore, often rendered unnecessary.
The ordinary 6 per cent Nal solution is so strong that pathology may be
obscured. The concentration in the bladder attained by the medium used
in the present studies corresponds to about a 3 per cent solution of NaL.
A. A. L.
TWENTY YEARS' PROGRESS IN UNDERSTANDING PSYCHIATRIC
PROBLEMS OF CHILDREN
ARTHUR H. RUGGLES
Bttler Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island
Clinical experience during the past two decades has given the medical
profession a more orderly classification of conditions in the field of child
psychiatry. The chief categories are as follows:
1. Birth injuries and developmental aberrations of the nervous system.
2. Postencephalitic syndromes.
3. Convulsive disorders.
4. Behavior problems.
This classification is not clear-cut, and correct diagnosis often depends
on the ability of the pediatrician to eliminate organic disease. After careful
physical examination there are many new facts that can be called upon, derived
from anthropometric studies of the range of normal anatomical development
and the investigation of the psychological growth of the normal child. Many
obscure cases in the first group have been better understood because of more
complete objective observation of normal child behavior and improved intel-
ligence testing. Postencephalitis cases depend on the epidemiology of the
underlying disease and are fortunately on the wane at present.
Convulsive disorders present a great problem because of the difficulty of
590
separating metabolic conditions, brain injury, and psychological dysfunction.
Encephalography may be useful in showing cortical damage. Treatment is
still limited. The curative effect of ketogenic diets is questionable and does
not lend itself to accurate control. Dehydration procedures are also trying
on both patient and physician. Thorough cooperation among pediatrician,
internist, and psychiatrist may produce good results through general dietary
and hygienic measures and psychological readjustment. Further study is
needed on the fundamental problem of etiology.
The field of behavior problems is one of great individual variability and,
therefore, closest to the psychiatrist, who must endeavor to understand every
patient as a separate personality. It must be remembered that even badness
or bed-wetting may be engendered by physical, environmental, or psychological
causes. Here, the child guidance clinic may be of paramount importance in
improving the child's environment. There is much unrecognized promise in
a new method of therapy termed, "The retraining of nervous pathways."
The better classification of juvenile psychiatric disorders (which is open to
further improvement) permits the segregation of patients for treatment in
which all branches of medicine combine to solve the problems of each indi-
vidual whether in hospital, clinic, or home.
From a preventive standpoint problems of behavior and personality should
be discovered early. The incidence of recovery from mental disease goes
progressively down after the twentieth year in all conditions. These cases
may be more accessible at an early age. H. H.
THE BEST CURRENT PRACTICES IN PSYCJfIATRY FOR CHILDREN
GEORGE S. STEVENSON
Director, Division of Community Clinics, National Committee for Mental Hygiene
Until the development of the child guidance clinic a few years ago there
was a decided lack of psychiatrists chiefly interested in children practising in
hospital wards and clinics. Although the apparent differences between
juvenile and adult psychiatry are not well defined, the child guidance clinic
had to break away from the technic and paraphernalia of adult psychiatric
methodology. A child is more suggestible than is an adult and his problems
are usually more accessible. A closer afliliation of pediatrics and child psychi-
atry has occurred in many medical centers, and dispensaries have tended to
consolidate rather than isolate the child guidance clinic.
Some psychiatrists are liable to psychologize every symptom and forget
that unless its cause can be discovered and removed it will return. The child
seldom outgrows a real problem. In some respects the large number of cases
makes individual study and treatment impractical from the clinical standpoint.
The child psychiatrist must have the public health attitude in mind, con-
591EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
sidering one child as symptomatic of many. This is especially true of school
work.
The genetic school of psychology believes that development is an unfold-
ing of behavior patterns conditioned or brought out by impact of experience.
None of the child's actions is haphazard; the phenomena of play are full of
dynamic meaning. The geneticist regards each abnormal outbreak as a step
in the progression of a chronic disorder and looks to the future. A sympto-
matic approach to the patient is the only rational procedure. The child
receives emotional impact from his experience, and to be effective psychiatric
treatment must leave emotional imprint. He must not regard the psychiatrist
as either condoner or flayer, but as a provider of helpful experience that can
be relied on, especially when the child is hampered by misunderstanding or
ignorance at home. The psychiatrist must try to match a complex person-
ality under stress with a complex therapy. He should not regard the men-
tally harrassed child as a pawn in a chess game but should think of himself as
one of the chessmen, helping his patient to overcome a mutual opponent.
Rational contact and progress often proceed largely on a lay basis, which is
particularly true of sexual and religious problems. An appreciation of the
complexity of child behavior provides incentive and time for study and treat-
ment. The ultimate goal is to supplement diagnosis with treatment. To this
end the collaboration of pediatrician, psychiatrist, psychologist, and social
worker is essential, both in the clinic and at home. In addition, the proba-
tion officer, public health official, and visiting nurse can play important roles
in the maintenance of child welfare. H. H.
OVARIAN TUMORS
JOE V. MEIGS
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
Of the simple tumors of the ovary the most important is malignant papil-
lary cystadenoma, which is frequently very badly treated. It is extremely
malignant and radical surgery is necessary. A bilateral oophorectomy and
hysterectomy should be done. Simple removal of an ovarian cyst, leaving the
other ovary, is wrong, because these cysts are frequently bilateral. When
papillary areas are found within a cyst, bilateral o6phorectomy should be done
unless children are urgently desired. When any solid epithelial tumor of the
ovary is found radical surgery should be used. The only excuse for leaving
the uterus is to apply radium within the uterine cavity.
Many tumors of the ovary are bilateral, therefore both ovaries should be
carefully examined. A certain number are pedunculated and may twist and
untwist, causing pain. Cysts of the ovary may rupture with relative fre-
quency. They may be ruptured by forcible pelvic examination before
operation.
592
EVENTS 593
Of 192 tumors of the ovary seen in the Massachusetts General Hospital,
associated pelvic inflammation was seen in 26.5 per cent, 16.6 per cent of
them were twisted, and 5 per cent ruptured pre-operatively. Pelvic inflam-
mation apparently bears some relation to ovarian tumors, although the exact
relationship is not clear.
The normal Graafian follicle may sometimes produce abdominal symp-
toms on rupture because of hemorrhage or mucous discharge. A corpus
luteum with a very thin covering may also rupture and produce symptoms.
When a young female is seen complaining of abdominal pain which simulates.
appendicitis, the possibilities of a ruptured follicle should always be considered.
It may be differentiated from a surgical abdomen in that the vital signs are
not elevated. Massive hemorrhage may occur from such a ruptured follicle.
This condition was not previously recognized at operation because the ovaries
were not properly visualized. With the use of the midline incision it has
been more frequently seen.
In acute pelvic inflammation inflammatory cysts of the ovary may be seen.
They are caused by adhesions blocking normal ovulation, so that a persistent
follicle cyst occurs containing cestrin and frequently producing endometrial
hyperplasia and abnormal bleeding.
Follicle cysts are found in metropathia hemorrhagica, which is frequently
characterized by amenorrhea, followed by bleeding for three to five weeks.
This type of bleeding in young patients is influenced by prolan or lutein. The
bleeding is believed to be due either to "dying" of the cyst with loss of cestrin
and resulting breaking down of the endometrium or to endometrial hyper-
plasia and sloughing. There is a brain-like wrinkling of the ovary and no
corpora lutea are seen. If such a cyst is ruptured normal menstruation ensues
for a while, and the patient is sometimes cured, but as a rule the condition
recurs. The possible methods of treatment are administration of urinary
prolan, administration of X-ray or radium, or hysterectomy.
Multiple corpus luteum cysts are associated with chorionepithelioma and
hydatidiform mole. They are also seen on prolonged administration of
urinary prolan. Removal of such cysts is not necessary unless they are very
large or unless much intra-abdominal hemorrhage results from them. In
hydatidiform mole, if the mole is removed the cysts will take care of themselves.
Of 29 cases of fibroma of the ovary, 4 had ascites and 3 had hydro-.
thorax, an unexplained complication. On removal of the fibroma the ascites
and hydrothorax were cured. This is an almost new entity, and the mechan-
ism of the ascites and hydrothorax has not been explained.
The Krukenberg tumor should be seriously considered in the differential
diagnosis of tumors of the ovary. It is also known as fibrosarcoma muco-
cellulare carcinomatodes and is a secondary metastasis to the ovary, usually
from a gastro-intestinal malignancy. It is not an implantation, but is believed
to be brought about by retrograde lymphatic metastases. The tumor is usually
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
bilateral, smooth, non-adherent, kidney-shaped. The primary focus may be
anywhere in the gastro-intestinal tract and may also be in the breast.
The ovaries are frequently the site of metastases of carcinoma of the
uterine body. Therefore the ovaries should be removed, as well as a radical
hysterectomy done.
Ovariotestis is a non-malignant congenital tumor arising in testicular
embryonal rests and causing hermaphroditism. The ovary present is usually
rudimentary and the testis adenomatous. Removal of the tumor causes
femininization of the patient.
The testicular tubular adenoma of Pick is a non-malignant tumor arising
from undifferentiated germ cells, made up of definitely male directed cells, and
similar to the tubular adenoma of the testis. The patient shows mild mascu-
linization and on removal of the tumor the patient becomes femininized.
Arrhenoblastoma may be either benign or malignant. It arises from the
epithelium of the testicular anlage. It causes severe masculinization. On
removal femininization occurs, but the voice remains unchanged.
Hypernephroma of suprarenal origin is a malignant tumor arising from
embryonal rests and causes masculinization. It differs from hypernephroma
of the kidney in that it produces hormones. On removal of the tumor
femininization occurs.
Dysgerminoma is a malignant tumor arising from undifferentiated sex cells
and accompanied by neutral sexual development. There is no masculiniza-
tion. This tumor is similar to a testicular tumor invading the seminiferous
tubules. Upon removal normal sexual development occurs. This tumor on
microscopic examination appears highly malignant, but the results belie this.
After five years four out of five cases are living and well.
Granulosa cell tumor may be either benign or malignant. It is believed
by Robinson to arise in the granulosa cells of the follicle, by Meyer to arise
in the indifferent sex cells or primitive granulosa cells. It secretes the female
sex hormone and causes precocious femininization and menstruation in the
young, abnormal bleeding in the adult, and postmenopausal bleeding in the
old. These old patients have cestrin in the urine. The tumor is accompanied
by hyperplasia of the endometrium. Removal restores normal menstrual
function. D. C. L.
IMMUNOLOGICAL APPLICATION OF PLACENTAL EXTRACTS
CHARLES F. MCKHANN
Harviard Medical School, Boston
The immunity of the newborn may possibly be explained on the basis of
the intrinsic resistance of embryonic and rapidly growing tissules, and on
mammary or placental transmission of antibodies.
594
The blood of calves denied colostrum and suffering, therefore, from
"scours," a colon bacillus infection, is devoid of globulins, and that of
children likewise deprived contains only one-half the amount of normal
globulins. These consist of the larger molecules. It is with the large
molecules that the antibacterial substances are associated; antitoxins are asso-
ciated with the smaller molecules.
The blood of the umbilical cord and extracts of the placenta have been
shown to contain antibodies to the causative agents of diphtheria, scarlatina,
poliomyelitis, and measles. The placental extracts have more antibody than
can be accounted for in the contained blood.
Extracts potent in protecting against measles may be prepared by treat-
ment with 2 per cent NaCl of finely comminuted pooled placentae containing
fetal and maternal blood. Sterility is tested by culture. Fractionated extracts
have the advantage over the crude of filtrability and consequently greater
safety, but are less potent. The tissue globulin fraction contains no diph-
theria or scarlatinal antitoxin, but is rich in poliomyelitis and measles anti-
bodies, whereas the pseudoglobulin fraction, probably derived from the blood,
contains all. This is of theoretical interest and makes it obvious that the
diphtheria antitoxin content of the extracts is no measure of their anti-
measles protective power.
Among the factors influencing effectiveness are dosage, potency, time of
injection, age and size of the patient, and degree of exposure. When the
extract was used for protection of children in poor health in a large isolation
hospital over a period of 3 2 years no measles but much chicken-pox cross-
infection occurred. Before this time cross-infections had been comparably
numerous. Effectiveness of the extracts when used to protect (administra-
tion before the fifth day after exposure), or to modify (fifth to ninth day),
has been adequately confirmed in a wider experience.
The safety of the material has been studied. Sterility is stringently tested.
No sex hormones have been detected. In three cases specific sensitivity on
reinjection was observed. Two of these had long family and personal
histories of allergy. Such non-specific reactions as may follow typhoid vac-
cination have more often been observed. Of 1149 patients 70 per cent
showed no reaction, 23 per cent had local soreness, and 2.8 per cent had
severe local induration and tenderness lasting 36 hours, but the lesions never
broke down; 12.5 per cent experienced a slight rise in temperature and 1.9
per cent had fever exceeding 1010 F. A search for the fraction and method
of administration giving the least reaction is under way. The greater the
proportion of tissue globulin, the greater the reaction.
Placental extract is effective and more readily available than is fresh
convalescent serum, but local reactions may be associated with its use. Oral
administration of some extracts will reverse the Dick reaction temporarily.
Further study and application to measles are necessary. A. A. L.
595EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
DERMATOPHYTOSIS
HARRY BAILEY
Hartford, Connecticut
Dermatophytosis has assumed importance because of its recent preva-
lence (accounted for by the present great active interest in sports), its possible
attendant economic disability and discomfort, and its possible provision of an
avenue of entrance for pus organisms. It is the second most common skin
disease affecting 50 per cent of the adult population and as high as 90 per cent
of college students who engage in athletics.
Prophylaxis consists of perspiration reduction by eliminating woolen socks,
by avoiding heavy or too small shoes, and by correcting orthopedic disorders
such as flat feet; also, by the avoidance of walking barefoot; by routine
sterilization of towels, socks, and slippers to prevent self-reinfection (though
Farley showed in 1921 that auto-infection was possible by recovery of the
organism one year after clinical signs had disappeared); and by the elimina-
tion by gymnasia of bath mats and wooden floors and the institution of ade-
quate hygienic measures. Osborn has had complete success in the Buffalo
High School through using 1 per cent sodium hypochlorite placed in pans
so located that the students must bathe their feet in the solution wherit
going to the showers from the dressing-rooms and when returning from
the showers. Ayres and Anderson have prevented recurrence by placing
infected shoes, socks, bath mats, etc. in one room, saturating the room
with vapor by means of boiling water and then burning a formalin candle
in the room.
Acute stages may be treated by using wet dressings of boric acid and
potassium permanganate. Other therapeutic agents include tincture of
iodine, ammoniated mercury 2 to 5 per cent, 10 to 20 per cent sodium hypo-
chlorite, 3 per cent solution of tartaric acid, and X-ray radiation in small
doses. Where the toes are involved, the following prescription has proved
effective:
Olei Caryophyllus ... .. ...... 0.06
Olei Cinnamomi ... .. ...... 0.06
Tincturae Iodi ... .. ...... 0.03
Petrolatum ..............................................q. s. 30.00
For groin lesions, boric acid, ammoniated mercury 2 to 5 per cent, and
2 per cent salicylic acid in alcohol prove effective. The procedure which is
too often neglected in the treatment of dermatophytosis is the use of an anti-
septic powder such as: 10 per cent boric, 10 per cent starch, 0.5 per cent sali-
cylic acid, talc base, q.s. 30. N. E. R.
596
EVENTS
RECURRENT ACNE
JOSEPH BECKER
New London, Connecticut
Proper therapeutic measures in the treatment of recurrent acne constitute
a problem which confronts not only the general practitioner but also the
dermatologist. This is due to the chronic nature of the disorder and its recal-
citrance toward all forms of treatment. Treatment is more or less empiric
in nature.
Possible therapeutic measures are: The use of X-rays, depending upon
the condition of the disorder and previous treatment. If the acne is recurrent
and X-rays have not been employed, and the case is one in which such
therapeutic measures can be employed, this method is successful in 85 to 90
per cent of the cases. In case X-ray therapy has been previously employed,
further X-ray may be used only if there are no persisting effects from the
past treatment, in which case never more than one-half the amount of the
previous dosage should be employed.
Ultraviolet light (cold quartz) may be employed instead of X-ray. The
method involves the application of one erythema dose to the entire body and
stronger exposure to the affected parts.
Local surgery (always used with the above methods) involving the open-
ing and draining of the abscesses and the pustules is indicated, as is the use of
potassium sulphate, etc.
Along with treatment of the above types such things as the general
physical condition of the patient, menstrual disturbances, constipation, and
vitamin deficiency must be considered. In cases of recurrent acne diet is
important. Carbohydrates and rich, oily, or greasy foods must be avoided,
while fruits, vegetables, and dairy products may be substituted. R. D. M.
RECALCITRANT DERMATITIS LIMITED TO THE EYELIDS
RICHARD J. LAWTON
Waterbury, Connecticut
Safe and effective treatment of recalcitrant dermatitis of the eyelids
requires a complete case history for here, as in other recalcitrant dermatites,
the patient has usually already made the rounds of the medical profession and
has probably been overtreated. Particular attention must be paid to a possible
use of X-rays in previous treatment which would make further radiation
dangerous.
Mild stimulating ointments, such as salicylic acid, sulphur, resorcinol, and
tar are effective in the treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis of long standing.
597
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Supertar, a new, non-staining, white ointment, is a useful prescription which
is particularly pleasing to the patient. The scales and crusts of eczema palpe-
brarum should be carefully removed before a medicament is applied. Thera-
peutic agents include ammoniated mercury of strength adapted to the case,
tar ointment, and Grenz rays in preference to X-rays. The use of ammoni-
ated mercury for eyelid conditions with an associated blepharoconjunctivitis
must be avoided where silver salts have been used to treat the latter condition
or severe irritations may result. The drug of choice for lupus erythematosus
is gold sodium thiosulphate lightly applied to the lesion with an added local
anesthetic to overcome pain. Possible foci of infection in such cases should
be determined and removed. Dermatitis of the lids caused by cosmetics can
be overcome by removing the cause and using mild lotions and ointments.
The fixed eruptions of phenolphthalein are often confused with seborrhoeic
dermatitis; again the importance of a complete case history makes itself
evident.
In all cases the general condition of the patient must be of concern.
X-rays should be used with caution and never more than one-half unit per
month employed. N. E. R.
WINTER ECZEMA OF THE HANDS
ALBERT LEVENSON
Bridgeport, Connecticut
The treatment of so-called winter eczema of the hands is no less a complex
therapeutic problem than is the treatment of eczema in general. Cold is the
physical agent which is most effective in bringing about the disorder. Further-
more, it has been ascertained that there are familial and constitutional char-
acteristics in individuals sensitive to climatic conditions. Horton, of the Mayo
Clinic, has stated that a physical agent, such as cold, might break down certain
molecules in the skin, subcutaneous tissues, or muscles with the liberation of
histamine-like bodies which, when they enter the general circ4lation, are
deposited in the skin and act as sensitizers. Inasmuch as the underlying
systemic factors causing eczema are at present unknown the treatment for
winter eczema must remain empirical and symptomatic.
The treatment of winter eczema of the hands should be both general and
local. Mild cases require little treatment and in general disappear with
warmer weather, or upon the application of any soothing bland ointment.
Chronic cases resist all forms of treatment and show definite changes in the
skin, which becomes dry, scaly, thickened, and fissured. In such cases every
effort should be made to investigate the presence of focal, systemic, or endo-
crine disturbance. The general health of chronic cases is usually below
normal.
598
Therapeutic measures involve avoidance of exposure of the affected parts;
refraining from the use of strongly alkaline soaps; application of starch water,
olive oil, mineral oil, or liquid petrolatum for cleansing purposes; the use of
stimulating ointments; application of silver nitrate when fissures are present;
and in some cases the use of fractional X-ray therapy. R. D. M.
SEBORRHOEIC DERMATITIS
RAYMOND V. QUINLAN
Meriden, Connecticut
Although the cause of seborrhoeic dermatitis is not definitely known our
suspicions fall on bacteria. It is characterized by a mildly inflammatory con-
dition with attendant hypersecretion of fat.
Treatment must pay due regard to the character and distribution of the
disease. Soap and water prove to be effective in mild cases of the scalp.
When the scalp is oily, mercury bichloride or 50 per cent alcohol may be
employed. For a dry scalp, the sulphur, resorcinol, and salicylic acid oint-
ments should be prescribed. Better success is usually obtained by substituting
12 to 25 per cent ammoniated mercury for sulphur. The ointment is applied
at night and washed out in the morning on three or four successive days.
Upon disappearance of clinical symptoms it is applied every week or every
two weeks. Some difficulty may be met in washing out petrolatum base oint-
ments. Some success has attended the use of shaving soap as a base. This
disease is a recurrent one; we can only control it. Three or four doses of
X-ray radiation, of one-eighth to one-sixteenth of a unit, has proved of assist-
ance. Calamine solution should be prescribed in acute involvement of the
face. For general treatment wet dressings of resorcinol and boric acid should
be used followed by 50 per cent ammoniated mercury plus 1 per cent salicylic
acid salve. The filtered X-ray has proved to be the only effective thera-
peutic agent for ear-canal seborrhoeic dermatitis. When the lip is concerned,
we meet with little success in spite of the use of ammoniated mercury, 20
per cent aluminum acetate, or even desiccation. Some hope attaches to a
proposed acid therapy which is based on the fact that skin tends to be alkaline
and thus aids the growth of possible fungi. This condition is remedied by an
acid solution, it being used instead of soap for washing. N. E. R.
PLANTAR WARTS
MERLIN J. STONE
Stamford, Connecticut
Plantar warts are quite common, and it is more than probable that the
increasing frequency with which they are seen parallels the increase of fungus
599EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
infection of the feet resulting from exposure to the etiological agent in such
public places as gymnasia, locker-rooms, and swimming-pools. Plantar warts
are of sufficient importance to justify the perfection of an adequate therapy.
Spontaneous cure occurs in a large number of common warts and, per-
haps, also in the case of plantar warts. Prophylactic treatment involves strict
cleanliness with the wearing of sandals or slippers, and the elimination of
existing warts. Treatment by suggestion through the use of charms and
hypnotism is common. Probably cure, if it occurs, is the result of a disturb-
ance of body chemistry. Systemic therapy through the use of intravenous
or intramuscular injections gives a high percentage of cures (70 per cent).
Local therapy involves the use of (1) chemical agents such as nitric acid,
glacial acetic acid, etc., (2) physical methods and agents such as carbon dioxide
snow, sunlight, electro- or actual cautery, X-rays, and radium.
Complications in the form of infection, hemorrhage, and pain from the
resulting scar may arise following the removal of plantar warts. R. D. M.
INJURIES TO THE EYE LEADING TO SYMPATHETIC OPHTHALMIA
MARTIN COHEN
New York City
It is well known that injury to the ciliary body will frequently lead to a
uveitis which in turn may produce a sympathetic ophthalmia in the other eye.
The ophthalmologist is frequently called upon to decide when-the injured eye
should be removed.
If it is so injured that there is complete loss of vision and there is tender-
ness over the ciliary region, it is desirable to enucleate the eye without delay.
If ciliary tenderness is present and vision in the injured eye is not seriously
impaired, waiting is advisable. The other eye should be watched for dis-
turbance in the uveal tract. Examination with the slit-lamp will reveal any
change in the aqueous humor. In the absence of visible pathology, the wait-
ing policy should be maintained.
If, when sympathetic opththalmia occurs, there remains considerable vision
in the injured eye it is inadvisable to enucleate the latter, as vision in the
former may in the course of the disease be completely destroyed.
Once sympathy appears it is very difficult to arrest. A. A. L.
ALLERGY OF THE UPPER AIR PASSAGES: INHERITED AND
ACQUIRED FACTORS
LEON FELDERMAN
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Allergy is the prominent factor in the pathogenesis of many diseases.
Vernal conjunctivitis, vasomotor rhinitis, asthma, eczema, urticaria, angio-
600
neurotic edema, and migraine may all be of this etiology. Rare cases of
mastoid disease have been found to improve when egg or milk are removed
from the diet.
Inhalants, ingestants, contactants, and injectants may be responsible.
Important in determining hypersensitiveness in general, rather than in any
specific hypersensitiveness, are hereditary influences. Endocrines such as the
female sex glands have been shown to affect the allergic state, and the action
of adrenalin is well known.
In attempting to arrive at a specific diagnosis intracutaneous, patch, or eye
tests should be employed. The patient's history and environment should be
scrutinized for a possible cause.
In treatment, air conditioning may be of help in providing proper moisture
and freedom from possibly guilty antigens. If the cause is found and is
otherwise unavoidable, specific desensitization should be attempted. Pre-
seasonal desensitization where it applies, and non-specific desensitization en-
hance the comfort of the patient. A. A. L.
MEDICINE AND LAW
HONORABLE ROBERT L. MUNGER
New Haven, Connecticut
A brief survey of the relative places which medicine and law occupy in
the community was presented, and the speaker referred to the-historical origins
of each. Medicine deals with science, law with concepts, but the two are
interrelated through the fundamental basis of the liberal arts. These profes-
sions may redeem themselves, not by science or by material gains, but through
liberal education. J. B. L.
THE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AND THE CONNECTICUT STATE
MEDICAL SOCIETY
STANHOPE BAYNE-JONES
New Haven, Connecticut
The Medical School was established as a product of the Medical Society
and remained its offspring for about 70 years, when the ties were dissolved.
They still have, however, several interests in common.
The Medical School is concerned with the education of students who
shall be qualified to practice the art of medicine, while the Medical Society
sees to it that the student is properly qualified. Students may evolve as two
types: the pure scientist or the practicing physician. "A student should know
a little more than he does about the world into which he is going" and for
this reason the Medical School and the Medical Society should be concerned
about the standards of medicine.
601EVENTS
602 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Both organizations are interested primarily in service to the community.
There are also certain sentimental and personal ties which bind the
Medical School and the Medical Society. Both contain members of Yale
University, either actively associated with it or as alumni. Members of the
School of Medicine faculty are members also of the Medical Society, and the
Society has a specific committee, whose function is cooperation with the School
of Medicine. J. B. L.
PRACTICE EXTENSION IN THE DEPRESSION
JAMES J. WALSH
Fordham University, New York
Inquiry into the matter of what may lead to an extension of the practice
of medicine, suggests that attention can well be given to the history of "the
cures that fail." Trousseau is quoted as having said that half of the people
that walked into his consulting-room had nothing wrong with their bodies,
but there was something the matter with their minds.
Allusion was made to the type of cures which have always supplied the
coffers of the cultists, with an attempt to see into what it was that they were
treating. Locke's shoes, Elisha Perkins' tractors, and Coue's sayings were
cited as the most successful of the cultist cures of mental disease. There is
reason to believe that the "millions" of people who accept this sort of therapy
could be divided among the medical profession rather than relegated to people
outside, as the cultists. In this respect, there is need for the cultivation of
optimism by the medical profession in treating these patients.
There is something in human beings other than the material, physical
things, and Walsh concludes, after 40 years of practice, that most people need
treatment of their minds. J. B. L.
NEW HAVEN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
Aprfl 17
SOME ASPECTS OF HYPERTENSION
DR. HARVEY CUSHING
The speaker first became interested in hypertension through some experi-
ments carried out in Kronecker's laboratory on states of acutely increased
intracranial pressure. These studies suggested the existence of a mechanism
that tended to keep arterial tension slightly above the level of the intracranial
tension. In the search for a practical sphygmomanometer whereby similar
responses in the operating-room and clinic could be made, he chanced to visit
Pavia where he found in use Riva-Rocci's home-made device with an inflatable
cuff to put around the arm. This device was subsequently introduced in the
Johns Hopkins Hospital and in modified form still serves as the basis of most
instruments for the clinical registration of blood-pressures.
The introduction of instruments of precision has advantages as well as
disadvantages. It was not until blood-pressures could be conveniently
recorded in millimetres of mercury that physicians began to talk of hyperten-
sion and perhaps less often about hypotension as if they were diseases, and
many persons because they were found to have the former have been needlessly
put in a panic and many a life insurance on this score is now refused.
What is called "essential" hypertension, particularly in young people,
like essential epilepsy or essential hydrocephalus, merely signifies that as yet
we have no satisfactory explanation for the condition. The kidneys have
long been under suspicion, and states of hypertension have been experimentally
produced in laboratory animals by various methods of causing severe renal
ischemia. However, in clinical cases the amount of damage to the kidney
is often surprisingly little.
Since the discovery forty years ago that extracts of the adrenal glands had
hemodynamic properties, the adrenals have also been under suspicion, more
particularly so since hypotension is a feature of Addison's disease in which the
adrenals are largely destroyed by disease. Malignant hypertension, however,
as seen in the clinic is rarely accompanied by any recognizable change either
in the adrenal cortex or medulla. Certain adrenal tumors, to be sure, are
associated with hypertension, and curiously enough they may be composed
either of medullary or cortical elements, extracts of which do not possess
hemodynamic properties. What is more, the excision of such tumors has in
a few instances been found to restore the blood pressure to normal.
The pituitary body is also a dual structure, extracts of whose neural lobe
have hemodynamic properties, whereas those of the pars anterior do not.
Here again, as in the case of the adrenals, removal or extensive destruction
of the gland is followed by vascular hypotension; and here, too, a peculiar
type of basophilic adenoma appears to produce hypertensive states.
Kraus and Berblinger, moreover, have observed that an increase in baso-
philic elements occurs in association with arteriovascular disease and hyper-
tension of advancing years. This, however, if they are correctly understood,
is looked upon as consequential rather than causal.
From the study of these basophilic adenomas, the speaker had been led
to investigate the question of posterior lobe basophilia. This appears to be
very common in states of essential hypertension, and he had ventured to sug-
gest that the degree of infiltration of the pars nervosa might be looked upon
as a measure of its functional hyperactivation. This view, however, has not
yet received support by others and remains merely a working hypothesis.
An interesting sidelight on the subject has been cast by H. E. MacMahon.
603EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
He has shown that a certain number of the victims of pituitary basophilism
have malignant nephrosclerosis, which Volhard and Fahr look upon as the
underlying factor in malignant hypertension. Thus there are three possible
sources of malignant hypertension: viz., kidney, suprarenal glands, and pitu-
itary body. Surgeons have chiefly interested themselves in the adrenal aspects
of the subject and have devised numerous ways of interrupting sympathetic
impulses to these glands, in some few instances with notably favorable thera-
peutic effects.
So far as the pituitary body is concerned, it is quite probable that the hyper-
tensive feature of the basophilism syndrome could be overcome by removal of
the small adenoma; and in a few instances a favorable effect has been brought
about by irradiation of the pituitary body. Irradiation has also been tried with
contradictory results in cases of essential hypertension unassociated with the
other clinical aspects of pituitary basophilism.
While the subject is an important one, it is still poorly understood and is
likely to remain so until essential hypertension is reproduced in animals, so that
we may learn something more definite of the pathogenic factor or factors
relating to the internal secretion. Not until then can we know just how they
should be attacked. H. H.
May 1
ANEMIAS: ETIOLOGY, DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT, WITH
PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO PERNICIOUS ANEMIA
DR. GEORGE R. MINOT
Harvard Medical School
The anemias concern the central nervous system and the gastro-intestinal
tract in addition to the blood. A stomach tube and a tuning-fork are valuable
instruments in diagnosis and treatment. A list of etiological factors is as
follows:
A. Gastric factor: (1) Deficient nutrition (macrocytic); (2) food
factor (sprue and pregnancy); (3) absorption (sprue and celiac disease);
(4) internal metabolism (cirrhosis of the liver).
B. Iron deficiency: (1) Intake (babies kept too long on a milk diet);
(2) absorption (anacidity, diarrhea); (3) utilization (chlorosis); (4) blood
loss (hemorrhage and pregnancy).
C. Vitamin C deficiency.
D. Copper (rare).
In a study of 100 cases the predominating onset symptoms were: gastro-
intestinal-31 (digestion, 14; gall-bladder, 8; peptic ulcer, 3); nervous-
26 (legs, 23; hand, 2; mind, 1); generalized weakness-33; cardiac-10
(angina, 5; dyspnea and palpitation, 5). The time, in years, required for
604
diagnosis after symptoms were definite, was: gastro-intestinal, 2.19; nervous,
1.28; generalized, 0.9,9; cardiac, 0.95. In 35 cases there was a long his-
tory of indigestion. On post-mortem, 25 per cent of cases showed signs of
gall-bladder disease. Concomitant conditions noted include arthritis in 30
per cent of cases, myxedema, cancer of stomach, and diarrhea.
Anemia must be treated on a quantitative basis, for degrees of lack vary,
while such factors as infection or sclerosis may inhibit the action of the agents
employed. Intramuscular treatment is 60 times as potent as when liver is
given by mouth and permits larger doses being used. If the hemoglobin con-
tent is low, iron as well as liver must be given. If the color index goes up,
more liver is needed. A greater amount of liver is indicated by greater age,
cardiovascular disease, damage to the liver, infection, neural lesions, and symp-
toms due to pernicious anemia. Recent work has shown that bile pigment,
crude chlorophyll, pheophytin, and sodium chlorophyllin accelerate iron utiliza-
tion. As yet, this is only of significance to the physiologist, for adequate iron
therapy is readily and cheaply attained.
There is a great deal yet to be learned about anemia. In all our efforts
toward this end the sick individual must remain the center of attention.
N. E. R.
May 15
THE INDICATIONS FOR RADIUM AND X-RAY THERAPY OF CANCER
DR. GEORGE T. PACK
Memorial Hospital, New York City
The advances in cancer treatment are due to the achievements of pathol-
ogists, to the use of radiation therapy and physical methods, and to the per-
fection of surgical technic, which also includes the surgical approach for
radiation therapy to otherwise inaccessible regions. If radiation is to be used,
the radiosensitivity of the tumor must be greater than that of normal tissue,
otherwise therapy is valueless and may lead to serious complications. Several
factors determine radiosensitivity. One is that the more rapidly growing
tumors are, in general, more radiosensitive. Another is that sensitivity is not
dependent on the anatomical structure or on the number of mitotic figures but
is an inherited factor depending on the tissue derivation of the tumor. How-
ever, there is no general rule applicable to tumors even if they are of the same
origin.
Early carcinoma of the lip is best treated by X-ray and radium, as the
tumor is very radiosensitive. Radiation has the added advantage that plastic
repair is unnecessary as it would be with surgical treatment. In advanced
cases, surgery is indicated, since plastic surgery will be necessary in any event,
for if radiation is used, the field is poor for plastic surgery as it is quite
avascular.
605EVENTS
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Carcinoma of the tongue, especially the posterior third, carcinoma of any
part of Waldeyer's ring, Schneiderian carcinoma, and carcinoma of the antrum
should usually be treated by radiation. The radiotherapy consists of external
radiation, radium pack, interstitial gold radon seeds, or a combination of any
two or all three.
Total laryngectomy for laryngeal cancer will give a fair percentage of
cures, but the loss of voice and consequent disability is a serious drawback.
Small daily doses of X-ray for three weeks yield a higher percentage of five-
year cures with less disability to the patient.
Surgery has cured a very few cases of esophageal cancer. Radiation has
not been able to effect any cures but it may be used as a palliative.
Carcinoma of the stomach is a surgical problem. All degrees of gas-
trectomy may be performed. Radiation may be used as a palliative especially
in inoperable cancer of the fundus or cardia. Radiotherapy consists of exter-
nal radiation and interstitial gold radon seeds.
Carcinoma of the colon is not radiosensitive and hence radiation is not used.
Rectal cancer of grade IV malignancy can be treated by external radiation
and implantation of gold radon seeds. Those of grades I, II, and III, i.e.,
of lesser malignancy than grade IV, should be treated surgically by resection,
and treatment may be supplemented with radiation.
Carcinoma of the pancreas, if operable, should be removed surgically.
Some good palliative results have been obtained with external radiation in
inoperable cases.
The treatment of the Wilms' tumor in children consists of external radia-
tion until maximum regression has been obtained, followed by nephrectomy
and postoperative radiation.
Carcinoma of the breast may well be treated by a combination of pre-
operative radiation and surgery. Radiation alone should not be relied on as
the degree of radiosensitivity of different types of mammary cancer is
extremely variable and, furthermore, the operative mortality is extremely low.
Surgical treatment of cancer of the cervix is not as effective in bringing
about a cure as is radiation therapy. Surgery also has the added disadvantage
of a high operative mortality. Cancer of the vulva should be treated
surgically.
The contraindications for radical resection of cervical lymph nodes are:
(1) incurable primary tumor, (2) crossed oral carcinoma, (3) crossed lym-
phatic metastases, (4) fixed, non-movable lymph nodes, (5) perforated cap-
sule of node, (6) highly malignant and extremely radiosensitive primary
tumors, and (7) poor condition of the patient. If any one of the above exist,
the dissection should not be performed. The nodes may then be treated by
external radiation and sometimes by the insertion of gold radon seeds.
A. A. R.
606
EVENTS
June 5
MOBILIZATION OF STIFF JOINTS BY ARTHROPLASTY
DR. W. R. MACAUSLAND
Diseased joints in general should be treated in the "functional" position,
i.e., the position which allows maximum function. If this is done recovery
takes place in the shortest possible time with the fewest unpleasant sequelae.
For inztance, a position of partial abduction is "functional" for the shoulder
joint-in fact, a shoulder joint ankylosed in such a position is probably best
left as it is.
In his pioneer work on ankylosed joints Murphy removed a good deal of
bone and inserted large amounts of nearby tissue between the ends of the
bones. The resulting joint was generally mobile but often unstable. Many
substances have been used for insertion between the bone ends-rubber, gutta-
percha, cellulose, celluloid, chromicized pig's bladder, etc. Nearly all were
followed by sepsis and reankylosis, and have since been discarded.
The most satisfactory method of arthroplasty is a careful dissection and
reconstructidn of the joint with insertion of a piece of fascia lata from the
thigh between the joint surfaces. If properly done this procedure results in a
smooth-working stable joint.
Considerable care should be used in the selection of cases. No joint
should be operated upon which has not been free from signs of sepsis for
some two years, and every patient should be thoroughly examined for foci
of infection in teeth, sinuses, pelvis, urinary tract, and elsewhere. Non-
observance of these precautions doubtless accounted for some of the early
failures and fatalities in this work.
During the past few years many successful arthroplasties have been done,
particularly on the elbow and knee, for both of which satisfactory operations
have been devised. The principle of both operations is the same, i.e., free
exposure of the joint, careful remodeling of the bone ends with rongeurs and
file, fitting of a piece of fascia lata over each end like a bag and securing it
with a purse-string suture. Excellent mobility is often obtained in these joints
and it is thought that the piece of fascia lata introduced may actually secrete,
in time, a little "synovial" fluid. P. M. L.
607
