THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 55 (1982), 477-485
Bone Marrow Transplantation:
Current Results in Leukemia
GEORGE W. SANTOS, M.D.
Professor of Oncology and Medicine, Oncology Center,
Johns Hopkins University School ofMedicine, Baltimore, Maryland
Received May 18, 1982
Bone marrow transplantation offers two potential therapeutic advantages over more con-
ventional therapy of leukemia. It allows more intensive treatment to be given without regard to
marrow toxicity and allows in the case of allogeneic marrow an additional immunotherapeutic
effect through graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Initially, allogeneic transplants in HLA
matched sibling donors were only employed in end-stage patients. Although there were en-
couraging results in terms of long-term therapeutic effects, the overall mortality was pro-
hibitive. Subsequently, patients were transplanted in remission with a marked improvement in
overall survival in both acute lymphocytic leukemia and acute non-lymphocytic leukemia. The
major obstacles to further improvement in the therapeutic effects of this procedure have been
identified (i.e., GVHD, viral infection, and relapse in ALL) and are subject to intensive in-
vestigations that already show encouraging results. Syngeneic marrow transplantation is
limited for obvious reasons, but early results have shown significant therapeutic effects, in par-
ticular, in chronic myelogenous leukemia. These results have encouraged others to use
autologous bone marrow. Marrow contamination with unseen tumor cells is being approached
by pharmacologic and immunologic techniques designed to "purge" marrow of tumor cells.
Animal and initial clinical studies have been encouraging.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers two potential therapeutic advantages
over that of more conventional therapy in leukemia. First, it allows treatment with
very intensive cytoreductive therapy without regard to marrow toxicity since the
marrow infusion is able to "rescue" the patient from this otherwise lethal toxicity. In
addition, allogeneic marrow transplantation may have an immunotherapeutic effect
against residual tumor via graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
In the present discussion, we will consider some of the highlights as to the present
state of the art of allogeneic, syngeneic, and autologous bone marrow transplanta-
tion in the acute leukemias and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). For the
theoretical, historical, and more extensive treatment of this subject the reader is
referred to several reviews [1-5].
MARROW DONOR
In all mammals studied, the major immunologic barrier to transplantation is
determined by a linear array of genes; in man these are located on chromosome 6.
477
Presented as part of the Cancer Lecture Series on October 30, 1981, at the Yale Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine.
The author's work has been supported in part by grants CA-06973 and CA-15396 from the National
Cancer Institute.
Copyright 0 1982 by The Yale Journal of Piology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
GEORGE W. SANTOS
This complex of genetic material is called the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC). A series of alleles exist for loci A, B, C, and Dr that can be identified
serologically by typing (microcytotoxicity testing) the lymphocytes of the patient
and the family. In addition, a fifth locus, the D locus closely associated with Dr,
may be identified by determining reactivity (non-identity) or non-reactivity (identity)
in one-way mixed lymphocyte cultures in vitro. In simple terms, all these laboratory
tests are designed to identify the two paternal and two maternal chromosomes
(haplotypes) and their inheritance in the family. Thus, after the typing is finished a
genetic analysis is made by inspection of the data. Individuals sharing the same
haplotypes are said to be genotypically HLA identical. These individuals, of course,
differ in terms of minor histocompatibility determinants since their inheritance of
other genetic material is not identical.
Although in certain situations "mismatched" donors and even unrelated donors
may be used, herein when we consider allogeneic donors they will be genotypically
HLA identical siblings.
Marrow is collected in heparinized syringes under general anesthesia from the
posterior iliac crests in the amount of 10-20 ml/kg. The marrow is then passed
through screens of decreasing mesh size and finally transferred to an empty blood
bag. The marrow is then immediately brought to the ward and infused intravenously
(IV) without an in-line filter [6].
Since the genes that determine major blood group antigens are not located on
chromosome 6, a situation may arise where a patient with blood group 0 has a
donor who is blood group A. Currently this poses no problem since one may simply
centrifuge the collected marrow and remove the mismatched erythrocytes. This is
routinely done on our unit and in no way have the results differed therapeutically
from situations where donors with ABO compatible marrow were used [7,8].
The term syngeneic is used when the marrow donor is a monozygotic twin. When
the patient serves as his own donor, the term autologous is employed. In these situa-
tions, of course, the marrow cells share all the genetic material of the recipient and
the expected hazards as well as possible therapeutic effects of allogeneic effects are
absent.
ALLOGENEIC TRANSPLANTATION
For ethical reasons, initial marrow transplants in acute leukemia were performed
only in end-stage patients, patients who had eventually relapsed and failed to go into
another remission with the best available chemotherapy. Total body irradiation
(TBI) alone, TBI in combination with cyclophosphamide (CY) [4,91, CY alone or in
combination with busulfan (BU) [10,11] were used as preparative treatments in these
early studies. The remarkable aspects of these early studies is that up to 15 percent of
such patients showed long-term leukemia-free survivals that operationally at least
appear to be cures. Unfortunately, however, early mortality was extremely high with
the majority of patients not dying of leukemia but rather from complications of the
treatment. Estimates of relapse rates also were in the order of 70-100 percent. The
UCLA group attempted to improve the results by an even more intensive cytoreduc-
tive treatment. Although there was a suggestion of a decreased leukemic relapse
rate, the overall survival was not improved because of treatment-related toxicity
[12]. Patients with blastic crisis (BC) with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
have a notoriously poor prognosis. In a sense, they are like the end-stage patients
with acute leukemia. In one series where allogeneic marrow transplantation was per-
formed, most died of either uncontrolled leukemia or treatment complications;
478
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION IN LEUKEMIA
however, three of 24 such patients are living in continuous remission for 30-60
months, indicating that a small salvage rate with allogeneic BMT is also achievable
here [4].
New directions and strategies were clearly needed and about six to seven years ago
it was decided to transplant acute leukemia patients while they were in remission. It
was reasoned that such patients would be in much better condition and free of infec-
tion and, furthermore, there would be less of a body burden of tumor to contend
with.
The Seattle group reported a series of patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia
(ALL) who were transplanted in their second remission following preparation with
CY 60 mg/kg given on each of two successive days and followed with a single dose
of TBI (800-1,000 rads). At the time of the report [131 7/22, or 32 percent, of the pa-
tients were surviving from two to four years free of disease. The majority of patients
[4] who failed therapy did so because of leukemia recurrence. The transplant center
at Sloan-Kettering has reported early results in a similar group of patients in second
remission, using CY in combination with hyperfractionated irradiation. Initial
results show a leukemia-free survival better than that reported by the Seattle group
[14]. Other preliminary reports wherein fractionated TBI was used in conjunction
with CY are also encouraging in this regard. Time and the addition of more patients
to these series is needed before one can judge the additional therapeutic effect of
fractionated radiation versus single-dose radiation. Further, the possible benefit of
transplanting poor risk ALL in first remission is being currently investigated by
several centers. If the situation is similar to acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANL),
leukemia-free survival should be increased. Essentially all transplant groups employ
TBI in ALL. It should be noted, however, that there is no evidence that TBI must be
employed to obtain equivalent tumor control rates. One European center has sug-
gested that chemotherapeutic regimens without TBI deserve further trial in ALL in
remission [15].
In contrast with earlier series of "end-stage" patients where the majority of pa-
tients died of non-leukemic causes, leukemic relapse has been the major problem in
patients transplanted in their second or subsequent remission. This strengthens the
notion that patients in remission better withstand the rigors of cytoreduction
because of a more favorable clinical condition.
The most exciting results have been reported for patients with ANL transplanted
in first remission. The largest series of such patients has been reported by the Seattle
group, using CY plus single or fractionated doses of TBI [16]. Of 58 such patients
transplanted, more than half were living in continuous complete remission with a
median duration -of greater than 34 months at the time of the report [4]. Further-
more, at that time only three of 58, or 5 percent, had suffered a relapse. Subsequently,
the Seattle group compared the effects of CY with single doses of TBI versus frac-
tionated TBI [17]. Kaplan-Meier analysis suggested a survival advantage of the
fractionated regimen but reasons for this increased survival were not clear since the
incidence of acute GVHD, chronic GVHD, leukemic relapse, etc. was not statistically
different in the two groups. A number of other groups employing single or frac-
tionated TBI for transplantation of ANL in first remission have reported their initial
results [18-20]. In general, their results in small series are similar or better than
reported by the Seattle group.
Our group is the only major transplant group that does not employ TBI in our
preparative regimen for transplantation in ANL without a history of CNS disease.
Based on extensive study in the rat [21-23] and studies in "end-stage" patients with
479
GEORGE W. SANTOS
ANL in relapse [10,11], we prepare patients with ANL with 4 mg/kg of BU given
orally on each of four successive days (total dose of 16 mg/kg), followed immediately
by CY (50 mg/kg) given on each of four consecutive days (total dose, 200 mg/kg).
Prophylaxis for CNS leukemia is provided with a course of intrathecal
chemotherapy 50-70 days following transplantation. At the time of this writing, we
have transplanted 33 patients in first, second, and third remission or early relapse.
Fifteen survive free of leukemia for 53 to 1,124 days (median, 470 days). There has
been only one relapse to date. This was in a 35-year-old male who relapsed in the
marrow 349 days following transplantation in his third remission. He was re-
transplanted using CY and fractionated TBI and survives free of leukemia 246 days
after the second transplant and 607 days after the first transplant. It is hoped that, as
more patients are added to the series and it matures with time, comparisons can be
made to other series where TBI is employed regarding late toxicities (i.e., cataracts,
pulmonary function deficits, growth rates, sterility, malignancies, etc.).
The decision to perform marrow transplantation, particularly in first remission,
has met with some resistance and it has been argued that survival curves for
transplanted patients are not yet statistically different from survival curves of
similar patients treated only with chemotherapy 124]. Clearly this matter will not be
settled without clinical trials that prospectively compare transplantation versus more
conventional cytoreductive therapy. It is hoped that the answer will soon be ap-
parent from several such trials that have already begun.
COMPLICATIONS OF ALLOGENEIC MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
The most serious complications following allogeneic marrow transplantation are
viral infections in the form of gastroenteritis and interstitial pneumonitis and acute
and chronic GVHD.
During the first month following transplantation, patients are highly susceptible
to bacterial infections, particularly those gram-negative in origin. Patients in "good"
clinical condition (i.e., in remission) are able to weather this period much better than
the "end-stage" patients. The appropriate use of some of the newer antibiotics, isola-
tion procedures, and judicious use of granulocyte transfusions have markedly de-
creased the severity of these complications (unless complicated by severe acute
GVHD). Currently, mortality from bacterial infection is less than 5 percent in our
center.
Following marrow transplantation, there is a severe combined immunodeficiency
that, in its gradual repair, mimics what one would expect in a recapitulation of on-
togeny [25]. We have found both B-cell, T-helper cell and T-supressor cell abnor-
malities [26]. It is, therefore, not surprising that these patients are, for a variable
length of time, susceptible to life-threatening fungal (i.e., candidiasis, aspergillosis),
protozoan (Pneumocystis Carinii), and viral infections [herpes simplex (HSV),
cytomegalic virus (CMV) and varicella zoster (VZV)]. Despite the use of Am-
photericin B, fungal infections account for 10 percent of deaths. The problem of
Pneumocystis Carinii has largely been eliminated with the use of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole. Similarly, the morbidity and mortality from HSV infections
should, in the future, be markedly decreased with the use of acyclovir [27].
Interstitial pneumonitis, 60 percent of which are associated with CMV, remains a
particularly serious problem in most transplant centers. The incidence in various
centers is 30 to 50 percent of allogeneic transplants with a fatality of 50-60 percent.
Preliminary observations from our own group suggest that it is less in those patients
who have received BU and CY or fractionated TBI as opposed to single high doses
480
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION IN LEUKEMIA
of TBI [unpublished observations]. Recent observations from our center indicate
that the prognosis of CMV infections correlates with cytotoxic T and other cytotoxic
cell responses [28]. Efforts to augment these responses by direct or indirect measures
should, in the future, decrease the mortality from this complication.
GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE
Acute GVHD remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality following
allogeneic marrow transplantation, despite the use of genotypical HL-A identical
sibling donors and post-transplant immunosuppression with methotrexate (MTX) or
CY. This iatrogenic disease shows a varied clinical spectrum ranging from a mild
skin rash to severe involvement of the skin, gut, liver, and bronchial mucosa.
Depending upon its severity it is also associated with profound immunodeficiency
and susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Severe acute GVHD may occur in
30-50 percent of patients with a mortality of 30 to 60 percent.
Acute GVHD has been well studied in animal models. It is clear that the disease is
initiated by cytotoxic T cells reactive to host minor antigens. On the basis of studies
in a variety of species, it appears to be a self-limited disease from which individuals
may recover if they are able to survive the critical period when immunologic
defenses and anatomic (i.e., skin and gut) barriers are broken and susceptible to in-
vasion by bacterial, mycotic, and viral agents. Eventually specific suppressor cells of
T lymphocyte origin arise that are able to terminate the generation of new cytotoxic
T cells [29]. Animal studies suggest that at least some thymic function is required
for amplification of the T suppressor response [29].
Treatment of the disease with steroids and/or antithymocyte globulin, although
partially successful, is far from satisfactory. A more rational approach would be a
prophylactic treatment to prevent the disease. The aim ideally would be to prevent
the development of cytotoxic T-cell responses and yet permit the development of
specific T suppressor responses. Cyclosporin A, a novel immunosuppressant agent,
appears to be an agent capable of accomplishing this aim in rodents [30]. Clinical
studies with Cyclosporin are currently under way at several centers [31,32].
Another promising approach being evaluated in several centers is to attempt to rid
the marrow inoculum of post-thymic T cells that initiate acute GVHD. A variety of
physical, immunologic (i.e., monoclonal antibodies), and pharmacologic methods
are being vigorously pursued, some showing initial clinical promise. For a more
complete discussion of this fascinating subject the reader is referred to other reviews
[33].
A chronic form of GVHD has been recognized in 25 to 40 percent of patients
undergoing allogeneic marrow transplantation. The disease is polymorphous in
nature and has a number of clinical manifestation similar to the collagen vascular
disorders: dyspigmentation, scleroderma-like lesions of the skin, mucositis, malab-
sorption, and pulmonary insufficiency. Chronic GVHD appears to represent a
severe imbalance of humoral and cellular immunity without the fine control system
that regulates a normal immune response. Less is known about the mechanisms in-
volved in chronic as opposed to acute GVHD; however, it is a subject of intense in-
vestigation both in the laboratory and clinic Mortality in this disease used to be as
high as 80 percent, primarily because of the associated immunodeficiency and death
due to gram-positive organisms. Currently this mortality has been reduced to about
10 percent with empiric treatment with corticosteroids and azathioprine [34] which
appears to restore immunologic balance in the majority of cases.
With the variety of approaches being taken, it is this author's opinion that the
481
prevention of clinical acute and chronic GVHD is highly likely in the next few years.
Paradoxically this may create new problems. For instance, it has been shown that
GVHD may have a therapeutic effect in preventing clinical relapse of leukemia. Will
leukemic relapses be increased if the practical problems of GVHD are solved? In an-
ticipation of an affirmative answer to this question, efforts in laboratory models are
being directed toward replacing the therapeutic effect of GVHD with alternative im-
munologic or chemotherapeutic treatments.
SYNGENEIC MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Marrow transplantation with monozygotic twin donors (syngeneic) offers a uni-
que opportunity to study transplantation without the problems associated with
GVHD. A series of 34 such patients with refractory leukemia in relapse(18ALL, 16
ANL) have been transplanted following treatment with CY and single-dose TBI
[35]. Recurrence of leukemia (13 ALL and 10 ANL) was the principal cause of
death. Three patients with ALL and five with ANL remain in complete remission
without maintenance therapy from 29 to 103 months. Mortality in this group due to
non-leukemic causes is much reduced over that seen in a similar allogeneic series;
however, this is balanced by the increase in leukemic relapse due to the absence of
GVH.
The possible therapeutic effect of GVH in ANL is strongly suggested by the fact
that of 20 cases of ANL known to the author [unpublished observations] trans-
planted in their first remission using monozygotic twin donors, 10 of 20, or 50 per-
cent, have relapsed as compared to the 5 percent seen in the Seattle series of allo-
geneic BMT for ANL in first remission.
Patients with CML in BC have a poor prognosis; however, one of six such pa-
tients given an identical-twin transplant survives in continuous unmaintained remis-
sion for 52 months [4]. The transplantation of such patients in the chronic phase of
their disease using identical twin donors, however, has demonstrated remarkable
results with 10 of 12 such patients showing complete continuous remission, free of
Ph' positive cells for 9 to 53 months (median 21) [36]. These results suggest that an
additional therapeutic effect of GVHD may not be required in all malignancies in
order to obtain long-term disease-free survival and possible cure. Encouraged by
these results, allogeneic transplantation in the chronic phase of CML has begun at
several centers. Initial results appear promising [33].
AUTOLOGOUS MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Currently there is a fair amount of interest in autologous marrow transplantation
partly because of the results of allogeneic marrow transplantation but more so
because of what can be accomplished with syngeneic transplants. The technology
and early results of clinical trials are presented in recent reviews [37-41).
Although some patients with acute leukemia have been transplanted with marrow
obtained in initial remission and cryopreserved without further treatment, none
have exhibited prolonged disease-free survival equivalent to that seen in syngeneic
transplants. An analysis of actuarial leukemia-free survival from data pooled from
several centers showed a median duration of remission of four to six months with no
evidence of a plateau of long-term disease-free survivors [42]. This suggests the
autologous marrow may contain viable leukemic cells. It would appear, therefore,
that an important requirement for autologous marrow transplantation in acute
leukemia would be the use of marrow that has been "purged" of tumor cells prior to
cryopreservation.
482 GEORGE W.SSANTOS
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION IN LEUKEMIA 483
Elsewhere, we have reviewed details of studies in animal model systems that in-
dicated it was possible to "purge" tumor cells from marrow by pharmacologic or im-
munologic methods [40]. We, for instance, were able to show that a congener of CY,
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4HC) was able to eliminate tumor cells from a
marrow-tumor cell suspension with a short in vitro incubation without inhibiting the
ability of this treated marrow to protect irradiated rats from lethal aplasia [43]. Cur-
rently we are engaged in a phase I study designed to determine the maximum concen-
tration of 4HC that can be used for in vitro incubation without destroying the
capacity of the marrow to effect hematologic recovery after otherwise lethal inten-
sive cytoreductive therapy. So far, early results indicate that satisfactory hemato-
logic recovery may be obtained at drug concentrations that inhibit over 90 percent of
the marrow colony forming units in culture (CFU-c) [44]. The current concentra-
tions are several orders of magnitude above what is even feasible if given in vivo.
Immunologic approaches to the elimination of tumor cells in vitro have also been
successful in animal model systems. Marrow-tumor cell mixtures have been in-
cubated with ordinary antibody (prepared in other species) and complement and
more recently with monoclonal antibodies and complement. Recently a number of
clinical trials have begun with this approach [33]. Although this method appeals to
the intellect because of its simplicity and specificity and offers the exciting possibility
of increasing its therapeutic effect by coupling a toxin to the antibody, the phar-
macologic approach may indeed turn out to be more practical. Theoretically, all one
needs to do is to destroy all the tumor cells without destroying the restorative prop-
erties of hematopoietic stem cells. It may make little difference whether or not other
cells in the marrow infusate are destroyed.
CONCLUSIONS
Prior studies have established that marrow transplantation is the treatment of
choice for severe aplastic anemia and severe combined immunodeficiency. Current
clinical results suggest that marrow transplantation in acute leukemia is at the very
least a viable option for the patient. Most of the major obstacles for a successful
outcome have been identified and solutions are being actively pursued. With the cur-
rent pace of laboratory and clinical research in this area, it seems reasonable to
predict that marrow transplantation will become the treatment of choice for acute
leukemia early on in the disease.
REFERENCES
1. Santos GW: Bone marrow transplantation. In Advances in Internal Medicine. Edited by GH Stoller-
man. Chicago, Year Book Medical Publishers, Inc, 1979, pp 157-182
2. Santos GW: The application of marrow grafts in human disease: Its problems and potential. In Con-
temporary Topics in Immunobiology. Edited by MG Hanna. New York, Plenum Publishing Corp,
1972, pp 143-184
3. Santos GW, Kaizer H: current status of autologous marrow transplantation. In Cancer:
Achievements, Challenges, and Prospects for the 1980s. Edited by JH Burchenal, HF Oettgen. New
York, Grune & Stratton, Inc, 1981, pp 673-682
4. Thomas ED: Bone marrow transplantation. In Cancer: Achievements, Challenges, and Prospects for
the 1980s. Edited by JH Burchenal, HF Oettgen. New York, Grune & Stratton, Inc, 1981,
pp 625-638
5. Thomas ED, Storb R, Clift RA, et al: Bone marrow transplantation. New Eng J Med 292:832-843;
895-902, 1975
6. Thomas ED, Storb R: Technique for human marrow grafting. Blood 36:507-515, 1970
7. Braine HG, Sensenbrenner LL, Wright SK, et al: Erythrocyte-incompatible bone marrow transplants.
In Experimental Hematology Today. Edited by SJ Baum, GD Ledney. New York, Springer-Verlag,
Inc., 1979, pp 215-220
484 GEORGE W. SANTOS
8. Sensenbrenner LL, Braine HG, Wright SK, et al: Erythrocyte incompatible bone marrow transplan-
tation: Physical purging of red cells and clinical results. Exp Hematol 9:127, 1981
9. Thomas ED, Buckner CD, Banaji M, et al: One hundred patients with acute leukemia treated by
chemotherapy, total body irradiation and allogeneic marrow transplantation. Blood 49:511-533,
1977
10. Tutschka PJ, Elfenbein GJ, Sensenbrenner LL, et al: Preparative regimens for marrow transplanta-
tion in acute leukemia and aplastic anemia-Baltimore experience. Am J Pediatr Hemat/Oncol
2:363-370, 1980
11. Tutschka PJ, Santos GW, Elfenbein GJ: Marrow transplantation in acute leukemia following
busulfan and cyclophosphamide. BLUT (Suppl 25):375-380, 1980
12. UCLA Bone Marrow Transplant Group: Bone marrow transplantation with intensive chemo-
therapy/radiation therapy (SCARI) in acute leukemia. Ann Intern Med 86:155-161, 1977
13. Thomas ED, Sanders JE, Flournoy N, et al: Marrow transplantation for patients with acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia in remission. Blood 54:468-476, 1979
14. Dinsmore R, Kapoor N, Kirkpatrick D, et al: Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) for acute
leukemia in remission. Proc Amer Assoc Cancer Res and Amer Soc Clin Oncol 22:491, 1981
15. Granena A, Rozman C, Casals F, et al: Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in acute leukemia with
BACT conditioning: Results in 7 cases. In Bone Marrow Transplantation in Europe. Edited by JL
Touvaine. Amsterdam, Oxford, Princeton, Excerpta Medica, 1979, pp 98-103
16. Thomas ED, Buckner CD, Clift RA, et al: Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphoblastic
leukemia in first remission. New Eng J Med 301:597-599, 1979
17. Thomas ED, Buckner CD, Clift RA, et al: Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphoblastic
leukemia in first remission using fractionated or single-dose irradiation. Int J Rad Onc, in press
18. Blume KG, Beutler E, Bross KJ et al: Bone marrow ablation and allogeneic marrow transplantation
in acute leukemia. New Eng J Med 302:1041-1046, 1980
19. Kersey J, Ramsaw, N, Kim T, et al: Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in first remission in young
patients with acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANLL). Proc Amer Assoc Cancer Res and Amer Soc
Clin Oncol 22:143, 1981
20. Powles RL, Morgenstern G, Clink HM, et al: The place of bone marrow transplantation in acute
myelogenous leukemia. Lancet i:1047-1050, 1980
21. Santos GW, Tutschka PJ: The effect of busulfan on antibody production and skin allograft survival
in the rat. J Natl Cancer Inst 53:1775-1780, 1974
22. Tutschka PJ, Santos GW: Marrow transplantation in the busulfan-treated rat. I. Effect of
cyclophosphamide and rabbit anti-rat thymocyte serum as immunosuppression. Transplantation
20:101-106, 1975
23. Tutschka PJ, Santos GW: Bone marrow transplantation in the busulfan-treated rat. II. Effect of
cyclophosphamide and anti-thymic serum on the presensitized state. Transplantation 20:116-122,
1975
24. Wiernik PH, Holland JF, Rai K, et al: Comparison of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) with
chemotherapy alone (CT) for remission maintenance in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Proc
Amer Assoc Cancer Res and Amer Soc Clin Oncol 22:484, 1981
25. Elfenbein GJ, Saral R: Infectious disease during immune recovery after bone marrow transplanta-
tion. In Infection and the Compromised Host Clinical Correlations and Therapeutic Approaches,
Second Edition. Edited by JD Allen. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins Co, Inc, 1981, pp 157-196
26. Korsmeyer SJ, Elfenbein GJ, Goldman C, et al: B-cell, helper cell and suppressor cell abnormalities
in patients with hypogammaglobulinemia following bone marrow transplantation. Transplantation
33:184-190, 1982
27. Saral R, Burns WH, Laskin OK, et al: Acyclovir prophylaxis of herpes simplex virus infections. A
randomized double-blind, controlled trial in bone marrow transplant recipients. New Eng J Med
305:63-67, 1981
28. Quinnan GV, Kirmani N, Esber E, et al: Restricted cytotoxic T Lymphocyte and nonthymic cytotoxic
lymphocytes responses to cytomegalovirus infection of bone marrow transplant recipients. J Inmnunol
126:2036-2041, 1981
29. Tutschka PJ, Hutchins GM, Santos GW: Suppressor cells as possible mediators of immune function
after marrow transplantation. In Experimental Hematology Today. Edited by SJ Baum, GD Ledney.
New York, Springer-Verlag Inc, 1979, pp 113-121
30. Tutschka PJ, Hess AD, Beschorner WE, et al: Cyclosporin A in bone marrow transplantation-
Baltimore experience in preclinical studies. In Experimental Hematology Today. Edited by SJ Baum,
GD Ledney. New York, Springer-Verlag Inc, 1981, pp 99-106
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION IN LEUKEMIA 485
31. Powles RL, Clink HM, Spence D, et al: Cyclosporin A to prevent graft-versus-host disease in man
after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Lancet i:327-329, 1980
32. Tutschka PJ, Beschorner WE, Hess AD, et al: Cyclosporin A to prevent graft-versus-host disease. A
pilot study in 22 patients receiving allogeneic marrow transplants. Blood, in press
33. Santos GW, Kaizer H: Bone marrow transplantation in acute leukemia. Sem Hematol 19 (3):227-239,
1982
34. Sullivan KM, Shulman HM, Storb R, et al: Chronic graft-versus-host disease in 52 patients: Adverse
natural course and successful treatment with combination immunosuppression. Blood 57:267-276,
1981
35. Fefer A, Cheever MA, Thomas ED, et al: Bone marrow transplantation for refractory acute
leukemia in 34 patients with identical twins. Blood 57:421-430, 1981
36. Fefer A, Cheever MA, Boyd L, et al: Clinical and cytogeneic complete remission (CR) in 12 CML pa-
tients after chemoradiotherapy and identical twin bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Proc Amer
Assoc Cancer Res and Amer Soc Clin Oncol 22:492, 1981
37. Deisseroth A, Abrams RA: The role of autologous stem cell reconstitution in the intensive therapy of
resistant neoplasms. Cancer Treat Rep 63: 461-471, 1979
38. Dicke KA, Zander A, Spitzer G, et al: Autologous bone marrow transplantation in relapsed adult
acute leukemia. Exp Hematol 7:170-187, 1979
39. Graze PR, Gale RP: Autotransplantation for leukemia and solid tumors. Transplant Proc
10:177-184, 1978
40. Kaizer H, Wharam MD, Johnson RJ, et al: Requirements for the successful application of
autologous bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of selected malignancies. BLUT:285-296,
1980
41. Santos GW, Kaizer H: Current status of autologous marrow transplantation. In Cancer:
Achievements, Challenges, and Prospects for the 1980s. Edited by JH Burchenal, HF Oettgen. New
York, Grune & Stratton Inc, 1981, pp 673-682
42. Gale RP: Bone marrow transplantation in leukemia. J Supramol Struct 4:3, 1980
43. Sharkis SJ, Santos GW, Colvin M: Elimination of acute myelogeneous leukemic cells from marrow
and tumor suspensions in the rat with 4-hydro-peroxycyclophosphamide. Blood 5:521-523, 1980
44. Kaizer H, Stuart RK, Fuller DJ, et al: Autologous bone marrow transplantation in acute leukemia:
Progress report on a phase I study of 4-hydro-peroxycyclophosphamide (4HC) incubation of marrow
prior to cryopreservation. Amer Soc Clin Onc 1:131, 1982
