OBSERVATIONS ON HISTOPLASMOSIS
INDUCED INFECTION IN THE MOUSE*
M. TAGER AND A. A. LIEBOW
Since DeMonbreun"4 proved in 1934 that histoplasmosis of
Darling (reticulo-endothelial cytomycosis) is caused by a cultivable
fungus, the disease has assumed some measure of clinical importance
and is being recognized in an ever-increasing number of cases. The
primary object of this note is to describe preliminary observations
on the production of a chronic, systemic histoplasmosis in the mouse,
in many respects analogous to the disease of man, and to summarize
the present state of knowledge of this disease in man and animals.
Mycological considerations
In the host, the fungus assumes the form of small, round or
oval bodies, averaging 3 by 3.5 ,u in diameter, surrounded by a non-
staining refractile membrane or capsule. With Wright's stain the
cytoplasm is lavender and the nuclear mass blue. Darling'3 empha-
sized the great variability of the nuclear mass: it may be globular,
oval, crescentic, or irregularly shaped, massed at one end of the cell
or distributed half way around the circumference. The detailed
morphology is best brought out by direct smears stained with Wright
or Giemsa dyes, and is not as clear in sections. The resemblance to
Leishlmaia donovani at first led Darling"' 12, 13 to regard this
organism as a protozoon, although he emphasized such distinguish-
ing features as the irregular form and arrangement of the nucleus,
the absence of the blepharoplast, and the presence of a refractile
capsule. The organism is typically situated within the cytoplasm
of the mononuclear cells of the so-called reticulo-endothelial system.
Crumrine and Kessel,'0 however, have also described a larger extra-
cellular type. Reproduction is regarded to be by budding, although
Darling also described fission.
When cultivated aerobically at room temperature on simple
slightly acid media, the yeast-like bodies are converted to a mycelial
* From the Departments of Immunology and of Pathology, Yale University.
School of Medicine, and the Meriden Hospital.
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
phase. On such media as 3 per cent dextrose agar at a pH of 6.5,
a white, fluffy, cotton-like growth develops."4 The under surface
may become brown in 10 to 14 days, while the aerial hyphae turn
a similar color in from 4 to 6 weeks. Gelatin is only slightly
liquefied, and of the carbohydrates tested, none are fermented.
Microscopically, the mycelium is septate. The most characteristic
structures are the large round or pyriform thick-walled chlamy-
dospores which often become tuberculate with age.
DeMonbreun"4 also succeeded in growing the budding yeast-like
forms on blood-agar slants at 370 C., but only when such inocu-
lations were made from infected tissues. Other authorities,6 9 how-
ever, were soon able to convert the mycelial to the yeast-like stage
without the intermediary of animal inoculation. This was accom-
plished by the direct inoculation of the mycelial form on sealed
blood-agar slants at 370 C., and Conant9 regards the maintenance
of the proper moisture in such enriched culture media as of para-
mount importance for this transformation. These yeast cells are
usually oval, with a pointed end from which reproduction takes place
by budding. In wet mounts, they are surrounded by a clear halo,
and exhibit a large protoplasmic granule in active brownian move-
ment and a large vacuole. Grossly, this phase forms small, white,
moist colonies, not unlike those of Staphylococcus albus, but may
require from 7 to 10 days to appear.9
While the proper classification of Histoplasma capsulatum is still
a matter of some dispute,7 14 15, 26 Conant,9 after studying culturally
the life cycle of the parasite, feels that it should be placed with the
Moniliaceae of the Fungi Imperfecti.
Histoplasmosis in man
Pathology. The most characteristic feature of histoplasmosis is
the invasion of the cells of the so-called reticulo-endothelial system
by the yeast-like forms of Histoplasma capsulatum. Usually this
process is generalized, but may be confined to a selected organ, such
as the lungs or adrenal glands. The organisms are occasionally
observed within the cytoplasm of parenchymal cells, such as the
intestinal mucosa,19 the epithelium of the skin,17 the adrenals,17 and,
recently, in polymorphonuclear leukocytes as well.30'85 Occasionally,
they have been observed extracellularly10 and even intranuclearly.18
Areas of focal necrosis and granulomatous nodules are often
470
HISTOPLASMOSIS
found. In his first case,1' Darling drew attention to the presence
of pseudo-tubercles in the lungs and of focal necrosis of the liver,
spleen, and lymph nodes. The evolution of such lesions has been
variously interpreted. Dodd and Tompkins"6 argued that, in part,
the necrosis is of mechanical origin, brought about by the occlusion
of capillaries and sinusoidal spaces by the great masses of mononu-
clear cells filled with histoplasma. They further believed that in
their case, the infiltration of the lungs and the collapse of a great
number of alveoli probably interfered with oxygen exchange, and
thereby also favored necrosis in various organs. Humphrey21 has
proposed three stages in the evolution of the granulomatous lesions
of histoplasmosis: first, the accumulation of parasite-laden phagocytic
cells in an organ; second, the obstruction of blood vessels, resulting
in necrosis of the infected macrophage cells and of parenchymal cells
as well; and finally, replacement by fibrous masses containing plasma
cells, lymphocytes, and occasional giant cells. He therefore regards
the "granulomatous pseudo-tubercles" as late lesions. These may
be free of organisms," and Humphrey would assume that the histo-
plasma had originally been present in such lesions but had since been
destroyed. Henderson and his co-workers19 have advanced an alter-
native explanation. They were impressed with the resemblance of
the lesions of Boeck's sarcoidosis to those of histoplasmosis. The
suggestion is made that the granulomas are the result of the libera-
tion of some by-products incident to the destruction of histoplasma,
not unlike the view of Harrell"8 that the lesions of Boeck's sarcoid
might represent a non-specific response to a lipid fraction of an
unknown agent. Reid35 believes that "some toxic product liberated
by the organism is responsible for the necrosis."
The most common gross lesions are splenomegaly and hepa-
tomegaly, although these are not invariably present.5 10, 17 The
enlargement of these and other organs, such as lymph nodes, is in
part attributed to a hyperplasia of the cells of the so-called reticulo-
endothelial system, and to their extensive parasitization by the yeast-
like bodies. The lungs may show interstitial pneumonitis, confluent
lobular pneumonia, tubercle-like nodules suggesting miliary tuber-
culosis or carcinomatosis, areas of caseating necrosis, and even small
abscesses.35 Humphrey described a soft nodule in a lung in which
mycelial elements were present, but this observation is unique and
not in accord with the general experience that yeast-like bodies only
are found in the living host. Pulmonary cavities have been encoun-
471
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
tered in association with co-existing pulmonary tuberculosis,25 thereby
making it difficult to be certain of the true pathogenesis of such
lesions. The liver, which may undergo a wide variety of changes,
may progress to a state of "granulomatous portal cirrhosis",11' 30 but
jaundice and ascites are uncommon. The adrenals, very commonly
involved, may undergo extensive caseation. In the skin and mucous
membranes, necrosis, ulceration, and some hemorrhage may take
place. The nasopharynx, larynx, and small and large intestines are
particularly vulnerable. The bone-marrow may be extensively
infiltrated with parasite-laden mononuclear cells, while other tissues,
as the heart, kidneys, and meninges, usually are involved to a lesser
degree.
Clinical and related considerations. To date, only 43 cases of
histoplasmosis have been diagnosed, including the unpublished ones
cited!by Meleney.24 All but nine of these have been observed since
DeMonbreun cultivated the fungus in 1934, and the list is mounting
at an accelerated pace. Any discussion of geographical distribution
at the present time is premature. However, Darling's original view
that the three patients he studied in the Panama Canal Zone were
suffering from an essentially tropical malady is no longer tenable.
Although isolated cases have been observed in Argentina,28 Brazil,4"
Java,27, 38 Honduras,32 and the Philippines42 the majority have been
diagnosed in the continental United States.* The disease has shown
some preference for the Mississippi River basin, but is by no means
restricted to this area. Of over 28 states reporting the disease, some
have been as far north as Minnesota, Michigan, and Iowa, south
as far as Florida, Tennessee, and Alabama, as far west as California,
and eastward in Maryland and Virginia. Meleney24 has pointed out
that the majority of cases have lived in small towns and in rural
areas. Although no race, sex, or age is immune to histoplasmosis,
the high incidence in infancy is outstanding, with almost 25 per cent
of the reported cases in infants of less than 15 months of age.
The portal of entry and the mode of infection remain unde-
termined. Opinion is fairly evenly divided between the respiratory
and, the intestinal routes as the chief portals. Invasion probably
may occur through the skin occasionally.17 Humphrey2' has drawn
attention to the incidence of otitis media in histoplasmosis, and sug-
gests the ear as a possible site of entry. With the discovery of
* The first European case of histoplasmosis has just been reported from England:
Derry, C. L., Card, W. I., and Wison, R.: Lancet, 1942, i, 225.
472
HISTOPLASMOSIS
natural histoplasmosis in a dog, the possibility of transmission of the
infection to man from lower animals has been entertained, perhaps
through insect and tick bites.15
Darling originally described histoplasmosis as a chronic, febrile
disease with splenomegaly, emaciation, and leukopenia, and with a
fatal prognosis. Hepatomegaly was present in two of his three
patients. He stressed the generalized involvement of the endo-
thelial cells of small blood vessels and lymphatics, the necrosis and
fibrosis of the liver, the splenomegaly, the pseudo-granulomas of
the lungs, and the necrosis of the lymph nodes draining infected
viscera. Many of these features have been noted in subsequent
cases.
Although the pathology may be generalized to a variable degree,
the clinical picture is often dominated by symptoms and signs
referable to the involvement of a particular tissue or organ system.
Thus, Henderson and his associates"9 have recently focused attention
on the enteric tract, and have pointed out that intractable diarrhea
and other gastro-intestinal symptoms may constitute the major com-
plaint. The symptoms referable to the alimentary tract do not
always correlate with the demonstrable pathology, but in 9 of 26
cases which they analyzed, granulomas and ulcerations were present
in the large and small intestines. Three recent cases have likewise
exhibited intestinal lesions.20' 30, 35
In some instances, symptoms referable to the upper respiratory
or alimentary tracts assume prime importance. Thus, Brown's5
patient complained chiefly of a sore throat of 2 years duration. This
followed a dental extraction, and was associated with fever, cough,
hoarseness, dysphagia, and a loss in weight of 108 pounds. This
patient also had severe diarrhea and extensive ulcerations of the
small and large intestines, including the rectum. When the throat
was examined, "the entire soft palate had a' fine granular, graying
appearance, and was studded with a number of small hemorrhagic
patches. The uvula was irregularly shaped and nodular. Both
arytenoids were edematous and . . . were studded with nodular
thickenings." Biopsy and necropsy established the diagnosis of
histoplasmosis. Another patient,40 aged 63, complained of "irrita-
tion of the throat and hoarseness for 18 months, pain in the left
side of the throat for 7 months, and a loss of 40 pounds in six
months." Direct laryngoscopy disclosed a polyp of the left vocal
cord, and a "verrucous, ulcerated mass extended from side to side
across the posterior commissure, involving the upper surface of the
473
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
arytenoids and extending below the level of the two cords." The
diagnosis was established by biopsy and other confirmatory studies.
In the case of Allen and Sherwin,2 a large ulcer of the lateral surface
of the tongue, which for a time responded to radiation and clinically
simulated malignancy, again proved to be histoplasmosis. In an
infant of 7 months,' perforation of the cartilagenous portion of the
nasal septum and ulcerations of the buccal mucosa were noted, with
the organisms recovered in the tissues of the septum. Many other
patients have presented lesions of the oral and nasal cavities.
Lesions of the skin are not often outstanding. In one patient,'7
a middle-aged steel welder, a dermatitis began in the popliteal
spaces, and spread during the next 15 years over the entire skin.
Severe pruritus was present, and the lesions varied from scaliness to
papules and frank ulcers. At necropsy, Histoplasma capsulatum was
demonstrated in the skin and in wide distribution in the viscera.
Meleney24 has emphasized the frequency with which the cortex
and the medulla of the adrenal glands are involved. Occasionally,
the histoplasmosis is found only in the adrenal glands, as in the
patient who also suffered from miliary tuberculosis.24 30 Although
this patient30 was not carefully studied from the standpoint of Addi-
son's disease, he had no obvious pigmentation, but a low blood
pressure of 84/60.
The lungs are almost invariably involved in histoplasmosis.
Symptoms may be severe, mild, or absent. Humphrey's2' first
patient, a 17-year-old youth, suffered from a persistent upper respir-
atory infection which developed into "pneumonia." The patient
ultimately succumbed to generalized histoplasmosis. Another
patient,43 a 52-year-old female, complaining primarily of dyspnea
and "asthma," was found to have signs of left lower lobe pneumonia,
and at necropsy there were encountered in the lungs granulomatous
nodules, fibrosis, and infiltrations of the walls of the bronchioles with
lymphocytes. Three3' 4, 16 of the infants succumbing to histoplas-
mosis first presented respiratory symptoms-persistent "colds,"
paroxysmal cough, etc. On the other hand, while Darling's first
and third patients had no obvious respiratory complaints, the
necropsies disclosed extensive granulomas surrounded by hemor-
rhagic zones, and the changes in the first patient were sufficient to
simulate miliary tuberculosis.
Occasionally, the lungs are affected by histoplasmosis to the
exclusion of other structures. Phelps and Mallory32 reported such
474
HISTOPLASMOSIS
a case, in which toxic cirrhosis of the liver and carcinoma of the same
organ were also found. However, some doubt has been cast on the
true etiology of this pulmonary infection.14 Meleney2" has described
two instances in which pulmonary histoplasmosis and tuberculosis
co-existed. He regards histoplasmosis as the chief pathogenic agent
in one case, while in the other patient, the finding of histoplasma-
laden cells at the edges of the pulmonary cavity suggested that the
fungus infection might have contributed to the terminal events.
Meleney24, 25 has further drawn attention to the frequent asso-
ciation of tuberculosis and histoplasmosis. In addition to his own
two cases, another one also had tuberculosis and leprosy," while a
fourth30 presented histoplasmosis of the adrenal glands and miliary
tuberculosis. When the dominant infection is tuberculous, and
histoplasma are found in one organ only, one might take the view
that tuberculosis lowered the patient's resistance to the fungus. On
the other hand, it has been shown that histoplasmosis may damage
considerably the phagocytic powers of the reticulo-endothelial sys-
tem.34 Since such studies as those of Lurie23 correlate, in part,
immunity in tuberculosis and an enhanced phagocytic capacity of the
macrophage cells for the tubercle bacilli, it does not seem improbable
that any severe disturbance in the function of these cells may lower
the resistance of the host to tuberculosis.
The frequency with which histoplasmosis co-exists with other
diseases-aside from tuberculosis-is noteworthy. Malaria,12 lep-
rosy,42 syphilis,8 lymphatic leukemia,44 and diabetes mellitus,45 and
possibly preceding brucellosis,33 have all been encountered with
histoplasmosis. It is unknown at present whether this association is
purely coincidental or represents a mechanism through which the
host's ability to withstand invasion by Histoplasma capsulatum is
weakened.
The blood picture. The blood count is undoubtedly influenced
by a host of factors. The age and state of nutrition of the patient,
the degree and anatomical extent of the involvement, the degree of
displacement and necrosis in such hematopoietic tissues as the bone-
marrow, and the extent of the liver damage, are but a few of the
elements which may influence the blood picture in histoplasmosis.
When the disease is not far advanced, one may encounter a moderate
anemia of perhaps 3.0 to 3.75 million red cells, and hemoglobin
values of 60 to 80 per cent. Rarely, slight macrocytosis may be
observed,10 or a microcytic hypochromic anemia35 is found. The
475
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
total white count is usually depressed, or at least not elevated in
proportion to the fever. The usual percentage of polymorphonu-
clear leukocytes may be maintained and may fall within the wide
range of 40 to 80 per cent. A marked shift to the left may35 36 or
may not2l be present. With progression of the disease, the anemia
may fall below 2 million red cells, the total white cell count may be
depressed to 1500 cells with some 10 to 15 per cent polymorphonu-
clears, and the platelets, which otherwise may be abundant, may
completely disappear. Rarely, however, leukocytosis is encoun-
tered.16' 17 When the blood changes are severe, and the thrombo-
penia marked, the purpura and other hemorrhagic tendencies noted
in advanced histoplasmosis are probably largely explainable on this
basis. Occasionally, the blood count is maintained at an essentially
normal level.5
Course and prognosis. Histoplasmosis tends to run a chronic
febrile course. The incubation period is unknown, but the disease
is usually manifest for several months. Such extremes, however,
as 5 weeks'0 and 8 years43 and 15 years17 have been reported. The
most chronic cases have occurred in adults. Fever may be extreme,
even 1070 C. with shaking chills,8 but is usually more moderate and
exhibits no characteristic pattern. Tachycardia is usual; occasional
patients, however, have no significant elevation of the vital signs.
Many authorities regard histoplasmosis as inevitably fatal, with no
available effective therapy. Humphrey, however, takes the view
that arrest and regression of lesions by fibrosis is possible, and
DeMonbreun"5 voiced the belief that perhaps the disease is far more
prevalent in a milder form which escapes clinical recognition. In
support of this view is the finding of occasional cases of histoplas-
mosis confined to one organ and complicating some other infection
which is the obvious cause of death.
Differential diagnosis. From the protean clinical manifestations
of histoplasmosis, it is evident that it may simulate closely many
diseases. In patients presenting chronic fever, weight loss, anemia,
leukopenia, and splenomegaly, presumptive diagnoses of kala-azar,
malaria, brucellosis, miliary tuberculosis, subacute bacterial endo-
carditis, and typhoid fever have all been made at one time or
another. Hodgkin's disease and other neoplastic states have often
been regarded as likely possibilities. At times, Gaucher's, Nieman-
Pick's, and Letterer-Siwe syndromes may be suspected, and in one*
case3 a splenectomy was performed because the histoplasmosis was
476
HISTOPLASMOSIS
mistaken for Banti's disease. Some patients may present the picture
of cirrhosis of the liver. Active pulmonary tuberculosis may well
come to mind in those instances characterized by chronic weakness,
weight loss, fever and cough, while those with more acute respiratory
symptoms often simulate pneumonia. When the blood changes are
marked, aplastic anemia and aleukemic leukemia have been diag-
nosed. Since chronic diarrhea is a prominent symptom in some
instances, ulcerative colitis, chronic amebic dysentery, regional ileitis,
and intestinal tuberculosis are among the diseases which may have to
be ruled out. From the severity of the adrenal lesions in some
patients, it is evident that the clinical picture of Addison's disease
may develop. The naso-oral lesions may be quite puzzling and
have suggested such processes as congenital syphilis' and neoplasia
of the tongue.2
Diagnosis. Histoplasmosis is only now coming into the clinical
consciousness, and as yet the majority of the reported cases have not
been diagnosed before death. A laboratory diagnosis, however, may
be made in several ways. Careful search of the blood smears
(Wright stain, or supravital preparations) may reveal the typical
intracellular bodies in the mononuclear cells and endothelial leuko-
cytes. In the presence of severe leukopenia, it might be well to
use methods designed to concentrate the white cells. The parasites
should be searched for on direct smears of any available material,
and have been demonstrated in the discharge of otitis media.16
Biopsy may be of the greatest value, and the diagnosis may be made
from a study of the bone-marrow or such involved tissues as lymph
nodes, spleen, tongue, larynx, or rectal ulcers. Thin sections stained
by Giemsa or by hematoxylin-eosin are satisfactory, although many
other technics have been successfully used.
Blood cultures and cultures of any available material should
always be taken. Some of the material should be inoculated on
somewhat acid media (e.g., pH 6.5), of which many, such as
Sabouraud's and 3 per cent dextrose agar are satisfactory, and kept
at room temperature at least 21 to 30 days. The material should
also be inoculated on sealed blood-agar slants, and incubated at
370 C. for at least 7 to 10 days. The demonstration of both the
mycelial and the yeast-like bodies on culture are mutually confirma-
tory and help to establish the diagnosis of infestation with Histo-
plasma capsulatum.
Theoretically, the organisms may be present in such materials as
477
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
sputum, urine, and feces, whenever the underlying lesions are of a
character to permit the discharge of the organisms. Clinically, how-
ever, the histoplasma have not yet been recovered from such sources,
but undoubtedly will be in the future.
Final laboratory proof may be furnished by the reproduction of
histoplasmosis in suitable animals. The susceptibility of many
species of animals to histoplasmosis will be discussed below, and it
will be evident that as yet it is impossible to recommend any one
procedure as the method of choice. However, on the basis of avail-
able evidence, it would seem that Parsons' 29, 31 technic of intravenous
inoculation of the yeast-like forms into young mice may prove the
most expedient one.
An additional aid in the diagnosis of histoplasmosis has come
from VanPernis and his associates.40 In filtered dextrose-broth
supernatants of histoplasma cultures they demonstrated an agent
which produced immediate and delayed skin reactions in their patient
and in infected animals. No precipitin reaction was obtained with
the patient's serum, however.
Histoplasmosis in animals
Natural infection. DeMonbreun"5 discovered spontaneous his-
toplasmosis in a dog. The animal was examined after an illness of
5 months characterized by weight loss, recurrent ascites, hepatomeg-
aly, splenomegaly, and hoarseness. General histoplasmosis was
found, with involvement of the liver, spleen, mesenteric nodes,
peritoneum, gastro-intestinal tract, lungs, heart, meninges, and bone-
marrow. The etiological agent was definitely established as Histo-
plasma capsulatum by cultures and animal inoculations.
In 1922, Sangiorgi37 observed in Albania a spontaneous infection
of mice with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, and parasitization by
organisms indistinguishable from histoplasma. Attempts at cultiva-
tion and reinoculations were unsuccessful. Shortt39 observed in India
the following year a similar infection in mice and in a rat, but again
no cultural or other confirmatory studies were of avail. Ciferri,
Redaelli and Visocchi7 believe that these infections may be caused by
a closely related form of histoplasma, which they have named
Histoplasma muris.
Recently, intracellular bodies were found22 in the spleen of a
ferret in Illinois. These were morphologically indistinguishable
from Histoplasma capsulatum, but since the tissues were already
478
HISTOPLASMOSIS
fixed, no other studies were possible. While all these reports are
highly suggestive of histoplasmosis, in the absence of cultural studies,
one cannot accept them without reservation. The only proven case
remains DeMonbreun's dog.
Experimental histoplasmosis. The virulence of infected tissue
and of the mycelial and yeast-like cultures of histoplasma for labora-
tory animals has been investigated. Neither Darling nor Hansmann
and Schenken succeeded in reproducing the disease in animals with
tissue obtained at autopsy, although the Italian investigators7 did
succeed with such material in guinea-pigs, rats, and rabbits.
In general, greater success has attended inoculation of the yeast-
like form of Histoplasma capsulatum than of the mycelial type.
DeMonbreun"4 infected 2 monkeys (Macaccus rhesus) with 5 cc. of
a broth suspension of the yeast-forms of a 3-day-old blood-agar
slant. The animals lost weight rapidly, became anemic, developed
lymphadenopathy, bloody diarrhea, and succumbed within 14 days.
Systemic histoplasmosis was found at autopsy. An attempt to infect
one monkey with the mycelial culture, however, failed. Wright
and Hachtel" were somewhat less successful with their inoculations.
A mycelial culture, inoculated subcutaneously, caused an abscess in
one monkey. This was aspirated and cultured on sealed blood-agar
slants, and the resulting yeast-like bodies were inoculated intrave-
nously in a second animal. This monkey became ill, positive blood
cultures of Histoplasma capsulatum were obtained, but the animal
made a recovery, and when sacrificed months later, pulmonary
abscesses were found, but sections and cultures for histoplasma were
negative.
Hansmann and Schenken"7 produced generalized histoplasmosis
in a dog inoculated with the mycelial cultures, and Ciferri and
Redaelli7 likewise were able to infect puppies. Following his dis-
covery of natural histoplasmosis in a dog, DeMonbreun15 studied the
susceptibility of this animal more extensively. Two puppies infected
intraperitoneally with the yeast-like form of the fungus succumbed
to the generalized infection in 8 and 12 weeks respectively, while
one inoculated with the blood of the moribund dog having the spon-
taneous disease remained clinically well, but had a few typical lesions
at necropsy 4 months later. All of 4 puppies and 2 of 4 adult dogs
had lesions of histoplasmosis when sacrificed following the feeding
of mixed mycelial and yeast-like cultures. Attempts to infect dogs
by the intratracheal route were unsuccessful."9
479
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Results with guinea-pigs, rabbits, and rats, have been somewhat
contradictory. Henderson and his associates19 failed to infect the
guinea-pig intratracheally, while Hansmann and Schenken"7 were
similarly unsuccessful with this species when inoculated intraperi-
toneally and produced regressive lesions only in the guinea-pig and
rabbit inoculated subcutaneously. In the rat, however, progressive
disease developed. Ciferri and Redaelli regard the rabbit and rat
as more susceptible than the guinea-pig. Reid and his associates,"5
using the yeast-like form intraperitoneally, produced generalized
disease in one guinea-pig, but two rabbits inoculated intravenously
remained well. Other workers40 failed to infect the rat, but had
some degree of success with the guinea-pig.
In view of the possibility of spontaneous infection with Histo-
plasma capsulatum, or some closely related strain, in the mouse, the
experimental results with this animal assume special significance.
The findings, however, have been conflicting. Two observers14 15, 40
were able to convert the mycelial forms into the yeast-like bodies
following intraperitoneal inoculation. Yeast-like bodies were found
by DeMonbreun in the peritoneal exudates as early as 3 days after
infection, while VanPernis and his associates noted intracellular
parasites in the spleen and lungs after 14 days. Reid and his
co-workers85 inoculated 10 mice similarly with the yeast-like fungus,
and concluded that "although there was some indication of infection
in two of the mice, the results with these animals were unsatisfactory,
perhaps due to their relative insusceptibility to infection with the
fungus." Parsons,29 however, in a preliminary abstract, reported
the extensive parasitization of the mouse after intravenous inocula-
tion of the mycelial form. He further stated3' that he found the
intravenous route the most successful, and that in young mice a more
rapid generalization followed the injection of the yeast-like forms
than of the mycelial cultures. Generalization and death occurred in
as early as 3 days with the yeast-like organisms, although the infec-
tion took several months to develop in some of the animals. While
Parsons' main efforts were directed to the intravenous route, he
never obtained positive results by the intraperitoneal one, even
though some of his animals were allowed to survive for more than
a year.
Experimental
Procedure. The strain of Histoplasna capsulatum, obtained
from Dr. Norman F. Conant of Duke University, was grown at
480
HISTOPLASMOSIS
room temperature on honey agar for 14 days. The colonies were
harvested from two slants, ground in a mortar, and suspended in
10 cc. of saline. After light centrifugation for 5 minutes to remove
the coarser particles, the supernatant was used directly. Micro-
scopic examination of this suspension failed to reveal any of the
yeast-like bodies, but mycelial elements were readily identified.
The suspensions were inoculated into two groups of mice: 15 white
laboratory-raised mice of unknown strain and about 3 months of age,
comprising the first group, were inoculated intraperitoneally and
intranasally under ether; 7 young mice, about 3 or 4 weeks of age
and of strain ABC, comprised the second group. These were inoc-
ulated intraperitoneally. Each of 10 mice of the first group
received 0.2 cc. of the suspension intraperitoneally, and each of 5
received, under deep ether, 0.05 cc. intranasally. The experiment
was terminated after 50 days. The second group of younger mice
received a similar dose intraperitoneally, but in some of the mice
the infection was permitted to run its entire course.
Results. Eight of the intraperitoneally infected mice in both
groups were sacrificed within the first two weeks after infection. No
gross abnormalities were noted, and Giemsa smears of the lungs,
liver, and spleen failed to reveal any of the yeast-like cells. Cul-
tures of the spleen and liver, however, were positive when carried
out on two occasions.
The animals infected intraperitoneally in the first group, as well
as those inoculated intranasally, failed to reveal any unequivocal
yeast-like bodies at 50 days upon complete histopathological
examination.
Of the seven young mice in the second group, three were sacri-
ficed within 2 weeks, with negative results, while four were per-
mitted to run their entire course. All of these animals succumbed
to the infection, dying in 100, 112, 121, and 150 days, respectively.
During the first two months, the mice appeared to be well, indeed,
one delivered a litter of four young; these were left in the same cage
with the infected animals. For more than a month before death,
however, the infected animals showed various degrees of emaciation,
marked weakness, some tremulousness, and loss of the usual sleek-
ness of the fur. Abdominal distension was marked, especially in
view of the poor state of general nutrition, and the firm edges of
the enlarged liver and spleen could be readily palpated. The 150-
day animal also developed bilateral ophthalmitis which led to the
481
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
virtually complete destruction of one eye-ball. No diarrhea was
observed at any time.
The gross pathology of these four animals succumbing to chronic
systemic histoplasmosis was essentially the same. No fluid was
encountered in the pleural or peritoneal cavities. In only one
animal, the 150-day mouse, were a few discrete barely visible
grayish-white nodules noted at the cardiac apex and on the surface
of the liver. The lungs showed no gross lesions on the exterior
surfaces, but were quite pale. The most striking feature of all was
the consistent enlargement of the spleen and liver, the most chronic
process leading to the greatest enlargement. These organs were
firm and of normal color, except for some areas of mottling or dis-
coloration. The spleen reached truly extraordinary proportions in
the 150-day mouse. It measured approximately 5 by 1.5 by 0.5
cm., and weighed 1.75 gm., while the liver weighed 4 gm. The
total weight of the animal was 21 gm. These organs virtually filled
the entire abdomen, and were displacing each other in the right lower
quadrant. Some of the abdominal lymph nodes were prominent.
Sections were prepared of various organs of the mice dying in
100 days (F8) and 150 days (F108). Smears of liver and spleen
of the other two animals succumbing to histoplasmosis revealed the
pathognomonic intracellular inclusions, but no sections were taken.
Fixation was carried out with Zenker's solution, and the preparations
were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and with Giemsa. The organs
of mouse F8 were well preserved, while those of F 108 showed some
post-mortem changes. The offspring of the infected animal
remained well, and complete histopathological studies some 6
months after birth were negative.
The parasite in the tissues of the mouse: general statement. The
parasites were found intracellularly except in very rare instances,
but even in these this apparently extracellular location may have
been the result of artefact. In sections fixed with Zenker's fluid,
cut at 3,u, and stained with Giemsa, the inclusions appeared as minute
bodies of almost uniform size with a ring of basophilic material
thickened at one point, a small quantity of acidophilic substance in
the center, and a clear zone around the whole. The cells containing
the parasites were invariably of the type of monocytes, tissue macro-
phages, and reticulo-endothelial cells of the liver, bone-marrow,
spleen, and lymph nodes. The endothelial lining of the heart and
vessels of all sizes, including the capillaries, and those of the lym-
482
HISTOPLASMOSIS
phatic system, displayed no propensity for phagocytizing the histo-
plasma. Large mononuclear cells laden with parasites were,
however, seen in the blood of large vessels, such as the renal artery,
even where the tissues did not contain such cells. The mesothelia
of the pleura, pericardium, and peritoneum were not parasitized.
At some points in the mesentery the thin membrane was so distended
with parasite-laden macrophages that they lined the surface. This
view is supported by the fact that the mesothelia of Glisson's capsule,
as well as that covering the intestines, were totally devoid of
histoplasma.
In the great majority of instances, the parasitized cells seemed
to retain their integrity, although the nuclei occasionally appeared
pyknotic. In others, as, for example, in the liver, the cytoplasm
increased markedly in volume and became acidophilic. At the same
time the nucleus became large, vesicular, and polymorphic. Similar
cells were seen in the lymph nodes and bone-marrow. This would
indicate that such cells are really those of the macrophage' system
and not altered parenchymal cells with which they might be readily
confused. In no instance were any organisms seen in the hepatic or
other parenchymal cells, nor were they observed in polymorphonu-
clear leukocytes. None of the parasites were proved to have entered
the nuclei, although there were some cells which suggested this.
In some areas, where the number of parasitized cells was very
great, there was an accompanying increase in the number of
lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and there were
occasional plasma cells. For the most part, however, the reticulo-
endothelial or large mononuclear elements were not accompanied by
other cells of an exudate.
In late stages, the parasitized cells attained such large numbers
that a consideration of their origin becomes of interest. Some of the
lining cells of the sinusoids in infected animals were found to be in
mitosis; none of these cells contained the yeast-like bodies. Else-
where, there was an apparent increase in typical mononuclear cells
of the hematogenous type, only some of which were parasitized. It
seems probable, therefore, that accretion by infiltration and multipli-
cation in situ both contribute to the large masses of invaded cells in
a given area.
Protocol of mouse F8. 100 days.
Heart: In the subendothelial layer of the right ventricle, several large mono-
ntuclear cells filled with histoplasma are seen. On the opposite side of the
483
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
ventricle, there is a minute thrombus entirely surrounded by endothelium.
At another point deep in the myocardium, there is another clump of large
mononuclear cells with huge, vesicular nuclei resembling those of Aschoff
cells. The cytoplasm of these cells is full of Histoplasma capsulatum.
Lungs: The alveoli for the most part have thin walls and are devoid of
content. Surrounding some of the smaller vessels and bronchioles, deep in
the parenchyma, there is edema and infiltration with small and large mono-
nuclear cells, the latter loaded with the characteristic intracytoplasmic parasites.
These cells are also present in the walls of alveoli remote from the broncho-
vascular rays. These alveoli have consequently become greatly thickened and
their lumina are strikingly reduced. Similar cells infiltrate the pleura but the
mesothelium of this membrane is intact. Well preserved also is the epithelium
of the large bronchi, and no exudate is noted in their lumina. The tracheo-
bronchial nodes are not notably enlarged, and no parasites are seen here.
Spleen: Much of the splenic substance consists of large cells with relatively
small rounded or oval nuclei and an abundance of cytoplasm speckled with the
yeast-like bodies. There are only a very few polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
The megakaryocytes are widely scattered but are typical in morphology. The
secondary follicles are poorly defined and their germinal centers are not prom-
inent. Some of the large mononuclear phagocytes contain masses of hema-
togenous pigment and partly fragmented erythrocytes. Necrosis is not in
evidence.
Liver: The architecture of the liver is seen under low power to be disturbed
by the presence of many large cells within the sinusoids throughout all zones.
Under high power, these are seen to be large Kupffer cells and other large
mononuclear elements together with occasional lymphocytes and polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes. All but the last-mentioned are filled with the character-
istic yeast-like cells. Similar rounded cells are found in large number about
and within the lymphatics of the portal zone. The effect upon the paren-
chyma seems minimal, except in a few places where parasitized cells have
become agminated into sheets, which include long and narrow atrophic hepatic
cells whose nuclei are in the process of karyolysis. Beneath the capsule of the
liver there are wedge-shaped zones of necrosis within which remnants of poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes are seen. These foci of necrosis have not become
encapsulated at any point, but are deeply demarcated from the surrounding
parenchyma. In the vicinity of these, the parasite-laden cells occur in such
large numbers as to suggest that blocking of sufficient sinusoids may have
occurred to result in the necrosis. This is further supported by the subcap-
sular location of the necrotic tissue and the absence of foci of necrosis through-
out the parenchyma. Histoplasma capsulatum is not to be noted within the
hepatic cells themselves.
Kidneys: There is a slight degree of cloudy swelling in the tubular epithe-
lium; otherwise there is no change of note. The blood in the renal vessels
contains large mononuclear cells with well-preserved intracytoplasmic para-
sites. None of these infiltrate the tissues of the kidneys, however.
484
HISTOPLASMOSIS
Small intestine: Deep in the lamina propria of the small intestine, scattered
large mononuclears containing the histoplasma are encountered. No ulcers
have occurred.
Mesenteric lymph nodes: Several small nodes in the mesentery contain,
scattered throughout the pulp and within the sinusoids, large numbers of cells
similar to those seen in other organs, and again filled with Histoplasma cap-
sulatum. These cells have been gathered into knot-like accretions within the
mesentery, even where they are not associated with large lymphoid follicles.
In some places, these appear to have displaced the mesothelium.
Bone-marrow: There are many large cells with ovoid, sausage-shaped poly-
morphous nuclei containing histoplasma. The marrow otherwise has a typical
appearance.
Voluntary muscle and tendons: Long columns of the parasite-laden cells
occur between the fibers of the voluntary muscles. These macrophage-like
cells have become so closely compressed into columns as to appear polygonal,
and here they resemble epithelium. Similar changes are observed in some of
the tendons, which, like the voluntary muscles examined, were adjacent to
the sternum.
Skin and subcutaneous tissue: The deep fascia contains closely packed,
heavily infested mononuclear elements. They are not found high in the
corium.
Nerve fibers: No infiltration is observed.
Protocol of mouse F108. 150 days.
In general, the lesions are similar in kind, but greater in extent than at
100 days.
Heart: The heart near its apex displays tremendous infiltration of all layers,
save for the endothelium and the mesothelium. In one subendocardial zone
there is a small focus of necrosis of the myocardial fibers. Here a few poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes have entered the necrotic tissue. Many of the
infested large mononuclear cells are present in the tissues subjacent to the
lesion. Attached to the endocardium by granulation tissue there is a thrombus,
composed largely of fibrin, in the process of organization.
Lungs: There is some peribronchial infiltration, greater in extent than in the
preceding instance. Some alveoli have actually become obliterated on account
of the thickening of their walls by the involved cells. The bronchi, however,
do not contain exudate, and their epithelium is intact.
Spleen: The spleen largely consists of huge masses of phagocytes filled with
histoplasma. Some of these phagocytes have a most abundant cytoplasm, per-
haps ten times that of the ordinary monocyte.
Liver: There is atrophy of much of the parenchyma, apparently associated
with compression by sheets of the characteristic cells. There are some foci of
necrosis, again situated near the capsule, but no true granulomas are found.
485
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
Kidneys: Only the lumina of the large vessels contain the parasite-laden
cells. The parenchyma is spared.
Gastro-intestinal tract: The involvement is much more extensive than at 100
days. In many places all the coats have become infiltrated by large phago-
cytes containing the histoplasma. This is true even in the case of the proven-
triculum. Here, the squamous lining as well as the glandular tissue of the
distal portion of the stomach are intact, but particularly striking, in the case
of the latter, is the dissection of the muscular coats by the masses of well-pre-
served parasite-laden macrophages. In one cross-section of the small intestine
there is a deep ulcer with the submucosa as its base. Here, in the deepest
portion of the lesion are the large mononuclear cells with the characteristic
yeast-like inclusions. More superficially, the necrotic tissue has become infil-
trated with lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes, as well as by the
cells of granulation tissue.
Bone-marrow: Much of the marrow is replaced by masses of the infested
large mononuclear cells. The material is not sufficiently well preserved to
detect with certainty any shift to the left. Remarkable is the absence of extra-
medullary hematopoiesis in the other organs of this animal.
Skull and central nervous system: The diploe in the skull are filled with sheets
of parasite-laden cells. Some of these are also found within the endosteum of
the skull, as well as in small numbers within the pia arachnoid. The brain
itself as well as the spinal cord does not contain the parasites.
Voluntary muscles, tendons, skin: The changes are very similar, but more
extensive than are those found at 100 days.
Comment
As has been previously indicated, there is considerable disagree-
ment as to the susceptibility of various laboratory animals to histo-
plasmosis. These differences can be resolved only by further
studies which must take more fully into consideration such factors
as the effect of age, the degree of individual variation in a given
species, the effects of differences in strain of organism and host alike,
the influence of dosage, route of administration, and many other
considerations.
The changes noted in the mice are essentially indistinguishable
from the advanced process in man. The outstanding difference is
the failure of the mice to develop granulomas.
A few of the lesions found in the mice are of special interest from
the standpoint of the human infection. Thus, the extensive involve-
ment of the stomach in mouse Fl 08 appears to indicate that this
organ may not be as completely immune as might be assumed from
the fact that it has been spared in the human cases studied. The
486
HISTOPLASMOSIS 487
invasion of the parasites about the voluntary muscles and tendons
has not, to our knowledge, been previously described. It seems
not improbable that the soreness in muscles and the aches of which
some patients complain are caused by local damage rather than by
the toxemia of a severe infection. Finally, the parasitization of the
heart muscle is of some special interest. Lesions of the heart muscle
have been noted occasionally in human cases,1' 21 as well as in
DeMonbreun's dog15 with natural histoplasmosis. The extent of
invasion in the human cases did not approach the severity of the
process in the 150-day mouse. The nature of the lesion produced,
including frank necrosis of the musculature, indicates that cardiac
damage in histoplasmosis may reach a degree which may of itself
jeopardize the life of the patient.
Summary
The present status of histoplasmosis (reticulo-endothelial
cytomycosis) in man and animals is reviewed.
The infection has been produced in mice by the intraperitoneal
injection of the mycelial form of the fungus.
The chief anatomical changes are those of hyperplasia of the
reticulo-endothelial system and infiltration with the cells of the
monocyte and macrophage type, and the intracytoplasmic parasitiza-
tion of these elements.
Such necrosis as occurred, appeared to be mainly the result of
occlusion of blood vessels. The pathological changes are analogous
to those in man, except that granulomas were not reproduced.
REFERENCES
1 Agress, H., and Gray, S. H.: Am. J. Dis. Child., 1939, 57, 5-73.
2 Allen, H. N., and Sherwin, C. F.: [Cited by Henderson, R. G., et al.
(Nr. 19).]
3 Amolsch, A. L., and Wax, J. H.: Am. J. Path., 1939, 15, 477.
4 Anderson, W. A. D., Michelson, I. D., and Dunn, T. M.: Am. J. Clin. Path.,
1941, 11, 344.
5 Brown, A. E., Havens, F. Z., and Magath, T. B.: Proc. Staff Meet. Mayo
Clin., 1940, 15, 812.
6 Ciferri, R., and Redaelli, P.: J. Trop. Med., 1934, 37, 278.
7 Ciferri, R., Redaelli, P., and Visocchi, V.: Mycopathologica, 1938, 1, 104.
8 Clemens, H. H., and Barnes, M. K.: South. Med. J., 1940, 33, 11.
9 Conant, N. F.: J. Bact., 1941, 41, 563.
10 Crumrine, R. M., and Kessel, J. F.: Am. J. Trop. Med., 1931, 11, 435.
488 YALE JOURNAI OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
11 Darling, S. T.: J. Am. Med. Asso., 1906, 46, 1283.
12 Darling, S. T.: Arch. Int. Med., 1908, 2, 107.
13 Darling, S. T.: J. Exper. Med., 1909, 11, 515.
14 DeMonbreun, W. A.: Am. J. Trop. Med., 1934, 14, 93.
15 DeMonbreun, W. A.: Am. J. Trop. Med., 1939, 19, 565.
16 Dodd, K., and Tompkins, E.: Am. J. Trop. Med., 1934, 14, 127.
17 Hansmann, G. H., and Schenken, J. R.: Am. J. Path., 1934, 10, 731.
18 Harrell, G. T.: Arch. Int. Med., 1940, 65, 1003.
19 Henderson, R. G., Pinkerton, H., and Moore, L. T.: J. Am. Med. Asso.,
1942, 118, 885.
20 Hild, J. T.: Am. J. Dis. Child., 1942, 63, 131.
21 Humphrey, A. A.: Arch. Int. Med., 1940, 65, 902.
22 Levine, N. D., Dunlap, G. L., and Graham, R.: Cornell Veterinarian, 1938,
28, 249.
23 Lurie, M.: J. Exper. Med., 1942, 75, 247.
24 Meleney, H. E.: Am. J. Trop. Med., 1940, 20, 603.
25 Meleney, H. E.: Am. Rev. Tuberc., 1941, 44, 240.
26 Moore, M.: Ann. Missouri Botan. Garden, 1935, 22, 335.
27 Mueller, H.: Geneesk. tijdschr. v. Nederl.-Indie, 1931, 72, 889.
28 Negroni, P.: Proc. Third Internat. Cong. Microbiology, 1939, 508.
29 Parsons, R. J.: Arch. Path. 1940, 29, 731.
30 Parsons, R. J.: Am. J. Path., 1941, 17, 582.
31 Parsons, R. J.: Personal communication.
32 Phelps, B. M., and Mallory, F. B.: 15th Ann. Rep. Med. Dept. United
Fruit Co. 1926. [Cited by Meleney (Nr. 24).]
33 Ramsey, T. L., and Applebaum, A. A.: Am. J. Clin. Path., 1942, 12, 85.
34 Redaelli, P.: Soc. internaz. di microbiol., Boll. sez. ital., 1935, 7, 312.
35 Reid, J. D., Scherer, J. H., Herbut, P. A., and Irving, H.: J. Lab. & Clin.
Med., 1942, 27, 1.
36 Rhodes, P. H., Conant, N. F., and Glesne, L. R. B.: J. Pediat., 1941, 18, 235.
37 Sangiorgi, G.: Pathologica, 1922, 14, 493.
38 Schultze: [Cited by Ciferri, R., Redaelli, P., and Visocchi, V. (Nr. 7).]
39 Shortt, E. H.: Indian J. Med. Res., 1923, 10, 908.
40 VanPernis, P. A., Benson, M. E., and Holinger, P. H.: J. Am. Med. Asso.,
1941, 117, 436.
41 Villeala, E., and Para, M.: [Cited by Meleney, H. E. (Nr. 24).]
42 Wade, H. W.: Rep. Culion Med. Soc., 1926. [Cited by Meleney, H. E.
(Nr. 24).]43 Williams, R. H., and Cromartie, W. J.: Ann. Int. Med., 1940, 13, 2166.
44 Wright, R. B., and Hachtel, F. W.: Ann. Int. Med., 1941, 15, 309.
FIG. 1. White, cotton-like growth of Histoplasma capsulatum on honey-agar, 14 days
at room temperature.
FIG. 2. Mycelial type of colony, showing aerial hyphae and spores. x 160.
FIG. 3. Same colony x 600. Note double-contoured, thick-walled round and pyriform
chlamydospores. Lacto-phenol cotton blue mount.
(FIGS. 4 to 15 are from tissues of F8, 100-day niouse.)
FIG. 4. Smear of spleen, Giemiisa stain. Intracytoplasmic yeast-like bodies. The
aplparent intraniuclear location is sup)erl)osition. x 1650.
(FIGs. 5 through 11 show histoplasma in the liver.)
FIG. 5. Cells of the exudate. x 1000.
FIG. 6. Cell resembling blood monocyte with one ingested parasite. x 1000.
FIG. 7. Masses of large parasitized mononuclear cells disteniding sinusoids. x 1000.
FIG. 8. Giant-cell with parasites. x 1000.
r-
rig
:. ,R
*. t'
U".
a
.a4fil:
r
j:.
i
........
FIG. 9. Subcapsular necrosis. x 68.
FIG. 10. Typical heavily parasitized field. x 750.
FIG. 11. Portal zone. Parasitized large mononuclear cells in and near lymphatics.
x 750.
FIG. 12. Spleen, a typical field. x 750.
FIG. 13. Volunitary muscle. Masses of parasitized mononluclear cells between the
muscle fibers. x 750.
FIG. 14. Heart. Masses of mononuclear cells betweenl the fibers of myocardium. x 750.
FIn. 15. Lung. Interstitial pneuimonitis, with parasitizedl mononuclear cells thicken-
ing the walls of the alveoli. x 160.
