BRIAN MAC MAHON* Department of Epidemiology, Harvard
I School of Public Health
EPIDEMIOLOGIC METHODS IN CANCER RESEARCH
As knowledge of the etiology of a disease increases, the disciplines seeming
to have the greatest potential for producing further advances change. In the
development of knowledge of the infectious diseases, centuries of clinical and
pathologic study devoted to definition preceded a phase of productive epi-
demiologic investigation that itself has now given way to an era of labora-
tory predominance. In a more primitive state of investigation are concepts,
for example, "positive health" and some psychiatric illnesses, that hardly
seem to have achieved sufficient definition to be measured and have their
distribution in the population described.
Cancer, on the other hand, seems ripe for epidemiologic investigation. Its
many components are reasonably well-defined, reasonably easy to diagnose
and even, in many areas, reasonably well-reported. And yet, the state of
knowledge of the etiology of cancer in man is to primitive that we do not
know whether the major etiologic factors are most likely to be found among
genetic, hormonal, infectious, chemical, physical, or psychologic agents. Nor
do we know to what degree etiologic factors are likely to be found common
to the many clinical and pathologic components of the category. For other
diseases, in the past, this is the state of ignorance in which epidemiologic
methods have provided some useful direction signals.
PAST ACCOMPLISHMEMS AND METHODS
What do we know of the etiology of cancer in man? Let us stick to well-
established facts. We know that exposure to cigarette smoke accounts for
about 90 per cent of the present lung cancer incidence. We know that lung
cancer can also be induced by prolonged exposure to some product or
products of chromate ore processing and that asbestosis is associated with
lung cancer and with mesothelioma of the peritoneum. We know that
ionizing radiation can produce leukemia, cancer of the lung, skin and bone,
and, at least in the fetus, a variety of other neoplasms. The cancerogenic
properties of ionizing radiation are shared by short as well as prolonged
* Chairman, Department of Epidemiology.
Received for publication 21 April 1965.
308
Research in cancer epidemiology MAC MAHON
exposures and by very small as well as large doses. We know that carcinoma
of the skin can also be induced by natural ultraviolet radiation and by many
of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, inorganic arsenicals and other
chemical agents. We know that some of the aromatic amine dyes and
related compounds produce cancer of the urinary bladder. We know that
cancer of the nasal sinuses may result from exposure to nickel refining
processes. We know that certain rare forms of neoplasms are inherited
through single major gene mechanisms.
It is an impressive list, for a disease whose "cause" is so often said to
be unknown. By what scientific methods was this knowledge acquired? To
get to the subject under discussion, I must pass over, with no more than
formal acknowledgment, the contributions made by clinical observation and
laboratory experiment, and come directly to consideration of the epidemio-
logic methods that have been productive. These can be described in terms
of the two general procedures that characterize inductive epidemiology
whether applied to cancer, carbuncles, or coccidioidomycosis.
The first of these is the discovery of variation in disease rates between
two or more populations, or between demographic subgroups of a popu-
lation. These variations are then used as the basis for hypothesizing a causal
relationship between certain characteristics of these demographic groups
and the disease. Thus, the discovery of the cigarette-lung cancer association
originated in the observation of differences in lung cancer rates between
males and females and between the population of 1940 and that of 1920
(Fig. 1). The low rate of cancer of the cervix among Jewish women has
led to hypotheses, as yet inadequately tested, concerning the etiology of
this disease. Routine demographic studies of occupational groups-e.g.,
radiologists and dye workers-have led to the identification of specific
physical and chemical carcinogens.
The second basic epidemiologic procedure is the study of the illness
experience of a group of persons known to have been exposed to an environ-
ment different in one or more respects from that of the general population.
Such groups are selected for study for any of a number of reasons. They
may be selected to test hypotheses developed from comparisons of disease
rates in demographic subgroups. For example, the observation of lung
cancer differences between males and females led to detailed comparisons
of smokers and nonsmokers; the observation of increased leukemia rates in
radiologists provided at least part of the justification for studies of persons
exposed to ionizing radiation in the course of treatment for ankylosing
spondylitis or during atomic bombing.
509
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
In other instances, a group was studied because an unusual disease
experience was suspected on the basis of clinical observation. Thus, the high
risk of death from respiratory disease in the Schneeberg miners was known
for centuries, although the recognition of its nature-lung cancer-and the
major responsible factor-radon gas-are more recent. In yet other
1901-20 1936-39
FIG. 1. Age standardized death rates from lung cancer by sex, England and Wales,
1901-20 and 1936-39. Data from Stocks.'
instances, a group was studied for reasons unrelated to cancer research,
e.g., the occurrence of bone sarcoma was unsuspected when the studies of
radium dial painters were initiated-aplastic anemia and bone necrosis were
the recognized health hazards. Other groups, e.g., those now being followed
because of their exposure to ionizing radiation, are studied to strengthen,
quantitate, and refine knowledge of causal relationships already known to
exist. Occasionally, the environmental experience of a group seems so
unusual as to warrant study even in the absence of suspicions of unusual
disease experience. This has been the case, for example, with persons
poisoned by mustard gas in the First World War and with the workers in
automobile tunnels.
S10
Volume 37, June, 1965
Research in cancer epidemiology MAC MAHON
In the course of my own work in cancer epidemiology, I have reviewed
this past experience on many occasions, and have come to some conclusions
regarding the productivity of various epidemiologic methods. I propose to
present these conclusions. They are not of earth shaking significance or
particularly original-you may, indeed, find them strikingly obvious-but
I believe that, if accepted, they do have implications to the direction of
future epidemiologic activities in the cancer field.
U.S
W4
I-
4
2
0-
MOUTH ESOPHAGUS STOMACH COLON RECTUM
FIG. 2. Age adjusted rates of cancer of the digestive tract in Japanese and U.S.
white male populations, expressed as multiples of the rate in the population with
the lower rate. Data from Segi and Kurihara.8
ANALYTIC AND DESCRIPTIVE STUDIES
First, as we have seen in respect to lung cancer and leukemia, knowledge
of the etiology of a particular neoplasm starts to accumulate when analytic
studies directed specifically to hypothesis-testing have been undertaken.
Statistical and anecdotal description of the peculiarities of disease distribu-
tion, which came to full flower with August Hirsch, is certainly an impor-
tant aid to the formulation of epidemiologic hypotheses. One can starve for
the absence of hypotheses. but also one can choke on a plethora of them.
At the present time, cancer research in general, and epidemiologic research
in particular, seem in greater danger from the latter than from the former.
For instance, it has been hypothesized for at least 50 years that circum-
cision of the spouse protects against cervical cancer, that lactation protects
511
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
against breast cancer, that fried foods produce stomach cancer, that alcohol
induces esophageal cancer, and that trauma predisposes to bone tumors.
And yet definitive studies to substantiate these hypotheses or lay them to
rest are lacking. Until we have some of the smoke cleared away, it is
going to be very hard to get at the fires. As I shall mention shortly, some
definitive analytic studies of these particular hypotheses are being started,
but the volume of analytic work is not by any means sufficient to test out-
standing hypotheses in the next decade or so.
14
32- JAPAM
m US
I0-
hi
2-
BRAST OVARY CERVIX CoRPUs PROSTATE
FIG. 3. Age adjusted rates of cancer of selected sex organs in Japanese and U.S.
white populations, expressed as multiples of the rate in the population with the
lower rate. Data from Segi and Kurihara.8 The original publication gives an over-all
rate for uterine cancer. The values shown here for cervical and corpus cancer are
estimated by assuming that in Japan 90 per cent and in the U.S. 60 per cent of uterine
cancer is cervical. These values probably understate the real difference in uterine
cancers.
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Secondly, in developing and selecting hypotheses, it is well to concentrate
on those that derive from the most striking features of the demographic
distribution of the disease. As Jennings has pointed out in discussing the
epidemiology of peptic ulcer,2 there is frequently a feature of the etiology of
a disease that is so obvious that it is never emphasized and consequently is
forgotten. This was the case with the unusual sex ratio in lung cancer which
was known for many years but, until relatively recently, was not considered
512
Volume 37, June, 1965
Research in cancer epidemiology MAC MAHON
as a basis for hypothesizing about the nature of the responsible environ-
ment experienced by men.
Bearing this in mind, I think we could hardly do better than to concen-
trate on attempts to explain the international variation which is such
a marked epidemiologic feature of many cancer sites. Take, for example,
the remarkable shifts that occur in a comparison of Japanese and United
States' experience as one passes, allegorically speaking, down the alimentary
canal (Fig. 2). One is nearly six times as likely to encounter a cancer in
10 z
BANTU
-u.s.Sal~~~US
AI-
4-
2 -~~-
ESOPHAGUS STOMCH COLON a UVER BREAST
RECTUM
FIG. 4. Age adjusted rates of cancer of selected sites of the South African Bantu
and U.S. white populations, expressed as multiples of the rate in the population
with the lower rate. Data from Higginson and Oettle.' Rates are for both sexes,
except for those for breast, which are for females mtly.
a Japanese stomach as in an American one, but the contrary holds distal
to the pylorus. Mouth and esophagus show similar, though less striking,
reversals. Even more marked differences are seen in some sexual sites
(Fig. 3). Cancer of the breast is 6 times, and cancer of the prostate 13
times more frequently recorded as cause of death in U.S. whites than in
Japanese. Other differences were observed in the classical survey of a Bantu
population by Higginson and Oettli' (Fig. 4). Cancer of the colon and
rectum and of the corpus uteri are very rare in this group, and yet
esophagus, liver, and cervix cancer are more common than in U.S. whites.
Up to the present time, these remarkable variations have been the
concern primarily of geographical pathologists whose main interest has
been in the description and verification of the patterns. It is time for a
program of analytic studies designed to test, one by one, the various
513
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
hypotheses by which the patterns can be explained. Some such efforts have
begun. The Biometry Branch of the National Cancer Institute has organized
a series of studies in migrant populations. In one of these, for example,
dietary habits of stomach cancer patients and controls from populations of
Japanese descent living in Japan, Hawaii, and California are being studied.
Another international study is under way in six centers in various parts of
the world to test the hypothesis that differences in frequency and duration
of breast feeding account for the international variation in breast cancer
rates. These studies are both based on retrospective data obtained at inter-
views with cancer cases and controls in geographic areas representing a
substantial spread of risk of the particular cancer site. These studies have
two characteristics which, strange as it may seem, are quite recent innova-
tions in epidemiologic method. First, data collection procedures, interview
schedules, and analysis are standardized throughout the various geographic
areas in which the study is undertaken, so that observed differences can, in
reality, be attributed to differences between areas rather than to methodo-
logic differences. Secondly, cancer cases represent, to the extent practicable,
all cases occurring in a defined population rather than cases coming to a
particular medical facility. This ensures that cases included are in fact
typical of this particular cancer as it is occurring in that locality. The
desirability of this feature is illustrated by the fact that past studies of the
breast cancer-lactation hypothesis within the United States have given
conflicting results, and it cannot be ascertained whether this can be
explained by the selection of study patients from different types of medical
facility.
So far as I am aware, the striking international variations in cancer of
the esophagus, colon and rectum, ovary, corpus uteri, prostate, and bladder
have not received any analytic investigation.
OCCUPATION
My third conclusion is that occupation has probably been the most useful
single epidemiologic variable. It has proved useful both as a demographic
variable, when hypotheses have been developed as the result of routine
tabulations of disease experience in occupational groups, and as a basis for
hypothesis testing, when an occupational group has been noted to have the
particular exposure necessary to test an hypothesis derived from demo-
graphic studies or from the clinic or laboratory. One need only review the
large number of occupations listed by Hueper8 that are known to have
increased risk of cancer of some form, to realize how intimately occupation
and cancer risk are related.
514
Volume 37, June, 1965
Research in cancer epidemiology I MAC MAHON
It is apparent that occupation continues to be a most important variable,
both as a determinant of a person's cancer experience and as a tool for
investigating the etiology of cancer. A recent illustration is the rising epi-
demic of lung cancer among the uranium miners of the Colorado plateau.
That this group is replicating the earlier experience of the Czechoslovakian
miners and that a clear dose response relationship can be demonstrated in
the American data (Fig. 5), adds weight to the evidence that pulmonary
820-
*so
j4so -
20 -
20
<120 820- 640- 8.00- 3720+
839 1799 3719
CUMULATIVE RADIATION EXPOSURE
(WOesuMO LEVEL MONTHS)
FIG. 5. Incidence of respiratory cancer related to cumulative occupational radiation
exposure in U.S. uranium miners. Data from Wagoner et al. Rates are age
standardized. A "working level month" represents one month's exposure at an
exposure of 1.3 x 10 Mev. of potential alpha energy from radon daughters per
liter of air.
radiation exposure is the major determinant of the excess lung cancer
observed in this occupation.6
Dr. Thomas Mancuso has pioneered in the development of a potentially
most important facility for the study of occupational cancer risk-the use of
the records of the Bureau of Old Age and Survivors Insurance, covering
work history, death, and retirement data on over 100 million insured
workers. The data can be used to identify cohorts of persons in selected
industries, to describe their age, sex, and racial distribution and, most
importantly, to identify subsequent deaths among the members of the
cohort through claims for benefit. The facility has recently been used to
S1S
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
identify increased bladder cancer risk in an industry manufacturing beta-
naphthylamine7 and lung cancer in an asbestos plant.8
RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE METHODS
My last major conclusion is that the most important studies in the cancer
epidemiology literature have been based, at least in part, and in many
instances in their entirety, on events that had already occurred prior to the
initiation of the investigation. Setting up large-scale studies that are entirely
prospective-and their attendant expense-has not been required.
You are all aware that the terms "retrospective" and "prospective" are
often applied to epidemiologic studies. I will not presume to expand on the
two quite distinct ways in which these terms are used, since my discussant
was the first to clarify this issue.' I do wish to point out, however, that in
those cancer studies that are commonly called prospective, e.g., the study of
smoking and causes of death among British physicians,l"at least half of
the relevant association (the cause) had operated prior to the time of the
study, and that in many of the studies to which this adjective is applied
the follow-up period has been so short, in relation to pathologic concepts
regarding the insidiousness of the early stages of cancer, that one may
wonder how many of the subsequently identified cases were not in fact
already affected at the time of the first questionnaire.
Dr. White has pointed out that the essential difference between this type
of study and the so-called retrospective study is that the primary sampling
procedure is from exposed and nonexposed cohorts of persons, rather than
from affected and nonaffected persons. To clarify this distinction, and in
particular to avoid confusion with the usage of retrospective and prospective
in relation to current time, as specified by Webster,. we have recommended
the use of the terms case history study and cohort study in this context.'
Regardless of terminology however, and regardless even of the primary
sampling frame, the distinction between these two types of study that adds
weight to the evidence derived from the "prospective" study is not that the
clinical onset of illness occurred after the initiation of the study, but rather
that the history of the suspected cause was recorded before the occurrence
of the illness. This distinction is important when the suspected cause is a
factor, such as smoking, the memory or statement of which might be
influenced by the existence of illness at the time the patient is questioned
and on which data are rarely recorded routinely during the course of a
person's life. But if the presence or absence of the suspected cause is
objectively recorded prior to the onset of illness, whether in a research
document or in one of the administrative documents that we initiate in our
516
Volume 37, June, 1965
Research in cancer epidemiology I MAC MAHON
journey through the vale of tears, there is no reason why a retrospective
study of the relevant documents should be any less reliable than a study that
is, in relation to the particular investigation, entirely prospective. It will
certainly be cheaper and quicker. The British studies of leukemia in
ankylosing spondylitis patients,'8 of bronchitis and lung cancer in mustard
gas victims," and our own study of childhood cancer following prenatal
exposure are all studies based entirely on events that had already occurred
at the time of the investigation.
I have a particular fondness for the type of analytic study that is entirely
retrospective in the sense of being based on past events but is prospective
in the sense that groups for investigation are cohorts of persons known to
have been exposed to a particular environment-in the terminology north of
the Connecticut border, a retrospective cohort study. Such a design is not
always feasible, but when it is, it combines rapidity of results, economy
and the virtues of the cohort approach. Its major difficulties stem from the
problems of tracing individual cohort members, and I would therefore like
to comment on some methodologic aspects of this problem.
In most cancer studies it will be sufficient to determine whether or not
the person is dead and, if so, the date and cause of death. I should point out
in this context that the high productivity of the British epidemiological
profession cannot be attributed entirely to the intellectual stimulation pro-
vided by working with an electric heater under the desk so that the feet are
warm but the head remains cold. Credit is also due to the existence of
a uniform centralized registration system of high quality whose functionaries
hate to throw anything away. Our own registration system is second to
none in extent and quality of data collected, but it is centralized only with
respect to certain advisory functions and the preparation of national sta-
tistical tabulations. The central agency does not exhibit the squirrel-like
propensities of its British counterpart, and, searching for a particular death
(which one might not be sure has occurred at all) in 66 different state
capitols and cities presents certain practical difficulties. In addition, although
we are particularly fortunate here in the Northeast, there is no uniformity
among State and local registrars across the country in the extent to which
they consider time spent on epidemiologic exploitation of their records to be
justifiable, or even legal. The National Center for Health Statistics has
periodically considered the establishment of a National Death Index. Such
a facility would make an enormous contribution to epidemiologic studies of
chronic illness in general, and cancer in particular.
Also of considerable potential are administrative systems into which a
follow-up is built because of insurance claims or other "benefits" attending
517
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
notification of the death to a central agency. I have already mentioned the
Bureau of Old Age and Survivors Insurance. Another is the program of
benefits and insurance for U.S. veterans, the data of which are being
developed by the Follow-Up Agency of the NAS-NRC.'
An alternative method of obtaining follow-up information in cohort
studies is comparing the names of the selected cohorts with a roster of all
cases of the particular disease known to have occurred in the study area. If
a member of the cohort does not appear on the case roster, it is assumed
that he is not affected. The disadvantages of the case roster method are that,
first, the case roster must exist, and, secondly, a control group or some
other device must be used to estimate the number of individuals who were
affected but, because of migration or other reason, do not appear on the case
roster. On the other hand, once an adequate case roster is established, it
can be used for any number of follow-up studies in the same area, without
the necessity of repeated field work.
For example, in an investigation of the relationship of prenatal X-ray
exposure to childhood cancer, we wished to find out which of 750,000
children born in some 40 hospitals in the Northeast between 1947 and 1954
had subsequently died of cancer. A direct follow-up was impractical, and
the method chosen was to assemble a roster of all children who died of
cancer in the Northeast after 1947 and were of appropriate age to have
been born since 1947. The birth certificates of these 4,500 children iden-
tified the 580 who were born in the hospitals of interest. This roster has
been kept up-to-date, and now contains approximately 10,000 names of
children born in the northeastern United States since 1947 who are known
to have died of cancer. In addition to its original use, this roster can be used
to "follow up" any special group of children (or pregnancies) to determine
whether they experience an increased risk of malignant disease. It could,
for example, be used to follow children exposed either prenatally or post-
natally to specific viral infections, chemical or physical agents, or children
vaccinated with material containing suspected oncogenic viruses. It has
been used to estimate the cancer risk to twins of cancer patients7 and to
identify families with more than one affected child.'
Useful as this roster is, it has a number of deficiencies, the most serious
of which is the loss of cases from migration between the time of birth and
death from cancer. This problem and others would be virtually eliminated
by the establishment of such a roster on a national scale. There is some
prospect that a national roster of childhood cancer might be set up in the
near future under the auspices of the Epidemiology Branch of the National
Cancer Institute.
5i8
Volume 37, June, 1965
Research in cancer epidemiology - MAC MAHON
Cancer registries are a special form of roster, and it would be remiss to
speak on cancer epidemiology in this State without referring to them. The
contribution of cancer registries to epidemiologic studies is not restricted
to the description of the demographic distribution of cancer incidence. The
studies that have originated from the Connecticut Cancer Registry in the
last few years on the causes of death of long-term cancer survivors,'9 the
occurrence of multiple primary cancers,' the genetics of cancer, and other
important topics, provide excellent examples of the use of registry data for
analytic studies. In fact, a cancer registry can be so useful that groups of
investigators occasionally decide they must have one of their own without
giving adequate consideration to the cost and effort of establishing and
maintaining an effective register. My own point of view in the discussions
that arise from time to time on the establishment of a new cancer registry
is that even existing registries are not used to their full potential for ana-
lytic studies and that further effort should be devoted to improving and
exploiting existing facilities before new undertakings are begun. This point
of view does not apply, of course, to new registries in areas where the
cancer pattern is substantially different from those of the areas of existing
registration.
APOLOGIA
To guard against the danger inherent in committing personal opinion to
paper-that one can appear to be dogmatic about what is good and what is
bad, what is productive and what is not-I wish to stress the transient as
well as the personal nature of these views. Perhaps, in epidemiology, we
cannot rival our laboratory colleagues in the definitiveness of their experi-
ments, or our clinical associates in the detail of their observations, but
I hope we will not lag behind either group in the ingenuity that we apply
to the development of new and improved methods of enquiry.
REFERENCES
1. Stocks, Percy: Regional and Local Differences in Cancer Death Rates. Studies
on medical and population subjects no. 1. London, Her Majesty's Stationery
Office, 1947.
2. Jennings, Denys: Perforated peptic ulcer. Changes in age incidence and sex
distribution in the last 150 years. Lancet, 1940, 1, 4441447.
3. Segi, M. and Kurihara, M.: Cancer Mortality for Selected Sites in 24 Countries.
No. 2 (1958-1959). Sendai, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Dept. of
Public Health, 1962.
4. Higginson, John and Oettle, A. G.: Cancer incidence in the Bantu and "Cape
Colored" races of South Africa: report of a cancer survey in the Transvaal
(1953-55). J. nat. Cancer Inst., 1960, 24, 589-671.
5. Hueper, W. C.: Recent developments in environmental cancer. Arch. Path.,
1954, 58, 360-399, 475-523, 645-682.
519
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 37, June, 1965
6. Wagoner, J. K., Archer, V. E., Lundin, F. E., Holaday, D. A., and Lloyd, J. W.:
Radiation as the cause of excess lung cancer among uranium miners. New
Engl. J. Med., 1965. In press.
7. Mancuso, T. F. and Coulter, E. J.: Methods of studying the relation of employ-
ment and long-term illness-cohort analysis. Amer. J. publ. Hlth, 1959, 49,
1525-1536.
8. : Methodology in industrial health studies. The cohort approach,
with special reference to an asbestos company. Arch. environm. Hlth, 1963,
6, 210-226.
9. White, Colin and Bailar, J. C., III: Retrospective and prospective methods of
studying association in medicine. Amer. J. publ. Hlth, 1956, 46, 35-44.
10. Doll, Richard and Hill, A. B.: Lung cancer and other causes of death in relation
to smoking. A second report on the mortality of British doctors. Brit. med.
J., 1956, 2, 1071-1081.
11. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 6th Ed. Springfield, Mass., Merriam. 1961.
12. MacMahon, Brian, Pugh, T. F., and Ipsen, J.: Epidemiologic Methods. Boston,
Little, Brown and Co., 1960.
13. Court-Brown, W. M. and Doll, Richard: Leukaemia and Aplastic Anaemia in
Patients Irradiated for Ankylosing Spondylitis. Medical Research Council.
Special report series, no. 295. London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1957.
14. Case, R. A. M. and Lea, A. J.: Mustard gas poisoning, chronic bronchitis, and
lung cancer. Brit. J. prev. soc. Med., 1955, 9, 62-72.
15. MacMahon, Brian: Prenatal X-ray exposure and childhood cancer. J. nat. Cancer
Inst., 1962, 28, 1173-1191.
16. DeBakey, M. E. and Beebe, G. W.: Medical follow-up studies on veterans. J.
Amer. med. Ass., 1962, 182, 1103-1109.
17. MacMahon, Brian and Levy, M. A.: Prenatal origin of childhood leukemia.
Evidence from twins. New Engl. J. Med., 1964, 270, 1082-1085.
18. Levy, M. A. and MacMahon, Brian: Leukemia and other malignancies in
siblings. In press.
19. Bailar, J. C., III.: Uterine cancer in Connecticut: late deaths among 5-year
survivors. J. nat. Cancer Inst., 1961, 27, 239-257.
20. : The incidence of independent tumors among uterine cancer patients.
Cancer, 1963, 16, 842-853.
DISCUSSION: COLIN WHITE*
Dr. MacMahon made a general remark at the very outset of his paper that
caught my attention. It has often been said, with pride, by epidemiologists
that John Snow made important contributions to the understanding of the
etiology of cholera long before the cholera vibrio had been isolated. Dr.
MacMahon now puts forward the interesting point of view that this timing
of the epidemiologic contribution is in the very nature of things. The
epidemiologist can work productively at some intermediate stage of knowl-
edge when the disease is well-defined, but ideas as to etiology are immature.
I think we can agree that the study of cancer is in this category.
We may inquire as to the special technique that the epidemiologist has, to
cope with these problems. It is simply the method of coming to terms with
* Professor of Public Health, (Biometry), Yale University School of Medicine.
520
