STUART C. FINCH | Department of Internal Medicine, Yale UniversitySchool of Medicine
RECOGNITION AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE OF THORIUM DIOXIDE (THOROTRAST®)
DEPOSITS IN HUMAN UNSTAINED BONE MARROW SMEARS
Direct microscopic estimation of the amount of hemosiderin in an unstained
bone marrow smear is of great value in the clinical evaluation of iron
deficiency and iron excess.' Usually, the highly refractile golden or amber
crystals of hemosiderin are easily identified and need be differentiated
only from particulate artifacts in the unstained marrow preparation. In
the course of evaluating several thousand unstained marrow smears for
hemosiderin content, smears from three patients have been encountered
which contained extensive crystalline appearing aggregates of thorium
dioxide (Thorotrast®). The physical appearance of these deposits was
similar but not identical to that of hemosiderin. A history of previous
injection of Thorotrast for diagnostic purposes was obtained only in these
three patients. An appreciation of the differences in the appearance of
Thorotrast and hemosiderin in the marrow may be useful in the clinical
recognition of excessive tissue stores of these substances.
CASE REPORTS
Case 1. Patient V. L. was a 52 year old, married, Italian male admitted
to the Joslin Service of the New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, in April of 1952 for regulation of his diabetes. He gave a
history of jaundice two months previously and excessive alcohol con-
sumption for many years.
A course of Thorotrast injections had been administered at another
hospital in order to facilitate X-ray visualization of his liver and spleen,
four years prior to admission. The total amount administered was not
known. Severe flexion deformity of the right arm developed following
extravasation of Thorotrast into the soft tissues of the right anticubital
fossa.
* Associate Professor of Medicine.
Received for publication 24 July 1963.
3.
Thorotrast in bone marrow
The physical examination showed evidence of recent weight loss. The
skin had a generalized dusky appearance, with deep brown pigmentation
of the scrotum and penis. Body hair was scanty. Hard subcutaneous bands
and nodules were felt in the right anticubital fossa. The right forearm
could be extended only to about 100°. Both breasts were tender and
moderately enlarged. A sharp liver edge was felt four finger breadths
below the right costal margin on deep inspiration. The spleen was palpable,
but no other abdominal masses were felt. The testes were soft and atrophic
The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Urine sugar was 10 grams in 24 hours, and the urinary sediment con-
tained from 8 to 10 leukocytes per high power field. The hemoglobin
concentration was 12.6 gm/100 ml. Total and differential leukocyte counts
were within normal limits. Platelet counts ranged from 56,000 to 62,000/
mm3. The serum iron level was 180 ,ug/100 ml. Liver function studies
showed a total bilirubin of 2.2 mg/100 ml. with a thymol flocculation of
2+ and cephalin flocculation of 3+ in 24 hours. Plasma prothrombin
activity was 30 per cent. Radiologic studies demonstrated esophageal
varices and the presence of multiple, mottled radio-opaque densities
throughout both the liver and spleen (Fig. 1).
The patient was thought to have advanced Laennec's cirrhosis and
diabetes mellitus associated with extensive Thorotrast deposits in his
liver and spleen. His physical and laboratory findings in association with an
elevated serum iron suggested the possibility of hemochromatosis. In order
to evaluate his tissue iron stores, a bone marrow aspiration was performed.
The cellular morphology was not remarkable, but in the unstained smears
numerous clumps of clear, moderately refractile crystalline appearing
material were uniformly distributed throughout the interstices of the
marrow (Fig. 2). These deposits did not have the typical highly refractile
golden appearance of hemosiderin and did not take an iron stain.
The patient's diabetes was rapidly brought into control with insulin.
On the 6th hospital day, however, he developed several moderately severe
episodes of hematemesis. Bleeding continued for several days but finally
ceased after many transfusions had been administered. The patient
gradually became comatose and died on the 16th hospital day. No autopsy
was performed.
Case 2. Patient G. M. was a 45 year old, white male who was admitted
to the Evans Memorial Hospital, Massachusetts Memorial Hospital, Boston
Massachusetts in May of 1953 with chief complaints of pain in the right
shoulder and fever of five days duration.
389
I FINCH
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
At the age of 4, a large cyst of the biliary tract was surgically removed.
This was followed by fistula formation and frequent attacks of chills, fever,
and obstructive jaundice during the next 15 years. At the age of 37, he
was investigated for a possible hepatic abscess. For each of three con-
secutive days he was given 25 ml. of Thorotrast intravenously. Follow-up
X-ray examination showed a normal liver. He was admitted with a
temperature of 1030F., pulse of 110/min. and respirations of 25/min.
There was minimal scleral icterus, and a few spider nevi were present over
the upper thorax. A sharp, tender liver edge was felt three finger breadths
below the right costal margin. The tip of the spleen was felt 2 to 3 finger
breadths below the left costal margin.
Laboratory studies showed poor liver function, and diagnoses of
cholangeitis and biliary cirrhosis were made.
Flat films of the abdomen revealed mottled densities in both the liver
and spleen. The radiologist felt that these changes were due to the presence
of residual Thorotrast in these organs. A few observers felt that hemo-
chromatosis might account for the entire clinical course. A sternal bone
marrow aspiration was performed. Stained smears showed reasonably
normal morphology, but the unstained marrow smears showed numerous
diffuse and clustered pale granules which could easily be differentiated
from the amber hemosiderin granules (Fig. 3). Prussian blue stain of the
marrow revealed only traces of hemosiderin interspersed among these clear
crystalline appearing aggregates which did not take an iron stain. Histologic
sections of the bone-marrow clot showed these deposits to be in and near
reticuloendothelial cells (Fig. 4).
On the 14th hospital day, exploratory surgery was performed. The
common duct was found to contain casts of biliary pigment. These were
removed, and a side-to-side choledochoduodenostomy was performed. Fol-
lowing surgery, the patient did poorly and expired on the 33rd hospital
day. An autopsy revealed advanced biliary cirrhosis, retroperitoneal and
subphrenic abscesses, and pulmonary edema. Thorotrast was identified
microscopically in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
Case 3. Patient H. N. was a 72 year old, white male admitted to the
Grace-New Haven Community Hospital in November of 1962 with cough
and sputum production of two weeks' duration. His sputum had occasion-
ally been blood tinged, and his temperature had been elevated to 100 and
1010 F. most of the time. One week prior to admission, he developed
some severe pleuritic left chest pain.
390
Volume 36, April, 1964
FIG. 1. Mottled denisities in the liver anid spleen due to aggregates of Thorotrast
injected four years previously.
FIG. 2. Thorotrast crystals in unstained bone marrow smear.
FIG. 3. Large irregular clear crystals of Thorotrast in the unstained boine marrow.
..............S - sS
:°,:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.......:FIG. 4. A cluster of Thorotrast crystals protruding into a vacuolated area in a stained
section of the bone marrow.
Thorotrast in bone marrow
The past history revealed that in July of 1939 he had been admitted
to the Grace-New Haven Hospital with an episode of subarachnoid
hemorrhage which was thought to be due to rupture of an aneurysm of
the right posterior cerebral artery. During the next two years, he had
several convulsive episodes, and in December of 1941, he was readmitted
to the Hospital for reinvestigation. A right cerebral arteriogram was per-
formed with 20 ml. of Thorotrast. No aneurysm was demonstrated.
On physical examination, he presented as a heavy-set man with normal
vital signs. Moist inspiratory rales were audible over the left lower lung
field. The heart was unremarkable. No masses or organs were palpable
in the abdomen. Diminshed strength of the left arm and leg were noted.
Moderately hyperactive reflexes and a positive Babinski sign also were
present on the left.
Initial laboratory studies showed an hematocrit of 35 per cent. The total
white count ranged from 6,500 to 9,000 cells/mm3. Differential leukocyte
count showed 59 per cent segmented cells, 5 per cent band forms, 1 per cent
eosinophils, 19 per cent lymphocytes and 16 per cent monocytes.
Reticulocyte and platelet counts were within normal limits. Sputum cultures
did not demonstrate any predominant organism, and no acid-fast bacilli
were isolated. A serum iron determination was 71 micrograms/ 100 ml.
A stained smear of bone marrow aspirated from the posterior iliac
crest revealed only slight increase in plasma cells. The unstained bone
marrow preparation demonstrated the presence of many small, clear,
moderately refractile granules, both alone and in large clusters interspersed
with a normal complement of hemosiderin.
Radiologic examination of the chest and the laboratory studies were
consistent with the diagnosis of viral pneumonitis. X-ray examination of
the long bones was negative. Many other laboratory tests were performed,
but all were within normal limits.
The patient was placed on oral tetracycline, and he became afebrile on
the 4th hospital day and remained so throughout the course of his hospital-
ization. Repeat chest films were obtained, and at the time of discharge,
chest films revealed only slight residual density in the left lower lung field.
DISCUSSION
The first patient, V. L., presented with a combination of skin pigmen-
tation, diabetes and cirrhosis. This triad of abnormalities made the
diagnosis of idiopathic hemochromatosis a very likely possibility. The
serum iron value of 180 micrograms/100 ml. was moderately elevated, and
391
FINCH
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
was thought to be consistent with iron storage disease. Normal to
moderately elevated serum iron levels have been reported in a few
patients with idiopathic hemochromatosis, expecially in the presence of
infection of neoplasia.2 Because of the patient's low prothrombic activity
and poor clinical condition, liver biopsy was not performed. The sternal
marrow contained numerous small and large clumps of a moderately refrac-
tile, crystalline-appearing material which closely resembled hemosiderin. In
contrast to hemosiderin, under low power magnification, this substance
appeared as clear crystalline aggregates or droplets scattered throughout
the unstained marrow rather than the more irregular clumps of golden or
amber hemosiderin. Under oil magnification, these granules were clear or
had a pale yellow appearance. In view of the atypicality of this material, a
confirmatory iron stain was done on the marrow smears. The crystals
remained unchanged in color, and a normal amount of blue-staining
hemosiderin was scattered through the marrow. Subsequent X-ray studies
revealed the presence of radio-opaque material in the liver and spleen
which was thought to be residual Thorotrast. In spite of the moderately
elevated plasma iron value, increased tissue hemosiderin was not demon-
strated, and the patient was believed not to have idiopathic hemochromatosis.
The extensive deposits of crystalline-appearing material in the bone marrow
were consistent with the physical characteristics of Thorotrast and could
be clearly distinguished from hemosiderin.
Iron storage disease was an unlikely diagnosis for the second patient,
G. M. The initial impression by one observer, however, was that the bone
marrow did contain excessive amounts of hemosiderin. The crystalline
deposits appeared identical to those found in the marrow of patient V. L.
Subsequently, it became clear that this material was Thorotrast, not
hemosiderin.
The bone marrow aspiration on the third patient, H. N., was part of
the investigation of his moderate anemia. In this instance, the refractile
granules in the bone marrow initially were thought to be Thorotrast on the
unstained smears. The patient's old medical record was located and the
history of Thorotrast injections 21 years previously documented.
In each of the patients, it is not known whether or not the long-standing
Thorotrast in body tissues was of any importance in the pathogenesis of
his basic disorder. Long-standing retention of Thorotrast in the liver fre-
quently has been associated with the development of portal fibrosis.`~5
The first patient, however, was a moderately heavy alcoholic and the second
patient had had biliary tract disease since the age of 4 years. The third
392
Volume 36, April, 1964
Thorotrast in bone marrow FINCH
patient, H.N., had experienced no serious difficulties, but a mild refractory
anemia was noted.
Thorium dioxide is an alpha, beta, and gamma emitter with a physical
half life of 1.4 x 1010 years. Only the alpha particle need be considered
in tissue ionization, but based on total ionization per particle, beta particles
are just as important.! The alpha particles have a range of approximately
30 to 50 micra in tissue resulting in about 4 x 107 ion pairs per centimeter.
Beta particles have a range from 0.5 to 5 mm. in tissue producing about
6 x 104 ion pairs per centimeter. Thorotrast is almost completely retained
after it is administered and only minute amounts are found in the urine,
bile, and feces. The material is taken up by the reticuloendothelial system
where it largely remains throughout the life of the patient.7 Excessive
deposits of thorium dioxide have been noted in the marrow medullary
space many years after patients had received their injections.9 Heavy
concentrations have been found along the endostial surface of the bone,
and a few patients have been reported with aplastic anemia.`0l Major
accumulations also occur in the liver and spleen. Many years after in-
jection radiologic examination may show mottled opacities in these organs
and dense shadows in the lymph nodes of the porta hepatis.'
Prolonged tissue retention of Thorotrast with excessive local ionization
may result in granuloma formation, fibrosis, or neoplasia.8'6"' Alterations
of long bone structure consisting of shaft thickening associated with
endostial irregularity and trabecular thickening has been noted.9 It is
quite probable that these bone changes were due to the excessive deposits
of Thorotrast in the endostium.
The use of Thorotrast as a contrast medium has certain diagnostic appli-
cations, but there remains little doubt that prolonged retention of this
material in body tissues represents a serious radiation hazard. Except pos-
sibly for the visualization of an accessory spleen in either elderly subjects
or patients with a very limited life expectancy,"8" the potential dangers
inherent in its administration would seem to overshadow its diagnostic
value. The patients described in this report were noted to have bone marrow
deposits of thorium dioxide from 4 to 21 years following injections. The
Thorotrast studies in none of the patients were of appreciable diagnostic
value.
Thorotrast has been identified many times in stained bone marrow
smears and histologic sections of marrow of patients who have received
Thorotrast injections. It appears as refractile tan granules in the
reticuloendothelial cells or in fibrous tissue.' It has not been described
393
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE Volume 36, April, 1964
previously in the unstained bone marrow preparation. This probably is due
to the fact that the practice of estimating marrow hemosiderin in the
unstained marrow is not widespread. Complete evaluation of a bone
marrow smear should include estimation of the amount of hemosiderin
present. This is especially important in determining the presence of iron
deficiency and iron excess.
The cases presented illustrate three examples where Thorotrast
aggregates in the unstained smears might easily have been mistaken for
excessive deposits of hemosiderin. Differentiation of Thorotrast from hemo-
siderin in the unstained bone marrow preparations of Thorotrast-injected
patients with liver disease or anemia may be of considerable diagnostic
value.
SUMMARY
1. The case histories of three patients with prominent deposits of thorium
dioxide (Thorotrast) in their unstained bone marrow aspiration smears
are presented.
2. The importance of differentiating hemosiderin and Thorotrast in bone
marrow smears is discussed.
REFERENCES
1. Rath, C. E. and Finch, C. A.: Sternal marrow hemosiderin. A method for the
determination of available iron stores in man. J. Lab. clin. Med., 1948, 33,
81-86.
2. Finch, S. C. and Finch, C. A.: Idiopathic hemochromatosis, an iron storage
disease. Medicine (Baltimore), 1955, 34, 381-430.
3. Cassel, Chester, Ruffin, J. M., Reeves, R. J., and Stoddard, L. D.: Late effects of
thorium dioxide in man. Arch. intern. Med., 1951, 88, 42-50.
4. Jonsell, J. E. and Lindgren, G. H.: Case of hepatosplenography with Thorotrast:
Results of autopsy 10 years later. Radiol. clin. (Basel), 1944, 13, 201.
5. Jacobson, L. E. and Rosenbaum, David: Postmortem findings and radio-activity
determinations five years after injection of thorotrast. Radiology, 1938, 31,
601-607.
6. Curtis, H. J.: The biological effects of radiations. Advanc. biol. med. Phys., 1951,
2, 1-51.
7. Stenstrom, Wilhelm: Elimination of radioactive elements by patients and rabbits
after injection of Thorotrast. Radiology, 1941, 37, 698-704.
8. Aub, J. C., Evans, R. D., Hempelmann, L. H., and Martland, H. S.: The late
effects of internally-deposited radioactive materials in man. Medicine (Balti-
more), 1952, 31, 221-329.
9. Looney, W. B.: An investigation of the late clinical findings following Thorotrast
(thorium dioxide) administration. Amer. J. Roentgenol., 1960, 83, 163-185.
10. Laborde, Simone: Les dangers des substances radioactives introduites dans
l'organisme. Presse mtUd., 1939, 47, 393-394.
394
Thorotrast in bone marrow I FINCH
11. Spier, Jack, Cluff, L. E., and Urry, W. D.: Aplastic anemia following administra-
tion of Thorotrast. J. Lab. clin. Med., 1947, 32, 147-154.
12. Schmidt, W., Schulte, A., and Lapp, H.: Klinischer und pathologisch-anatomischer
Beitrag zur Frage der Schadigung durch Thorotrast. Strahlentherapie, 1950,
81, 93-102.
13. Hieronymi, G. and Sandkiihler, St.: Bone marrow insufficiency 11 years after
Thorotrast application. Dtsch. Arch. klin. Med., 1953, 200, 561-572.
14. Moeschlin, S., Marti, H. R., and Germann, W.: Todliche Panmyelopathie durch
Thorotrast (Thoriumdioxyd). Schweiz. med. Wschr., 1953, 83, 1061-1064.
15. Duane, G. W.: Aplastic anemia fourteen years following administration of Thoro-
trast. Amer. J. Med., 1957, 23, 499-501.
16. Thomas, S. F., Henry, G. W., and Kaplan, H. S.: Hepatolienography: past,
present, and future. Radiology, 1951, 57, 669-684.
17. Levowitz, B. S., Hughes, R. E., and Alford, T. C.: Treatment of thorium dioxide
granulomas of the neck. New Engl. J. Med., 1963, 268, 340-342.
18. Yater, W. M. and Coe, F. O.: Ten years' experience with Thorotrast hepato-
splenography. Ann. intern. Med., 1943, 18, 350-366.
19. Loeb, Virgil, Jr., Seaman, W. B., and Moore, C. V.: The use of thorium dioxide
sol (Thorotrast) in the roentgenologic demonstration of accessory spleens.
Blood, 1952, 7, 904-914.
395
