YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 45, 457-462 (1972)
Serum Muramidase in Patients with Neutropenia*
WESLEY M. VIETZKE,t PASQUALE E. PERILLIE,t
and STUART C. FINCH§
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Havent, Connecticut 06510, and the Veterans' Administration Hospital,
West Haven, Connecticut
Received for publication 29 November 1971
The purpose of this study was to determine whether variations in serum mura-
midase (lysozyme) activity in neutropenic patients have clinical significance. The
possibility of a valid relationship is based on the premise that most of the normal
plasma enzyme activity is derived from the degradation of senescent neutrophils
with subsequent release of enzyme from their granules(I-4). There now is abun-
dant evidence that muramidase is found predominantly in the lysosomes of ma-
ture neutrophils and monocytes(5), and that the number of circulating mature
neutrophils correlates well with serum muramidase activity(2-4). It also has been
demonstrated that increased serum muramidase activity is associated with ex-
panded total granulocyte or monocyte populations in patients with leuke-
mia(l,3,6,7) and the probable increase in marrow granulocyte turnover in
megaloblastic anemias(8). On the other hand, serum enzyme activity frequently is
reduced in acute lymphocytic leukemia in relapse(7) and other conditions which
appear to reduce the total body neutrophil population(l,3). These observations
suggest that neutropenia due to diminished granulopoiesis may result in reduced
serum muramidase activity whereas neutropenia due to accelerated granulocyte
destruction may produce either a relative or absolute increase in serum enzyme
activity. Preliminary observations in patients with aplastic anemia and various
types of neutropenic disorders are consistent with this suggestion(3,9).
* This research was supported by USPHS Training Grant HE05316-10 and USPHS Research
Grant CA-11106.
t Formerly a Research Trainee in Hematology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven; currently an Assistant Professor of Medicine, University of Connecticut School of Medi-
cine, McCook Hospital, Hartford, Ct. 06112.
+ Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Ct.
§ Professor of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Ct.
457
Copyright ( 1972, by Academic Press, Inc.
VIETZKE, PERILILIE, and FINCH
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Serum mturamidlase activity was meastlre(l in 55 neutropenic patients at either
the Yale-New Haven Hospital or the West Haven Veteran's Administration Hos-
pital. The periplheral blood neutroplhil count was less tllan 2000/mm3 in each
patient at the time of study. A periplheral 10loo0l monocyte concentration of
greater than 750/mm" was defined as monocytosis. All patients in the stut(ly had
blood urea nitrogen levels below 20 mg/100 ml.
Sertum mturamidlase activity for eaclh patient was correlate(d with bone marrow
granulocyte celltularity, peripheral blood neutroplhil an(l monocyte counts, and
clinical diagnosis. The neutropenia was due to a wi(le variety of clinical condi-
tions, blut for purposes of this study the degree of bone marrow granulocyte celltu-
larity rather than disease diagnosis received primary conlsideration. Bone marrow
granulocyte cellularity was determined from coverslip smears of marrow particles
and bone marrow needle biopsy sections. The combination of overall marrow
cellularity anid( the myeloid:erythroid ratio provi(led the basis for judging tlle
extent of marrow granulocyte cellularity. The distribution of patients according
to clinical diagnosis and marrow granulocyte cellularity is slhown in Tables 1
and 2.
Sertum muramidase activity was determined by a modification of Litwack's
turbidimetric metlhod using an egg white standard, measuring change in optical
(lensity of a suspension of Microco ccus lysodeikticus at 540 nm(I0). Control
values range from 7 to 14 ,ug/ml(2,3).
RESULTS
Serum mturamidase activity was witlhin or above the control range in all pa-
tients witlh normal or increased bone marrow grantulocyte cellularity (Fig. 1,
Table 1). Twelve of the 22 patients in this group (55a/c) lhad increased serum
muramidase activity. The median serum value was 14 ,ug/ml with a mean of 15.2
[kg/ml ± 6.0. There were four patients in this group witli peripheral bloodl
TABLE 1
DISTRIBUTION OF PATIFNTS WITH NEUTROPENIA ASSOCIATED WVITH NORNIAL OR INCRIEASEI)
BONE MARROWV GRANULOCYTE CELLULARITY ACCORDING TO DIAGNOSIS
AND SERUM MURAMIDASE ACTIVITY
Serum murami(lase (ug/ml)
Diagniosis <7 7-14 >14 Total
I(liopathic neutr-openia 0 2 5 7
Hyperplastic refractory aniemia 0 1 2 3
Lupus er-ythematosus 0 0 1 1
Felty's Synd(rome 0 2 2 4
10 or 20 spleinic hyperplasia 0 5 2 7
Total 0 10 12 22
458
SERUM MURAMIDASE IN NEUTROPENIA
monocytosis, eaclh of whiom lhadl increased sertum mturamidlase activity (Fig. 1).
The ine(lian value for the patients witlh monocytosis was 16 tg/ml and the mean
value was 17.1 /g/mnl ±- 4.8. Increased serum mutramiclase was observed in eiglht
of the remaining 18 patienits (44%) with normal or increased marrow granulocyte
activity but witlhotut mnoniocytosis (Fig. 1). The median serum enzyme activity was
12.7 ,ug/ml an(d the meani ser-um value was 14.8 [kg/ml 5.1.
Serutm mutrami(lase activity for all patients witlh (liminisledl marrow granutlo-
cyte celltularity was eitlher withlinl the control range or re(ulcedI (Fig. 1, Table 2).
The me(dian valule was 4.0 [g/ml witlh a mean of 5.5 [,g/ml 3.3 for this entire
grotlp. Serumn en7zyme activity was below the control range in 26 of 33 patients
(79%). None of the patients witlh reduced marrow granulocytes hlad periplheral
bloodimonocytosis.
30 _
25
E
20 S
w
4s i
10
5 WITHOUT WITH 0
MONO- MONO-
CYTOSIS CYTOSIS ° 98
v'
NORMAL or INCREASED REDUCED MARROW
MARROW GRANULOCYTES GRANULOCYTES
FIG. 1. This figure derx1monstrates that serum muramidase activity is lnormal or increased in all
paticnts with monocytosis (A) or without moniocytosis (0) whlenever marrow granulocytc celltI-
larity is normal or incr.easel. Neutropenia in the presence of re(lnce(I marrow grranulocytc pre-
cursors (o), however, is associated with iiormal or reducedl serum enzyme activity. The contirol
ranige for serum murami(lase is shown by the crosshatched area anid the mediani for each group
by a horizontal bar.
TABLE 2
DISTRIBUTION OF PATII.NTS WN'ITH NEUTROPENIA ASSOCIATED WVITH DECREASED BONE NIARROW
GRANULOCYTE CELL1 ULARITY ACCORDING TO DIAGNOSIS AND SERUM MURAMIDASE ACTIvITY
Serum muiramiidase (,ag/ml)
Diagnosis <7 7-14 >14 Total
Aplastic atieneia 10 4 0 14
Drug-ini(duce(d agranulocytosis 5 2 0 7
Radiation ther-apy 2 1 0 3
Acute lymphocytic leukemia 8 1 0 9
Total 25 8 0 33
49
460 vIIETZKE, PERILLIE, and FINCH
Comparison of the two groups indicates that reduced serum muramidase ac-
tivity is more clharacteristic of those patients witlh reduced marrow myeloid cel-
lularity (79%) than is increased sertum muramidase activity for the groui) witlh
normal or increasedl marrow granulocyte cellulairity (55%). The clifference be-
tween the mean serum muramidase value for those patients witlh diminislhedI bone
marrow myeloid activity and. those with normal or increased myeloid activity
(witlhotut monocytosis) is hiiglily significant (P < 0.001).
The overall relationship for eitlher group between sertum muramidase activity
and peripheral blood neutrophil count was poor (Fig. 2). All blut one patient with
severe neutropenia, however, witli peripheral blood neutrophil counts less than
200/mm3 in association with reduced marrow granulocyte cellularity had reduced
serum enzyme activity. For any given peripheral blood neutrophil count serum
mtramnidlase activity was increased in patients witlh monocytosis, but no greater
tlhani in some witlhout monocytosis (Fig. 2). Tlhus, the relationslhip between serum
mturamidase an(d total blood monocytes or the combination of neutroplhils and
monlocytes was poor for these extremely neutropenic stubjects.
DISCUSSION
These data dlemonstrate clear differences in leukocyte-muramidase relation-
slhips in patients witlh various types of neutropeniia. First, those patients with
normal or increase(d numbers of marrow granulocytes in whom there probably
is increased neutroplhil turnover have normal or increased serum muramidase
activity. It seems likely that the relatively lar-ge amounit of sertum enzyme activity
30
25
en0
i
4 *A
15_*
U100//.0
o00
0
5
0~~~~~~~~~~
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
BLOOD NEUTROPHIL COUNT (x i03)
FIG. 2. A poor ovcrall relationship is nioted betwvceie blood neutrophils and scrum muurami-
(lasc. All patienits with monocytosis (A) had iincrease(l serumli enizyme activity, but to levels which
were no higher than those of many patients with inicreased marrowv granulocytes wvithout mono-
cytosis (0). All but one patient with reduced marrowv granulocytes (o) and less than 300 circu-
lating neutrophils hadl reducc(l serum muriarnilase activity. The crosshatched ar-ea showvs the
control range.
SERUM MURAMIDASE IN NEUTROPENIA
in the patients is (de to increased neutrophil destruction. In the patients with
monocytosis it is uncertain- as to whetlher the increased serum muramidase ac-
tivity is primarily of neutroplhilic or monocytic origin, but the consistently higher
levels of activity stuggest a major monocyte contribution. The second group con-
sists of patients with neutropenia associated with reduced marrow myeloid cellu-
larity wlhichi is probably a reflection of decreased total granulopoiesis. Serum
muramiclase activity ustually is reduced, but may l)e in the normal range. These
observations stuggest tlhat, in the absence of monocytosis, increased serum mura-
midase activity in patienits with neuLtropenia is related to active granulopoiesis
in association witlh increasecl granulocyte destruction. Reduced serum muramidase
activity is cluie to myeloid hypoproliferation resultinig in diminislhed granulocyte
turnover. Redluctioni of serum nmlirami(lase activity to levels as low as 1.4-1.6
1g/ml occurrecl in patients witlh marrow myeloid hypoplasia or aplasia. This
indicates that as muchi as 80%X` of serum miuramidase activity is derive(d from de-
grade(d granulocytes.
The "murami(lase in(lex" lhas provedl of rather limited value in characterizing
the type of neutropenia in this group of patients(7,8). If one excludes patients
witlh severe neutropenia (< 200 neutrophils/mM3), all of whom lhave reduced
marrow granulocyte activity, the general trend is for higher indices in patients
with normal or increasednmarrow granulocytes in comparison to those with re-
d(ucecd marrow granulocytes, but overlapping of values is too great to be of much
clinical value.
The extent to wlhich monocytes contribute muramiclase to the body's total
muramidlase pool is diffictult to ascertain. The relative number of monocytes in
the periplheral 10loo0( of neutropenic patients frequently parallels the peripheral
neutroplhil count, especially when there is marrow myeloid hypocellularity.
Within the dlecreasecl or normal range of blood monocyte concentrations, the
mIonocyte-muramidlase relationslhip is poor. i\Ionocytosis, however, usually is as-
sociated with increase(d serum muramidase activity(l,2,6,7) so that the actual en-
zyme contribution from nieutroplTils in the presence of increased numbers of
monocytes may be relatively small. Furthermore, there always is the problem as
to wlhetlher or not the lperiplleral blood monocyte count reflects the size of the
total body monocyte pool. Some patients with monocytic leukemia have low
peripheral blood monocyte counts in the presence of marrow monocytosis and
increased serum muramidase activity(6). A similar phenomenon cannot be ex-
clucded as the cause for normal or increased serum muramidase activity in some
of ouLr most neutropeniic patients.
It is of interest that all neuttropenic patients with peripheral blood monocytosis
lha(l normal or increased bone marrow-myeloid activity. Not only is this of pos-
silble diagnostic importance in terms of granulocyte mechanisms in patients with
neutiropeniia, blut there may be important implications concerning a common
etiology for these cells. In accord with this relationship is the fact that monocyto-
penia occurred in the patients with reduced marrow granulocytic activity and
the most severe reductions in peripheral blood neutrophils.
461
462 VIETZKE, PERILLIE, and FINCH
The close correlation between serum muramidase and bone marrow granulo-
cyte activity in neutropenic patients may provide another useful parameter for
the laboratory study of the mechanism of neutropenia in some patients. De-
creased serum muramidase activity invariably reflects decreased neutrophil pro-
dtuction. Increased serum muramidase in the absence of azotemia reflects either
increased neutrophil turnover or monocytosis. Serum muramidase activity in the
control range adds little information of value to the study of these. The eventual
clinical usefulness of these relationships in the diagnosis and management of
neutropenic patients, however, is uncertain at this time due to overlapping of
values in some instances and minimal change in others.
SUMMARY
Serum muramidase activity was related to bone marrow and peripheral blood
clhanges in 55 patients with various types of neutropenia. Normal or reduced
serum enzyme activity was observed in all patients with diminished bone marrow
granulocyte cellularity. Patients with neutropenia associated with abundant bone
marrow granulocytes generally had normal or increased serum muramidase
activity.
REFERENCES
1. Finch, S. C., and Lamphere, J. P., Acta Haematol. Japon. 25, 478 (1962)
2. Finch, S. C., Lamphere, J. P., and Jablon, S., Yale J. Biol. Med. 36, 350-360 (1964).
3. Finch, S. C., Gnabasik, F. J., and Rogoway, W., Estratto da Ille Symposium Internazionale
sul Lisozima di Fleming. MIilano, 3-5 Aprile 1964.
4. Fink, M. E., and Finch, S. C., Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 127, 365-67 (1968).
5. Cohn, Z. A., and Hirsch, J. G., J. Exp. Med. 112, 983-1004 (1960).
6. Osserman, E. F., and Lawvlor, D. P., J. Exp. Med. 124, 921-951 (1966)
7. Perillie, P. E., Kaplan, S. S., Lefkowitz, E., Rogawvay, W., and Finich, S. C., J. Amer. Med.
Ass. 203, 317-22 (1968).
8. Perillie, P. E., Kaplan, S. S., an(d Finch, S. C., N. Engl. J. AMed. 227, 10-12 (1967).
9. Vietzke, W. M., and Finch, S. C., Clin. Res. 16, 543 (1968).
10. Litwvack, C., Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Mled. 89, 401-403 (1955).
