THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 53 (1980), 47-54
Herpes Simplex Virus Infection: Problems and Prospects as
Perceived by a Peripatetic Pediatrician
ANDRE J. NAHMIAS
Professor of Pediatrics, Chief, Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia
Received August 23, 1979
The multivaried aspects of the herpes simplex viruses (HSV) types I and 2 and the infections
they produce are discussed. Points emphasized are: (1) the need for considering these (and other
viruses) from an evolutionary perspective; (2) the necessity ofdisseminating current methods for
virus identification; (3) the great progress in molecular-virological aspects and in the genetics of
the virus which provide new tools for epidemiological and immunological studies and define
more convincingly the possible causal role of HSV-2 in cervical carcinogenesis; (4) the problems
with vaccines and the therapeutic advances and failures; (5) the great psychosocial aspect of
some herpetic infections and the need to be sympathetic and supportive to afflicted patients and
their families; (6) the overreaction regarding HSV that currently exists among physicians,
nurses, the public, and the press resulting in increased misery for those afflicted or misdiag-
nosed, or in poor advice or management given by some physicians pressured in part by the fear
of malpractice suits. The problems then are many but the prospects for their solution are in sight
as more research at all levels is being conducted today in all corners of the world on the complex
herpes simplex viruses.
I have been asked to write about the problems and prospects of herpes simplex
virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 in a relatively small space. This restriction would not
permit a detailed review of the multivaried aspects of these viruses about which I and
various co-workers have written and continue to be asked to write [e.g., 1-16]. I find
myself in the much more enviable position of limiting my remarks to some
perspectives on the present and future which I can give from having lived for almost
20 years with herpes viruses. Of the various possible ways of looking at these viruses,
the most stimulating and the one which permits the most encompassing panorama of
all aspects of virus-host interactions from the molecular to the epidemiological, is the
evolutionary perspective. It is then with this "evovirological" [5,6,15,16] view that I
will approach this topic.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
First to consider must be the clinical problems, since without them concern with
HSV would be like that with Reoviruses 1, 2, and 3-of interest currently only to a
few basic investigators. Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 are much more important
clinically today, since many of the sites that they can infect can also become diseased,
often only in special hosts (Table 1). The most severe of these diseases are in large
part a product of modern life and contemporary medicine. We have only to ask in
whom we are seeing today the disseminated herpes, the herpetic pneumonias, or the
chronic HSV infections. One growing group of individuals likely to be afflicted with
47
Copyright © 1980 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
ANDRE J. NAHMIAS
TABLE 1
Body Sites Which Can Be Involved by Herpes Simplex Viruses
Commonly Involved Sites Infrequently Involved Sites
Oral cavitylAS Larynx3A, Trachea3A, Lungs3A
Lips'8 Esophagus3A, Stomach3A, lntestines3A,
Pancreas3A, Liver3A, Spleen3A
Penis2B, Vulva2B, Vagina285, CerviX2BS Urethra2BS, Prostate2BS, Seminal vesicleS2BS,
Anus2B, Bladder2CS, Kidneys3A, Adrenals3A
Eyes-Corneal B, Conjunctival AS Lens2A, Choroid2A, Retina2A
Skin-above the waist'B Heart3A, Bone marrow3A
-below the waist2B
-hands3B
Sensory ganglia-trigeminalls Brain3A, Meninges2A, Spinal cord3A
-sacral2S
Sympathetic or parasympathetic ganglia3S
Salivary and lacrimal glandsx
Peripheral bloodx
Lymph nodesx
Placenta and cordx
HSV type most usually found: HSV-1; 2 HSV-2; 3 about equal frequency or dependent on type of host
(e.g., newborn)
Clinical form most usually seen: A primary (in newborns = no transplacental antibodies); Brecrudes-
cent; Cabout equal frequency. s frequently subclinical x Information too incomplete regarding
frequency of involvement, HSV type, or clinical form
Italicizedare those sites in which the diagnosis has heretofore most commonly been made clinically (and
often erroneously).
From Nahmias [8]
these manifestations of the herpetic infection are those with cancer or other chronic
diseases whom we are keeping, or trying to keep, alive with a variety of potent
immunosuppressive drugs, e.g., bone marrow transplant recipients. Others are
individuals experiencing acute insults, such as the severely burned cases who, in
yesteryears, were doomed to die from their burns. Even the deeper ocular herpetic
manifestations are believed by some old-time ophthalmologists to be related to the
advent of the use of corticosteroids. As regards the newborn, it is not our advances in
medicine only (fetal monitors have repeatedly been shown to introduce HSV into
babies' scalps), but changes in sexual mores, which have increased the frequency of
genital herpes-the major source of neonatal herpes [2,7,10]. Parenthetically, many
babies are undoubtedly being saved, unbeknownst to the physician, from acquiring
the mother's genital herpes virus at the time of delivery by the ever-increasing use of
cesarean sections based on other reasons, rational or not.
It is obvious that we cannot but continue to increase our efforts to keep our
patients with aplastic anemia or with severe burns alive, and that we cannot legislate
sex. So what can we do now-or what's ahead? I shall give my views regarding
possible resolution to these problems and the impact of basic knowledge at the
molecular, cellular, and immunological levels after I discuss further clinicoepidemio-
logical problems.
48
HERPES SIMPLEX: PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
ONCOGENIC POTENTIAL OF HSV
Let us look for a moment at genital herpes and cervical neoplasia, a subject our
group at Emory and now many others have struggled with for nigh 15 years
[1,3,4,9,14]. Why would HSV or any other DNA viruses cause cancer which is
generally a point of no return for the virus, since current information indicates that
the virus in the transformed cell is no longer infectious, therefore incapable of being
transmitted. Transformation, as discussed elsewhere [15], must somehow be linked to
important functions needed for survival of the virus in its replication or perhaps in
the establishment of latency. It could, however, be only a chance event when the virus
(probably with a defective genome) enters a cell particularly susceptible to being
transformed. I would similarly explain HSV encephalitis [5], a rare phenomenon
(about one case per million), for which we have at present no evidence for any
specifically neurovirulent HSV strain nor for any particular immunological suscepti-
bility of the host [13]. In any case, cervical cancer, if it is indeed causally related to
HSV, would have been a rare disease in Ancient Woman, as would all cancers
detectable most usually in people 40 years of age or older.
Several observations have been made recently regarding the virus-cancer relation-
ship. First has been the finding of viral-specified RNA transcripts and proteins in
many cervical neoplasms [17-19]. Second has been the exciting molecular work
[19,20] delineating portions of the HSV genome in which the transforming potential
appears to reside in HSV-2 transformed hamster cells or in cervical neoplastic cells.
This should open soon the possibility of defining in even more detail the specific
carcinogene(s) and the proteins coded, allowing more sensitive technology for their
detection in human neoplasms and for the demonstration of immunological reactions
to these specific proteins in patients with HSV-associated neoplasms. Third has been
the observation that inactivated HSV, not only transforms in vitro, but also when
inoculated genitally in mice will produce large numbers of cervical tumors [21;
Wentz W, personal communication]. A fourth recent finding suggest-s that the highest
risk of developing cervical neoplasia isiri-women with primary genital HSV-2
infection, i.e., those who have had no previbus HSV-1 infection. If these observations
made by U.S. and British workers independently, using different methodologies
[22,23], are confirmed, then the potential of vaccination in HSV seronegative
adolescents becomes a much more practical possibility.
PROSPECTS OF IMMUNIZATION
It is this concern that the transforming potential of HSV noted in vitro and in
animals might also occur in humans which has limited vaccine approaches to those
using glycoprotein vaccines which lack viral DNA, or to constructing viral mutants
lacking specific nefarious genes. The development of such vaccines is under way [24].
As the questions of efficacy and side-effects are resolved, it might then be possible to
demonstrate with well-designed studies over a 5-10 year period the influence of
vaccines in protecting from cervical neoplasia-the final proof that the virus has
some causal role in cervical carcinogenesis [4,14].
An important contributor to the possible development of vaccines for the two HSV
types is the enormous progress made in recent years in our understanding of the
structure and function of the viral genome [25]. That it took only a few years to
obtain a map of the HSV genome allows one to believe that we will also have, in the
not too distant future, the function of the proteins coded ascertained. Those proteins
49
ANDRE J. NAHMIAS
involved in immunogenicity may even be synthesized, if not in the chemist's
laboratory, then by the use of bacterial recombinant systems. No longer will we ever
talk in such crude terms as "soluble" antigen used for diagnostic or immunological
studies. The availability of better characterized and purified proteins, besides
permitting improved and cheaper potential vaccines, would permit definition of the
immunological reactivity in different hosts with primary or recurrent infections or
with HSV-associated tumors. Furthermore, the current application of hybridomas to
herpes simplex viruses should offer monoclonal antibodies to specific proteins of the
viruses.
Coincidentally with the molecular advances has been the development of immuno-
logical assays [1 1,13]. We now have dozens of methods to detect antibody function at
the level of the virus and of the infected or transformed cells-antibodies not only in
different classes of immunoglobulins, but also those which act with complement or
with K lymphocytes, monocytes, or polymorphonuclear leukocytes to lyse the HSV-
infected cells. The possible role of NK lymphocytes in herpetic infections [26] has just
burgeoned over the past two years and assays for lymphocyte cytotoxicity and for
various lymphokines are under active study. We are also beginning to appreciate the
cyclic nucleotide-HSV-interferon interactions, as well as effects of other hormones on
herpetic infections. The task that remains is to differentiate those immune or non-
immune host factors of relevance in humans from those which are recognizable in the
host, but are really only secondary events playing no important role in host resistance
mechanisms. Just beginning to be examined are the effects of the fine modulation of
suppressor and helper systems in controlling the infection or preventing immuno-
pathological disease.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
We are already blessed today with a large number of serological techniques and
virological methods for identifying the herpes viruses in the infected host [8,27].
Many of these tests require further work in order to establish their specificity and
sensitivity. In particular, as HSV type-specific proteins are being characterized, their
application to serological studies attempting to define antibodies to HSV-1, HSV-2,
or both viruses will be most helpful. The biggest problem today is actually making
available to clinicians throughout the U.S. current methods for virus identification.
What would be most helpful would be the development of an assay which can be used
routinely at the hospital laboratory level for detecting very rapidly an HSV infection.
Such a test could be one detecting viral-specific enzymes or antigens in clinical
specimens. We desperately need such tests, for example, for the rapid diagnosis of
HSV encephalitis, at present only possible with a brain biopsy [28], and for detecting
subclinical genital HSV infection in pregnant women at the time of delivery [7,10].
THERAPEUTIC ADVANCES AND FAILURES
The information obtained on viral replication in cells and of virus-specified
enzymes has provided possible methods for treatment. It is now established that
iododeoxyuridine, adenine arabinoside, and trifluorothymidine are effective in the
treatment of ocular herpes. Also recently established is that systemically administered
adenine arabinoside will curtail significantly the mortality and sequelae of HSV
encephalitis and of neonatal herpes [28; Whitley R et al., unpublished observations].
For the latter two severe herpetic conditions, we badly need better methods for
earlier diagnosis and possibly new drugs. On the horizon is a new antiviral-
acycloguanosine (acyclovir)-which is currently under control trials for HSV ocular
so
HERPES SIMPLEX: PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
infections, as well as for genital and non-genital herpes, and is under open trial as a
systemically administered drug for the treatment of the more severe herpetic forms of
infection. Also requiring better definition is the possible use of interferon in the
control of herpetic infections.
We have been unfortunately repeatedly disappointed by the various regimens
suggested for use in HSV infections-smallpox vaccination, BCG, transfer factor,
levamisole, ether, dye-light treatment, etc. We await more definitive studies on the
use of 2-deoxyglucose, of lysine, and of several other therapies claimed to be helpful,
but still with no firm scientific evidence. Always to be kept in mind is the possible
harm we can physically cause our patients (or even their contacts in case of smallpox
vaccination) with unproven regimens, as well as the psychological damage to patients
who expect to have their herpes cured with the new "miracle" drug they read about in
their daily newspaper or weekly magazine.
The use of topical therapies to curtail the duration of herpetic lesions, if proven to
be effective and non-toxic, would indeed be an important advance. However, it
would be unlikely to provide the solution to the problem of frequent recurrences and
the concern of spreading virus to close contacts. Here is where the key to the HSV
problem mainly lies. From an evolutionary perspective, what better way for a virus
species to survive than to persist in a latent form to be available for transmission to
others at a later time in the host's life? This is the Achilles heel of the herpes virus, if
we can only find it. We have learned much more in the past few years about this
crucial problem than heretofore. There is now firm evidence that the virus can remain
latent in human ganglia of both the sensory and autonomic nervous system [29,30].
Work is actively under way to define the status of the virus genome during latency
and mechanisms for establishment -of reactivation of the virus. Such information
would permit a different strategy for controlling recurrences by "keeping the virus in"
[12]. After all, who cares if the virus is latent in our body unless it is reactivated to
infect others and/or cause recurrent lesions?
MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGY
Molecular virologists have aided us in this aspect, as well as at the epidemiological
level. They have demonstrated that all HSV strains within one type are different
unless epidemiologically related [31]. By the use of restriction enzyme analyses of the
HSV genome, it has already been possible to relate the source and spread of neonatal
and nosocomial infections and to demonstrate that some genital recurrences may be
due to exogenous reinfection [32]. Epidemiology with these, as well as the improved
serological tools noted earlier, will allow us to understand better the different modes
of spread of herpes simplex viruses, their presence in different populations, and their
association with human cancers. Such methodologies might also assist us in ascer-
taining how frequently a primary genital HSV-2 infection is subclinical and how
frequently infection with HSV-l occurs after a primary HSV-2 infection.
PROBLEMS ONE DOESN'T WRITE MUCH ABOUT
There are several other clinical problems which may be associated with HSV and
for which evidence is still flimsy, at best. Is HSV possibly teratogenic in humans?
Could it be the cause of some chronic neurological diseases or psychiatric disorders?
Of some cardiac or autoimmune diseases? Of other tumors than possibly cancer of
the cervix, such as of the lips, oral cavity, endometrium, prostate? The technology
currently or soon to be available will permit us to establish more definitely causal
associations of the two HSV types to such entities.
51
There are several other aspects of HSV infection which are infrequently brought
out. One is its psychological impact in many individuals. How can it help but affect
the 14-year-old girl who develops a severe primary genital infection after her first
sexual exposure? The knowledge that she can spread it to any future sexual contact
and to her future babies, as well as its possible relationship to cervical cancer and the
problem of recurrent lesions can ruin her social and mental health, as well as that of
many other afflicted individuals. Several marriages have been broken in large part
due to the transmission ofgenital herpes by a mother to her baby, grossly damaged or
dead as a result of the infection. The blame of who-gave-it-to-whom can be
psychologically devastating. We must therefore be sympathetic to such patients and
help them in whatever way possible.'
Another poorly discussed aspect is related to malpractice suits-for instance,
against a person who may have transmitted the virus to another; against a doctor
who did not separate a newborn from a mother with herpetic stomatitis or who did
not perform a cesarean section when the mother had genital herpes at the time of
delivery; or for doing or not doing a brain biopsy in a patient with possible herpes
encephalitis. The end result has been an overreaction to the problem. For instance,
women are being told they cannot have babies if they have genital herpes; some are
unnecessarily aborted if they have recurrent herpes during the first trimester; others
are delivered by cesarean section without any evidence of the virus around the time of
delivery. Many individuals also suffer unnecessarily for an erroneous diagnosis of
herpes without laboratory confirmation. Some national committees are recommend-
ing that all nursery personnel with a fever blister be removed from patient care. No
similar recommendation is being made, however, to remove any asymptomatic oral
shedders who may be even more dangerous (if either is at all). At least persons with
fever blisters know they should not fondle babies and they can cover their lesions.
Current evidence indicates that fetal monitors are definitely more dangerous than
"neonatal monitors," and that the pregnant woman with genital virus at the time of
delivery is the one who is most likely to transmit the virus to a baby. Yet, these same
committees are not pushing in areas where the problem really lies. It appears that
such august bodies prefer to avoid a still hypothetical risk without facing the problem
of what it might mean to other babies who need care, when hard-to-get nursery
personnel are removed for their cold sores, without apparent concern for the
tremendous financial burden that would be incurred it all hospitals in the U.S. would
practice what the committees recommend.
There is thus a sense of hysteria today pervading the public, the press, and the
medical and nursing professions regarding HSV infection. Yet, there are rational
approaches to several of the problems, e.g., monitoring pregnant women, obtaining
frequent Pap smears, diagnosing accurately the infection, treating some of the
diseases produced. Many of the problems, however, still require a firmer scientific
basis for effective recommendations. What I have tried to emphasize here is that
many of the problems are man- (and woman-) made and not necessarily caused by
the virus. There is little question that if the next decade is as replete with new
information at all levels about herpes simplex viruses as the past decade has been, the
prospect is excellent that we will have the means to manage better many of the
problems caused by these viruses.
'There is actually an organization called HELP to assist such afflicted patients (address: P.O. Box 100,
Palo Alto, California 94302).
ANDRt J. NAHMIAS52
HERPES SIMPLEX: PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS 53
REFERENCES
1. Naib Z, Nahmias A, Josey W: Cytology and histopathology of cervical herpes simplex. Cancer
19:1026-1030, 1966
2. Nahmias A, Alford C, Korones A: Infection of the newborn with Herpesvirus hominis. Advances in
Pediatrics 10:185-226, 1970
3. Nahmias A, Naib Z, Josey W: Herpesvirus hominis type 2 infection-association with cervical cancer
and perinatal disease. Persp Virol 7: 73, 1971
4. Nahmias A, Naib Z, Josey W: Genital herpes and cervical cancer-can a causal association be proven?
In Herpesvirus and Oncogenesis. Edited by de The, Biggs, Lyon, International Agency for Research
on Cancer, 1971
5. Nahmias A: Herpesviruses from Fish to Man-a Pathobiological Viewpoint. In Pathobiology
Annual. Edited by H loachim. Appleton Century Crofts, 1972, pp 153-182
6. Nahmias A: The Evolution (Evovirology) of Herpesviruses. In Viruses Evolution and Cancer. Edited
by E Kurstak, K Maramorosch. New York, Academic Press, 1974, pp 605-622
7. Nahmias A, Visintine A: Herpes Simplex. In Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn Infant.
Edited by J Remington, J Klein. Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co, 1976, pp 256-290
8. Nahmias A: The laboratory diagnosis of herpes simplex virus infections-Prospects and Problems. In
Diagnostic Horizons. Bethesda, Microbiological Associates 1:1-7, 1977
9. Nahmias A, Sawanobori S: The genital herpes-cervical cancer hypothesis-10 years later. Prog exp
Tumor Res 21:117, 1978
10. Visintine A, Nahmias A, Josey W: Genital herpes. Perinatal Care 2:32, 1978
11. Nahmias A, Ashman R: The Immunology of Primary and Recurrent Herpesvirus Infection-An
Overview. In Oncogenesis and Herpesviruses, III. Edited by G de The, F Rapp. Lyon, lnternational
Agency for Research on Cancer, 1978, pp 659-674
12. Nahmias A, Norrild B: Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2-basic and clinical aspects. Disease-a-Month
25(10):1, 1979
13. Shore S, Nahmias A: Immunology of Herpes Simplex Virus Infection. In Immunology of Human
Infection. Edited by A Nahmias, R O'Reilly. New York, Plenum, in press
14. Nahmias A, Norrild B: The Oncogenic Potential of Herpes Simplex Viruses and Their Association
with Cervical Neoplasia. In Oncogenic Herpesviruses. Edited by F Rapp. West Palm Beach, Florida,
CRC Press, in press
15. Nahmias A, Reanney D: The Evolution of Viruses. Ann Rev Ecology and Systematics 8:29, 1977
16. Reanney D, Nahmias A: Evolution of Viruses. Scientific American, in press
17. Frenkel N, Roizman B, Cassai E, et al: A DNA fragment of herpes simplex 2 and its transcription in
human cervical cancer tissue. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA, 69, 1972
18. Aurelian L, Davis H, Julian C: Herpesvirus type 2 induced tumor specific antigens in cervical
carcinoma. Amer J Epid 98:1, 1973
19. McDougall J, Galloway D, Feneglio C: Cervical carcinoma: detection of herpes simplex virus RNA in
cells undergoing neoplastic changes. Int J Cancer, in press
20. Camacho A, Spear P: Transformation of hamster embryo fibroblasts by a specific fragment of the
herpes simplex virus genome. Cell 15:993, 1978
21. Wentz W, Reagan J, Heggie A: Cervical carcinogenesis with herpes simplex virus type 2. Obstet
Gynecol 46:117, 1975
22. Nahmias A, Norrild B, Vestergaard B, et al: Does HSV-1 prevent HSV-2 associated cervical neoplasia
as turkey HV does MDV tumors? Proc 4th International Congress for Virology. The Hague, The
Netherlands, 1978
23. Skinner G, Whitney J, Hartley C: Prevalence of type-specific antibody against type I and 2 herpes
simplex virus in women with abnormal cervical cytology: evidence towards pre-pubertal vaccination
of seronegative female subjects. Arch Virol 54:211, 1977
24. Proceedings of the Experimental Herpesvirus Vaccine Workshop (FDA, BOB, NCI, NIAID).
Bethesda, MD, Feb 7-9, 1979
25. Roizman B: The structure and isomerization of the herpes simplex viruses. Cell 16:481, 1979
26. Ching C, Lopez C. Natural killing of herpes simplex virus type I-infected target cells: normal human
responses and influence of antiviral antibody. Inf Immun 26:49-56, 1979
27. Stewart J, Nahmias A: The Laboratory Diagnosis of Herpes Simplex Virus Infection. In Laboratory
Diagnosis of Sexually Transmitted Agents. Edited by J Prier. APHA Manual, in press
28. Whitley R, Soony S, Dolin R, et al: Adenine arabinoside therapy of biopsy-proved herpes simplex
encephalitis. New Eng J Med 297:289, 1977
54 ANDRt J. NAHMIAS
29. Baringer J: Herpes simplex virus infection of nervous tissue in animals and man. Progress in Med
Virol 20:1, 1975
30. Warren K, Brown S, Wroblewska Z, et al: Isolation of latent herpes simplex virus from the superior
cervical and vagus ganglions of human beings. New Eng J Med 298:1068, 1978
31. Roizman B, Buchman T: The molecular epidemiology of herpes simplex viruses. Hospital Practice
14:95, 1979
32. Buchman T, Roizman B, Nahmias A: Demonstration of exogenous genital reinfection with herpes
simplex virus type 2 by restriction endonuclease fingerprinting ofviral DNA. J Infect Dis 140:195-304,
1979
