YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
THE TREATMENT OF CANCER. With Special Reference to Radiotherapy
and Chemotherapy. Edited by J. S. Mitchell. Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1965. 315 pp. $18.50.
Professor Mitchell, a distinguished radiation therapist and Regius Pro-
fessor of Physic in the University of Cambridge, organized a Cambridge
Postgraduate Medical Course and this volume records the presentations
and discussions of the varied program. It is doubtful that any but the most
eager oncologist would find all the chapters of equal interest because the
subjects include basic and applied pharmacology, clinical aspects of radi-
ation and radiobiology, the problem of malignant disease in Hongkong
and Macao, and many others. It is a bit like a Reader's Digest of cancer.
Nevertheless, most of the book furnishes useful reading on recent progress
or lack thereof in the non-surgical diagnosis and treatment of cancer.
There are twenty-three lectures included, many with brief and enlightening
discussions. Of interest was the chapter on Clinical Trials by Diana Brinkley
and J. L. Haybittle. The trial, involving a supposed radiosensitizer, Syn-
kavit, and oxygen in conjunction with radiation therapy of patients with
inoperable lung cancer, is discussed in regard to the problems of experi-
mental design, implementation and evaluation. The clinical-research minded
would find this chapter of benefit. An important lesson is that clinical trials,
at least in cancer treatment, must involve cooperative efforts among insti-
tutions because no one center will have enough patients to yield significant
values for evaluation within reasonable time limits.
The majority of articles deal with the chemotherapeutic aspects of cancer;
among these the review by Jacobson on the basis of treatment with steroids
of some malignancies and of aplastic anemia appears to establish a bio-
chemical rationale for this form of treatment. His investigations of testos-
terone action on glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in shunting glucose-6-
phosphate into pentose phosphate pathways and the inhibition by cortico-
steroids of this mechanism, which is important to nucleotide synthesis,
increases the knowledge of action of steroids on cell growth. The papers on
recent developments in chemotherapy, folic acid antagonists in acute leu-
kemia, and the treatment of acute leukemias are well written and useful.
Brief reports are given on tetracycline fluorescence in bone tumors, the
study of bone marrow changes as a prognostic guide in chemotherapy,
radiation chemistry, Waldenstroms macroglobulinemia and diagnostic radi-
ology as an aid to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The diversity of sub-
jects weakens the cohesiveness of the book but also permits selective
reading. Most chapters have a list of references. There are both subject
and author indexes.
Professor Mitchell has investigated the action of the drug, Synkavit
(Synthetic vitamin K) for twenty years, first as a possible therapeutic
radiosensitizer and recently as a radioactively labelled agent with possible
direct carcinocidal properties. Some of the papers deal with these studies
and it is discouraging that so little therapeutic value has developed from
so much effort.
CARL F. VON ESSEN
130
Volume 39, October, 1966
