THE YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 54 (1981), 89-94
The Proliferative Capacity of Pure Red Cell
Aplasia Bone Marrow Cells
L. JAY KATZ, M.D., RONALD HOFFMAN, M.D., A. KIM RITCHEY, M.D.,
AND NICHOLAS DAINIAK, M.D.
Hematology Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
Received October 31, 1980
Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) is a heterogeneous disorder. Immunologic abnormalities have
recently been uncovered suggesting that both cell-mediated and humoral immune mechanisms
may be of etiological importance in PRCA. Utilizing a technique for the cloning of bone mar-
row erythroid precursors, we determined the in vitro proliferative capacity of erythroid cells
obtained from 21 patients with PRCA. Bone marrow cells from one group of patients produced
normal or increased numbers of erythroid colonies while the in vitro proliferative capacity of
bone marrow cells from a second group was characterized by subnormal erythroid colony
formation. Sera obtained from the former group was frequently associated with demonstrable
serum inhibitors of erythropoiesis, while PRCA in the latter group was probably the conse-
quence of intrinsic erythroid stem cell defects or pathologic cellular interactions with noneryth-
roid regulatory cells. This survey of a relatively large population of patients with PRCA
provides evidence for the multiple causative mechanisms that can be operative in the production
of PRCA.
INTRODUCTION
Pure red cell aplasia is a disorder characterized by a selective reduction in marrow
erythroid elements. The marrow is normocellular and characterized by normal
granulopoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis [1]. A varied nomenclature has been
applied to this disorder. In children, this clinical syndrome is referred to as Diamond-
Blackfan syndrome, congenital hypoplastic anemia, or erythrogenesis imperfecta [2].
In adults, the syndrome has been called pure red cell anemia, isolated aplastic
anemia, aplastic crisis, chronic erythrocytic hypoplasia, erythroblastopenia, or red
cell agenesis [3]. Unfortunately, the use of these terms supplies little information
concerning the pathogenesis of the red cell aplasia and makes specific therapy
difficult.
Krantz and his co-workers used marrow cell culture methods to first demonstrate
an inhibitor of heme synthesis and an antibody to erythroblast nuclei in the y G
globulin fraction of a patient with pure red cell aplasia [4]. These observations have
supported the general concept that, in some instances, this disorder is associated with
an antibody directed against marrow precursor cells.
Recently clonal assay systems that quantitate human erythroid precursor cells have
been developed [5,6]. In this investigation we have used the plasma clot culture
system for the growth oferythroid colonies to study the proliferative capacity of bone
89
Address reprint requests to: Ronald Hoffman, M.D., Hematology Section, Dept. of Internal Medicine,
Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06510
Copyright 0 1981 by The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
KATZ ET AL.
marrow cells from 21 patients with pure red cell aplasia. Our observations indicate
that this disorder might be categorized into two subdivisions according to the ability
of bone marrow cells from these individuals to generate erythroid colonies. The
marrow cells from one group of patients are characterized by the formation of
normal or greater than normal numbers of erythroid colonies, while bone marrow
cells from the second group were capable of generating meager numbers of colonies
in response to erythropoietin. These diverse in vitro growth patterns suggest that the
pathogenesis of the pure red aplasias is heterogeneous.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Subjects
After informed consent was obtained, 21 patients with PRCA and five normal
volunteers were studied (Table 1). Each patient experienced severe anemia with
reticulocytopenia. The bone marrow aspirates of each patient were normocellular
with a paucity of erythroblasts. There were, however, normal numbers of megakaryo-
cytic and granulocytic elements. These bone marrow findings were felt to be
consistent with a diagnosis of pure red cell aplasia. Only patient 13 has been
previously reported [7]. Five subjects were diagnosed as having idiopathic acquired
PRCA (A-PRCA), four as Diamond-Blackfan syndrome (DBS) in relapse, four as
transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC), one as aplastic crisis of sickle cell
anemia (AC-SS), three with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL and PRCA), two as
drug-induced PRCA (D-PRCA), and two as preleukemic PRCA (PL-PRCA). In this
last group, acute myelogenous leukemia developed four and twelve months after the
diagnosis of PRCA was established.
Erythroid Cell Cultures
Approximately 0.5 ml of marrow aspirate were collected from each subject in
Eagle's minimal essential medium containing 2 percent fetal calf serum and heparin.
Mononuclear cells were separated over a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient [8] and washed
three times in media with 2 percent fetal calf serum. Dispersed mononuclear cells
were then placed in plasma clots in a final concentration of 6 x 105 cells per 1.1 ml in
the presence and absence of 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 international units per milliliter
(IU/ml) of human urinary erythropoietin (Lot M-12 TaLSL, U.S. National Insti-
tutes of Health; 12.4 IU per mg of protein) and cultured according to the method of
Tepperman et al. [6]. In studies searching for humoral inhibitors of erythropoiesis,
0.1 ml of patient serum was added to cultures of the patient's own bone marrow cells
containing 2.0 IU of erythropoietin/ml.
After six days of incubation at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 3 percent CO2
in air, plasma clots were removed from culture and fixed in gluteraldehyde to glass
slides. They were then stained with benzidine and hematoxylin and the number of
colony-forming unit-erythroid (CFU-E) derived colonies were scored under
100 x magnification, counting only those colonies containing between eight and 49
benzidine-positive cells. Data concerning the ability of PRCA marrow cells to form
erythropoietic bursts is not included since assays ofthis more primitive erythropoietic
stem cell were performed in only a minority of patients.
RESULTS
The clinical diagnosis and presenting laboratory features of the 21 patients with
PRCA who are the subject of this study are shown in Table 1. All the patients were
90
PURE RED CELL APLASIA
S-000-zIzzzI zz
-H-H-HH--HH--H-HHM -H-Il-H-H-IlM
o
0N v0m 0 0 0__
_en__
4.)-0
0o C> Sf 00 (~1so - Nooo N o 0 so o o e so 0-0C
N ci 0% tC so so so 00 so - '0 N 4 C, 0% ci %0 I- & _"
- t- -4
.4 eq0 0 0 0 so0 ic-ar-4en00 -
-Idd~o-
.D - i00 -s
o 0 0 o 0 o - -o-o
0 -- 0 06_;6
lt (71 "t m " IV o m wo in ~v 11 t 14 4n wo Ci m £
C% C-4 %O el; 00 C~~6 el; U N~N- %0 'U - el;t-N %0 ~
W W W o0 Wo 0 W W 0
>4 >4
o)
>4 > z >4 z zo 'v
>4 4 >. Z 4 > Zo Z Z
4I)00 e- en "it 0N000eo n00 000ci%OsoW
r<enqten oren N"-ic-iC-iN o* -ns00s
z <<
U
UUUU)UU
< 4uuUU U
U
in N 0% 00 %0
U U< <
lx4U U
04
04lUUU.~A40
wwwu
- c -'* Ws%O N 0 ON 0 -o _ 'Ut so %0 N 00 o 0-
.______ AC-a
4-4
4)b
._ ._
~CU 0
h.C
c 0
Ca
-~ ._
.z Q o
cs o
Co
.50;
Pi e 0
n .
*g .e
_ .= o
Q 0
- *U4
O CUi
U) X @
4).5UY
U
91
0
0 0
0
o0
o
0
C:
0
0 -H
so
0 0
O o0
*CQ
0.
3)
cn
5-
0
.0
0
-o
0.
wo
.0
4)
U)
'0
0.
CU
U
5:
4)
I-
"Ia20%_
-U
-
u .'
m 0
x
.-,
la
0
0
.54
1.
0.
4.)
13
0
o
0.,CU
9
Ez4
0o a 0
o
>.o
a .
r
0o
= CU.= .W4
m
severely anemic and reticulocytopenic. Their bone marrow aspirations were charac-
terized by normocellularity and normal granulocytic and megakaryocytic matura-
tion. The most striking abnormality, however, was a virtual absence of erythroid
elements except for patients 4, 19, and 20 in which there was an arrest of erythroid
maturation at the proerythroblast stage. In each case there was agreement among
several independent observers as to the diagnosis and identity of bone marrow cells.
Patient 7's red cell aplasia was associated with oxacillin ingestion, while patient 8's
aplasia was temporally related to isoniazid therapy. None of the patients were found
to have thymomas after the performance of routine chest X-rays and mediastinal
tomography in patients 1, 2, 3, 5, and 14.
Bone marrow cells from five hematologically normal adult donors were able to
generate optimal numbers of erythroid colonies (65 ± 14 mean ± 1 standard error of
the mean [SEM] erythroid colonies/6 x 104 cells) in response to 2.0 IU Ep/ml. We
were unable to obtain normal control marrow specimens from children since this was
felt to be inappropriate by the Human Investigation Committee of the Yale
University School of Medicine. Bone marrow cells from patients 1-11 were able to
form in response to a similar erythropoietin dose 103 ± 24 mean ±1 SEM erythroid
colonies/6 x 104 cells. CFU-E derived erythroid colony formation by PRCA marrow
cells was not increased by addition of greater amounts of erythropoietin. On the
other hand, bone marrow cells from patients 12-21 generated only 4 ± 1 mean
± ISEM CFU-E/ 6 x 104 cells under similar experimental conditions. The increased
numbers of CFU-E derived colonies produced by bone marrow cells obtained from
the first group of PRCA patients is especially striking since very few erythroid
precursors were recognized on morphological examination.
Humoral inhibitors of erythropoiesis were sought by addition of patient's own
serum and that of normal controls to the patient's own marrow cells. Normal control
sera did not have a statistically significant effect on the number of CFU-E derived
colonies generated by PRCA bone marrow cells. We have previously shown that sera
from individuals with comparable degrees of anemia due to aplastic anemia actually
increased colony formation [9]. This increase in colony numbers is probably due to
the large amounts of erythropoietin in these specimens. Of the 15 patients with
PRCA, only sera from patients 1, 2, 4, 5, and 11 markedly inhibited the ability of
their own marrow cells to generate erythroid colonies in vitro. Of the five patients
with demonstrable serum erythropoietic inhibitory activity, only three had received
previous transfusion therapy. Sera from all these five patients also significantly
inhibited CFU-E derived colony formation by normal marrow cells.
DISCUSSION
The category of PRCA in a particular patient is often determined by the age of the
patient, the association with drug ingestion, or the presence of a co-existing
hemolytic anemia or leukemic disorder. These diagnostic labels are often convenient
but give little information concerning the pathogenetic mechanism responsible for
the production of the particular PRCA. Understanding this mechanism might be
useful in designing appropriate therapy for the individual patient. Using a system for
the clonal growth of committed erythroid stem cells, we have attempted to determine
the proliferative capacity of PRCA bone marrow cells. Regardless of the clinical
setting, patients with red cell aplasia can be allocated to one of two groups on the
basis of the in vitro proliferative capacity of their bone marrow cells. One group is
characterized by near normal or increased CFU-E proliferation, while the second
group is characterized by markedly diminished or absent CFU-E colony growth.
The erythroid stem cell compartment of patients with PRCA associated with
92 KATZ ET AL.
PURE RED CELL APLASIA
normal or increased marrow erythroid colony growth appear to be qualitatively and
quantitatively intact, since placement in an in vitro environment results in normal
proliferation. These findings are similar to data originally reported by Krantz and
colleagues, who showed that isolated marrow cells of a patient with pure red cell
aplasia responded to erythropoietin in vitro by appropriate increase in the rate of
heme synthesis [4]. It has subsequently been shown that plasma from some patients
with PRCA inhibited this increase in heme synthesis, whereas normal plasma does
not and that the inhibitory activity resided in the IgG fraction of the plasma
[4,10-12]. The red cell aplasia in patients 1-11 in our series would seem to be
produced by a mechanism similar to that originally described by Krantz and his co-
workers in that a circulating inhibitor of erythropoiesis apparently inhibited the
normal proliferation of CFU-E in vivo [4]. We were, however, able to demonstrate
serum erythropoietic inhibitory activity directed against autologous bone marrow
cells in only five of our patients. The inability to detect serum inhibitors in the other
six patients may reflect the insensitivity of our assay system in detecting such factors
or that the PRCA in these individuals is due to a deficiency of functionally active
erythropoietin.
The pathogenesis of the PRCA in patients with deficient bone marrow erythroid
colony formation is probably different from that described in the first group
described. In this group the deficient in vitro erythropoiesis may be due to a
deficiency of stem cells, a qualitative abnormality of the CFU-E resulting in a
defective response to erythropoietin, or the presence of cellular inhibitors (lympho-
cyte or macrophage) of erythropoiesis resulting in defective erythroid differentiation.
When sera from these patients were examined, erythropoietic inhibitory activity was
not demonstrable using allogeneic bone marrow cells as a target tissue (data not
shown).
Four of our patients presented with a clinical constellation consistent with a
diagnosis of transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC). TEC is a form of pure
red cell aplasia which occurs over a wide age range in previously normal children and
spontaneously remits within a few months with only supportive therapy [13]. Koenig
and co-workers have recently shown that bone marrow mononuclear cells from a
child with TEC produced normal numbers of erythroid colonies when cultured in a
system free of the child's own plasma and that serum from this child showed
suppressive activity against erythroid colony formation by autologous and allogeneic
bone marrow cells which disappeared after hematologic recovery occurred [14].
These workers have concluded that the anemia of TEC is caused by an immune
mechanism that directly suppresses erythroid progenitor cell differentiation and that
this suppressive activity resides in a plasma IgG fraction. Our data obtained in
patient11
is virtually identical to that presented by Koenig and is consistent with a
humoral erythropoietic inhibitory factor having pathogenetic significance in TEC.
The in vitro proliferative capacity of the bone marrow cells obtained from our three
remaining patients with TEC, however, was markedly deficient when compared to
normal bone marrow cells. Recent evidence demonstrating suppression of erythro-
poiesis by an adherent bone marrow cell population in patients with chronic
infections [15] suggests the possibility of a transient activation of bone marrow
adherent cells following a minor infectious episode which might result in suppression
of erythropoiesis in a subset of patients with TEC. Our data suggest that the
pathogenesis of TEC is diverse and that this syndrome can be produced not only by
immune suppression of erythropoiesis but perhaps by transient cellular suppression
of erythropoiesis.
The demonstration of antibodies in the sera of patients with PRCA which are
93
94 KATZ ET AL.
active against erythroid progenitor cells in vitro often results in the use of immuno-
suppressive agents and the reconstitution of normal red blood cell population [1].
Current techniques to detect antibodies with erythropoiesis inhibitory activity are
relatively crude and insensitive. Recently Beard et al. reported four patients with
PRCA in whom antibodies capable of reacting with erythroblasts were not detected
but each of these patients responded clinically to either prednisone or cyclophospha-
mide therapy [16]. Our use ofan in vitro clonal assay system for erythroid colonies to
categorize two subpopulations of patients with PRCA might allow for a more
rational use of cytotoxic agents in this disorder. The PRCA of those patients who
have normal or increased numbers of marrow CFU-E derived colonies would appear
to be secondary to a humoral inhibitor of erythropoiesis. If the PRCA of these
individuals does not spontaneously resolve as in TEC and AC-SS, or resolve
following discontinuation of a drug that the particular patient is ingesting, these
individuals would be ideal candidates for immunosuppressive therapy.
REFERENCES
1. Krantz SB: Diagnosis and treatment of pure red cell aplasia. Med Clin N Amer 60:945, 1976
2. Diamond LK, Wang WC, Alter BP: Congenital hypoplastic anemia. Adv Pediat 22:349, 1976
3. Erslev AJ: Pure red cell aplasia. In Hematology. Edited by WJ William, E Beutler, AJ Erslev, RW
Runddles. New York, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1978, pp 278-287
4. Krantz SB, Kao V: Studies on red cell aplasia. I. Demonstration of a plasma inhibitor to heme
synthesis and an antibody to erythroblast nuclei. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 58:493, 1967
5. Stephenson JR, Axelrad AA, McLeod DL, et al: Induction of colonies of hemoglobin-synthesizing
cells by erythropoietin in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 68:1542, 1971
6. Tepperman AD, Curtis JE, McCulloch EA: Erythropoietic colonies in cultures of human marrow.
Blood 44:659, 1974
7. Hoffman R, Kopel S, Hsu SD, et al: T cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: Presence in bone marrow
and peripheral blood of cells that suppress erythropoiesis in vitro. Blood 52:255, 1978
8. Boyum A: Isolation of mononuclear cells and granulocytes from human blood. Scand J Clin Lab
Invest 21 (Suppl 47):77, 1968
9. Hoffman R, Zanjani ED, Lutton JD, et al: Suppression of erythroid colony formation by lymphocytes
from patients with aplastic anemia. N Eng J Med 296:10, 1977
10. Zalusky R, Zanjani ED, Gidari AS, et al: Site of action of a serum inhibitor of erythropoiesis. J Lab
Clin Med 81:867, 1973
11. Krantz SD, Moore WH, Zaentz SD: Studies on red cell aplasia: V. Presence of erythroblast
cytotoxicity in 'Y G-globulin fraction of plasma. J Clin Invest 52:324, 1973
12. Browman GP, Freedman MH, Blajchman MA, et al: A complement independent erythropoietic
inhibitor activity on the progenitor cell in refractory anemia. Am J Med 61:572, 1976
13. Wranne L: Transient erythroblastopenia in infancy and childhood. Scand J Haematol 7:76, 1970
14. Koenig HM, Lightsey AL, Nelson DP, et al: Immune suppression in transient erythroblastopenia of
childhood. Blood 53:742, 1979
15. McGlave PB, Zanjani ED, Davies S, et al: Suppression of erythropoiesis by bone marrow (BM)
macrophages in chronically infected (CI) patients. Clin Res 301A, 1979
16. Beard MEJ, Krantz SB, Johnson SAN, et al.: Pure red cell aplasia. Quart J Med 187:339, 1978
